THE VNLAWFVLNESSE OF Subjects taking up Arms AGAINST THEIR SOVEREIGN, in
what case soever.

Together with an Answer to all Objections scattered in their several Books.

And a proof, that notwithstanding such resistance as they plead for, were not
damnable, yet the present War made upon the King is so, because those cases,
in which only some men have dared to excuse it, are evidently not now; His
Majesty fighting only to preserve Himself, and the rights of the Subjects.

Printed in the Year 1643.

The unlawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms against their Sovereign, in
what case soever.
. 1.
HE that will endeavor to make the yoke of government more easy, by setting a
people loose from the restraints of positive laws, upon pretense, The cause
upon which men are misled to a desire of Innovation.
they may justly use their native liberty, and resume their original power, if
civil constitutions, which were agreed upon for their good, be not effectual
to that end, but prove disadvantageous to them, shall be sure to meet with many
favorable Readers. Because the greater part of mankind, as in other matters,
so in this present case, are easily prevailed upon, to make a truce with
conscience, and eagerly to prosecute what appears most profitable. And the
chiefest cause of our miseries is, that they do not rightly apprebend what is
truly advantageous. For States are framed upon a sinister opinion of men, they
suppose most (as it does commonly fall out) will be dishonest, yet if they be
not unwise, and suffer themselves to be carried on, as against conscience, so
against interest also, a Kingdom cannot want plentiful means of subsisting,
of flourishing. The ground of these unhappy mistakes, (which makes them advance
public ruin, wherein all single men will be lost, while they are vainly
encouraged by deceiving hopes of being private gainers) can be no other but
this. They rule their actions and desires but by one syllogism, and look upon
the immediate consequence, which is a satisfaction of some particular ends, and
serving some present turn, and have not ordinarily so much depth of
understanding, as to be able to discern the future evils, which will
inevitably spring from the same fountain. They are not capable of that good
counsel of Polybius, Non tantum praesentia spectare, sed and futura
prospicere, and quis exitus inde futurus sit. The bait only is visible to
most, and accordingly the real goods which are promised by innovation (for no
government being free from all evil, therefore every proposal of change is
easily baited with some good) are entertained with delight, but once unwarily
swallowed, they become hooks in the entralls It happens to most men, that they
behold the children (as of their bodies, so) of their opinions; but the
grandchildren of their tenants: -- Caliginosa nocte premit Deus,
Nepotes discursus,


The further removed consequences (though allied in a right line) they have not
strength of reason to discover. Quisque nascitur liber, 1. False, because all
are subject by nature to paternall power, and consequently to the supreme
Magistrate, to whom divine law confirms the several powers which Fathers
resigned up. 2. If true, it concludes not for them, because out natural
liberty is restrained by consent.


To instance in two maine principles, by which the seduced multitude has been
tempted to catch at empty happiness, and thereby have pulled upon themselves
misery and destruction.

The first is a doctrine craftily instilled into the minds of the people, upon
no other foundation then a mistake, in the meaning of true and profitable
liberty, that the law of Nature does justify any attempts to shake off those
bonds imposed upon them by Superiors, if inconvenient and destructive of
native freedom: the fallacy of which is easily discerned by understanding
men. It is true, if we look upon the Privileges of Nature, (abstracting from
paternall dominion) Freedom is the birthright of mankind, and equally common
to every one, as the Air we breath in, or the Sun which sheds his beams and
luster, as comfortably upon Beggars, as upon the Kings of the earth. This
Freedom was an unlimited power to use our abilities, according as will did
prompt. The restraint of which would questionless have been very grievous,
but that experience did demonstrate, it was not so delightful to do what ever
they liked, as it was miserable, to suffer as much as it pleased others to
inflict. The evils which flow from want of Government.
For any that was stronger then his neighbor had it in his power to hinder him
from enjoying the benefits of liberty; nor yet could the most powerful man
among them take any extraordinary comfort in this as yet hostile State, because
his mind was distracted with continual fears, since there was not any so
contemptibly weak, but that if he despised his own life, or desired to enjoy
it with more uncontrolled pleasures, he might make himself Master of any other
man's, though not by force, yet by subtilty, and watching advantages, or at
least a few combining might destroy the strongest, and might be tempted so to
do, for their fuller security.

This was their unhappy condition amidst fears and jealousies, wherein each
single person looked upon the world as his enemy, and doubted (as formerly
Cain, when he was excommunicated and cut off from the civil body) lest the
hand of every man might be upon him; and to this confusion the disturbers of
this State endeavor to reduce us, not that this (...), want of order, most
hateful to God, can be pleasant to the most wicked man; but as knowing the
effect of it, an insupportable and general calamity will quickly unite
multitudes into a people again, and force them to restore some government; and
they may hope in a new compact to gain a greater share in the rule, then their
ambition has been able to force from the settled Kingdom.

I will add the unavoidable occasions of quarrel, extremely opposite to the
prime dictate of nature, the preservation of themselves, and to the means
which conduce thereto, a peaceable enjoyment of the comforts of this life. For
whilst every one had right to all, no body could with safety make use of any
thing; since when some would take to themselves what others delighted in, their
desires and right being equal; there was no title but that of greater force,
which could determine to whom it ought to belong, and this could not be known
but by fighting, and this right reason abhorred, as by which men would either
be exposed to famine in the midst of plenty, or else be forced daily to hazard
the loss of their lives, out of a natural desire of conserving them.

The sense of these calamities quickening their understandings to find out, The
remedy of those evils, civil unity.
easily prevailed with their wills, to entertain a remedy of so great evils;
which manifestly proceeding from division, the ready cure was to make
themselves one, because no body is at variance with it self. There being no
way to effect this naturally, they reduce themselves into a civil unity, by
placing over them one head, and by making his will the will of them all, to the
end there might be no gap left open by schism to return to their former
confusion. Because the wills of men, though the fountains of all voluntary
actions, yet are not themselves the objects of choice; (for we cannot will to
be willing, (this would be infinite) but to perform what is commanded) and so
are not capable of being obliged by compacts; therefore this submission of all
to the will of one; or this union of them agreed upon, is to be understood in a
politic sense, and signifies the giving up of every man's particular power
into his disposal, so that he may be enabled to force those who are unwilling
upon some private ends, to be obedient for the common good; otherwise they
would enjoy the benefits of others faith in observing laws, and the advantages
of their own violations and breaches, which may probably be prevented, if
penalties be appointed much greater then the profit which can come by their
disobedience; because, as men are naturally tempted by hopes of good, so they
are as naturally deterred by a certain expectation of greater evils.

Thus also by transferring every particular man's power into the hands of one,
is not meant a real laying down and natural translation of their strength,
(because their nerves and sinews are not alienable, as their money and goods)
but a consent and mutual obligation (as of all to one, whether he be King, as
in a Monarchy; or some Nobles, for they are one too, as in Aristocracy, so of
every one to each other) of not using their natural power, but only as Law
shall require, that is, of not resisting that body in which the supreme power
is placed, as likewise of aiding him, or them by virtue of that promise, or of
that oath, according to the nature of the contract, when be or they summon
their strength.

By what is laid down, may be discovered the weakness of their second
principle (which has done most mischief and till it be thoroughly rooted out
of men's minds the seed is still left behind, from whence rebellion will spring)
the falsehood whereof, I thought fit to manifest in relation to the peace and
quiet of Christendom and the world in general, it not at all concerning His
Majesty's case, who was so far from offering violence, that it was the
extraordinary mercy of God upon this land, that did enable him to defend his
life against it, his Magazines and forts, and Ships, that is all his civil
power being taken from him, and an army actually raised against his personal
strength, (for His Majesty had not granted one commission to raise a man, when
they began their defensive war) so that Lucans expression might seem fitted
to this Kingdoms misery. Parque novum fortuna videt concurrere bellum
Atque virum --


The doctrine is; the law of nature will defend us, whomsoever we kill, though
the King, in our own defense, and we are acquitted by that principal vim vi.
(nay some go higher and make it unlawful not to resist even the highest
authority, it being a sin against nature etc. whom the examples of the holy
Martyrs and of Christ himself do clearly confute, though they cannot satisfy
them.) I will breifely answer it, as meaning to enlarge my self thereon in
the following discourse.

It ceases to be lawful, Native right restrained by positive obligation.
after we have made our selves sociable parts in one body, because we
voluntarily and upon agreement restrained our selves from making use of this
native right and the renouncing this power by mutual compact will appear very
consonant to sound reason, whether we look upon the benefits ensuing thereby,
or the mischeifes avoided. For it is a more probable means to the attaining
that very end, in relation to which they plead for it, the preservation of
particular persons. Prudentiall motives for parting with some rights of nature,
without power to resume them.
Upon this condition of obliging our selves not to resist public authority,
in requital for this submission of our private strength, we are secured by the
united power of all, and the whole Kingdom becomes our guard. And it is most
likely we should be less exposed to injuries, when that impartial and equal
measure of right, the known law, is by this means maintained. The evils which
would flow from this license to resume our power against contract, are
infinite. Our own feelings too fully instruct us in the sad effects, and I
doubt not but the weariness of our present sufferings, and the expectation of
growing mischeifes, will be powerful beyond rhetoric to persuade us to value
highly the public tranquillity. I am confident, if the people of this land
(whose eyes have been opened of late, and they are now sensible, that to
continue violences to His Majesty has introduced a necessity of oppressing
them, and that they are bound to be undone in order to the injuries to their
sovereign) were able to deliver themselves from their defenders, we should
suddenly be restored to happiness, and it would be as hard a matter to engage
them in a civil war, when they had again tasted the sweetness of plenty
and quiet, as it is to persuade them to agree to peace, who challenge a legal
power by the title of war to dispose of the Kings and Subjects revenewes at
pleasure.

As reason induced men to enter into such a Covenant, and to lay a mutual
obligation one upon another, not to resist authority upon what ever grounds,
whether of fancied, or real injustice, but to submit their actions and persons
to the ordinary trial, though it might possibly happen, that some particulars
would be sentenced unjustly, because a far more considerable good could not
be obtained, unless by agreement patiently to submit to this possible evil,
since the common peace and quiet, cannot be effectually provided for, if it
shall be indulged to any, to appeal from the Laws to themselves, and to judge
their Judges: So honesty and religion strictly bind them to preserve their
faith entire, and this contract inviolable.

The pains I have taken, to lay open, by way of introduction, to the view and
examination of all that desire real satisfaction, the foundation upon which
rule and Subjection are built, will appear not so delightful, as it was
necessary. And it is no otherwise in the works of Art, operum fastigia
spectantur, latent fundamenta, passers by admire the superstructure, when that
strength which supports the most elegant piles, lies deeply buried in the
earth, and unregarded. It were very strange, if any man should be so
prodigiously weak, as to suffer himself to be persuaded to remove his
chambers and galleries into a healthier air, a pleasanter prospect and more
commodious Situation; and yet the same unreasonable advice is hearkened to,
concerning the civil frame, The foundation upon which States are settled,
overthrown; if the people be made Judges of their safety, and allowed to use
any means which they fancy conducing thereto.
without any consideration of the ground-workes. Populi salus suprema lex, is
the Engine by which the upper rooms are torn from the foundation, and seated
upon fancy only, like Castles in the air. For the safety of the people is
really built upon government, and this destroyed, the other, non jam aedes,
sed cumulus erit, will be soon swallowed in the common confusion; but this is
evidently and demonstrably ruined by these principles. For government is an
effect not of a peoples divided natural powers, but as they are united and
made one by civil constitution; so that when we call it supreme power, we
impose an improper name, and have given occasion for mistakes (yet I shall not
endeavor to alter the common use of speaking, but only to prevent a
misunderstanding of it) because indeed this power is simply one, and when it
does express it self by one person or more, (according to different forms)
who yet are but several parts of one governor, there is not left in the
Kingdom or Commonwealth, any civil, that is, any legal power, which can
appear in resistance, because all of them have bound their natural hands by a
politic agreement.

Hence it follows, those that will allow any power to Subjects against their
ruler (let it be, Liberty to resist those in whom the Law places jus gladis the
right of the sword, destructive to the very nature of government.
one man, or many united by one common form, which is the consent of the major
part, and this is not capable of division) do thereby dissolve the sinews of
government, by which they were compacted into one, and which made a multitude a
people, and so break the Commonwealth into as many pieces, as they have set
up opposers against it. For there cannot be two powers and yet the Kingdom
remain one. This is that, which distinguishes Francs and England and Spain
from one another, because they have three powers legally distinct, and are the
same in relation each to other, as three particular men meeting in some
wilderness, and considered as not having agreed to any Laws of Society.

I am fully persuaded, no sober man can imagine the policy of this State is so
defective, as to open a necessary way to its own ruin, that is, to divide the
Kingdom legally in it self; and therefore it must necessarily be granted,
those that take up arms being not authorized so to do by law, are guilty of
rebellion, and the consequences of it, murder and rapine. It is very easy to
determine, whom the Law has armed with power, because not any part of the
people, not the two Houses, but the King alone is sworn to protect us, which
is an evident argument, he is enabled to effect this end, and that the
necessary means to compass it, which is the posse regni, is at his disposal.

By these generals thoroughly digested, and rightly applied, we shall be able
to rule particular decisions.

I shall desire one thing especially may be remembered, as which has great
influence upon all cases. Though what is truly the right of any one, does not
cease to be so naturally by another sentence to the contrary; yet after
positive constitutions, upon a Judges decision, he can challenge no title to
it, because by his own deed, and consent, he passes it away in that judiciary
determination. And equity and prudence both dictate, that it was a most honest
and reasonable agreement, as conducing to public peace, and the quiet of
mankind, that persons publicly constituted and more unconcerned in the
decisions, should put an end to all debates. Because otherwise the controversy
was not likely to be ended, but with one of the parties; For each man out of
natural favor (the strongest corruptive of judgment) inclining to his own
Interest, there was nothing left but force to determine it. There cannot be a
more unhappy administration of Justice, then when strength is made the measure
of right, and when all Judges are bribed, as passing sentence to their own
advantage.

. 1.
THe following Section shall be spent in proving the proposition, by which the
consciences of all Subjects must be directed.

It is unlawful to resist him, or them, in whom the supreme authority, (that
is, all the legal power of the Kingdom) is placed, and no dispensation
(grounded upon what persons soever, as inferior Magistrates, or upon any
cause, as the extreme abuse of this power to their oppression) can excuse such
resistance from the sin of rebellion.

Upon this pillar not only monarchy stands firm, but all other governements
are equally supported; the general reason being applicable, according to the
difference in several forms.

In the third Section I will bring the case home to our selves by proving this
assumption; The King of England has this supreme power, and then I shall
leave it to every man's conscience to infer the conclusion, therefore it is
unlawful to make resistance against their Sovereign.

In the fourth Section, I will answer all the evasions (how plausibly soever
founded) which I could meet with in the several writings of those men, who
though they strike at the King down right and more immediately, yet by plain
and evident cousequences they destroy all civil society.

By way of conclusion, I will show, though such a power of resistance, as they
or any others have yet openly pleaded for, should be granted lawful (as when
in their own defense, or when he that has the highest authority, and is bound
by the law of God and his own oath, to administer justice equally, yet after
frequent representations of their grievances, and most just Complaints of their
great sufferings, affords no redress) yet this can be no justification of the
present war against the King, nor acquit the Actors in it from being rebels.
Because this case is evidently not now, as will appear after a view taken of
the causas of this unnatural, and illegal division.

The proposition to be proved is, It is unlawful to resist him or them in whom
the supreme authority (that is, all the legal power of the Kingdom in order
to raise arms) is placed, and no dispensation (grounded upon what persons
soever, as inferior magistrates, or upon any cause, as the extreme abuse of
this power to their oppression) can excuse such resistance from the sin of
Rebellion.

I make no question every man will apprehend, that by resistance here,
Differences between not obeying against law; and hostile resistance to a
lawful Sovereign.
is meant only hostile opposition, and not a refusal to put unjust commands
(measured by divine or humane laws) in execution; for the truth is, if they
are, or seem repugnant to Gods law, (for then they are so really, in respect
of those who have that apprehension; idem est esse and apparere, in this case
of good and bad: because whatsoever is not of faith is sin) we must conform
our practice to that standing rule, laid down by the Apostle, Active
obedience against Gods law, sin.
Deo magis, qua^ hominibus, We ought to obey God rather then men, we are bound
(to use Tertullians phrase) temperare majestatem Caesaris infra Deum. The
reasons to the contrary for absolute and unlimited obedience have no solidity.

One is upon a false supposall, Objections to the contrary.
that at our entrance into civil society, we submitted) as our wills, by which
is meant not the faculty, but the effects of it, which were in our power, and
which are subjected as far as they were in our power, that is in all honest
performances, for peccare non est nostri juris, so) our understanding, and
consequently, though in our private opinion, such actions were unlawful, yet
if commanded and said by our rulers to be just, our public judgment (which
we had given them right to pass upon good or bad) did pronounce them honest.

A second argument is, though we think such actions unlawful upon a
particular comparing them, with the measure of right and wrong, divine precept,
or prohibition; yet from a more general raeson, we think this thought of ours
condemning such actions, to be an error, and so if we do, what we think in
our private judgment God has forbidden, we do contra opinionem agere, sed
non contra conscientiam, practice against our opinion, not against our
conscience, because that is swayed by this general reason. If when rulers say
such a thing ought to be done, I say, it ought not, the sense of it is, I am
wiser then they. But if I grant them the more able men, I must needs think
they are likely to make truer judgment, and so am bound to submit to the
greater discretion, because in moral differences, which are not capable of
demonstration, I must guide my practice by the highest probabilities of good.
If sheep knew how apt they are to go astray, they would be content to be
guided by the shepherd, and therefore governors, who are (...), are to direct us
in the ways of safety. He that shall undertake to be his own master, will
have a fool to his scholar; and he that refuses to follow his guide, and
fancies some private turnings, is likely to miss his way, and through many
wanderings to come weary to his journeys end.

A third argument is, to challenge to our selves the judgment of good and
evil, is the fruit of that bitter root of Adams disobedience; Eritis sicut
Dij, scientes bonum and malum, was the temptation, and the sin was, he did
eat of the forbidden tree of knowledge of good and evil. He was not content
to be acquainted with good only, submitting to (that which made actions good or
bad) the command or prohibition of him, who had dominion over him, but began to
examine the justice and reasonableness of them, and so would make himself
like the Lawgiver.



Of the first sort are the plain and familiar truths laid down in scripture,
of which S. Paul binds us to be so confident, that though an angel from heaven
should preach any other doctrine, we may not admit it. As likewise many moral
duties easily discerned even by weak apprehensions. If this were not so, the
Apostles rule could not lawfully be made use of, we must obey God rather then
men; and the people would be bound to follow their blind leaders into the pit
of destruction. For Christ tells us both shall fall into the ditch. But the
Apostle allows them to whom he spoke, to examine his doctrines of this nature,
by the rule of their own understanding. I speak as to them which have
understanding judge ye what I say, and judge in your selves, is it comely etc.
and in the verse following, does not even nature it self teach you etc. This
case is clearly decided in the 14th to the Romans where we learn, if we condemn
our actions, though in themselves not blameable, yet to us they are sin. v.
22, 23. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows. He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
faith; wherefore he gave a general command in the 5. v. let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind.

Of the latter sort are things more intricate, and which cannot without great
difficulty be judged of. Being such for the most part wherein not men's honesty
but their prudence is exercised. And here a submission of judgment is very
reasonable. As in law cases to be swayed by the professors of it, or if we
build a house to be directed by artists, or in a tempest to take the most
probable way of escaping, by relying on the pilots steering the ship and
forbidding unexperienced passengers to run to the helm confusedly and alter
the course, according as their ignorance and fears prompt them, upon a
conscientious madness, that they shall be accessory to their own death, if
they put their lives out of their own hands, though they commit them to
seamen, whose experience has better enabled them to avoid the rocks and the
shelves: And thus in civil government, wherein the greater part of men can
have no deep insight, to trust the managery of the public safety, to persons
wiser then themselves, and to bind one another to perform all offices in
relation to this end, according as they shall be commanded by their governors,
and not to rule their lawgivers by disputing the unreasonablenes of what is
injoined. And to this captivateing of their understanding religion obliges
them; for God is not a God of sedition, of mutinye, and confusion, but of
unity, order and of peace.

The case thus resolved produces an excellent temper, in man's obedience; as by
which we render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things
which are Gods. Be subject to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. This
binds universally, those only cases being excepted, which God expressly and
evidently reserves to himself; and in them we must take law from the more
powerful. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in
Hell.

This liberty of denying obedience can neither be offensive nor dangerous to
authority.

First not offensive, No inconveniences from this doctrine rightly stated; God
to be obeyed rather then men.
because magistrates can challenge no more right over our actions, then God
gives them or we our selves had, before we submitted them to their commands;
which was none in this supposed case, because a dishonest deed non est nostri
juris is not in our power. We can no more pass away by promise Gods right to
our obedience, then we can covenant to transfer and give away another man's
goods or demeasnes.

Secondly it is harmless in the consequences, because if any out of a real
or seeming repugnance to divine precept, deny active obedience, they must
confess themselves obliged by the same conscience of observing the law of God,
not to resist that authority, which he has armed jure gladij, with the right
of using the sword, probably to this end that Religion might not be a cloak for
Rebellion, and that we might not dare out of the fear of God to violate the
order of divine providence; by which he has thought fit to govern the world.
This is the patience of the Saints, which shall be rewarded with heaven,
because they suffer, rather then do evil for earthly considerations, as being
assured, God has forbiden them, though for prevention of their particular and
undeserved misery, to disturb the public happiness, by resisting that power,
which Scripture tells them is from above. It often times pleases God to make use
of ill governors, and their unrighteous judgment may be his just sentence for
our former transgressions; if it be his will to scourge us by them, no smart,
should tempt us to cut his rod in pieces.

Because generally men are hardly brought to entertain a truth, which seems
disadvantageous to them, and comes in ill company, attended with affliction,
Quis enim facile credit, propter quod dolendum est? (though this should not be
amongst Christians who are crucis candidati, and quibus frui fas est Diis
iratis, and who ought to rejoice in their present sufferings, as the exercise
of virtue, and that way to eternal glory, which our Savior has chalked out
both by example and precept?) I will use the greater diligence in evidencing
this point by all kind of proofs, of which the matter is capable.

If we look back to the law of Nature, we shall find that the people would
have had a clearer and more distinct notion of it, if common use of calling it
Law had not helped to confound their understanding, when it ought to have been
named the Right of nature; Difference between Law of Nature and Right of
Nature.
for Right and Law differ as much as Liberty and Bonds: Jus, or right not
laying any obligation, but signifying, we may equally choose to do or not to
do without fault, whereas Lex or law determines us either to a particular
performance by way of command, or a particular abstinence by way of
prohibition; and therefore jus naturae, all the right of nature, which now we
can innocently make use of, is that freedom, not which any law gives us, but
which no law takes away, and laws are the several restraints and limitations
of native liberty. Upon this ground I have showed already the right of nature
cannot be pleaded against positive constitution, that being a permission only,
and not an injunction, and therefore ceasing by a subsequent obligation arising
from promise and compact, when multitudes became one Civil body.

I was unwilling to weary the Reader by an unprofitable debate, and different
stating of the original of power. For though it be most true, that paternall
authority was regal, and therefore this of Gods immediate constitution, Their
own Scheame of Government serves our turn, and justifies the Kings cause.
and founded in nature, yet it is not much pertinent to the present decision,
nor can it necessarily concern modern controversies between Rulers and
People. Because it is most evident, no King at this day (and much less other
Governors) holds his Crown by that title, since several paternall powers in
every State are given up, and united in one common father, who cannot pretend a
more immediate kindred to Adam, then all the rest of mankind. For this
consideration, I thought fit to lay down their own Scheame of Government, and
let them make what advantages they can, by presenting to your apprehension a
multitude before a people, like a heap of stones, before they are cemented and
knit together into one building. I shall only desire my adversaries would not
betray so much want of ingenuity, as to make this favor of joining issue upon
their own principles, a contradiction. For I thought it loss of time to
insist upon their mistakes in the manner of derivation of power, when all of us
agree well enough in the thing. That, after the multiplying of mankind, there
was an Anarchy is confessed, only they impute it to a want of all Law and
Rulers, and we derive it more naturally from the multitude of Governors, whose
wills being various, were so many distinct Laws to those who were under them,
when in every family was a Kingdom. (...)
(...).
as Euripides describes the Cyclops: their Subjects were their own flesh and
natural Princes, being wives and children) when there were so many absolute
Princes within the compass of a Parish, that a man had scarce room to walk
in a Territory; when a Commonwealth was lodged in a Cottage, this (...) was the
mother of confusion, and by reason of such a multiplicity of Kings, it was not
ill styled (...). Though they had absolute power, yet it was confined within a
narrow compass, and if they exercised any jurisdiction, or made use of their
liberty to the prejudice of neighbor States, this begot controversies, and
both parties having right to be Judges in their own causes, they made force
the measure of decision, and who was strongest could not be known, but by the
issue of the war. -- Quis justius induit arma
Scire nefas, summo se judice quisque tuetur.
-- Haec acies victum factura nocentem est.


To prevent those fatal mischiefs to which they were subject, while they
lived in this hostile State, evidently occasioned by their divided powers, a
way was found out by making their individual strengths, and the many narrow
authorities (which still justled one another) one legal power, and this was
placed then with great prudence in one person, to the end the cause of their
sufferings might be fully taken away, and that there might not be left a
possibility of relapsing into their former miseries, which proceeded from
opposition between equal authorities. Thus I grant to them their own Scheame,
yet without prejudice to that truth delivered by Cedren, who makes Adam the
catholic Monarch: (...).

As reason first represented to them Monarchy, as the most perfect form, (from
which their want of government was a defection, for we may say of Anarchy, Non
fuit sic ab initio) so sense confirmed it, they having happy experience of
those eminent advantages peculiar to this constitution, as unity, secrecy, and
expedition. The Roman story does approve this wisdom, by acquainting us with
the fatal miscarriages, and bad successes of their Armies, when commanded by
two Generals. And if we look upon this State in peace, we shall find by
putting down Kings they laid the feed-plot of those many miserable civil
wars, with which that people was so frequently, so extremely afflicted.

The form of that Commonwealth was Democraticall; The government of Rome
according to the form, democraticall; but according to the practice, an
illegal Monarchy.
but if we judge of it, not as established by Law, but according to the
practice almost in all times, we must pronounce the Government an illegal
Monarchy. For either some one man governed the Senate, and made them an
instrument to oppress the people, or else (according as it was aptest to
advance his interests) siding with the people, and telling them the Nobles took
too much upon them, Different judgment of the best form of government,
oft-times the cause of sedition.
he by their power compassed his private ends under the names of common good,
and public safety.

The truth is, the different judgment of the best State, does de facto open a
gap to sedition, because men naturally desire to live most happily, and are
easily tempted to contribute their endeavors to any change, which they fancy
for the better; though in right it ought not to be so, notwithstanding some
form might be proposed, which were really more perfect, because our faith once
given to the present government, cannot be recalled; this civil union is as
fast tied as the marriage knot, we are bound to take it for better for worse.
And if otherwise, States would probably be shorter lived then men, as having
their foundation on the sands, that is, on the inconstant wills of the people,
who are blown about with every wind of contrary discourses. Fallacy in
discourses concerning what kind of government is best.
But in this dispute concerning the best form of civil society, there is a
great fallacy, as yet not fully discovered. Schemes are drawn in speculation,
and politic discourses are framed, which bear much resemblance with some
figures of Mathematicians, which are made with much ease upon paper, and with
appearance of solid demonstration, so that the Scholars not able to object
against it, entertain it for certain knowledge. But when reduced into
practice in wood or stone, the failings are presently seen, and their
contemplations appear vain and unprofitable, because they did not take into
consideration the capacity of the Subject, on which they were to work, nor
foresaw what resistance the matter would make. This error is committed in the
comparison of States, and many plausible reasons are laid down for the rule of
the Nobles, or of the people; which are best confuted by experience. For when
it is debated, whether Monarchy be the most convenient government, the true
sense of it is this, (if we judge according to the frequent practice, which in
Politiques is made the most reasonable measure of Laws) whether the people
will live more happily when Law places the supreme power in one, and nominates
that person (by which no room is left for division) or when one man being more
active and crafty then his fellows, who ought to have an equal share in this
authority, raises a faction upon plausible pretenses, and under color of
serving his side, persuades them to be commanded by him, and so exercises the
supreme power in an illegal way: which as it is compassed by engaging the
people in misery, under color of making them more happy, so ^^ it must be kept
up by as bad arts, and an Army must be maintained, to make good by force, what
Law cannot justify.

I do not wonder, (for it is no strange thing, part of the people should be
unwise) that some should be induced to cast off Monarchy. They are told, it is
very unreasonable that one should have all the power, -- (Toto liber in orb
Solus Caesar erit;)
They may upon the same ground persuade them to quarrel with God Almighty.
Their meaning is (though they dare not speak out) there is no government good,
unless they have a share in it. This interest of being joint Sovereigns,
makes them unable to see, or else willing to dissemble the apparent dangers
which division threatens, as likewise the great disadvantages which wait on
slow proceedings, (counsels, as well as men, growing weak by age) and the
unhappy miscarriages of brave undertakings, because not managed with fitting
secrecy. All these three are plainly spoken in many Governors, Faction, Delay,
Opennesse.

The method whereby the peoples affections are poisoned, and won to a dislike
of the present State, By what means so many of the people are misled into
Rebellion.
and by degrees, brought first to desire, then to attempt an Innovation, is
this. All the defects (how unavoidable soever, by reason of secret lets and
hindrances not to be foreseen, as depending upon many circumstances, which
are variable according to other men's wills, and which they have not the honesty
to put the people in mind of) are with great care represented to their
considerations, and much diligence is used to set before them a perfect
Catalogue of what ever faults have been committed by inferior Magistrates and
under Officers; and as they have excellent memories in repeating grievances, so
they have learned an art (very convenient for their ends, and for creating a
misunderstanding between King and people, that they may manage the discontents
of the Subject to advance particular designs) to forget the several
satisfactions given by Princes, when upon general complaints, they are fully
instructed in their Subjects sufferings.

The next work is to assign such a cause of these corruptions as shall open a
way to the alteration they aim at, which is, to impute them to the nature of a
monarchical government, by telling them, their happiness is built upon a very
uncertain foundation, the will of one man, and if he be bad, they must surely
be miserable.

Lastly, a promise is made, of healing all their evils, and the remedy is,
multitudo medicorum (the same plausibilities may be urged to persuade an
entertainment of many Physicians about a sick person, as about a distempered
State, but experience masters these reasons, and has demonstrated the danger
of it) they must place the Sovereign power amongst many, to the end, if one
should fail of his duty, others may supply it, if one should be willing to
oppress, others may be able to protect them. It fares with men in the
distempers of State, as in those of their bodies; They are easily induced to
make trial, of what any man tells them will do them good, and they have the
strongest phancies to those things of which they have least experience. But the
Fallacy which abuses the people is non causa pro causa; there ever was and
always will be matter of Complaint, under what kind of regiment soever we
live, and till men be absolutely perfect, the government cannot be so;
voluntary corruptions, and natural frail^ties must have an influence upon
every state. This tampering with the Body to reduce it to perfect health, has
overthrown many excellent constitutions, and such kind of physic proves the
most dangerous disease. Wherefore we must not fall out with our selves upon
every distemper, and presently think of altering our natural habit, lest we
make our selves well, only as dead men are so. It may become State-doctors to
take notice of Hippocrates his Aphorism, consueta longo tempore, etiamsi
deteriora, insuetis minus molesta esse solent.

It will concern us in prudence to take that course which will convay to us
the greatest goods, and is the most probable way of avoiding the most evils.
And this I conceive monarchy is most likely to effect, and I make no doubt the
people would be of the same opinion, Fallacy of unequal comparison.
if their affections had not been craftily prevailed upon, by that miserable
fallacy of unequal comparison, between a King not performing his trust, and
Nobles not failing of their duty as if the word (...) or optimacie would
warrant it) whereas if they were put into a just balance they ought to be
supposed both good, Greater hores in Monarchy; greater fears in an Aristocracy.
or both bad, and then a true judgment might be made of the mischeifes and
advantages; Then we should clearly discern, we have greater hopes under a
virtuous King, (suppose both good) and greater fears under a vicious nobility
or Senate, (suppose both bad) And besides there is one very considerable
circumstance, which ought to rule much in the decision; it is much more
probable we shall have a good King, then a good nobility. (I take good in a
politic sense, for that only concerns the present dispute, and understand it
in this notion, as providing for the peoples happiness.) Because his interest
is the same with that of the People, which is strong State security; Kings
interest the same with the peoples; that of Nobles divided from their happiness.
whereas that of particular Nobles, and much more of men of lower rank, where
such are admitted, is divided from the public happiness. The Commonwealths
of Greece will afford many examples of persons selling their Country, and
putting the great Council upon ill attempts, and laboring with their utmost
cunning to frustrate good designs, because their dependence upon a foreign
Kingdom or State, was worth much more unto them, then they could hope to gain
by honest service to their Country.

First, we have greater hopes under a virtuous King: because upon supposall
that both be willing to promote the peoples happiness, Much greater happiness
in Monarchy.
yet he is more able to compass that end, by reason he has a more united
power, and the execution of what ever designs, depends but upon a single
resolve, and therefore may be managed with certain closeness, and all
convenient swiftness, so that good counsels shall be first discovered in the
effects: whereas a great body moves slowly and most times the opportunity of
doing is gone by, while they are but half way in their deliberation.

Subjects living under good Lords or Senators (such as value the honor of
being esteemed worthy patriots, above the advancing their own fortunes, or
raising children, or preferring friends, subsidia dominationi, or enriching
kindred, and these qualities rarely meet in the major part of an assembly)
seem to me to be in the same state, as children who have lost a father, and
whose fortunes by his care are left to Feoffees in trust; these though
extremely honest, yet by reason of necessary particular cares, which more
immediately concern them, and because they are many, and so every one expects
the rest will probably be careful to perform this trust, and therefore he may
be spared, and allowed to spend his time more advantageously in improving his
own estate, especially this performance of faith to a dead man being a very
barren virtue, either the wages being paid before, or else nothing allotted. He
presuming upon their goodness, and frequent deep Protestations of loving his
equal to themselves, and thinking it an unworthy thing, to set a price upon an
old friends fidelity, and so leaving it to be rewarded only by heaven, and the
same honest care in others of their children; These I say out of real or very
plausible hindrances, are forced to neglect the childrens portions, and the
poor Orphans receive uncomfortable satisfaction. They would have been in much
better condition, though strangers in worldly affairs, if wholely left unto
themselves, because their necessities would have quickened them, whereas now
their hands are tied up from helping themselves, and all they can contribute
toward making themselves Masters of their own fortunes, is a fruitless
impudence in vainly importunating the curators: So is it most times in the
government of many, though understanding, and good men; which is a rare
happiness, and yet no security against miseries, because onus commune
negligunt singuli, what belongs to their common care, frequently miscarries by
particular negligences.

Secondly, Greater miseries in Aristocracie.
we have greater fears under vicious Lords or Senators; That is, it stands
with clear and evident reason, we should be more miserable, living under many
tyrants, then under one. The thirty tyrants of Athens, and the Decemviri of
Rome, and that state variously oppressed, sometimes by the Senate, sometimes by
the people, and at length to prevent ruin cadens in sinum imperatorum,
Monarchy a more healthy constitution.
are examples of this sad truth. That which makes a people out of love with
monarchy is a contemplation of the miserable consequences of abused power,
whereas the government by Senate is more apt to degenerate, and the oppressions
under it are more intolerable.

As there are many advantages peculiar to Monarchy, so there is not any one
inconvenience to which a people living under an Aristocracy (as to instance for
the better understanding it, under a Parliament as it is now mistaken for the
two Houses, challenging absolute obedience to their Ordinances, without the
Kings ratification, nay against his plain denial, by which they are null by
the Law of England) are not subject in a much higher degree.

Let us suppose a Prince to be lustful, or cruel, or covetous, or prodigal,
and wasting what might be employed on the public upon favorites. The
diseases of a Senate more violent.
If these vices are so grievous, when confined within one breast; to what height
will our misery swell, when they shall be scattered through all parts, and be
active in each corner of the Land? Their wives and daughters may be safe by
distance, and live out of the reach of one man's embraces: If his loose desires
are so insatiable, how can they weary those of so many? Secondly, it is more
easy not to incur the hatred of one, whereas there are scarce possible ways
of compliance with so many cross humors. One will never fall out with all,
for he knows he should have an ill match of it, whereas the whole State may
suffer by cruelty exercised by divided oppressors, because each man gives full
reins to his revenge, as thinking it safe enough, the fears from a few
persons crushed by him, being below the delight of manifesting his power in his
enemies calamity. Thirdly, the covetousness of Senators is more devouring,
because we may feed one fire with less expense of fuel, then a hundred. And
fourthly a Princes profuse spending upon favorites is infinitely
over-ballanced by so many providing for their poor kindred, and making
friends, and purchasing dependants. This art (very necessary to all men
employed in State affairs, who are subject to various censures) of
underpropping their reputation, and hiring Advocates to plead for them in their
absence, must draw out very considerable sums, and be more chargeable to the
people (from whom the supplies must come) then the bounty of one man, though
showred down over-plentifully upon some few privadoes. The wisest States have
ever made ample allowances to enable their Prince to bestow favors according
to merits, or liking, (the privileges of every private man) it arguing a noble
soul to be bountiful.

It has been showed already, that Monarchy is a more healthy constitution,
and that when sick the diseases of it are less violent, Easy remedies for a
sick Monarchy.
and it will easily be made to appear, they are more curable. Good counsel,
or at least age and experience has reformed many Princes; but however our
grievances are mortal, the death of one opens a way to better hopes: but the
corruption of a Senate ends in dissolution. The diseases of a Senate incurable.
Tacitus gives a full character of the distempers which are fatal to a
degenerate Senate. Inter Patres plebemque certamina exarsere, modo turbulenti
tribuni, modo consules praevalidi; and in urbe ac foro tentamenta civilium
bellorum. Mox e plebe infima C. Marius, and nobilium saevissimus L. Sulla
victam armis libertatem in dominationem verterunt. 2. hist. There arose hot
contentions between the Nobility and Commons; now the factious Tribunes bore
sway, then the Consuls kept them under In the City and the place of public
assembly there were frequent skirmishes, the Preface and Essays to a civil
war. Anon Caius Marius, the meanest of the Commonalty; and Lucius Sulla, the
cruellest amongst the Nobles, destroying their liberty and property by the
assistance of their illegal Militia, introduced an absolute and unbounded
government.

There be some, The miseries of a kingdom when a child governes, an argument
for monarchy.
with whom that of Ecclesiastes prevails, woe to thee O land, when thy King is
a child, and they think it a strong argument against monarchy, because this
calamity is not incident to a senate, they not being subject to nonage. But
this place rightly understood, is a very full confirmation of the happy
condition we have reason to expect under monarchy, and of the calamity and woes
which probably attend an Aristocracy. For the cause of those miseries foretold
is plainly this, A King during his infancy being not able to rule, the
government is managed by the nobles. Whence we learn, that change which the
people often times with sinful earnestness labor for, is to be found in the
catalogue of Gods judgments, and they sue for, and by wicked arts endeavor to
compass their own punishment. It is an argument of Gods great mercy to them,
that he fights against them; if he were thoroughly angry, the designs of
innovatours would have better success. This truth is warranted by scripture.
For the transgression of a land, many are the princes thereof: but by a man of
understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged. prove. 28. 2.

To all these corruptions a popular state is more subject, Popular form the
worst government.
and the imperfections of it, are so much the greater, as it is farther distant
from monarchy; the temper of it (which is unity, the soul of government) being
more easily dissolved. Those which cry it most up, will be unwilling to admit
it in their families, which are smaller principalities. Three things especially
have made it so taking with the vulgar. 1. a pretended impartial
administration of justice; 2ly. an empty name of liberty; and 3ly the so much
applauded equality, by which they seem to reduce their civil constitutions to
the primary laws of nature, which gave to all men a common right.

Concerning the first, More equal administration of justice without reason,
and against experience, promised in this form
their hopes that justice should be more equally administered, are grounded upon
this probability: It is very hard to corrupt a multitude into favor or respect
of persons; (though some rivers have been infected, the ocean cannot be
poisoned.) A man may satisfy the interests of one or some few, but to buy
injustice of so many would be no thriving trade, he might more cheaply loose
his cause. This is a plausible but very fallacious argument. Because experience
makes it evident, that to prevent the evils of division, which the many
following particular and cross interests do beget, one remedy is constantly
made use of, which is this; some few of the more crafty citizens, who have
gained credit with them, agree together in private, and order businesses at
their close committee, and so undiscernably lead the multitude on to what ever
they call the public good, of which they having prevailed upon their
affections are esteemed the most competent Judges. And what is this, but to
pretend to a Democracy, and be governed by an illegal Aristocracy? By this
means any one of the Junto (for they must gratify each other mutually) is
enabled to stop the course of law in a friends behalf, and to put a sharper
edge upon the sword of justice when it strikes an enemy. These kind of men
have got the Art of changing the peoples opinions of just and unjust, according
as it is more suitable to their own profit, and they are not so much beholding
to any solid wisdom for it, as a kind of frothy eloquence, which we may
observe in their set speeches and declamations, with much cunning fitted to the
capacity of their auditors. They do not at all trouble themselves to satisfy
reasonable men, for they are but a few, and can stand them in little stead,
where things are carried by the greater number, and reasons are not weighed,
but told. The art is, to apply their harangues to that which rules weaker men,
the affections (suadendo docent, non decendo suadent) and these are easily
convinced, and made the measure of their judgment; the want of weight in the
premises being supplied by an extraordinary love to the conclusion. It was too
truly said in reference to these popular decisions. -- Vtilitas justi prope
matter and aequi est.


From this fountain arise the many debates amongst men in civil affairs. For
in Mathematical knowledge, because it concerns not meum and tuum, there is an
unanimous consent; all agree, what lines are straight, and what crooked; but
the judgments of right and wrong, are as various as their interests different.
The objection of greater liberty, answered.


Secondly, concerning liberty, it is very strange that men should so generally
fall in love with a bare sound, and court a name of freedom, which duly
examined, will be found to signify nothing. They cannot mean by it a
looseness from all laws, because their intent is to change, not take away
government; they dare not own such a pernicious license. And therefore the
true debate amongst men is, not whether they shall admit of bonds, (that is
such obligations as laws lay upon them, these are readily embraced) but who
shall impose them; the question is not an servirent, sed an uni vel pluribus,
and it is commonly called liberty, to serve more masters.

The restraint of our freedom is that which is most valuable amongst the
benefits of government. For this preserves peace between men, that their hands
are tied up from doing injuries. Though we naturally delight in a full and
absolute liberty, yet the love of it is over-ballanced by fears; every one
could wish to retain it himself, but not upon this condition, that all others
should enjoy the same freedom. Because as the contemplation of our own
liberty is pleasant, to do what we list, so there is a more sad consideration
arising from the thought of others freedom, to make us suffer, as much as they
may be tempted to inflict.

Thirdly, Aequalitate nihil est iniquius
concerning equality, if they urge, it comes nearer to the law of Nature, by
the same reason they must dissolve the bonds of all government, since there can
be no Magistrate, no Superior and Inferior, and par in parem non habet
imperium; so we must indulge to every man to do what seems good in his own
eyes. This argument does not conclude for one form above another, but equally
destroys all, and is applied to a popular State, only out of resemblance of
some imperfections common to both, because that government comes nearest to
none, and is but few degrees removed from Anarchy and confusion. But the truth
is, this equality which they so passionately affect, is clearly against
nature, who if an equality of rewards had been intended, would have made all
men equally deserveing. Reason does teach us, since it is manifest, we may
excel others by education and industry; greater encouragements should be
allotted, in consideration of the charges of good breeding, and of the
extraordinary studies, whereby men enable themselves for the honor and good of
the public. Besides this equality, though pretended to conserve, does in
truth destroy amity, for none are so quarrellsome, none so subject unto envy,
as equals.

We may judge of the thriving of popular States, by what we observe in commons,
which are always poor, and bare, and if taken into one man's hands, would be
improved fourefold: we find by experience what all should look after, is
neglected by every one, whilst each man thinks his particular expense of time
and study will not conduce much, and that they may be supplied by others, and
therefore he chooses to employ them rather on his private interests much more
profitably.

Seeing that the greater part of men in a popular sway, are bred up to gain,
they make profit for the most part of the rule of their actions, and so
entertain but little sense of honor. And hence this State is easily corrupted
by their low affections, so that particular persons may be sometimes rich, the
State can never be glorious. How can the happiness of that Commonwealth be
lasting, where the wiser and honester part being still the fewer, must be ruled
by men of weak understandings, and of corrupt affections, men extremely
violent, if they be not awed, and in their fear irresolute in all their
proceedings, men not capable of secrets, so that they expose themselves to all
disadvantages? Their assemblies are full of inconstancy and disorder, it is
very hard to separate tumult and multitude. The wiser often times dare not
speak, fearing the madness of the people. For if things should succeed ill by
some secret lets, they are sure to suffer for the event, since amongst such
Judges it is not enough to counsel prudently, unless fortunately also. The
States of Sparta and Athens will afford plenty of examples.

If they be not united by fear of a foreign war, they will quickly break
out into a domestique. They are well compared to the raging of the waves; their
contrary humors easily raise a tempest. The united Provinces are thought by
many to owe more to the Spaniards constant enmity, then to the aides of
English, Scots, or French. (And yet without their assistance they had been
long since swallowed up,) and they may thank the justice of Monarchies, that
these friends made them not a prey to themselves. He is a stranger in the Roman
story, who knows not how fatal Mercenaries were, when lent by a Commonwealth.
If he would not have fought with them, he had conquered them long ere this. The
fate of Greece would have been theirs, Graeciae civitates dum imperare
singulae cupiunt, omnes imperium perdiderunt: we see how the Athenians,
Lacedaemonians, Thebans, Arcadians, Phocians, Locrians, Corinthians, Boeotians,
with others, variously siding, that they might keep the balance even,
miserably warred upon one another, till at last Philip took advantage of their
discords, and made himself King of all.

I have been tempted into this large digression, for the fuller satisfaction
of the people, in whom a dislike of the present government is begot, and so a
way is laid open for a change of it, upon pretense some other form would be
more advantageous. Which first is not true, and therefore they have not any
motive for disloyalty, since they would be dishonest against Interest. And
secondly, if it were true in it self, yet it is not so, when a State is settled
under another form, the certain miseries of a civil war, and the great
difficulties of setting it together, when it is torn into so many pieces, will
be above any hopes they can reasonably propose to themselves. And thirdly, if
it could be done advantageously and safely, yet it cannot honestly. They will
forfeit Heaven for that, which in all probability will make them more miserable
upon earth; and it were a sad purchase, if they should obtain as much as their
ambition or covetousness can devour. Civil society is founded upon Justice,
and supported by Religion, which obliges us to preserve the faith of contracts
entire. We are bound to stand to our bargain, though it should appear it
might have been better made. Experience shows us, that States may live and
flourish too under the worst form of government, and they are not immortal
under the best. Let the imperfections be more or less in this or that kind of
regiment, they cannot absolve the Subjects conscience; though he may have
reason to prefer other Laws, he must have so much religion to be obedient to
those under which it pleased God to place him.

It is high time to make particular application of the former discourse,
concerning the original of government, and by a distinct state of it to give
light to all which follows.

Non est potestas nisi a Deo, True state of government in general, with
application to that of this Kingdom.
says the Apostle, Romans 13. There is no power but of God, that is, the right
by which the Magistrate governes, and all the jurisdiction he exercises is
derived from divine ordinance. This may be conveyed either immediately, as
amongst the Jews, when God designed the person, which now no State will
pretend; or else mediante populi consens^, the consent of the people
intervening, and this two ways, either by a free election, upon hopes from his
extraordinary goodness; or by conquest, attended with a voluntary submission,
upon fears from his extraordinary power, that he may be willing to protect,
who was able to injure: whether of these motives presented the person, is not
certain in the first times, but it is clear their Empire was absolute (I
exclude not the bounds of justice according to the Laws of right reason, and
equity) usually known by the name of (...), in which arbitria principum pro
legibus erant. Though this continued long in the world, and the Eastern people
enjoyed a great measure of happiness under it, and therefore with great reason
(to use the expression of Tacitus) addicte admodum regnabantur. they were
subject most devoutly; yet the sense of some sufferings (as the fate of humane
things is interwoven with a mixture of good and evil) suggested a remedy,
which was to bound his power within the limits of positive Laws. From hence
proceeded the different qualifications of Regal power in several Kingdoms.
Some, though restrained by Laws, yet were truly Monarchs, (...), being not
responsable for any breaches, as supreme, though not absolute: others had the
name and title of Kings only, but were subject to a superior jurisdiction, as
Theseus to the people, the Spartan Kings to the Ephori, It is not necessary to
determine that question, whether the frequent debates about the not observation
and the breaches of these agreements, (which, a discontented part of the people
challenging the liberty of being Judges in this case, and the King thinking he
had as much right, did produce civil wars, and most unnatural distractions)
have not heretofore, and will probably hereafter make States more unhappy then
they were even in their worst times, and when they suffered most under the
abuses of one man's power, whilst there was, though sometimes an unjust, yet
always a certain way of ending controversies; when a sentence, if it did not
find, yet made a right, and res judicata pro veritate accipiebatur. To decide
this, I say, is not altogether necessary, because the obligations which lie
both on King and people have their strength from this, not that he might better
govern the people in such or such a way, but because this particular
government is established by the consent of both parties; their wills give the
form to the regiment, and not the conveniences of it. To come nearer home, and
grant as much as reasonable men, and those which understand the nature of
government can require. For I think they do ill service to the cause, though
with good affections, who out of a desire to make it more firm and stronger,
place it upon any other then the natural foundation, and that which is only
fit to support it, and take the rights which God gave to the Kings of Judah,
for the measure of all regal authority, which if they were, all Kings would
have equal power, but this evidently varyes according to different Laws, and
is more or less according to several constitutions. That which is pleaded for
in this discourse, as common to them and our Kings, is only jus regni, the
right of Monarchy, not to be accomptable to any inferior jurisdiction.

I shall not deny, a Kingdom may be so constituted (but then it is no
Monarchy) that upon a real breach of such or such conditions, named in the
compact, and a forfeiture being expressed, the sword of Justice may be taken up
by some Magistrates, appointed by law, as the Ephori amongst the
Lacedaemonians; or by the people, as at Rome when the last appeal did legally
lie unto them, (for it did not always, as when a Dictator was created, he was
the whole people for six months, and though the time of his reign was
limited, his power was not bounded, he was (...), accomptable to none for what
he did in his regency, no, not when a private man again: and so under the
Emperors, as appears by the Lex Regia, quoted by Vlpian, which transferred
all the peoples power upon him, (L. quod. D. de constit. prin.) A mistake upon
this has seduced so many of the Kings Subjects into Rebellion. For because it
is made appear a State may be so established, and they are induced to believe,
it is more reasonable it should be so established; upon these premises they
conclude most inconsequently, that our State is so established, and in the
strength of this fight against His Majesty, and did their best to kill Him,
contrary to Gods ordinance, applied to our civil constitutions, and repugnant
to their own oath, in which they swore to be loyal in reference to His
Person, and that they would defend His life with their utmost power.

That a Kingdom may be so established, a considering man will not gainsay. If
the State of Venice should call their Duke King, this new name would not convey
any new power into him. Election or succession cannot rule the case; for an
elective Kingdom may be conferred absolutely, as will appear in the Roman
Empire, and a successive may be subject to forfeiture, if this be expressed in
the Covenant. For succession is not a new title to more right, but a legal
continuance of what was first gotten.

2. That it is more reasonable so to establish a Kingdom, that the Prince
shall be accomptable to a higher power, either placed in some Magistrates, or
in the people, (and then by the way it is not a Monarchy, but either an
Aristocracy or a popular State) though this be very false, yet if it were true,
it cannot justify this war now undertaken as things are ordered in this
Land, against the King. Because Policy is no dispensation against observing
known Laws, and we may not destroy our Governors out of reason of State;
Machiavell must not give Law to the Gospel. If we might challenge such
liberty, there were not such a thing as Justice, our oaths would be of no force
against Interest; profit should be the measure of our actions, and we must
conclude all right what ever was advantageous. Since then not such persons as
they could better fancy, but those only whom the Law has consided in, and
enabled to that end, can put Arms into the hands of the people, it concerns
every man, as much as his soul is worth (for that will certainly be lost in
those great sins of Rebellion, Perjury, and Murder) sadly to examine whether
to fight against the King, be not to resist the Supreme Power, to which God
has threatened damnation.

Every State has a supereminent dominion or paramount interest over all
particular men, and what belongs to them, and consequently has full power to
restrain the license of resisting, for the preservation of order and public
tranquillity. That it should lay such an obligation upon all Subjects,
Non-resistance to the supreme power, essential to the preservation of order.
there is evident reason, because what the supreme power, that is the State
(in order to those things wherein supremacy consists) does, is truly the act of
all, and none can have just cause of quarrel for dislike of what they
themselves do; and moreover necessity inforces it. Because without this the
essence and being of a State were destroyed, which is, Order. For this ceases*
if first and last be confounded, and the City is dissolved into a multitude,
and that which should be one body, becomes so many independent men.

The benefits which are conveyed to us by men in authority, are described by
Timothy 1.. 2. 2. and he calls them the leading of a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty. It is not imaginable how they should be enabled
to compass this end, except some sentence be supreme, from which it shall not
be lawful to appeal; and consequently except that power which Law arms, and
which looks to the execution of what is decreed, be not to be resisted. For if
it should be indulged to us to change our Adversary, and fall out with the
Judge, and as often as we think we suffer wrong by his determination, to take
the freedom of righting our selves, upon this ground, that his duty is to give
righteous judgment, and therefore not satisfying that trust, he is no longer a
Judge, then just; his sentence ought not to be submitted to, for we are not
bound to be obedient to his will, but law; if he endeavor to put it in
execution by himself or his malignant Officers; though we kill him, it is no
fault, because violence was offered only to his person, not to his authority,
which was none in this case, because he judged against Law, and that gives not
power to its own overthrow; it is evident this principle makes our strifes and
debates endless, all our Laws would be writ in blood; it breaks in sunder
all the bonds with which the goodly frame of government is knit together, and
robbes us of our peace under Anarchy and confusion. Out of this consideration
the wisdom of all States has thought it fit to secure the person or persons
in whom the supreme power is seated, by the strictest Laws, and most severe
punishment, which cannot consist with a liberty of resistance, to the
indangering his or their lives. By the Civil Law, a Soldier was cashiered,
not if he did strike again, but if he only kept off some strokes, and held
the rod of a Centurion; but if he broke it willingly, or offered the least
violence, he was sacrificed to the Roman discipline, and expiated his offense
by death. Certainly the people would have nourished in their breasts a greater
reverence, and more awful respects toward Majesty, if they had not been ill
catechized and taught, that Dei minister est nobis in bonum, He is the Minister
of God, might be construed, the Peoples servant; and that a King is but their
creature, and therefore in duty is bound to submit to his maker.

The truth is, we find it called by Peter (...); the people have a hand in it,
this cannot be denied, but we have it in the same verse raised into a divine
workmanship, The King is Des Minister, not the peoples servant, not their
creature.
(...), acknowledge your selves to be subject, submit to the King, or break
not order, in which he is first or supreme, for the Lords sake: 1 Pet. 2. 13.
The work is taken out of their hands, when they have contributed as much as
they were able, which was to give up their divided powers, and unite them in
him; their act made him the fountain of all that power which they had, and by
consequence the fountain of all honor, that always bearing proportion to the
former; for to honor is nothing else, but to testify by our actions an
opinion of so much or so great power in any one, and therefore the same act is
expressed only in different words, Fear God, honor the King: v. 17. If they
had been changed to honor God, fear the King, they had signified the same
duty. And therefore it is said, Servants be subject to your masters with all
fear: v. 18. The work I say is taken out of the peoples hands, and God
himself perfects it. If it had stayed there, if God had not pleased to add
to, and finish it, yet it had been most true, that no resistance were lawful;
and evidently false, that he were universis minor, because he that has
supreme, that is, all their power, is the representative all, he is legally
the whole people. But the obligation of not resisting is infinitely more
weighty, if we consider him not only as representing the people, but as
representing God himself. The King Gods representative, as well as the peoples.
He has given to him a power of a much higher nature, a part of his dominion
over the life of man. The people could not agree together to dispense with Gods
precept, Thou shall not kill, nor distinguish shedding blood with the sword of
vengeance from murder. Power over the life of man, from God only, not from
the people.
It was not possible for any man to give away a greater right over his own
life then he had, Nemo plus juris ad alium transfer potest, quam ipse habet;
and he had nothing to do in the disposal of any others, and therefore except
killing a man's self be lawful, the people cannot enable the Magistrate to
take away their lives. Hence it follows, though that be lamentable Sophistry
in many respects, Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale, urged to maintain a
clear contradiction, that Subjects are above him whom they have placed over
them; yet if it were sound reason, it were a very impertinent argument, because
it proceeds upon a false supposall, that the people should efficere talem.
Because jus gladii, (to bear the sword innocently, and to cut off offenders
without deserving greater punishment then they inflict, by transgressing
against Gods known will, Vindicta mea, ego retribuam, Vengeance is mine, I
will repay says the Lord,) must refer to God as the author. Magistrates are
(...), Gods Delegates, and not the peoples; (...), (...), Gods Ministers, his
revengers, (or as it is better without a comma,) his revenging Ministers to
execute wrath. It is very strange the people should be so much abused, as to be
persuaded to take upon them Gods Prerogative, and to usurp his language. Psalm.
82. 6. We have said, ye are Gods; and to contradict Christ, who says to his
unjust Judge, Thou could have no power to take away my life, unless it were
given thee from above: but they state it otherwise, unless it were given thee
from beneath, from us, and we were not so mad as to contract for our own ruin.

Most of their Writers in their printed Sermons and Pamphlets, declaime against
this tame behavior, this obligation not to resist, as an absurd and senseless
thing, and a condition repugnant to man's nature, and unworthy of reasonable
creatures; but I must tell them God was not of their opinion, who thought it
fit to govern his own people in this way: who ever was not obedient to what
the highest authority did determine, Gods own people bound not to resist the
supreme Magistrate; therefore this no absurd constitution.
was to die, as appears Deuteronomy. 17. 12, 13. The man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest, (that stands to minister
there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that man shall die, and
thou shall put away the evil from Israel. God commands he should be made an
example, that the people may not be tempted to Rebellion; for in the 13 verse
it is said, All the people shall hear and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. It is worth our notice that here all the people are mentioned;
if they had agreed together to resist not a pretended, but a real false
sentence, this conspiracy could not turn their sedition into a just war, it
could not take off the guilt of disobedience, though the multitude of offenders
might hinder the punishment; Populi salus, suprema lex, had been but a weak
plea here.

This is urged only to prove thus much, that all their arguments (which have
greatest influence upon the peoples affections) drawn from inconveniences by
reason of the faults of Governors (under which the Jewish Commonwealth
frequently suffered, as appears by the Prophets reprehensions) may as justly
be made against the Jewish Government, of which God himself was the author.
And that he forbade resistance to supreme authority is plain moreover, the
first of Joshua, v. 18. Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy
commandment, and will not hearken to thy words in all that thou command
him, he shall be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage. Hence the
weakness of that Sophistry (which has caused these sad distractions) is
evident. For they persuade the people, it were madness to make such a
contract, which upon supposall of bad Governors would leave them without
remedy, and therefore ^it for certain truth they made their bargain wiser.
Whereas there is no ground for imputation of folly, for following Gods own
pattern, and yet if it were indiscretion, this does not void the compact: They
are bound to be honest, though they were not wise; to plead they were fools,
will not license them to be knaves.

Lex Regni, as it is called, 1 Samuel 10. 25. the fundamental Law of Government,
(of which a Monarchy is but a species) or the right of supreme authority is
most excellently described by Samuel, in the 1. Book, 8. cap. 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17. verses. This shall be the right of the King that shall reign over
you: He will take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his charets,
and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his charets. And he will
appoint him Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, and will set
them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments
of war, and instruments of his charets. And he will take your daughters to be
confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers. And he will take your
fields, and your vineyards, and your olive-yards, even the best of them, and
give them to his servants. And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your
vineyards, and give to his officers and to his servants. And he will take your
men servants, and your maid servants, and your goodliest young men, and your
asses, and put them to his work. He will take the tenth of his sheep, and ye
shall be his servants. And ye shall cry out in that day because of your King
which ye shall have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that day. It
is not lawful for you to break that yoke which ye put upon your selves,
neither shall your tears prevail with God to take it off your necks:
notwithstanding such afflictions were foretold, their resolution is, to have a
King over them, that they also may be like all the Nations, and that their King
may judge them, and go out before them, and fight their battles. Sit
incommodum, we acknowledge these are grievous inconveniences, (nam quid fere
undique placet, it is the fate of all governments, because managed by men, who
may prove vicious, to be unavoidably subject to great calamities) verum illud
compa^imus commodis, we have weighed the advantages of being ruled by a King,
and conceive the probable goods which are conveyed from Regal government,
which are known by experience in other Nations, will overbalance these
accidental evils, however we are resolved to venture it.

A misunderstanding this part of Scripture has opened a way to two dangerous
extremes, which are both false, and have produced unhappy consequences. From
hoc erit jus regis* some conclude his will is his Law; and quicquid libet,
licet; but this is clearly convinced in the 17 of Deuteronomy, where the duty
of their King is described, from the 16 verse to the end of the chapter.

Others make it a bare prophecy of the tyrannical abuse of power by the King
which they should choose, (if so, the people had small reason to shout for joy
at his Inauguration; and secondly, this was not fulfilled in Saul, for though
he proved a Tyrant, yet not in all these particulars) and so they confound jus
with factum. But it cannot be found in any author that ever jus was taken in
this sense, Mischpat will not bear this signification. When Thieves take away
men's goods or their lives, it might as properly be said, hoc est jus Latronum,
this is the right which robbers have.

To find out the true meaning, The true sense of jus Regis in Samuel.
we must know, that this law was not given as a rule for him to command, but
for the people to obey by; it did not excuse him from sinning, but disabled
them from punishing him for his offenses: and therefore it is said, when the
solemnity of his Inauguration was ended, Loquutus est Samuel ad populum legem
regni, he spoke not to the King, but applied himself to the people, and
declared their duty. This was not what he ought to do, but what they ought to
suffer, when a King swerved from that rule by which he was bound to govern.
For his duty was well known, being laid down many ages before by Moses, and
written in the book which Moses commanded the Levites to keep in the side of
the Arc of the Covenant, that it might be there for a testimony against
transgressors: Deuteronomy. 31. 36. so that this binds the people not to resist,
though they are oppressed; wherefore the close of it is, since there is no
help in man, they must only cry unto the Lord: 1 Samuel 10. 18. This
signification is confirmed by the Civil Law, where we are informed, jus
praetor reddit, etiam cum inique discernit; the meaning of it is explained,
relatione scilicet facta non ad id, quod ita praetor fecit, sed ad illud quod
praetorem facere convenit: L. jus plur. D. de just. and jur. And in this sense,
summum jus is sometimes summa injuria.

It were happy for all States, if the people were fully instructed in this
Text, and could distinguish Potestatem imperii ab officio imperantis, the right
to govern, from government according to right. For the former is obligatory
and stands in full force, though he be defective in the latter.

This middle way, inter abruptam contumaciam, and deforme obsequium, neither
guilty of stubborn disobedience, or servile compliance, is very safe and
honest. For it acknowledges he that has supreme authority, is subject to some
laws (for it was truly said by Harmenopulus, (...), and that of the Emperors
is fit to be observed, Digna vox est majestate regnantis, legibus alligatum se
principem profiteri. Adeo de auctoritate juris nostra pendet auctoritas: and
revera majus imperio est, submittere legibus principatum. l. 4. c. de legibus.)
But he is not subject to any Judge upon earth, because he has no superior.
This the Graecians called (...), a government not accomptable to men; and they
opposed (...) such a Monarchy (...), to such Rulers as were responsable:
Ambrose expresses it by non ullis ad poenam vocari legibus, tutos imperii
potestate. The reason of these constitutions was grounded upon necessity, which
enforced them to place an impunity somewhere, for avoiding confusion. A
necessity to grant impunity to some in all governments, to avoid confusion.
For a circle in government would be infinitely absurd, and of pernicious
consequences, when Rulers are placed over us, to challenge a right to rule
those Rulers. The Poet very wisely was at a stand: -- Quis enim custodiet ipsos
Custodes? --


But these men run round till they are giddy, all the foundations of
government being moved by them, and put out of course. Because they have not
settled (...), as Galen calls it, a supreme power, to whose sentence the last
resort must be, and whose determination jus facit, that is, though it should
swerve from the rule of justice, yet it must have the effect of right; it is
binding to all, they cannot call him to account for it, and make him
responsable for the wrong. His authority is a guard to his person; and though
he chance to do some things not innocently, (for he ought to be guided by the
laws of honesty given to mankind, and to observe his oath and promises) yet
he must do all safely, because he cannot be punished by any National Law.
This impunity makes all resistance which may any way endanger his person
unlawful. David clearly determines the case. Destroy him not, says he to
Abishai, the reason of this ne perdas is now of full force, and ties up the
hands of inferiors in every State: For who can stretch forth his hands against
the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26. 9. The substance of this
anointment, which makes their persons sacred, and not to be touched with
violence, remains even where the Ceremony is not practiced. For it is nothing
else but jus regnandi, the right of supremacy, a true title to reign over
them; and therefore Cyrus a Heathen King is called Gods Anointed: Es. 45. 1.
though the material ceremony of pouring oil upon him, was not in use amongst
the Persians. It is a metaphorical expression of supereminency, taken from
that quality of oil, which is, when it is mixed with other liquours, to be
uppermost.

The Fathers unanimous gloss (which certainly ought to bear greater sway in
our actions, then the authority of those men, not known to us, but as the
causes of our misery) upon David's confession, Against thee, thee only have I
sinned; Psalm. 51. 4. pleads for this impunity. Notwithstanding he had abused
Vriah's wife, and contrived the death of so gallant a man, who forgot what was
dearest to him next unto the Kings honor, and would not go in unto his wife,
until the Kings enemies were destroyed; yet he says, in the height of his
humiliation, he had sinned against God only, because there was no Tribunal
amongst men to which he was responsable. Our Common Law seems to express it
self in the same sense, le Roy ne fa tort, the King can do no wrong; Though
we may suffer undeservedly, yet no sense of injuries received can dispense with
the obligation of not righting our selves by force.

I have done with my proofs out of the Old Testament, and I desire my readers
to weigh how much is concluded, lest they should think the application hollow,
because all Kings have not the same rights which belonged to the Kings of
Israel.

First therefore it has been showed, How much is concluded out of the old
Testament to the present case.
to restrain this liberty of resistance, is a wise government, because of Gods
own institution; and so that temptation which has strong influence upon many,
ought to cease; that it is folly to contract to be obedient in such a way, as
may leave them without remedy for great grievances.

And secondly it is evidenced, that the same power which the Judges before, and
the Kings of Israel after had, is in every State somewhere, that jus consistens
in impunitate delictorum, a right of not being accomptable for their actions,
which fences the person or persons in whom suprema dominatio is, and secures
them (as strongly as Laws can do) from all violence, is either in one man (so
always in a Monarchy) or in a certain body, whose power though abused, must
give Law (in order to non-resistance) to all inferiors.

There is a possibility of suffering very great inconveniences, without any
lawful means of redress: It is an unhappy condition we shall live in, if he
or they should be Tyrants, and take delight in our oppression. But we cannot
help it, God out of his dominion might thus dispose of our fortunes and lives,
and he declares his pleasure so to do, and therefore we must choose the least
evil, which is, not to resist, and by endeavoring to save our goods or
bodies, to loose our souls. Certainly if we were as truly religious as we
would be thought to be, we have not any cause to be troubled, though these
things should happen to us. No hard Law to require from us Non-resistance.
If our patience in submission to his precept be chargeable, we make God our
debtor; all the taxes and tributes are put upon his account, and he will
return them in as plentiful measure, as if we had spent so much charitably,
(and we cannot lay out our estate better.) The Magistrate is Gods receiver, as
well as the poor. He commands part of our revenues in him, in those he seems
to entreat: that is to pay debts, this comes nigher to a courtesy, and
therefore we might better excuse our uncharitableness, then our resistance.
But what if their cruelty extend to the farthest, and endeavor to take away
our lives wrongfully?

These are justly dear to men, and much is done to draw out a few years,
(notwithstanding our comforts are interwoven with sorrows, our fears are
oftentimes above our hopes, most of our days are cloudy, and over-cast with
melancholyes, and the discontents arising from our wants (which are as vast and
unbounded as our desires to have) are much greater then the narrow pleasures of
enjoyment, which is confined to a few things, the stroaking of fortune being
not so delightful, as her blows are grievous:) but what value ought we then
to set upon eternal life? how highly ought we to prize those everlasting
joys, which still quicken, and still satisfy the appetite, and what should we
not suffer, rather then forfeit these? This is the present case, He that by
resisting saves his life, (a doubtful good, and of no long continuance) looses
that happy being, to which God has promised to such as submit to his commands,
and he that looses his life is a great gainer, he falls a Martyr of justice,
and shall be raised a Saint into glory.

The same obedience which God required of the Jews under the Law to be shown
to their Judges and Kings, The same duty of Non-resistance enjoined by Christ
in the Gospel.
and as high a degree of patience Christ injoynes his followers under the
Gospel, toward the highest powers. And there is great reason we should
perform this duty more cheerfully, because our Savior has commended
persecution to all those who will live godly, and that both by precept and
example. His method was, facere and docere, he began to do and teach; and it
is not much different in the end, docere and pati; to teach patience, and
confirm his doctrine by his suffering: we must take out the same lesson, for
the promise is conditional, (...), if we suffer with him, then (and not else)
shall we also reign with him, Romans 8. 17. Rebellion in Christians is a most
prodigious thing, we having plain and peremptory commands for obedience, and
a certain and ample requital for all the charges of our honesty. That
Heroical speech of Socrates, (...), It is in their power to kill me, it is not
in their power to hurt me, carries in it the flame of true Religion; the
Apostle expresses it higher, for us to die is gain, Phil. 1. 21.

The Jews wanted not some colors of reason to justify their impatience in
this case; The Jews more excusable in case of rebellion.
for it was a strong temptation not to be willing to be cut off, when their
blessings were temporal, the chief of them being length of days, and upon
which all the rest depended, and must necessarily end with their lives. And yet
they submitted to those Laws, which entrusted their fortunes, and being in the
hands of the supreme Magistrate, Jos. 1. 18. This power in succeeding times
was often abused to their destruction, and they gave themselves up to the
slaughter, upon hopes not grounded in any set promise, but only in the free
goodness of God, whom they thought to be a better master, then to let any man
be the worse for doing him service.

But a Christian cannot have any shadow of scruple. Christians have not any
color for it.
St. Peter failing in this duty by resisting the Magistrate in defense of his
innocent Master, has taken special care not to be imitated, and therefore
informs us largely with the full extent of Christian patience. I will first
lay down the grounds for which our Savior reprehended him, and I desire they
may be seriously pondered by such as are more inexcusably faulty, and then I
shall take his precepts into consideration. Much may be alleged in Peter's
justification, and yet all will not excuse him, Put up thy sword again into
his place, says Christ; if he do not, he threatens the punishment of murder to
him, all they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword, Matthew. 26. 52. It
concerns them sadly to apply, who pretend resistance, but are really invaders,
and therefore cannot make so fair a plea. First, it was a sudden and
unexpected assault, no means of escape did appear. Secondly, their violence
armed with Swords and with Staves as against a thief, did evidently aim at
the life of his Master; and he might not without reason suspect his own in
danger. Thirdly, he kept the laws of that which is called inculpata tutela,
innocent defense; he did it in the instant, not after deliberation, when he
might have thought of other ways of safety, and he had no advantage of
Weapon, and he did not kill outright, but only wounded a servant.
Notwithstanding all this he is rebuked by Christ, who makes satisfaction for
his offense by a miracle. And the sense of this correction made so deep an
impression, that he after warned others of their duty, when they suffer in the
like persecution. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, etc. yet if any man
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this
behalf. For the time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God.
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping
of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator, 1 Pet. 4.
Though this might serve turn, yet he speaks more home in another place,
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.
For so is the will of God, that with well doing, you may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God, etc. Fear God, honor the King.
Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For even hereto
were you called. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that ye should follow his steps who did not sin, neither was guile found in
his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.

The case of resistance is here enforced as highly as favorable circumstances
can raise it, The case of resistance enforced with greatest advantages, yet
condemned.
and when the most plausible limitations are put in, yet it is concluded
unlawful; we must submit as Christ did, though we should be as innocent as he
was, and though vires non deessent, we were sure to make good our opposition;
for he could have summoned an army of Angels in his defense: we are bound to
submit not only to justice, but to injuries also, and to be obedient as to good
and gentle masters, so likewise to the froward, to bad as well as good Kings,
their failing of their duty, not licensing us not to perform ours, nor
dispensing with our loyalty. This is evident, because the reasons annexed
equally enforce this duty in Subjects as in Servants. Though liberty be our
birthright, yet it must not be made the cloak of sin, it takes not off those
bonds with which God has tied up our hands from fighting against the supreme
power. No lifting up private swords against the sword of justice, ours against
Gods weapon, Deus resistet, we shall have an ill match of it.

It is well worth our observation, that though the Apostles maine work was
heaven, yet they are very sollicitous to settle our quiet upon earth, by
enforcing obedience unto government. Saint Paul delivers the mind of God most
fully, most plainly. He could not have expressed the duty of Subjects more
punctually, if he had lived in these last and worst times, wherein his doctrine
seems a kind of tame folly; as once much learning, now much Religion has made
him mad. Our Saviors prophecy is fullfilled, of faith failing amongst men,
they think it unreasonable, to be bound to submit to certain present evils,
out of hopes of future good, and to be abused by bad Magistrates, upon
expectation to be righted hereafter; and charity waxes cold, it must no longer
be ranked amongst Christian duties to prefer public good to private
interest, the peace of the Church, and tranquillity of the State to our own
profit or safety. No, we must stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has
made us free. We are not so indiscreet to submit to any trial by law, because
we may meet with corrupt Judges; patrocinium peccati, multitudo peccantium, our
number ought to make us safer then innocence can them; it is madness to be
hanged, when we are more then those that should hang us; we may call our selves
the commonwealth (for this is some where, and the lesser part has less reason
to challenge it to themselves) and then Populi salus, Suprema lex, what ever
conduces to our safety, becomes law to the Kingdom. If any malignant and ill
affected persons object the breach of known laws by us, we must tell them
they are abrogated by equity, because if they should stand in force, they would
destroy us. The truth is, these men antedate that prophecy of Christ (as they
have done many besides) He shall put down all rule, and all authority, and
power. 1 Cor. 15. 24.

This is clearly done by their practice, Kings are dishonored in the fear of
God, and I need not say quid verba audio, cum facta videam, for their professed
principles maintain it. If they are not of the true religion, that is, make
not the peoples opinion their Creed, or if they do not govern to the advantage
of the Saints, that is, join not with them in those designs which they
christen Gods glory, and the great work, the pious Reformation, then because
they are no longer Dei ministri in bonum, Gods ministers for their good, they
are ipso facto discharged of their Magistracy; not Gods holy ones, but their
own vices have deposed them, and (...) their lawful authority is not opposed
by them, but their persons only, they fight against the man, and not the
Magistrate. This is the doctrine which has produced such miserable things in
the Christian world, to the ruin of many States, and what is more lamentable,
the destruction of millions of souls. For upon those grounds many have been
induced to fight against God, and perished in their sin, and too many are so
far scandalized at it, that they suspect the truth of Christianity,
concluding within themselves, that if we did really believe that Gospel, which
we outwardly profess, and if we were persuaded those precepts laid down by
the Doctor of the Gentiles, ought to be the measure of our practice (for he
injoynes subjection though to tyrants, for such were the Roman Emperors then,
and the Kings in those times Reges gentium dominantur earum) the most wicked
Magistrates, and those that took greatest delight in cruelty and oppression,
will sooner be weary in doing injuries, then we could be in suffering.

Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers] (...), Paraphrase upon part
of the 13 to the Romans
all are included, not any one can plead exemption, we may say with the
Apostle, only he is excepted to whom every soul is subject. If every member
should be commanded to be obedient to the head, they could not lawfully oppose
upon joint consent, and ground their excuse upon a metaphisicall abstraction of
the body from those of whom it is compounded. The reason is because the action
of the body is constituted of the particular acts of each member, the joining
of so many personal acts makes up the act of the civil body, and if it be a
fault in any one, it does not take of the guilt, that he sins in consort and
offends with company. This notion of universal speculatively distinguished
from singulars is so far from changing the moral nature of actions, that the
act of the body (which is created by law, and civilly completed by the consent
of a major part) may be sin, and yet many members, as the lesser part who do
not contribute their votes, shall be innocent, because men are accomptable only
for their personal deeds.

(...)] Let every one be subject, keep under, in due rank and order. Now
seeing that in all order there must be some first, all others must submit to
this, and this non potest in ordinem cogi, ab aliquo, cannot be legally ordered
by any, because there is not any upon earth, prior primo, before the first, and
higher then the supreme. If he break his order, he is responsable to him only
that is above him, who is God. Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis.


These highest powers (...). God is super deos, and orders them as he pleases.
So that the wronged people must only cry unto the Lord, as the Jews were
directed in their hard condition: And Saint Ambrosse is sensible of this
obligation, repugnare non novi; dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere,
etc. aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere. Least Christians should be more
stiff-necked then the Jews, who bore this heavy yoke, Saint Peter prescribes
their behavior and tells them it is a part of their calling (and unless they
perform their vocation, they cannot make their election sure) to imitate
Christ thus far, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, no dishonorable
speeches, no reproachful language from him, which yet falls short of the
meditated malice of the pen, when he suffered he threatened not, no killing and
slaying so much as in words, and no people can have greater innocence, and no
Governor greater faults, but he committed himself to him that judges
righteously. 1. Pet. 2.

(...) [unto the higher powers] Hereout they endeavor to pick some advantage.
for, say they, by the same Logique, as we conclude impunity due to Kings, and
so all resistance unlawful, we must be forced to enlarge this privilege, and
communicate it to all Magistrates whatsoever, because they are higher powers
also. But this immunity is overlarge by our own confession, as repugnant to
all States, and therefore seeing we cannot justify the inference in its full
latitude, we cannot reasonably collect any thing. These men strangely mistake
the grounds of our deduction, their strong fancy against it, not permitting
them to take the reason of it into due consideration, we confess thus much is
concluded for all Magistrates (such are they to whom the King delegates his
authority) that it is not lawful for any that are under them to make
resistance; Lawful to resist inferior Magistrates if they oppose the supreme.
as a private man may not oppose a Constable, nor a Constable a Justice of
peace, nor he a Judge; So common Soldiers cannot punish a Lieutenant (except
by virtue of a Commission from the General, and then they are above him, as
being made Magistrates to execute martial law upon him) nor he a Colonel, nor
a Collonell the General, they being but private men in reference to one above
them; and so Kings in Monarchies (and proportionably in Aristocracies those
persons, in whom the supreme power is placed, which are the major part
consenting) are not judicially accomptable to any, because they are the
highest. Thus much Scripture evinces, the civil law confirms, reason
suggests, and the practice of all States has embraced it.

For there is no power but of God] Here is the cause of obedience rendered, this
right to govern, is not only by his bare permission, so theft and murder are,
but it is his constitution, and by virtue of this, the Apostle collects that
honor is due to their persons. I have proved formerly that such power could
not be, (...), unless it were of God; the people could not dispense with
divine precept, non occides, thou shall not kill.

The powers that be, are (...), ordained or ordered of God. This is his
ordinary providence by which he has thought fit to govern the world, and we
must submit to it, till he declare his will to the contrary; nothing can take
off this obligation but express revelation. And we have some new Enthusiasts,
who are going on to this height of fury; Methinkes it should startle all good
men, to see some interpretations of obscure prophecies out of Daniell and the
Apocalypse cast out to justify the breach of plain duties.

Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God;] Here
is fair warning, take heed what ye do, you have a terrible enemy to encounter
with, it is (...), a fight against God, You cannot flatter your selves with a
prosperous issue, for those which resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

Lest any should be so miserably besotted with a senseless distinction (as it
is misapplied by them) of the authority from the person, as to incur the
danger of this fearful commination, Against that distinction of the authority
from the person.
he joins them together and uses them promiscuously, and in the prosecution
inforces that, by mentioning the persons, which before he had attributed to the
powers. Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves damnation; it immediately follows, For
rulers (...), not (...), are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.
Then he comes to the authority again, will thou not be afraid of the power?
do that which is good and thou shall have praise of the same; For he is the
Minister of God to thee for good, there he concludes with the person.

Observe with what vehemence he repeates this duty, though fully delivered
before, as if his mind misgave him concerning these rebellious times. Wherefore
you must needs be subject. A necessity is laid upon us, and woe unto us, if we
be not subject. we have two powerful motives, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake. As for fear what the Prince may (for rebellion seldom
prospers; Traitors are unfortunate gamesters, though they win at first, they
are most commonly terrible loosers in the close) so what God will inflict. You
have his word for it, you are damned if you resist.

Though Rebels should get the start by seizing his ammunition, Forts, and
Ships, and you have cause to think your loyalty will disadvantage you, when a
King is in sight too weak; yet be wary what you do, God often times raises up
strength to him, beyond man's expectation, and the event shows, those which
continue honest are most truly wise. The heads of the rebellion shall be
brought to condign punishment, and their memory be odious amongst all good
men. It Is true, to be subject to present plunder is a strong temptation against
duty (yet upon a general survey ye shall find they take not much more from
their enemies, God is to be reckoned of the Kings side, who will overballance
their greatest forces.
then they force their friends to give; they have no great reason to brag of
being savers, it has cost them very round sums to loose their souls) But
ye see how much the King indulges to this fear (I know not whether God will
pardon so easily, for if fear of loosing by being honest be a good excuse for
neglect of duty, hopes of gaining by playing the knaves, may as reasonably be
pleaded) so unwilling is he any should suffer for his sake. How often has he
been pleased graciously to forgive, upon that easy excuse, they did not dare
to be his friends; that is, they were his enemies not out of spite and malice,
but only for their own advantage; and he is content, not any should loose for
him. O let not his goodness move you to have a hand or purse in the evils which
are brought upon him and the whole land. Betray not your bad tempers so ^arre,
that it should appear you will do more for fear then love, lest your base
natures may induce hereafter a stricter government, when experience does
demonstrate the worst masters have the best servants. Let not his lenity, which
does deserve to find friends, be the only cause he has so many enemies. If I
must direct my speech as unto cowards (for you have no excuse for disloyalty,
but your fears) consider with your selves, how God has blessed his servant
with three potent and successful Armies (all of them raised with such
disadvantages, as they clearly speak an immediate providence giving testimony
to the sincerity of his many sacred protestations) beside many hopeful
Seminaries in diverse Countries, and thousands of gallant Gentlemen, and brave
spirits in other Shires, now unfortunately situated (O tristi damnata loco) who
wait for an opportunity to revenge their tame suffering hitherto, and the
unworthy usage from fellow Subjects. If notwithstanding all this you could
unreasonably flatter your selves with being the stronger side, yet you have
juster and greater fears elsewhere, which ought to give Law to your cowardice,
which has betrayed your alleagiance. For what would it profit you, if you
should save your houses from being plundered (though this is the most probable
way to hazard your estates, which are forfeited to the King, cannot be
escheated to them) and loose your souls, for which the whole world is but a
base price? There is evident danger in fighting against the King, but the
Apostle threatens certain destruction because you fight against your own
consciences.

Their several exceptions and corrupt glosses by which they endeavor to avoid
this plain obligation of non resistance, I shall meet with in the fourth
section.

The practice of primitive christians is a faithful commentary upon these
texts. The duty not to resist proved further by the practice of the more
innocent ages of the Church.
And certainly their authority, (who witness to their own disadvantage,
teaching submission though to tyrants, under which they cheerfully suffered
according to Christ's example) ought to prevail with us above any modern
writers, who have broached a doctrine (very seasonable for some places and
occasions, but unknown to those innocent times, when Christianity thrived upon
suffering, and gained as much by patience, as it is likely to loose by
stubbornness) that it is lawful for inferior Magistrates, say some, (and this
from the fundamentalls of government;) for the people, others, tells us, (and
this from the law of nature) to right themselves by force, if the supreme
Magistrate deny to do it, and so fail of that trust, which was committed to
him for the good of others. These principles lately taken up open a fair way
for advancement of private ends, by disturbance of public peace, either upon
real (which often times are) or at least pretended faults in governors which
shall never be wanting, whilst there are ambitious men who want preferment, and
desire to have what others are possessed of, and make it a reasonable cause, to
endeavor innovation, because they may be bettered by the change. In what an
unhappy State do we live, if such a number (upon pretense we are not so well
governed as we might be, that is, they have not so great a share in the
government, as they could wish for, and since the greater part can never be
satisfied, we cannot hope for peace and quiet) shall be enabled to force the
King to recede from laws and in the room of those known and standing rules,
to give us uncertain temporary ordinances.

The Emperors were for the most part very bad, but especially to the
Christians they were hard masters. Though the Romans counted it the highest
gallantry, to shake off the yoke when it galled them, and did often rebel in the
cause of liberty; (and it is a sad thing that this pagan bravery should be
preferred to the tamenesse which Christ enjoined to his followers; of all good
actions the murder of a tyrant is most commendable, says one. Eusebius. Philad.
dial. 2. And Buchanan thinks it a defect in policy, that rewards are not
allotted for such meritorious deeds) yet the Christians could never be tempted
by their greatest sufferings to join in any conspiracy. Tertullian professes
their innocence, and he is to be looked upon in this case, not as a single
witness, but as one that wrote in the name of all; his Apologetique is the
sense of the whole Church. We may be confident of the truth, because it was a
matter of fact, and we have no reason to suspect he could be so vainly impudent
as to present that in their justification, which must be evidently convinced of
falsehood. He makes a bold challenge, and desires them to produce if they can
one example of any Christian taking part with rebels. Such as Cassius, Niger,
Albinus, Cleander, Aelius Letus, the Pretorian soldiers (who murdered
Pertinax) Stephanus, and Parthenius were. It is manifest these were not
traitors out of wantonness, there were just grounds for heavy complaints
under Domitian, Commodus and Septimius Severus, all bloody tyrants. Yet the
Christians were better catechized, then to think resistance lawful, when they
were oppressed by those whose duty it was to have protected them. Their
unanimous confession is, nos judicium Dei suspicimus in imperatoribus, qui
gentibus illos praefecit. I shall give you the sense of it at large. We kiss
the hands which wound us; though they have not any cause to do such things,
yet there is too much cause why we should suffer them, we must acknowledge our
sins toward God, and he may punish them in what way he thinks fit. We cannot
deny, but we have deserved as great afflictions, and shall we, who are guilty
be stubborn, when patience is required, though we were most innocent? The
example of Christ is made our law, and in him no sin was found. We cannot
suffer more, nor boast less demerit. If we did serioussly consider it, we
could not hate the worst governors, for we have no reason to be angry, because
they do things to our advantage, and certain it is, if we submit with
patience, their sins further our salvation, their faults increase our glory.
What pity is it, they should go to Hell, for that which procures us a higher
place in heaven? Nay what uncharitableness is it in us, to cut them off in
their sin, and so send them thither? And it is a sad meditation, to think that
we shall follow; because we could not endure their company here, we take a
course to live together eternally miserable.

Cyprian inforces this meekness with excellent reason. God (says he to
Demetrian) is the revenger of his injured servants: in which this argument is
employed, Vengeance belongs unto the Lord, and except we can produce his
Commission, our private justice will damn us; animam in vulnere, in our
enemies wounds our souls will bleed to death: it is madness to strike, when we
are certain the blow will recoyle to our eternal destruction. Therefore the
Apostle commands, as we wish well to our selves, to recompense to no man evil
for evil: Romans 12. 17. Self-love is the motive why we should not hurt others.
He exhorts by the natural affection which is due to our selves, not to avenge
our selves, (...), but rather to give place unto wrath: v. 19. The wisdom of
God has introduced an excellent temper in government, and such as the sense of
great evils prevailed with men to esteem very good, and confirm it by their
laws. Private revenge unlawful.
Honorius and Theodosius tell us, judiciorum vigor, jurisque publici tutela
videtur in medio constituta, ne quisquam sibi ipsi permittere valeat ultionem.
That of Claudian is true in this sense also: Qui fruitur poena, ferus est.


Injured men are over-passionate, and easily tempted to cruelty. Amplius ex ira
quod enim se quisque volebat
Vlcisci, quam nunc permissum est legibus aequis,
Iccirco est homines pertaesum vi colere aevum.
Upon these considerations God has made revenge unlawful, and beside this
obligation of divine precept, our hands are tied up as strongly as faith of
promise can do it. This Covenant knits society, and cements the civil body.
Though we do not only fancy grievances (as the world is full of such mistakes)
though we are really injured, yet it becomes injustice to right our selves. All
the account we can give at Gods Tribunal, is only this, we did not sin
first. And this plea will afford miserable comfort to be damned after another.
That none might be tempted to strike, because others hands are bound up from
returning the blow, God has appointed a middle way to deter men from doing
evil, for fear of suffering it in as high a degree. For Tertullian says
true, disciplinae interest, injuriam vindicari. Metu enim ultionis omnis
iniquitas refraenatur. The fountain of our actions is the opinion we have of
the good or bad, we shall receive by them; if they appear certainly hurtful,
and that we shall suffer by so doing, we most commonly forbear, I do not say
always, because the will may thwart the understanding, else it were not free,
and experience shows, that sometimes a less good present, does overweigh a
future, though certain greater evil. God will judge our cause, and revenge us
upon wrong doers; but he performs this not immediately, but by his
Magistrates. He delegates his authority to them, and Saint Paul proclaims
their Commission in these words, There is no power but of God. Quicquid per
officiarios facit, per se facere videtur, what they do are legally his acts,
we have no right to reverse them by a strong hand. If an inferior Magistrate
gives false judgment, God grants a liberty of appeal to him in a higher
Magistrate, if he confirm the former unjust sentence, it is lawful to proceed
by way of appeal, till we come to the highest; but then because God has
appointed a peaceable end of controversies, we must sit down with the present
loss, being fully assured God will judge this Judge; we shall have another day
of hearing in Heaven, and all damages shall be amply repaid. If we did believe
this, our unnatural divisions would cease, that is, if we were truly
Christians, we would not do as we have done, we could not resist the highest
power. I have warrant to say it, Here is the patience and faith of the Saints:
Rev. 13. 10. they believed, therefore they suffered.

Upon such considerations Cyprian grounds the duty, and shows the practice of
the Primitive Christians was very consonant. Inde est quod nemo nostrum, quando
apprehenditur, reluctatur: nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestram, quamvis
nimius and copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur. For this cause not any one
of us does make resistance when you apprehend him, nor revenge your unjust
violence: Patientes facit de secutura ultione securitas. God is able to reward
our patience, and to requite all our sufferings. If we took delight in the
misery of our persecutors, we might be abundantly comforted. But alas we pity
them, and grieve more for their deplorable condition, then our own torments.
God will avenge our innocent blood more severely, then any good man can wish
for. Tertullian expresses the same in his eloquent manner. Satis idoneus
patientiae sequester Deus est. Our goods are not taken away, they are
sequestered for our benefit, and entrusted in safe hands, God keeps them for
our use and will return them with ample increase. Si injuriam deposueris penes
eum, ultor est, if you will not fight, he will undertake your quarrel, and you
need not doubt but your enemies will be soundly worsted; Si dolorem, medicus
est, your wounds shall save you, Si mortem, resuscitator est, if you fall a
Martyr, you shall rise a Saint. Quantum patientiae licet, ut Deum habeat
debitorem? what cannot our sufferings do? they make even God our debtor; he
owes us heaven for our selves, and he owes us Hell for our enemies, but we
breath out our souls in prayer, that he may be entreated not to pay this.

The Example of the Thebane Legion commands our imitation in the like cause. It
is one of the noblest passages in all the ecclesiastical story, wherein
Christianity did shine forth in its full luster, and it affords plentiful
light for our direction. This band consisted of almost 7000 men, all
Christians. when the Emperor Maximian commands the whole Army to offer
Sacrifice to false Gods, they remove their quarters, that they might avoid if
it were possible this occasion of discontenting the Emperor. He summons them
to perform their parts in this devilish worship. They are forced to return an
humble denial, and their resolution not to disobey God, for whose sake they
had ever been and would continue faithful servants to him. The Emperor
unsatisfied with this answer, puts them to a decimation; They submit with much
cheerfulness, and die praying for their murderer. After this sad spectacle his
commands are renewed, but prevail nothing upon the remainder. Wherefore they
also are butchered without the least resistance; There was no delay in their
death, except from the weariness of the executioners. This was truly to
confess him, who was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb opened
not his mouth, and they a flock of his fold, were quietly devoured by ravening
wolves. The Commander of this Regiment, Maurice could not contain his joy,
when he had seen the first decimation gallantly suffered. How fearful was I,
says he to his surviving soldiers, (for armed men may be tempted to defend
themselves) lest any of them upon color of just resistance for self
preservation in an innocent cause, should have strugled against this blessed
slaughter. I was watchful, and had Christ's example in readiness, who
commanded his disciple to put his sword into his scabberd. Salus vestra non
periclitabitur, nisi vestris armis, if you use not your weapons, I have Gods
own warrant for your safety.

Despair it self could not conquer one single patience, which yet creates
valor in cowards, and makes them more courageous in such extremities, because
they are fearful; Since they are likely to endeavor most to preserve life;
who are most terrified with death.

It would be more wearisome to me, then delightful, or profitable to the
Reader, to enlarge my proofs by that plenty of authorities, which offer
themselves in the ancient Fathers and many Councels. The truth is, the labor
is needless, their practice is so evident, that the greatest friends to
Rebellion, will not betray so much ignorance as to deny it. They are forced to
grant that they do such things, as those great lights of the Church, those
holy men, though infinitely more oppressed then they can pretend to, durst not
venture on. Thus far we both agree. But why durst not? Here they show
themselves; not because to resist Tyrants would have been a wicked, but a
vain attempt; vires deerant, they were not able to go through with a
Rebellion; what the Heathens admired as extraordinary goodness (many of them
being converted by this religious confidence, reasonably concluding, men that
approved themselves very prudent in all other matters, Not want of strength the
cause of their patience.
could not be guilty of such madness as to die thus, unless they had good
hopes to be recompensed in another life) these fomenters of strife call
weakness, to the unspeakable scandal of such as have a true sense of
godliness. It is an insufferable blemish to their innocence, and stains the
precious memory of those blessed Martyrs. If this were indeed true, that they
wanted not will, but power to destroy, we can hardly blame their persecutors,
who thought it wisdom to prevent the blow by striking first: it seemed but
killing the Cockatrice in the egg; they had small encouragement to cherish
frozen Serpents in their bosom, who when they had recovered warmth and
strength, would dart their poisonous sting at their preservers. Certainly they
had an extraordinary confidence they should prevail, else they would never so
openly have discovered such principles, and instructed States to provide better
for their security hereafter, by utter disabling them to do any hurt. These men
cry out against Popery, and yet profess what all good Protestants esteem the
most malignant part of Jesuitisme. If this evasion will not hold, they know not
what to say for themselves, and it may clearly be convinced of falsehood. For
this very objection is made by the Ancients, and answered to our hands by
themselves. So careful were they that posterity might not mistake their
goodness, and think it nothing else but an impotency to do evil. The Fathers
speeches, which witness sufficient strength, if religion had not tied their
hands, cannot be imputed to any overreaching or lying to gain reputation to
their sufferings (as Mr Goodwin insinuates in his Anticaval. and we shall anon
take notice of it) our enemies would be extremely glad to see their own art
thus credited. But we have no reason to conceive them so impudent, and we may
be certain, they were not so mad, as to face down the Emperor, and their
other potent adversaries (who would make great advantage of their so manifest
untruths) by affirming what they must evidently discern false, and could not
choose but see the contrary.

Cyprian says expressly, Quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit populus,
though we have competent forces more then enough to do the business, yet we
wrestle not with our oppressors etc. The Theban Legion was in a posture of
resistance, but they durst not lift up those hands into which the Emperor had
put weapons, against his personal commands, though most unjust, most bloody.
six thousand six hundred, and sixty six men of such extraordinary valor, as
did not entertain the least fear of death might probably have conquered (and
this cruelty might have increased their party by the defection of
malcontents) but they must certainly have made some sport for their lives,
they could not have wanted that comfort, which to some tastes is beyond the
pleasure of life, to die revenged. Besides had not the Emperor and his under
princes known them true Christians, and been acquainted with the tamenesse of
that profession, toward the highest power, he would never have hazarded a
rebellion by making so considerable an army desperate.

I will conclude this with Tertullian, who argues very handsomely, after he had
spoken to this sense; we are so numerous you can hardly see one another for
Christians, cui, inquit, bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares
copiis, qui tam libenter trucidamur? Though we had not the advantage of number,
Which yet you perceive we have, numeri damnum virtus pensaret, courage would
supply this defect, and though fewer, since we contemn our own lives, we
might be masters of yours. We could undo you, not if we should rebel, but if
we would be idle; we do not fright you so much, as to desire you, to fancy us
fighting against you, you were lost if we did not fight for you. What would
become of you, if we should turn Separatists? Si tanta vis hominum, if such
multitudes as we are should break out from amongst you into any corner of the
world, your Empire would sink for want of strength to support it. Your Cities
would seem deserts without us etc. in that thin remainder you would have many
enemies, though but few men. Even now they would rebel, if they were not awed
multitudine Christianorum, paene omnium civium, by those multitudes of us, who
are of some rank, almost all of us citizens, and almost all the citizens are
of us. Our example invites some to obedience, others fear our readiness to be
commanded to reduce them to due subjection. In Apologetico. I may add his
other speech in the same place, vestra omnia implevimus, we have filled your
Cities, nay castra ipsa, your very camps would be empty without us Christians.
It is not possible to bring in more express, more clear testimonies in any
matter, it is too probable, such as have made a search, are blinded with
interest, and shut their eyes that they may not see this truth. I know not how
to excuse Bellarmine, Alane, Ficlerus, Simancha, Buchanan, Hottoman, Knox,
Brutus, for these were scholars; and therefore not so likely to be deceived
themselves in such an easy truth, as upon design to deceive others. But I
have a more charitable opinion of most of those men, with whom we have to
deal, though some have discovered plenty of malice, yet they are very few, of
whom we can say, ad evertendam rempublicam sobrii accesserunt. Some are
Enthusiasts, and mistake their own fancy for the Spirit, and the greater part
do this mischeife out of ignorance, drawing out of broken cisterns, the
seditious writings of the Roman and the Reformed Jesuits, and transcribing one
another, and so are taught and reach to despise dominion, and speak evil of
those things which they know not.

. 3.
I Make no question the proposition is now evident, that the supreme power in
any State (let it be where it will, somewhere it must be, for else it were an
Anarchy, and no government) ought not to be resisted. This makes rebellion sin,
as transgressing divine and humane laws. In the next place, for the perfect
direction of conscience, Most necessary to know the subject of Supremacy.
we must examine, in whom the supreme power is placed; a mistake in this is as
dangerous, as an error in the former. For as zeal, which is not according to
knowledge, is impiety; for though it have the heat, it has not the light,
which is required to true devotion; so the most scrupulous obedience is but
humble rebellion, if it be misplaced, and yielded to fellow Subjects against
him who has jus regnandi, the right to command them. Thus in an Aristocracy to
aid one man against the Senate, is Treason against the State, and in a
Monarchy (because the constitution is different, and places the supreme power
in one) to aid the Senate (of which that one is the head, and opposed to him,
they are but a livelesse trunk in order to those things to which his influence
is necessary, Fortescue warrants the expression, sine capite communitas non
corporatur) against the Monarch and supreme Ruler, is rebellion and treason
against the State. The Assumption therefore shall be,

The King of ENGLAND has this supreme power.] when this is proved, the
conscience must take law from this necessary Inference, therefore it is
unlawful for Subjects to hold up arms against the King of England: Because as
it is an absurdity in speculation, so it is sin in practice to deny the
conclusion; there they offend against Logique, here against Religion also. For
whatsoever is not of faith, that is, not of judgment, whatsoever we do
against our own reason, and the light of conscience, is transgression.

The matter of this discourse is of high concernment. For as things now stand,
on it hang Heaven or Hell, our salvation or eternal damnation. If the King be
the highest power, you are bound to submit to him, but if you have new
Sovereigns, if your fellow Subjects are become the Lords anointed, there may
be some color of justification. Except this be proved, you are altogether
inexcusable, as appears in the last Section, and therefore it will behoove you
to hearken to Solomon's advice; My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall rise
suddenly, Prove. 24.. 21. 22.

Certainly unconcerned men will think I have undertaken no very difficult
task. The Kings Supremacy witnessed by out Oath.
If I can but persuade the Kings adversaries, they have not forsworn
themselves, I shall recover them to due obedience (but I must tell them, if
they were not perjured in taking the Oath of Supremacy (not to mention now that
of Alleagiance) they are so in breaking it) The words are so express, that not
any colorable gloss can be invented, to excuse the violation of this solemn
Sacrament. I, A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the
Kings highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other
His Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as Temporal, etc. I d^ promise that from
henceforth, I shall bear faith and true allegiance to the Kings Highness, His
Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and authorities granted or belonging
to the Kings Highness, His Heirs, and Successors, or united and annexed to
the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

So help me God and by the Contents of this Book.] It has been replied,
That this Oath is taken in opposition to the Pope, to exclude the Supremacy
usurped by him for many years. They speak truth, but not all the truth; for
there are two parts in it. One negative, by which we profess, that not any
foreign State, or Potentate, nor the Pope has this power. The other
positive, by which the Subject of this power is specified. The Kings Highness
is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, as in all Spiritual things,
and causes, so likewise Temporal. Both Ecclesiastical and Civil supremacy
are here asserted to be in the King. It was not thought sufficient to tell who
was not Supreme, but they declare also who was. When we had truly sworn the
Pope out of this Kingdom, what necessity was there to make the people
perjured? for certainly they forswear themselves, who solemnly testify and
declare in their conscience, That the Kings highness is the only supreme
Governor, if the meaning of those words be only this, that the Pope is not.
It concerns us as highly as our Souls are worth, reddere juramentum domino,
to perform unto the Lord our Oath, and not to lift up those hands against the
King, which were laid upon the holy Gospel, in witness of our submission to
him as the only supreme Governor. What desperate malice is it to expose our
Souls to every Musket shot? if we fall, we perish eternally. This sad
contemplation, that we stand on the very brinke of Hell, ready to be turned
into the Lake of everlasting woes, by every sword, every bullet, will smite our
hearts, and make our arms feeble in the day of battle; what confusion and
amazement and horror of conscience must needs seize upon all considering men?
Think upon the heinousness of parricide, to murder a Father is a sin greater
then any one is able to bear: But to spill the blood of our Sovereign (which
they have done, who fought against him, for it is murderin Gods sight; his
goodness in protecting his servant, does not excuse their sin in endeavoring
to destroy their King) whom God commands not to touch, and whose life we have
sworn to defend with the utmost hazard of our own, and we have desired the
Lord to revenge it in our destruction, if we do otherwise, is of a much deeper
dye. For the King is Pater patriae, a common Father to all without a Metaphor:
what ever power Fathers had over, and consequently whatsoever honor as an
effect of this power, was due to them from their children, he has right to
challenge the same of all. And though we should join together, King has
paternall powers from consent of the people.
and call our selves the Commonwealth, we can no more lawfully dis-respect,
give law to, resist upon hard usage, or say he is less honorable then all we,
then children by agreement may dispense with their duty to their parents. It
was our own act which united all particular paternall powers in Him, and that
these are truly transferred, and now really in Him is very evident, because
else we should be bound to obey our Fathers commands, before those of the King*
For divine precept stands in full force, Honor thy Father, etc. and therefore
we musts confess, tam pater nemo est in terris, he that begot us is not so
much our Father, as the King is. It may be fit to take notice here, that the
supreme power of a State, has by our particular deeds and common agreement, as
much right over, not single persons only, but the whole body, as every Father
had over not this or that child only, but his whole family: and as he cannot
be said, though major singulis natis, yet tota prole minor, so neither a King
(if this power be placed in one, which is essential to a Monarchy) minor
universis.

Though a Monarch has greater right, and larger power, then even all the
people could bestow upon him, for he has potestatem vitae and necis, He has
power of a higher nature from Gods grant.
and this Fathers have not now over their children, over themselves; it can
only come from him who has dominion over his creatures, and therefore the
people must look upon him, not only as their own, but as Gods representative;
yet to say nothing of this, and to deal liberally with our adversaries, by
supposing (though I cannot grant) their principles true, concerning the
original of power being in the people, I can demonstrably convince them, by
most plain and evident deductions from their own scheame.

I took this method in my Answer to the Observations, that by joining issue
upon their own grounds, I might put a quicker end to the debate. It would have
required more time to show at large, The Kings power was from God (which was
proved in brief, and there, as is this discourse, it is acknowledged to be
restrained by His own or His Progenitors grants, potest enim Rex vim regni
minuere) and so of much higher nature then the contribution of popular Votes
could raise it to; it was abundantly sufficient, to prove that the people have
not any legal power against the King. The former is built upon this pillar,
nemo dat, quod non habet; the power of the Magistrate was not in the people
considered severally, and before civil society, and in such a State, as the
Aborigenes are described by Salust, genus hominum agreste, sine legibus, sine
imperio, liberum atque solutum, a multitude, not a nation, and certain wild
routs, without Laws, without Empire, free to do or suffer wrong, and loose
from all positive obligations. Not any one having jus gladii, a right to take
away the life of man, it follows they could not bestow it upon another, for
what is not, cannot be alienated. And therefore the supreme Magistrate has
more power then the whole people, and is vice Deus, Gods vicegerent. Let them
take heed how they call Gods minister the peoples Servant; God has taken
especial care the Magistrate should be honored; and respect is due, as to
his, not their creature.

The latter, that the people have not any legal power against the King, is as
firmly supported by another pillar, nemo habet, quod dedit. Suppose the
original of power in the people, or as they love to speak, suppose them the
efficient cause of power, which cannot be but by giving to one man in a
Monarchy, to a Senate in an Aristocracy, a right to use their divided
strengths. Since therefore they cannot retain, what they have parted with, nor
have what they gave away, he which has all their power (I may add his own
particular besides) must needs be greater and more powerful then they. The
truth is, he is (in a Monarchy, and they are in an Aristocracy) the only
fountain of all power and justice. Answer to the Observat, page 10. This is as
certain, as that there are some governments besides Democracy, for it is
essential to them: what is that which makes Anarchy, except this, that every
man has right to do what he will, Demonstration from the difference of forms
of Regiment.
in reference to any national Law? The only means to avoid this confusion, is
to resign up this hurtful liberty; (which is very prudently done upon choice,
but necessarily upon conquest) if it be given to one, we call that State,
Monarchy; if to few, we call it Optimacy; if to very many, who rule by turns
and are elected by the people, we call it Democracy. There cannot be any other
ground to difference the forms of Regiment.

Hence appears the weakness of those discourses, which have no other
strength, then the impossibility, that the people can make one greater and more
powerful then all they (which is understood not of their natural, (this
cannot be past away to another) but politic strength, that is the right of
using their power, this may be, and is parted with, (except the Government be
a Democracy) because Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale. The reply to the
Answer to the Observations, confesses my argument, concluding, if it were true
that the people had parted with their power, page 6. upon this the
determination of the whole controversy depends, and that it was rightly stated
by me, will evidently appear, because unless the people have resigned up
their power, the Author can never show how this State is a Monarchy. It does
not alter the case, that the King has restrained himself from the use of this
power to some purposes without their consent, as for making new laws or
raising money; for this limitation only makes such acts illegal, but does not
return any power into them, whereby they may be enabled to raise an Army, or
to oppose the Militia of the Kingdom against him, to compel him by strong
hand to govern according to law. If the subject of this power be the people,
who may meet together and lawfully determine (for though he resolve all into
the two Houses, yet if he follow the consequences of his own principle, he
must go thus high) what they fancy conducing to their own safety, we are
clearly fallen back into Anarchy. To avoid this confusion, the Author places it
in their representatives, but it will come to the same thing by undeniable
deductions from his own grounds. For the same arguments which are made against
the King, equally conclude against the two Houses; since Quicquid efficit tale,
Arguments brought against the King, conclude as much for the people against the
Parliament.
est magis tale, and that they are entrusted for the common good, may be
equally applied to them, and then King and Lords and Commons are Voted away at
the pleasure of the multitude.

The sum of his Book is, that the people retain their power, and therefore
may make resistance, in case he govern not according to law, and he is
responsable for such breaches; The proof is, He is entrusted for their good,
and there is a mutual covenant between King and people, and this violated by
him dissolves the compact.

I have in this discourse punctually examined these and what farther grounds of
scruples I could find in the replyer, as will appear more fully in the
following Section. Being to answer so many, I would not trespass upon the
Readers patience by an exact view of his particular mistakes, which might have
been confuted with great ease, but with no great advantage to the cause, to
which I have spoken more closely, and as fully as I was able.

I will discover to him one desperate consequence from his principle, which it
concerns him to blush and repent for. There is a mutual Covenant between
King and People, and the breach of it dissolves the compact: if so, his Crown
is forfeited, and he ceases to be King de jure upon such violation, which he is
now charged with, (because they could not have any color for taking up Arms,
but upon this pretense.) Therefore the plain conclusion is, it is no want of
duty in them, though they depose him, for it is no injury to take away, what he
can challenge no right to; his claim was by virtue of compact, which is
dissolved by his not standing to conditions, and so the bargain is unmade, the
bonds of allegiance are broken asunder. The Houses have labored to clear
themselves from this wicked doctrine, by telling us the deposition of the
second Edward, and Richard was not to be numbered amongst the presidents of
Parliament, and that no free Parliament ever attempted the like: and yet a
private man dares publish such manifest Treason. I am persuaded that the
Author, supposing a breach of covenant of His Majesty's part, and then telling
us such a breach dissolves the compact, was not fully apprehensive that this
pernicious principle unkings his Sovereign. When he sees his treasonable
error, he will find that Logic ill managed is a more dangerous weapon, then
a sword in the hands of mad men.

To return to further proofs of the Kings supremacy; Kings supremacy further
proved.
That which makes a State one, is the union of supreme power, and this
according as it is placed in one or more persons, gives denomination to the
form: so that all those Acts of Parliament which confess this a Monarchy, are
so many solid testimonies of the Kings supremacy.

The Answer is, Though this be demonstrably true in an absolute Empire, yet it
concludes not in a mixed Monarchy.

I am very confident a mistake of this mixed Monarchy has engaged many
well-meaning men against the King, to the overthrow of our Laws, which the
simpler part are persuaded they fight for; Honesta voluntate rebels sunt,
there are some who contribute their forces to destroy this Kingdom in behalf
of the Commonwealth, The true meaning of that which is called a mixed Monarchy.
and they are so far deceived, as to be made unhappy instruments to advance
private interests with public hearts. And therefore it will be necessary to
discover their error, by which their unfortunate Country has suffered as
much, as by the saults of others.

They have not any shadow of excuse to countenance their Rebellion from this
distinction, unless mixed Monarchy do signify either that the people in their
diffusive body, or by their representatives have a greater, or at least an
equal power with the King. The reason of which is, because inferiors by the
acknowledgement of all, have not any jurisdiction over superiors: and equals
though they have not imperium, right to govern, yet if injured and they
require satisfaction, and upon denial of it, attempt to compass it by force,
they are esteemed by the Law of Reason and Nations, just enemies: whereas
Subjects, if they make war upon their Sovereign, though when wronged, are
worthily accounted Rebels. First, the diffusive body of the people has not
greater, nay, not equal power with the King, because they have not any legal
way of expressing themselves. Our Laws determine it Treason to enter into any
association, or raise a War without the Kings consent, and much more against
his express commands. Secondly, the representative body has not greater nor
equal power with the King. The same argument overthrowes their claim, for the
people cannot authorize them to do, beyond what themselves were enabled to,
therefore if actions of this nature were unwarrantable in the diffusive body,
they are so in the representative. Representative Body is not the People to all
purposes.
It may be not unfit to observe that the representative body is the people
only to some ends and purposes, whereto they were entrusted by them according
to Law, and therefore no illegal ordinances, (such as all those are, which the
King denies to ratify) ought to be called the Acts of the people: They are no
more concerned in it, then if they should take upon them contrary to Law, to
stamp and coin money with the inscription of Senatis, populusque Anglicanus,
or to send Ambassadors, or denounce war against, or enter into a League of
friendship with foreign Princes, or bestow the great offices of State, or
dispose of Wardships, or take to themselves a power to raise Arms without His
Majesty's consent. Again, because they represent the people but to some
purposes only, though their principles were firm, (as they are extremely
weak) that the King is less then His Subjects conjunctim, and that they
collectively are more honorable then He, etc. yet they bring not the
conclusion home to the two Houses. Because it does not appear, and they had no
reason to take it for granted; that the two Houses (which they call the
Parliament) are the people in this consideration. A Jury is the representative
people, (as experience teaches, and we may find it in Sir Thomas Smith, l. 2.
c. 26. The legal answer to that interrogatory, How will you be tried, is, Dei
populique judicio, by God and my Country; and the Clerk of the Sizes replies,
Ecce tibi hi probi viri populum repraesentant) and the Sophistry would be
easily discovered, if we should argue they are therefore more honorable, then
the King. We may take notice also, that their arguments are only capable of
concluding for the House of Commons, (and if they follow the necessary
consequences of them, they must maintain the Lower is above the Upper House)
for the Lords sit only in personal capacities, being enabled thereto by the
prudence of our Laws, which thought it reasonable they should have as great a
share in the government as a negative voice came to, because they enjoyed such
ample revenues, that they were likely not to agree to any thing prejudicial to
the present settled State.

I shall prove more fully in the next Section, that those who represent
Subjects (and that but to some purposes, and not the King to any, for this
would overthrow that fundamental constitution of three distinct Estates)
cannot be equal to, much less above their Sovereign. And that groundless
invention which denies subordination, and introduces an unheard of
co-ordination, such as creates Regnum in Regno, and rents this Country into
distinct Kingdoms, shall be refuted.

Since what is called mixed Monarchy cannot give such a right as is pleaded for,
that Subjects should be free to wage war against their Prince, because this
liberty makes two independent States, which are not compatible in one body, but
would be as really distinct Kingdoms in England, as Spain and France are; I
will endeavor to declare the true meaning thereof. If we speak properly,
there cannot be such a thing as mixtum Imperium, a mixed Monarchy, or mixed
Aristocracy, or mixed Democracy. Because, if there are diverse supreme powers,
it is no longer one State. If the supreme power be but one (that is that
authority unto which Le dernier ressort de la justice, the last appeal must be
made, and against whose sentence though unjust, we have not any legal remedy)
this must be placed either in one man, who is the fountain of all
jurisdiction, and then it is a Monarchical government, or in some Nobles, and
then the Regiment is Aristocraticall, and the sentence of the major part of
them becomes Law to all effects, whether concerning our goods or lives; or if
the civil constitutions of a State direct us to appeal to the people, this is
an absolute and true Democracy. By a mixed Monarchy therefore (not to quarrel
about words) nothing but this can reasonably be understood, that it is not
(...), or (...), wherein the will of the Prince publicly made known, gives
the Law, Quodcunque Principi placet, legis habet vigorem, but (...), a
government not arbitrary, but restrained by positive constitutions, wherein a
Prince has limited himself by promise or oath, not to exercise full power.
This grant is of force, because any man may either totally resign, or diminish
his rights by Covenant. Hence it is that in Monarchies all Kings have supreme
power, though they have not all the same jura Regalia, their prerogatives are
larger or narrower according to their particular grants. For example, our Kings
have retained to themselves the rights of coining money, making great officers,
bestowing honors, as Dukedomes, Baronies, Knighthoods, etc. pardoning all
offenses against the Crown, making war and peace, sending Ambassadors to
negotiate with foreign States, etc. and they have restrained themselves from
the use of that power which makes new Laws and repeales old, without the
consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament; as likewise from raising money
upon the Subject without their consent.

Some do ask, How are we the better, if we must suffer him to break this
Covenant as often as he pleases? it is the same thing not to have any Laws, and
not to have provision for the observance of them.

First, Difference between arbitrary rule and government, restrained by Law,
notwithstanding hostile resistance unlawful, though in case of violation.
I must tell you, this objection is answered by showing there is a necessity
that some body must be trusted. It is no discretion to prevent a possible
mischief by probable inconveniences; if you will not trust one you must trust
more, that is, if you are weary of Monarchy (under which your forefathers
enjoyed happy times, and experience cannot cozen you, though arguments may) you
know the way to cast it off by placing so many guardians over your Prince, but
have you any greater assurance then before? Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? They
have as great temptations to fail their trust as he had, and it is likely
being warned by such a president of deserting your natural Prince, they may
fear your inconstancy, and upon pretense, that you are subject to mistake; and
because they suspect you may be willing, they will take such order, you shall
not be able to call them to an account. But suppose this may not be, and that
those who suppress Tyrants (or perhaps excellent Kings under that name) may
not be frighted with their own example, to make use of their present power, to
exercise a greater tyranny; for it is not impossible they should grow jealous
too, and tell you plainly, they have no reason to trust you. If you deny them
money, here is ground of diffidence, your design is to expose them to poverty,
so to contempt, so to ruin. But suppose I say nothing of this, but that they
will be secure amidst your jealousies, which manifestly endanger their safety;
yet you will be forced at last to trust the giddy multitude, who are always
weary of the present government, because there are still some unavoidable
defects, and these are discerned by sense, and they have not such depth of
understanding as to foresee greater mischiefs (which can only be judged of by
reason) and therefore are easily persuaded to attempt a change, so that your
peace is built upon a very weak foundation; you have no better security
against a civil war, then that the greater part of the people will be
discreet. If things prosper not according to their wishes, crafty men persuade
them the fault lies in those who have the managery of the public, and if
these be not removed, and honest and wise men (meaning themselves) put in their
places, their miseries will daily grow upon them. A general accusation of ill
affected, malignant persons, wicked Counselors, is cause sufficient to out
their supposed enemies of all preferments, and put their pretended friends in
their rooms. This opens a gap to all confusion; civil war, and most
unnatural distractions are the certain issue of it. Our own lamentable
experience confirms this sad truth. After you had obtained a perfect
confirmation of all your ancient rights and liberties, with a gracious
enlargement of them by new grants, and with such security as your forefathers
were not acquainted with, you are frighted with the possibility of a relapse.
To prevent which, it was thought fit to take away the Kings power, with which
our Laws had invested him, as the necessary means for our protection, because
it was not impossible he might use it for our oppression. Accordingly the Kings
Navy, His Forts, Magazines, and the Arms of the Kingdom, are put into such as
you would call safe hands. I do not ask with what conscience, but with what
judgment you did this? The want of prudence was as great as that of honesty,
what has been the success of confiding in those whom the Laws had not
entrusted? are not your sufferings infinitely multiplied? are you not
extremely sick of your remedy? The tables are quite turned, and your friends
have undertaken the same bad game, and play it much worse; you only make the
stakes, and are in a probable way to loose all that you have. What one thing
did you complain of, which is not exceeded by them? your grievances are highly
improved, Magna Charta and the Petition of Right are now malignant, they speak
not the sense of the House, but take part with the King. To quote our good and
ancient Laws is interpreted a breach of Privileges of Parliament; appeals
are made to the people, the ready way to a universal confusion. And they
according to private information, and mis-guided affections, did once pass
this sentence, that to imprison without cause alleged, and to deny Habeas
corpus's, is no intrenchment upon the liberty of the Subject; to bestow men's
estates by whole sale, and take away their Money, Plate, or Goods, does not
destroy the property of the Subject; To scorn and revile the Book of Common
Prayer, against an Act of Parliament, which severely punishes such contempt,
and to supplant our established doctrine and discipline by countenancing
Anabaptisme and Brownisme, conduces to the holy Reformation, and will in time
effect that great work, and settle true Religion. Thus much by the way, to
show that we cannot have any absolute security; in all governments it is
necessary to trust some body. For if we should retain a liberty to right our
selves (not to mention the fatal mischiefs of Anarchy, and that it is
probable this freedom would be frequently abused to our wrong, self-love
making men partial in their own causes) the decision of controversies would
be writ in blood, and we should lay a fruitful seed-plot of civil wars,
contrary to the end of society, which is to preserve public peace, though
sometimes with private loss; because though we suffer some things by
injustice, yet we enjoy great benefits by common tranquillity, but in the ruin
of the whole, the rights of single persons must be destroyed. The hazard
likewise appears much greater, by inabling those to injure us, whom the Law
has not entrusted with our protection.

To answer their objection fully, who would persuade the people, there is not
any differnce between arbitrary government, and government restrained by
laws, if Subjects may not compel their sovereign to the observation of them.

Greater security would undo us. For though we suffer sometimes under real
greivances, yet pretended breaches of our rights (which can never be wanting,
as long as ambitious persons are discontented) would have the same influence to
stir up civil dissentions, and it is a more prudent course, to oblige some
to sit down though wronged, then to open a certain way for Schism in the
body by indulging a most pernicious freedom of righting themselves. It was
wisely said by Seneca satius est a paucis etiam justam excusationem non accipi,
quam ab omnibus aliquam tentari. For Kingdoms are many times disturbed upon
mere pretenses. There are such who will set their country on fire, only to
warm their own hands by it, and trouble the waters, that they may the better
catch fish, that is, who will pursue private interests with hazard of public
destruction. He that doubts this, let him consult histories, and he shall find,
it has been fatal to the best Princes to have the worst Subjects. I appeal
to men's consciences whether they have not read, and perhaps scene, the reign
of a most gracious Prince, a Prince eminently merciful, and just, branded with
the odious name of Tyranny. And when malice it self cannot blemish his
actions, when he is not so bad as they could pray for, (for they would have
made great advantages, if they could charge him with personal vices, as
unchaste, intemperate, or negligent in performance of religious duties) yet
craft has done their business, and abused the peoples weakness so far, as
to make them active in their own ruin, by that wicked Art of declaming
against evil counselors. Of such dangerous consequence is it, to open a way
to civil war upon pretended miscarriages in government? But grant, not
fancyed, but real injuries, Yet -- non tanti est civilia bella moveri.


It is true, the people are then not so happy as they might be; but to make use
of force, as a remedy, will increase their miseries. It is certain, this
Kingdom never suffered so highly under the greatest tyrant, as it has already
by this unnatural war, and who can tell, whither it may not end in a
universal destruction. If a King be forced to conquer against his will, who
knows how far he may be tempted beyond his natural disposition. It is a
melancholy consideration, that a peoples perverseness may change a gentle
Scepter into a rod of iron. But if Subjects prevail, we can see no end of the
war. Foreign nations will be powered upon this unhappy land, and there will
never be wanting at home a considerable party (as long as there are either
honest or discontented men) to fight for the regaining his haereditary rights,
to keep whom in awe, our fellow Subjects will plead a necessity of being
tyrants (I could wish it were not already acted upon us; first their will made
necessity, and then necessity makes their will the measure of right and wrong,
and destroys all law) their wants will give law to us, and imprison us upon
bare suspicion of Loyalty, and seize on our estates for fear they may be
honestly employed.

Thus we see a necessity of trust, and that we are bound not only in
conscience, but in prudence also, not to revenge the not performance of it, I
can further make it appear, we have very good security (as strong as humane
wisdom ever invented) that we shall live happily, and therefore we have no
reason to rob our selves of those great blessings which we lately enjoyed,
peace and plenty, upon vain fears and groundless jealousies of imaginary
miseries. Our forefathers did not distrust the sound temper of this policy, and
they enjoyed the benefits of it in a high degree.

First, the King has sworn to preserve our Laws, our Liberties, our
Propriety, and our Religion; and he desires God so to prosper him and his, as
he performs this Oath unto the Lord, who will require a severe account. We
may make a highly probable conjecture of the sincerity of his royal heart, and
the unfeignednesse of his many sacred Protestations from his miraculous
success. If God had not fought on his side, if the immediate hand of
providence had not supported him, in man's judgment he had been swallowed up.

Secondly, if he should command any illegal things, the executioners of them
are responsable, and must make satisfaction to the injured parties. And they
cannot flatter themselves with hopes of impunitie, for once in three years a
Parliament will call them to account, and they have a great Democraticall
advantage for the obtaining justice. Because the Kings wants cannot be supplied
without their consent, and it is very unlikely he will deny any reasonable
petitions, or reject any desires but such as rob him of his honor, which is
infinitely dear to him above plenty; except they endeavor to make him worse
then poor, (which cannot be by demanding justice) it is most probable he will
readily assent.

Thirdly, His interests are the same with the Subjects. They are not like two
buckets, when one is lowest, the other is highest, but they resemble the Head
and rest of the Members, and the Head cannot thrive by a consumption of the
Members. Illegal gainings from the people are shifts rather then true policy;
they may serve a present turn, yet are not worth the price at which they are
purchased, envy and discontents; whereas the gratitude of the Subject is a
constant and cheerful patrimony. When the King, like the Sun, in
consideration of what is drawn up from them, shall return it in plentiful
showers, and the blessings of a just government, which makes a Land fruitful.

Upon these grounds we have very good reason to promise to our selves a happy
government; our hopes are much above our fears, especially after his greater
experience of the unfortunate consequences of some miscarriages, and the
strange blessings upon his strict observation of the certain and known Laws.

They that require fuller information in the nature of this government, may
find ample satisfaction in Stawnford, Dyer, Crompton, and Sir Edward Coke,
That the King is the fountain of all justice, and consequently that the Laws
have placed the supreme power in the Crown. I have chosen rather to show it
out of Bracton, a man worthily famous for his knowledge in the Civil and
Common Law, because the book is less common, and I find his authority often
abused to justify their cause. Sciendum, quod ipse dominus Rex, qui ordinariam
habet jurisdictionem and dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui in regno suo
sunt, Kings Supremacy proved out of Bracton.
habet enim omnia jura in manu sua, quae ad coronam and laicalem pertinent
potestatem, and materialem gladium qui pertinet ad regni gubernaculum. Habet
etiam justitiam and judicium, quae sunt jurisdictiones, ut ex jurisdictione
sua, sicut Dei minister and Vicarius tribuat unicuique quod suum fuerit. Habet
enim ea quae sunt pacis, ut populus sibi traditus in pace sileat and quiescat,
and ne quis alterum verberet, vulneret, vel male tractet, ne quis alienam rem
per vim and roberiam auferat vel asportet, ne quis hominem mahemiet vel
occidat. Habet etiam coercionem ut delinquentes puniat and coerceat. Item habet
in potestate sua leges and constitutiones, assisas in regno suo provisas, and
approbatas, and juratas, ipse in propria persona sua observet and subditis suis
faciat observari, nihil enim prodest jura condere, nisi sit qui juratueatur,
Habet igitur Rex hujusmodi jura sive jurisdictiones in manu sua. lib. 2. cap.
24.. 1. And again, ea quae jurisdictionis sunt and pacis, and ea quae sunt
justitiae and paci annexa, ad nullum pertinent nisi ad coronam, and dignitatem
regiam, nec a corona separari poterunt cum faciant ipsam coronam. The english
of it in brief is this. The King has supreme power in all civil causes, and
is super omnes, over all persons, over the body politic; all jurisdictions
are in him; the material sword of right belongs to him, and whatsoever
conduces to peace, that the people committed to his charge may lead peaceable
and quiet lives. The power of holding Assizes is derived from him, and of
punishing delinquents. For Laws were vainly enacted, if there were not some
body enabled to protect us by defending them, etc.

These conclusions are naturally deduced from his premises. To dispose the
Militia of the Kingdom without the consent of the Sovereign (and much more
against his express prohibition) is illegal. To issue Commissions by any
other authority then his, for killing and slaying, or taking men's estates by
force, is against the known Laws: and to forbid the holding of Assizes (upon
whatever pretense of advancing the Subjects property, by stopping the course of
Justice,) is destructive of the rights both of King and Subjects.

He defines the Sword, lib. 1. cap. 8.. 4. lest Subjects should think it
lawful to take it up in their own defense without his authority, significat
defensionem regni and patriae, it is the right to defend the Kingdom. Populi
salus, the safety of the people (the pretense of which has engaged them in a
likely way of ruin) cannot dispense with our Laws, which have enabled only
him to protect them. It is not possible to speak more home then he has done
in the fifth Paragraph. Omnis quidem sub rege, and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum
sub Deo. Parem autem non habet in regno suo, quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum
par in parem non habeat imperium. Item nec multo fortius superiorem nec
potentiorem habere debet, quia sic esset inferior sibi subjectis, and
inferiores pares esse non possunt potentioribus. Ipse autem Rex non debet esse
sub homine, sed sub Deo and sub lege, quia lex facit regem. All are under the
King, and the King is under God only. He has no equal in his Realm, (no
coordination here) because then he could not command all, for amongst equals
there can be no Empire. Therefore much less are any his superiors, or can
challenge greater power, because then he would be under his Subjects, etc. The
King ought not to be under man. He is under God and the Law, because the Law
makes him King.

The last words (though advantage be made of them, and Fortescue is quoted to
the same purpose) can afford no just ground of scruple; for he explaines
himself within a few lines. Lex facit regem, signifies no more then that of the
Roman Emperors, Adeo de autoritate juris nostra pendet autoritas. l. digna, c.
de legib. The meaning may be extended thus far. That the people had a hand in
the conveyance of their divided rights into him, and he may now challenge them
by virtue of their own agreement, and by divine right also, but as
presupposing this consent; because God does not immediately dispose of
Kingdoms now, and conquest signifies greater force not juster title; that often
times gives possession, and a subsequent compact creates a true right. I do
not deny, but that conquest in some cases may be a lawful way of acquisition;
the provocation may be so great, that persons and estates are forfeited to the
victor; but because the will is not capable of being forced, it does not
follow, he has got a right over their goods and bodies, therefore they are His
Subjects, and owe to him obedience. For to be subject, being a moral bond,
where God does not lay upon us any obligation, (as the duty of children toward
their Parents does not depend upon choice) it can only flow from our consent.
But this consent of the people was not an adequate cause, but a necessary
qualification to make him capable of receiving a larger commission from God.
The Sword of Justice is blunt, the peoples agreement could not put an edge upon
it to cut off offenders, this is done by the Magistrate, as Gods delegate.

That the King is sub lege, under the law, has this sense, That he ought to
govern according to those standing rules. His Majesty freely confesses this
obligation, and since experience has taught him the benefits of strict
observance, he will not be entreated upon what plausible pretenses soever (and
much less will he be commanded) to recede from their known and certain
direction. But if he should swerve from these rules, he is not liable to any
punishment, nor compellible by strong hand; not for want of sin, for he
offends highly in that case, but for want of a superior jurisdiction. Bracton
delivers this truth plainly, we have no legal remedy, we can only humbly
petition His sacred Majesty, locus erit supplicationi, quod factum suum
corrigat and emendet; quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam,
quod dominum expectet ultorem. Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare,
multo fortius contra factum suum venire. If he will not hearken to our just and
reasonable desires, satis sufficit, his punishment is more then enough, for he
must render an account to him that judges righteously. Let not men presume to
question his deeds; much less to undo by force, what he shall do though not
according to right. That you may not think this dropped from him unwarily, he
repeates it in other places, and lib. 5. tract 3. de defaltis, cap. 3.. 3. He
puts the case. That the King should do injury, and a plea is brought against
him, in whose behalf he did it; the King being petitioned and persisting, and
he rules it thus. Quo casu cum dominus Rex super hoc fuerit interpellatus, in
eadem perstiterit voluntate, quod velit tenentem esse defensum cum injuria, cum
teneatur justitiam totis viribus defensare, extunc erit injuria ipsius domini
regis, nec poterit ei necessitatem aliquis imponere, quod illam corrigat and
emendet nisi velit, cum superiorem non habeat nisi Deum, and satis erit illi
pro poena quod Deum expectet ultorem. If the King who is bound to administer
justice to his utmost power, will not recall the wrong he did upon a false
suggestion, in this case, he injures his Subjects, but no body can force him to
do right, because he has supreme power; he has no superior but God only, and
it is sufficient that we shall have a day of hearing hereafter at a just
tribunal, where he shall be punished for doing wrong, and we amply requited
for our patient suffering. In lib. 2. cap. 16.. 3. he attributes the highest
authority to the King of England. If the place be rightly understood by a wise
Chancellor of this Land, whose collections from thence I shall lay down, you
may find them in his case of the Postnati, page 107, 108. De chartis regiis
and factis regum non debent nec possunt Justiciarii nec privatae personae
disputare; nec etiamsi in illa dubitatio oriatur, possunt eam interpretari, and
in dubiis and obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos contineat intellectus, domini
regis erit expectanda interpretatio and voluntas, cum ejus sit interpretari,
cujus est concedere. The sense is, that all casus omissi, cases not determined
for want of foresight are in the King: so that it gives not power to him to
make new or abrogate old Laws without consent in Parliament, but the right of
interpretation belongs to him, not in plain and evident cases (for these need
no declarer; to challenge a right to declare all Laws, were in effect to make
them, and then all the Subjects rights would be in their breasts, and depend
upon arbitrary votes) but only in new questions and, doubts which must not be
resolved contrary to old Law. By this it appears that Subjects ought not to
judge of the equitable part of Law, and to overthrow the literal sense at
pleasure, to the praejudice of their Sovereign. Our King has as much right by
our constitutions, as that civil Law gave the Roman Emperors, Inter
aequitatem jusque interpositam interpretationem nobis solis et licet et oportet
inspicere. l. i. c. de leg. et constit. or that other Rex solus judicat de
causa a jure non definita.

Notwithstanding such express testimonies of the Kings supremacy, yet such is
the ignorance of some (these transcribing only, and only varying the method of
treason in their seditious pamphlets, as appears by that remarkable error
borrowed out of the observations of Richard the second, being misled by
Spencer; which I have met with in many of their libells) and such is the malice
of others, who have searched the place in Bracton by them quoted, that his
authority is cited against the King almost in all their Pamphlets which either
speak Latin, or pretend to knowledge in the Laws.

The author of the fuller answer to Doctor Fern tells us, Bractons authority
abused by them.
the two Houses collectim considered in a joint body, are not Subjects. p. 4.
And Bracton, he says, will bear him out in it. Rex habet superiorem, Deum
scilicet, item legem per quam factus est Rex, item Curiam sua^, viz. Comites,
Barons, etc. The King has above him besides God the Law, whereby he is made
King, likewise his Court of Earls, and Barons, etc. This man has betrayed
either want of knowledge, or want of honesty; I suspect the latter, because he
must needs understand, that this was a very unfit proof of coordination
between the three Estates (upon the strength of which his whole discourse
hangs, and it is merely begged) for this concludes against it, and makes a
most absurd subordination of the Sovereign to such a number of his Subjects,
and therefore he confesses, he need not go so high. The adding. etc. as he
has above him his Court of Earls and Barons, and so forth, does discover
their unfaithful dealing. For first, here is not the least mention of the
House of Commons (which they would seem to imply) and therefore it cannot
serve their turn* and secondly the words following (craftily left out) show
the absurdity of it, the reason of the speech is, quia Comites dicuntur quasi
socii Regis, et qui habet socium, habet magistrum, and ideo si Rex fuerit sine
fraeno. i. e. sine lege, debent ei fraenum ponere nisi ipsimet fuerint cum Rege
sine fraeno, (Because Earls are quasi fellows to the King (I may perhaps
render the meaning by calling them his Peers) and he that has a fellow (or a
Peer) has a Master. And therefore if the King will indulge himself a
looseness from all Laws, they ought to impose those bonds upon him, except
they also will cast off obedience to established Laws. Then, he says, no
farther remedy is left but crying to the Lord, and the Lord will return this
answer. Vocabo super eos gentem robustam and longinquam quae destruet eos etc.
by the way he does not say that Subjects shall call in a foreign Nation, that
is treason, But the Lord will bring them in, because they would not judge their
people righteously.

The distinct answer to it is, that Bracton lays not this down as Law, but
when he had taught the quite contrary, Omnis quidem sub eo and ipse sub nullo*
sed sub Deo tantum, and non habet parem, and sufficit ad paenam, quod Dominum
expectet ultorem. He puts this speech into the mouth of a man discontend at the
abuse of regal power, and arguing from the practice of that Age wherein he
wrote, for the Rebellious Barons seized on the Militia of the Kingdom, which
of right appertained to Hen, third* as Bracton clearly delivers himself, ea
quae sunt justiciae and paci annexa ad nullum pertinent nisi ad coronam, nec a
corona separari pot^runt. That he speaks it in the person of another appears
from hence; that he begins it with dicere poterit quis. some body may say The
King has done Justice, and it is well; and why has he not the same liberty to
censure him if he do injustice, and accordingly to require him to perform his
duty, lest he fall into the hands of the living God? He proceeds immediately
to Rex autem habet superiorem, etc.

It would be very easy, for one better read in our Laws, then I am, to show
that the King of England has supreme right, from the nature of all Subjects
lands holden of him in fee; which though it gives a perpetual estate, Kings
supremacy proved from the nature of all his Subjects tenures.
yet not absolute, but conditional, for it depends upon the acknowledgement of
superiority and is forfaitable upon a not performance of some duties, and
therefore it returns unto him. For the breach of Fidelity is loss of Fee, as
appears in Duarenus, Wesembechius, Farinaccius, Molina, Socinus, Gail, and
they tell us that all Lawyers agree, that all Feuda are lost by rebellion; as
also by our common Law, which according to the nature of the trespass, varies
the forfeiture. In case of Treason, as taking up Arms against the King, (for
so you may find it determined 25 Edw. 3. c. 2.) after legal conviction all
their lands and tenements are absolutely in the Kings disposal; in case of
felony, the King has a year, a day and the wast, after which it passes down
to the heirs. It is very evident, that the King only has that high degree of
property in his lands which Lawyers call alaudium or alodium. The sense is the
same though the words differ; for it is not material, whether with Budaeus we
derive it from the privative particle (a) and Laudum, which signifies,
nomination, so that it denotes praedium cujus nullus author est nisi Deus: to
hold in his own full right, without any service, any payment of rent, because
from God only, or like to those of Heinault, who acknowledge no tenure but
from God and the Sun, Pays de Hainault tenu de dieu and du soleil. or else we
may derive it from the same privative particle (a) and the Saxon Leod, or the
French lewd (a vassal or leigeman) and then it expresses thus much, a tenement
without vassallage, without burden, to which our English Load retains some
resemblance.

But Subjects of what degree or condition soever hold their lands ut feuda, in
the nature of Fee, which implies Fealty to a superior. It is all one whether
they belong to them by inheritance, or by purchase; for though they may
sometimes be dearly bought, yet such is the condition of the alienation, that
they cannot be conveyed without those burdens which were laid upon him who had
novell Fee. So that Camden page 93. of his Britannia, observes very truly, that
the King only has directum dominium, this being reserved by the conouerour,
who changed many of our laws, and introduced the customs of Normandy, and
instituted all our pleas in French, and passed over the utile dominium only; he
gave though not absolute yet perpetual right, conditions being performed to
use and enjoy such and such lands* The highest expression of a Subjects right
which law will justify, is this, seisitus inde in dominico suo, ut de feudo. He
is seized of such lands in his demaine, as of fee. Now Feudum is manifestly a
derived right, and founded in him who has supreme right, in consideration
whereof all lands held by Subjects are burdened with some services, which
differ according to the variety of grant from the King. Hence some tenures
expire with life, others go down to our posterity by descent, to whom the law
gives usum fructum, a right to use, enjoy and make all profits, but they are
properly but mesn or mesme Lords, as holding of an over Lord, or Lord
paramount, who is the King.

The Kings supremacy is as strongly proved in, that he is our Liege Lord, Liege
Lord bound to some duties,
as appears by sundry Statutes, for such an one can acknowledge no superior,
as Duarenus shows in comment. de consuetudin. seudorum. c. 4. number. 3. And all
Subjects are homines ligii, liege men, and owe faith, and true alleagiance to
him, as their superior. The definition of Legeancy is set down in the great
customary of Normandy, Ligeantia est ex qua domino tenentur vassalli sui etc.
Ligeancy is an obligation upon all Subjects to take part with their liege Lord
against all men living, to aid and assist with their bodies and minds, with
their advise and power, not to lift up their arms against him, nor to support
in any way those who oppose him. but not under pain of forfeiture, as Liege
men are.
The Lord like wise is bound to govern, protect, and defend his liege people
(so the English are often called in Acts of Parliament) according to the
rights, customs, and laws of the Country. If Subjects break their faith and
prove disloyal, their estates and lives are expressly forfeited; and the King
is enabled by law (as the fountain of all Jurisdiction) to seize upon their
goods and lands, and to destroy their persons. If he perform not his duty (for
there is a mutual obligation between liege Lord and liege men) yet
notwithstanding this failing, neither his Crown or any rights belonging to his
Royal dignity are subject to forfeiture. Let them if they can produce any one
law to maintain their assertion. If there had been any, it would not thus
long have been concealed, for they are not accustomed to dissemble any
advantages by overmuch modesty. Indeed they have not any shadow of proof or
color of reason for it; and yet upon their bare word how many thousands have
hazarded their souls by assisting rebels, which are eternally lost, if they
perish in their sin? What madness is it to believe their saying, before
their and your own oaths? Is it possible you can innocently destroy your
Sovereign, whose life you have sworn to defend with your utmost power? Be not
abused by that miserable fallacy drawn from the nature of a Covenant. The
mistake lies here, that law has provided to bring Subjects offending to a
trial, but has not, could not question the King, and compel him to be
responsable, for want of a superior jurisdiction, All just proceedings must be
per legale judicium parium, and legem terrae, by trial of Peers and the law
of the land. But the King has no Peer, and lex terrae does not in any case
disarme the King of the sword of Justice, it is not separable from his Crown.
Therefore he is exempt from trial, and it cannot be just to punish him
unheard, uncondemned. The conditions of Kings were very miserable, if he who
swears to govern the people according to the known laws, so that they see
what to trust to, should himself be liable to their arbitrary Justice. The
Premises are firm; for the Major is part of magna charta, and the Minor is as
evident, as that his Subjects are not greater then he; which signifies only,
that those which are under him are not his superiors. Bracton, you may
remember, is frequent in the expression, Rex non habet parem in regno, and he
is tantum sub Deo etc. There is besides an ancient monument, which shows the
manner of holding a Parliament before the Conquest, which will afford us no
small light in this point. It is said to be delivered to William the
Conqueror by discreet men, at his command, and to have been approved by him;
it runs thus, Rex est caput, principium and finis Parliamenti and ita non habet
parem in suo gradu etc. The King is the head, the beginning and the end of the
Parliament and so he has not any Peer or equal, but is himself the first
degree. The 2d is of Archbishops Bishops, Abbots and Priors holding by Baroney.
The 3d is of Proctors of the Clergy. The fourth is of Earls, Barons and other
noble personages. The fifth is of Knights of the Shire. The sixth degree is of
Citizens and Burgesses, and so the whole Parliament is completed by six
degrees. But we must know that though any of the five degrees besides the King,
shall be absent, if they were duly summoned, Parliamentum nihilominus censetur
esse plenum, the Parliament is full in law.

The latter part is as manifestly true, that Lex terrae does not in any case
disarme the King of the sword of Justice. By our constitutions Regia majestas
est armis decorata and legibus armata, the directive part of Law concerns the
King, the penal does not; He ought to square his actions according to this
rule, but if they should swerve from it, they cannot fall within the cognizance
of his Subjects. All offenses are punishable as committed against Him, His
Crown and Dignity, and though the Law has condemned them, they are pardonable
by His Grace: which clearly demonstrates, He is above penal Laws, and it is
indeed an inseparable privilege of supreme jurisdictiction, let it be placed
where it will, in one or more persons. Naturally, (supposing men by distance
absolved from paternall dominion) that is, before a positive constitution of
Empire, when men were equally free, it was not unlawful to require by strong
hand satisfaction for wrong; but after an established government, this liberty
was civilly restrained; and it is not in our power to right our selves but in a
legal way, which is by Magistrates; and the last appeal lies to the highest
Governor, that the process may not be infinite, but we may have some certain
and peaceable decision of all differences.

To conclude this Section, (for I shall have occasion to enlarge my proofs in
the next, in answer to their exceptions) we have sworn to bear true
allegiance to the King, (such as have not are nevertheless strongly obliged by
divine Law, and this duty does naturally flow from the right to govern.) I
request all men to examine their consciences how they can excuse themselves
from f^^t perjury, if they endanger his life and endeavor to destroy him. It
is expressly high Treason to compass his death. 25. Edw. 3. Though God in his
great goodness has restrained their malice from effecting it, yet by shooting
at him, by attempting to kill him, they are lost temporally, their goods and
chattels, lands and tenements, and lives, are forfeited in Law; and what is
most lamentable, their souls are eternally ruined. Disloyalty to their King is
disobedience to God, I need not aggravate the sin, the Apostles eloquence is
most powerful, They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. The
case is so extremely plain, I am amazed that the people should be so
bewitched into Rebellion, contrary to Oaths and solemn Protestations, and
repugnant to Christianity. For they are condemned out of their own mouths,
unless that gross nonsense be true, that they shot at him (as at Edgehill)
for His preservation, and endeavored to kill him in his own defense. It is
miserable comfort which the doubtful signification of (...) can afford, but
sinking men catch hold of every reed. The word in the Greek is rather to be
translated judgment and punishment, (the words following are peremptory) and
as Piscator observes, thereby is not meant eternal damnation, but the
punishment of the Magistrate in this life: Master Bridge his Answer to Doctor
Fern. p. 4. This calls to mind those men of whom Minutius Felix says, they
did optare potius quam credere, rather wish then believe that no such thing as
eternal damnation was intended. The Analogy of the place will evince, that
this word (...) is like a sword with two edges, fitted not only to kill the
body, but to destroy the soul also. That it threatens punishment from the
Magistrate is very true, but not all; you must needs be subject not only for
wrath, but likewise for conscience sake: v. 5. 13. c. to the Romans. You are
exhorted not to rebel, because you may be hanged, but lest confidence in
numbers should answer this objection, a stronger motive is used, you shall
certainly be damned; It is probable, you may take the Gallows in the way, but
however Hell will be the end. Though you escape a shameful death, yet you have
forfeited eternal life.

. 4.
I Will begin with a most remarkable passage in Calvin's Institutions, wherein
are many things worth our observation, and which will conduce much to the
decision of the present dispute. Neque enim si ultio domini est effraenata
dominationis correctio, ideo protinus demandatam nobis arbitremur. Quibus
nullum aliud quam parendi and patiendi datum est mandatum. De privatis
hominibus semper loquor. l. 4. c. 20.. 31. If correcting unbridled governments
be his work, who said vengeance is mine, we must not therefore take Gods
office into our hands, we cannot think to reform the abuses of higher powers
is committed to us, to whom is given no other commandment but to obey and
suffer. I speak always of private men. This truth clearly delivered speaks
the goodness of the cause, and demonstrates the unlawfulness of taking up
Arms against the King, though their supposition were true (as it is evidently
false) that His Majesty did cast off the bridle of established Laws, whereas
He does hazard His Life and Crown in their defense. The quarrel is, that he
does obstinately maintain our good old customs and constitutions (such as
experience has confirmed happy and beneficial to this Nation) and will not be
over awed to make new Laws, such as private interests would force upon Him and
the Kingdom.

This is a sure ground for conscience to rely upon, and evidently destructive
of most of their popular principles, which have poisoned the affections of the
Subjects. It is not lawful for us to correct ill Governors, because this
cannot be effected without resistance, and all private men have direct precept
against this; that of obedience and patience. This will speak home to the
business, when it will after appear, that all inferior Magistrates opposed
to the highest, whose Delegates and Ministers they are, are but private men.

In the mean while, we may hence discover the falsehood of their principles,
viz. That the law of nature will justify all resistance against injuries, and
for our own preservation; that no people is so mad as to contract to their
own ruin, (and therefore may resist any Magistrate, if their lives be
endangered; the meaning is, if they have offended against known Laws, which
will certainly adjudge them to dye, the Magistrate shall bring them to a legal
trial at his own peril) or to agree to be ill governed; and therefore since
there is a mutual compact, if Rulers perform not their duty, the contract is
dissolved, and they are at liberty to right themselves, and to govern their
Governors, and to fling the Pilot overboard, if he wilfully steer upon the
Rocks, not by way of jurisdiction, but selfe-preservation. That the King is for
the people, and Governors are appointed for the good of those that are
governed, and therefore Subjects are the more considerable men, and greater and
more honorable then those who are placed over them, they bearing relation of
the end, Magistrates but of the means, and so the safety of the people must
give Law to the Magistrate, if he will be peevish, and protect them according
to old Laws, when they fancy greater benefits from innovation; that Quicquid
efficit tale, est magis tale, but according to their grounds, private men made
all Magistrates, (for before they constituted some form of Regiment by
pactions and agreements, they were but a multitude of men, amongst whom none
had jurisdiction over other) the conclusion is, therefore private men are more
Magistrates, and may call even the highest to account, and force him to be
responsable for what ever they judge abuse of power.

The grounds upon which our seditious writers do argue, are very contradictory
in themselves, and yet all of them conclude for Rebellion.

Some (and I think the greater part) confess it is unlawful for private men
to resist the Magistrate, though abusing his authority. These must needs
acknowledge the weakness of those arguments (which yet they constantly
press, and which prevail most upon the peoples affections) that it is a
senseless thing to imagine, we can be obliged to be slaves, in case a King be
guided by his Lusts, not Laws, or not to preserve our selves against bloody
Tyrants. For their determination is contrary, that private men for want of
authority to arm them, are bound to suffer. And Calvin is express, lib. 3. c.
10.. 6. nullum magis praeclarum facinus habetur, etiam apud philosophos, quam
liberare tyrannide patriam. Atqui voce coelestis arbitri aperte damnatur, qui
privatus manum tyranno intulerit. They maintain therefore, though private men
sin in resisting; yet if countenanced by inferior Magistrates, then it is not
Rebellion, but a just War. These may be clearly convinced, if they will but
consider, that inferior Magistrates are such only in respect of those who are
under their jurisdiction, because to them they represent the King, but in
reference to the King, they themselves are but Subjects, and can challenge not
jurisdiction over him.

Some state it thus; though not private men, not yet inferior Magistrates, yet
superior powers may bridle the exorbitant lusts of Princes by force of Arms;
this we grant, and therefore acknowledge, that in an Aristocracy where the
laws place the supreme power in such a body of men, what is done by their
authority ought not to be resisted, and if any one man take upon him regal
power contrary to their constitutions he is a Traitor, and may be cut off. But
this concludes nothing in a Monarchy, Res apud alios acta, aliis non
praejudicat; for their error is* They make the two Houses the Kings superiors;
who themselves disclaim it in words, and seem to ask you, who made them
supreme Ruler; for all their petitions (which are the acts of them not as
single men, but as united bodies, and considered unitive, not disjunctive;
socially, not severally) carry this truth in the Title, Your Majesty's humble
and obedient Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament, etc. which
acknowledges their obligation to be under him; and to say otherwise would be of
dangerous consequence, for if they be not His Subjects, they put themselves out
of His protection.

Some again think it too gross and absurd to maintain, that Subjects in any
capacity are above their King, and therefore a coordination serves their turn.
By which if they mean an equal right in the King and the two Houses of a
negative voice, in respect of new Laws to be enacted, or old abrogated; this
is granted, but will do them no service, and indeed it overthrowes their
cause. For as the King does not pretend that he can make use of his power to
make new laws without their consent, so by the same reason, neither can they
challenge a right of taking away our old Government without the Royal assent.
But if they mean by coordination, a division of Sovereignty, this is against
the nature of it, and a clear contradiction. So that if he be our only
Sovereign there is no such thing as coordination; if they be
joynt-Soveraignes, in what a miserable condition are we Englishmen, who should
be bound to impossibilities, to obey three masters commanding contrary things?
They might as well challenge us to do homage to them, which is and ought to be
performed only to the King, tum per id efficiamur homines solius illius cui
juravimus, as the Civilians determine; and we cannot be duorum in solidum: l.
Si ut cer.. Si duobus D. commodati.

Some, and those the most desperate mutineers, lay such principles, as will
bring in a certain confusion: For they tell us obedience is commanded only to
good Magistrates; if men entrusted to govern according to Law fail in their
duty, they cease to be Magistrates, for these are defined Dei ministri nobis in
bonum, The Ministers of God for the good of the Commonwealth; so that to
destroy such is to resist the men only, and not the power; it is a war
against the person only, and not the authority, which is none, if used against
Law, because that does not enable any to destroy it self, the Law cannot die
legally; by power is not meant (...) what they may do by strength, but (...),
what they ought to do in right.

This is the most reasonable doctrine, because coherent to it self throughout,
but the most seditious doctrine likewise, because it gives a full liberty to
the people, not only in a representative body, (and therefore in the diffusive
much more, because all the right that can pretend to against the King, is
derived from this) but to any part of them, to any private man to resume (as
some express it) their power, or as others to make use of that power, which
they never parted with to their own inconvenience, and so all necessity of
suffering, except when they have deserved it, is taken away, and Christianity
is made a tame madness.

To return to Calvin, whose following words are much abused (though I must
confess some conceive them craftily laid down by him, in reference to the
time and place when and where he lived, and that his design was to insinuate
some small color in plausible Generals, for that most unjustifiable action of
the Citizens of Geneva, who had lately cast off their true Prince, because a
Bishop of a contrary religion) after he has informed us, that God requires all
private men to obey or suffer though under Tyrants, he adds, Nam si qui nunc
sint populares magistratus, etc. If there be at this time any Magistrates
appointed by Law, in behalf of the people, to restrain the licentiousness of
Kings, such as were the Ephori, opposed and set over the Lacedaemonian Kings,
the Tribunes of the people which curbed the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchi who
bridled the Senate at Athens, etc. upon this supposition they not only may,
but ought to reform the abuses of government, and to do right to the poor
Commonalty whose guardians they are. This is undenyably true, but impertinent
to the present controversy, because the People or Nobles cannot challenge that
power in a Monarchy, with which they are invested under an Aristocraticall or
Democratical regiment, such as Athens, Rome, and Sparta were.

It is very observable by the way, that by reason the supreme power was placed
in the Lacedaemonian Ephori, and Roman Tribunes, etc. their office made their
persons sacred and inviolable. They did justly challenge the same impunity,
which we maintain, belongs to Kings in a true Monarchy; for I argue not from
the name, (for though the Duke of Venice were called King, it would not enlarge
his authority, and the Spartan Kings had only a Royal title, but were truly
Subjects as we learn from Plutarch and Polybius) but from the nature of that
power wherewith the constitutions of a Realm do invest one person. Hence
appears the unreasonablenesse of their seditious invectives founded upon some
inconveniences, because power will probably be sooner abused, if any person may
do what he will, and not be responsable for his injustice. These kind of
Declamations, with which their Presses and Pulpits labor, strike equally at
all government. For there is a necessity we should lie open to some possible
evils from the abuse of authority, or else we cannot provide for greater and
certain goods of common peace and public tranquillity. It is no prudence to
cure the miscarriages of government by a legal confusion, since even the worst
government is less miserable then Anarchy.

I believe I can make a full discovery of those wicked Arts whereby crafty men
have opened a way to the advancement of their covetous and ambitious designs
at the price of public calamity. Tib. Gracchus was excellently learned in
those damnable politiques; and I desire all indifferent men to judge whether
the unhappy disturbers of England have not exactly managed the miseries of this
Kingdom according to his principles. He proposed some Laws which might well
become a real lover of his Country, Graccus his seditious practices, their
pattern.
but his violence in the illegal establishment of them, which did evidently
tend to confusion, did make it apparent, that public pretenses were taken up
in order to the satisfaction of private lusts. Marcus Octavius, as his fellow
Tribune had the right of a negative voice, for if one Tribune dissented, no
Ordinance could be made which ought to have the power of Law. He not able to
effect his ends, informs the people that this opposition between their equal
authorities did threaten civil war, and therefore it would concern them as
they loved their own safety, which was the supreme Law, to decide this
difference, by recalling that power which they had bestowed, to the end they
might receive benefit therefrom; but which was now abused contrary to a trust
reposed, to their prejudice. The issue was, he prevailed with them to depose
Octavius, and he made them substitute a mean person, one of his dependants.
But being sensible afterward, that amongst all his illegal Acts, this gave
most distaste, not only to the Nobility and Gentry, who were endued with
clearer understandings, but even to the slowly apprehending Commons, and that
it proceeded from lawless passion to debase the highest dignity of Tribune of
the people, and expose that sacred function to scorn and contempt, which ever
before was justly esteemed inviolable, and such as secured the persons from
being touched, he brings these colors to excuse that most unpresidented
action.

The Authority of Tribunes is truly sacred and inviolable, but for no other
cause then as particularly devoted to protect the people, and established to
advance their welfare: If therefore a person thus highly entrusted, fails in
performance of duty, suffers the people for whom he serves, to be oppressed,
and endeavors to abridge their power, and denies to them the means of
expressing their will and pleasure by his vote; (for he is but their mouth,
enabled by them to declare their meaning.) In this case he forfeits all
Prividedges and Prerogatives due to his office, because he thwarts those very
end which first moved the people to bestow upon him such large preeminences:
for if otherwise we must be bound to sit still, while he pulls down the
Capitol, or sets the Navy on fire, and notwithstanding any violences, or
whatever exorbitancies of his lusts and wildest passions, tamely to obey him as
our Tribune, that is such an one who by virtue of our trust for the improvement
of our safety, usurpes a right to cut our throats, and is our servant to
destroy us. Certainly if he endeavor to stop that breath which created him,
and to overthrow the underived authority of the people, he is no longer their
Tribune. Is it not a most unreasonable thing, that a Tribune may imprison the
Consul, if it conduce to the preservation of the State, because in that the
peoples safety is concerned; and yet that the people cannot depose him in their
own defense, and resume their power when employed to their ruin? For as the
Consul, so the Tribune likewise is the peoples creature; they live and move and
have their being in their election. Again, Regal dignity (in which the powers
of all other Magistrates of what degree or rank soever, were united and made
up a personal Sovereignty) was declared sacred and holy by the most solemn
and most religious Ceremonies, as approaching nearer to, and partaking much of
Divinity: nevertheless the people expelled Tarquin, abusing his Royal power,
and some personal faults were thought a sufficient reason to take away the
most ancient Magistracy, and that which founded Rome it self. There are not in
this City any persons more holy, more venerable, then those pure votaresses*
the vestall virgins, whose charge it is to preserve the eternal fire. But if
they stain their honor, our Law buryes them alive: They cannot challenge any
privileges belonging to their sacred employment, because when they cease to
respect the Gods, we no longer owe a reverence to them, which is paid only in
order to their service of the Gods. Can it then be reasonable to suffer the
peoples enemy, to enjoy the privileges due to their Protector? He would cut
off those hands which hold him up. If the consent of the major part could make
him Tribune, shall not the same power which did constitute be equally strong to
dissolve? and much more can a greater power depose him, the concurrence even of
the whole people declaring him unworthy. What is more holy, what less to be
violated, then things offered up and consecrated to the Gods? And yet no man
dares forbid the people to make use of these, or to remove them from one place
to another, as often as they shall judge it convenient so to do. By the same
reason, without dishonor to the Authority, they may discharge the person, and
choose out a better habitation for that sacred office. That the Magistrate is
separable from the man is evident, because many, when made by the people, out
of a love to a retired life, or a sense of their infirmities, and unfitness to
manage the public, have deposed themselves, others have entreated the people
to choose more able servants. Plutarch. in the life of Tiberius, and Gajus
Gracchi.

It is needless to make the application. Observe the event; This illegal deed
(which was justified only by a pretended necessity, for I know not what
imminent dangers did threaten the Commonwealth, except this Bill did pasle)
being ventured on by the unconsidering multitude to avoid Civil War, proved
the ready means to kindle it. The flames of which suddenly consumed the
author, with many of his adherents. For one Nasica so managed Gracchus his
seditious principles, that he killed him with his own weapons. For taking
advantage of the many discontents, he requires the Consul to aid the public
safety, by destroying him who had usurped a tyrannical power. The Consul
replies with much moderation, justice and prudence, It did not become him to
make force the measure of right, nor could he kill a common Citizen, before he
were brought to a legal trial, and condemnation had past upon him. But he
promises, if the people either seduced or awed by Tiberius, should Vote any
Ordinance contrary to established Laws, he would esteem it of no force, and
would not yield to the observance of it. Nasica rises up in a rage, and gives
the word to the Tumult, since then the chief Magistrate neglect the common
safety, we must not be wanting to our own preservation; such as will maintain
the reverence due to lawful authority, follow me. In this mutiny Tiberius
falls a sacrifice to the public peace. -- Stones and Staves were the only
weapons by which this popular man, and above three hundred of his companions
were destroyed. The behavior of Blossius a great incendiary, and an over
active instrument to advance wicked designs, is very remarkable. He being
arraigned before the Consuls, confesses freely, he had executed what ever
Tiberius had commanded him. Nasica asks him, what he would have done if he had
been commanded to fire the Capitol; He replies, Tiberius would not have
commanded such a thing; others press hard upon him to tell his resolution, in
case Tiberius should have commanded it; He plainly tells them, he had then
done it, being confident Tiberius would not have commanded it, except it were
for the good of the people. The parallel will be defective, if there have not
been unhappy instruments who captivating their sense to an implicit says,
and believing not what themselves feel, but what others Vote, are active in
their own ruin in pursuance of safety, and pull upon themselves misery and
destruction in obedience to those Ordinances, which tell them the Subjects
happiness is thereby advanced.

There are other circumstances fit to be taken notice of. He had provoked so
many, he did not dare to be a private man again, (not any personal ambition,
but only State jealousy would not permit him to lay down his power) and
therefore he so contrives his business, that the people may choose him Tribune
the following year, not so much to satisfy any private desire (for he would
seem to rule only in obedience to their commands) as to provide for their good
in his own safety. The way to this end was to court the Commons by all popular
Arts. He propounded new edicts, by which the time of military service was
shortened, and some years were cut off from the prefixed number, in which Roman
Citizens were bound, when called upon to perform the duties of War. He made
it lawful to appeal from any sentence to the judgment of the people. To the
Senate (in whom only before the authority to administer justice did reside) he
joined an equal number of the inferior Commons, so that a major part of them,
with a minor part of Senators, if they made the major part of the whole, did
sway all businesses. Thus, says Plutarch, by all possible ways, lessening and
weakening the authority of the Senate by creating greater power in the people,
rather out of wilfulness and obstinacy, then sound reason, which must needs
perceive, it was void of all Justice, and very disadvantageous to the public
interest. He had some other little Arts which stood him in good stead; when
the Votes of the people were to be numbered to authorize his edicts, if he
perceived his adversaries would prevail in number, because some of his party
were absent, he would take some opportunity to pick a quarrel with his
fellows, only to divert the business for the present, and gain time, and if
that would not do, he would dismiss the assembly, and command another
meeting. Then would he appear first upon the place in mourning apparel, and
with afflicted looks, and humble countenance, sadly requesting the people to
take compassion on him, who suffered such miserable things, and feared worse
only for doing them service; and desiring them to reward his faithful
endeavor by loving his poor Wife and little Children, for he gave himself
for a lost man, since he had reason to fear (yet the cause in which he should
fall was an unspeakable comfort) that the enemies of the Commonwealth, and
such as maligned their happiness, would come upon him in the night, and force
his house, and murder him. These well dissembled griefs so wrought their
passions, that the abused Citizens set up Tents about his house at their own
charges, and maintained a constant Guard for his protection.

When such men shall make a State miserable, under pretense of improving its
happiness, and challenge to themselves a right to break all settled
constitutions, under color of forcing upon the Kingdom new Laws, which will
be more beneficial; when they shall imprison us at pleasure, that we may
enjoy our liberties, and take away our goods to secure our property, and punish
the most orthodox, conscientious, and painful Preachers, and impose upon
Congregations factious Lecturers to settle true Religion; and when they have
acted such high mischiefs, shall tell us, the Nobility and Gentry of the
Kingdom are Malignants, and delight in, and contribute their aides to advance
an illegal government, who are certain to suffer most in it, it is then time
to cry out, Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?


I have been tempted to a large digression, because the same Arts which made
Rome miserable, are visible in our calamities. I will now proceed with Calvin;
after he has very conscientiously instructed us in our christian duty, by
saying all resistance is unlawful, unless undertaken by the authority of
Magistrates, whom the Law enables to be the peoples protectors, and gives them
the highest power (which can only be in an Aristocracy or popular State) he
has afforded too great an occasion for mistake by an ungrounded conjecture, Et
qua etiam forte potestate, ut nunc res habent, funguntur in singulis regnis
tres ordines, quum primarios conventus peragunt. And the same power, (which the
Tribunes of Rome, etc. had) as things now stand, peradventure belong to the
three Estates, when they hold their principal assemblies. I could wish, I were
able to excuse him from temporizing; yet he lays it down extreme cunningly,
perhaps, peradventure, if this chance to be otherwise, you have nothing to say
for your selves; you are condemned out of his mouth, and in a point of such
higly concerning consequences, you have no reason to change his adverbe of
doubting into an assertive. I shall oppose to his perhaps, it is certainly not
so in England, because our Laws make this a Monarchical government, and so
different from that of Rome, or Athens, or Sparta, and therefore conscience
has no warrant for resistance against him in whom the supreme power is placed.

The work of the second section was, to prove it unlawful for Subjects to
resist him or them, in whom the supreme authority, that is, all the legal
power of the Kingdom in order to raise arms is placed. I shall now show the
invalidity of their exceptions against it, by manifesting, that no dispensation
grounded upon what causes soever, as endeavors to make them slaves or beggars,
or to introduce another and a false religion, and what else may be comprehended
under the extreme abuse of this power to their oppression, or upon any
persons, as inferior magistrates, or any color of preserving the authority of
the man, by fighting, and as much as in them lies, destroying the man in
authority, or of making the power well used for the good of the people, and not
the person abusing that power to be the minister of God etc. can excuse such
resistance from the sin of rebellion, and from (...) a fighting against God in
despising his ordinance.

Tyrannical abuse of power does not make taking up arms against the supreme
governor lawful.

This truth is confessed in words even by their chief writers, Tyranny does not
dispense with the Subjects duty of allegiance.
though in the mean while, they make use of such arguments to prevail on the
peoples affections (and exhort them against the King in the fear of God) as
clearly overthrow this acknowledgment. The fuller answer to Doctor Fern says
thus, there are two kinds of tyranny, regiminis and usurpationis, that of
government, though never so heavy, yet must be endured not only to the good,
(says the Apostle 1. Pet. 2. 18.) but the froward too, and therefore I know no
man that defends the ten tribes revolt from Rehoboam. p. 22. when they
complained of some greivances under which they had groaned in his fathers
reign, he was as indiscreete, as unjust, and told them, he would oppress them
more, and yet because he had jus regiminis, it is ingenuously granted, it was
unlawful for them to Rebel.

The breife answer to Doctor Fern, thus, we profess against resisting power,
authority, though abused. He does not hide himself (as ordinarily) by dividing
the power from the person who is invested therewith, but concludes against
resisting the men also. If those who have power to make laws, shall make
sinful laws, (that is prove tyrants (and so give authority to force
obedience; we say here, there must be either flying or passive obedience. p.
113. By the same reason, if he that has the only power by laws already made,
to train, array, and mustar, and to dispose of the Militia, with which he is
entrusted for his Subjects protection and his own safety, should put them into
hands, which they cannot confide in, yet there must be no war waged to
prevent a supposed danger, there must be either flying or passive obedience.

But if one that is in authority command out of his own will, and not by law,
I resist no power, no authority at all, if I neither actively nor passively
obey, no, I do not resist so much as abused authority. If you mean by not
passively obey, take up arms ^ against (which you must, if you speak
pertinently, and would make an application of this answer, to the justification
of hostile resistance in Subjects) you do resist power and authority in this
case. For though you are no: obliged to yield obedience, either contrary to
divine praecept, or the known laws of the realm, yet by making use of arms,
you transgress that law, which disables Subjects to make war without the
Princes authority, much more against his express command, to the manifest
indangering of his royal Person. He answers, this had been but accidental.
p. 121. and so we are told by others, he might have stayed away. Those damned
assassins and bloody villains, by whose hands the two French Henry's fell,
might have made the same plea for their execrable murders. If they had not come
in their way, which they might have avoided by locking themselves up, or by
some other means, they had not been killed by them. But he implies a desire,
and beseeching him not to be there, but to withdraw himself. If the King had
as full right to be there, as in any other place within his Kingdom, they may
with the same reason justify the murder of him, if he will not be entreated to
keep such company only as they shall allot to him, or to leave his Court, or
creep into an oven.

The Author extremely contradicts this duty, before professed in the name of
all, of flying or passive obedience, and lays down a most desperate
conclusion, which dissolves all government and makes Anarchy legal. Upon
suppossall that Parliaments (taken in the only true sense for King, and Lords,
and Commons) should degenerate and grow tyrannical; I confess says he the
condition of such a State would be very dangerous and like to come to
confusion; particular men could not help themselves, and the whole State
(mark how he fancies a whole State, when opposed to King and Lords and all the
Commons representatively; what can this State be, but such a number of
particular men, who he says, cannot help themselves?) ought to suffer much
before it should help it self by any ways of resisting: but if you can
suppose a Parliament so far to degenerate, as they should all conspire
together (all in Law are the major part of both Houses with the Royal assent)
with the King to destroy the Kingdom (how unreasonably he expresses a
supposall of being won to satisfy private Interests by making prejudicial
laws to the Subject in general, let him translate the scene into Ireland, and
he may think the supposition very possible) and to possess the lands and
riches of the Kingdom themselves (not all, but in an unequitable proportion)
in this case whether a law of nature would not allow of standing up to defend
our selves, yea to reassume the power given to them (this is a clear
confession, they parted with their power) to discharge them of that power they
had, and set up some other, I leave to the light of nature to judge.



This is not properly to resist the power, but to discharge the power, to set
the power elsewhere. They daily improve their principles, and now profess
plainly, what understanding men did before collect from their grounds, that it
is lawful not only to depose a King, but even the Parliament. He is very
apprehensive he has spoken out (and it is very strange the Committee should
order this doctrine to be published) I know says he, this will be cried out
of, as of dangerous consequence, wherefore God deliver us, (as I hope he will)
for ever making use of such a principle. page 133, 134.

They confess generally, they are bound to defend the Kings person; (and if
they should say otherwise, we have their oaths and solemn protestations
against their words) witness the 23 day of October (which may require an
Annual gratitude for the great deliverance both of Church and State in the
preservation of His Majesty) whether they did according to the information of
their own consciences. All the answer I can meet with carries this sense,
which I will express in Mr Burroughes his words; As for the Kings person, is
it not the profession of the Parliament to defend it? page 112. and again, why
does the Doctor speak of stretching forth the hand against the Lords Anointed?
who endeavors it? does not the Parliament profess the defense of the Kings
person? page 120. Hence it appears, they know their duty, the question is,
whether they performed it, who directed their Canon more especially against His
sacred Majesty; which they cannot esteem an accidental thing, who are not
ignorant of that treacherous advertisement which Blague gave in to the Earl of
Essex, in what part of the battle, the King and Prince were, that they might
at one blow, cut off our present happiness and future hopes. I desire only,
that their ears would not hang in their eyes, and that men would not believe
authority against sense. I shall only say, most miserable is he; who
condemns himself in that thing, which he allows and practices.



tyrant under this notion, as an usurper, this is very true, but nothing
pertinent, for there is not any just scruple, but those may be turned out by
force according to law, who come in by force against Law; as in the case of
Athalia, destroyed by Jehoiada, whereby Joas^ who had true title, was
established in the throne. But if they mean (as they do, if they would
conclude for themselves) a King having right to govern, and proving a wicked
or weak Prince, it is false that this Tyrannus cum titulo the Lords Anointed
though he abuse that power (for Chrisma domini. this holy oil only excludes
usurpation, and includes a just title only, and not either the Orthodox
religion, or goodness, or prudence) is opposed simply to a King, but to a just
or wise King. As therefore his right to the Crown, is not founded in his
divine or moral virtues, but in a lawful succession, so neither can contrary
vices dispense with any to depose him, or lift up their arms against him.

This will be evident, if we consider what kind of Prince he was, to whom
Saint Paul writing to the Romans, forbad resistance for conscience sake. It was
Nero, in whom very happily this position might be enforced to the height, and
yet all their exceptions are determined invalid. Notwithstanding his Idolatry,
his oppressing his Subjects by strange cruelties, and persecuting the Saints.
-- Quae divisa tyrannum
Efficient, collecta tenens --


Yet the Apostle commands not to resist even him upon pain of damnation. Our
(or rather Saint Paul's) adversaries seem to object, durus hic sermo, this is a
hard saying. The Law of Nature allows self preservation; the people made Nero
Emperor by their consent, (for usurpation can give no right) and therefore are
more powerful then he, for Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale. The people
may be without the Emperor, the Emperor cannot be without the people: It is
not probable the safety of mankind should depend upon the lust of one man,
etc. I shall answer with the Civilian, who teaches us to obey and not dispute
even humane constitutions. Quod quidem perquam durum est: sed ita lex scripta
est. L. prospexit. D. qui and a quib. It was Gods pleasure so to order humane
affairs. Such Christian submission does most commonly produce peace and plenty
in our streets, and is the mother of many goods, but if the abuse of power
should bring evils upon us, they cannot be so great, so general as civil
war would create. But suppose we suffer more in a corrupt peace, then amidst
such unnatural distractions as this miserable Country now bleedeth under: yet
we ought not to be tempted to impatience, but should rather rejoice, that God
has enabled us to stand out his fiery trial; such afflictions if rightly
understood, are blessings, and though we are not bound to pray for them, yet we
ought to give thanks. Bad Rulers (if we do not imitate, whom we condemn,
and neglect our duty, because they perform not theirs) are but unhappy
instruments of our greater glory. If we did deeply consider the fruits of our
patience, we should certainly pity, and perhaps love our oppressors, as the
unfortunate occasion of our higher bliss.

The Christians under Julian were very sensible of this duty, and confess
themselves bound to obey him in all lawful things, and they did accordingly
fight his battles; but when a greater then he did interpose, cessabat
potestas minoris, they chose to serve God in the first place, and redeemed
their not obedience to him, by offering up their bodies willing sacrifices. For
they wanted not numbers sufficient, as appears by the Armies electing Jovianus
a Christian to succeed him in the Empire, with this acclamation, Christian^
sumus. If resistance were lawful in any case, never men could have brought
fairer pleas. Julian was an Apostate from the established true religion; he
dealt with Sorcerers and Magicians, and professed against doing justice to the
Christians, making sport with their injuries, and returning no other answer to
their tears, and humble Petitions but such scoffs as these; It is part of
your religion to be abused; you forget the Galilaeans precept, Why do you not
rather suffer wrongs? you must forgive all offenses against you, as you hope to
be forgiven; if they strike you on one cheek, you are bound to turn the other
also; if they take away your cloaks, that gives them a just title to your
coats also, if at least he whom you worship have power to dispose of your
goods; you are bound from going to Law, and rendering evil for evil; why do
you petition against, who are bound to pray for your Persecutors? If they take
away your revenues, they advance you into the state of perfection, which
requires, you should not possess any thing, etc.

They were more persecuted by his wit then his cruelty, and yet though he did
even wanton in their miseries, his barbarous usage could not prevail with them
to neglect their calling, but they committed themselves to him who judges
righteously, and he revenged their causeless sufferings in his destruction;
for as stricken from Heaven, he cried out, O Galilaean, thou have got the
better.

It is as hard a matter to persuade men to obey, or suffer under bad Princes,
as it is to make them (the same in practice which they are in profession) true
Christians. For they are very apt to corrupt the plain Text with false
glosses, as often as religion runs cross to civil interests. Their strong
desire it should be false supplies the defects of arguments, which could not be
able to stand against manifest truth, if affections had not a more powerful
influence upon humane actions, then reason. I shall therefore labor to prove
what they are so unwilling to believe, and I will lay down the conclusion in
Calvin's own words (whom they cannot except to as a Royalist) In homine
deterrimo, honoreque omni indignissimo, penes quem modo sit publica potestas,
praeclaram illam and divinam potestatem residere, quam Deus justitiae ac
judicii sui ministris verbo suo detulit. Proinde a subditis eadem in reverentia
and dignatione habendum, quantum ad publicam obedientiam attinet, qua optimum
regem, si daretur, habituri essent. Let his vices be never so many, so great,
and his merits small or none, yet by reason of his office we must esteem his
person sacred; God does shed upon him the rays of Divinity, by constituting
him his Minister: wherefore his Subjects should look upon him with the same
reverence and awe as they would upon the best King. Instit. l. 4. c. 20.. 25.

The Heathens went far, Voto expetendos bonos principes, qualescunque
tolerandos; But Christianity goes higher, we may pray for the best, but we must
not only suffer, but yield cheerful and hearty obedience to the worst. If any
doubt arise, let them consider the divine providence so frequently mentioned in
the Scriptures, and his especial disposing of Kingdoms. The Kings heart is in
the hand of the Lord as the rivers of water, he turns it whither soever he
will: Prove. 21. 1. and Dan. 2. 21. He changes the times and the seasons: he
removes Kings, and sets up Kings, etc. There is a place in Jeremy very
apposite. I have made the earth, the man and beast that are upon the ground by
my great power, and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it
seemed meet unto me, and now have I given all these lands into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my servant, etc. and the Nation which will
not put their neck under the yoke of the King of Babylon, that Nation will I
punish says the Lord with the sword, and with the famine, and with the
pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand. Therefore hearken not ye
to your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, nor to your Dreamers, which speak unto
you saying, ye shall not serve the King of Babylon: for they prophecy a lie
unto you that ye should perish. cap. 27. He was a fierce Tyrant, and yet
obedience was enjoined by God, because he had a right to govern them. I have
enlarged my self upon that of Samuel, Hoc jus erit Regis, this shall be the
right of the King who shall reign over you; and it amounted to this, to
destroy their liberties and property. Calvin draws this conclusion from it;
Kings could not do so according to right, because the Law was against it,
which instructed them in their duty to govern justly; but it was called jus in
populum, a right over the people, to which they must needs be subject; nor was
it lawful for them to resist. l. cit.. 26.

It is a frivolous objection (says he) that this precept concerned only the
Israelites; because the command is general, and obliges all not to resist him
to whom the Kingdom of right appertains. The counsel hence inferred is very
good, let not us therefore break our duty, because Kings perform not theirs.
If we live under a bloody Prince, or covetous, or intemperate, or weak, or one
that persecutes the most godly professors, let us call to mind our own sins,
which have deserved greater castigations. Let us think it is Gods sword, the
sword of Justice, though man commit murder with it. If we have deserved to
die, and the Law pass sentence upon us, we ought not to be impatient, though
we be cut off by a wicked executioner.

Many examples are alleged out of the old Testament to color this breach of
duty.

We have plain precept not to resist, and must conform our actions to known
rules, not the practice of others. For instance, Who can lift up his hands
against the Lords anointed and be guiltless? this implies a command not to
rebel. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. He that resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God. Submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto
Governors as unto those who are sent by him, Legibus vivendum est non
exemplis: Examples can only show what was done, not what ought to be done.

To answer briefly, the examples by them produced are either impertinent, as
being acted upon Usurpers, or not to be drawn into a rule, because
extraordinarily allowed by God, who may dispense with his own law (but this
cannot warrant our imitation, no more then the Israelites robbing the
Egyptians can license Plundering, or any other illegal weakening the wicked;
or Jacobs lying to his Father, can excuse want of sincerity and truth, when by
false reports, they may probably undo their brethren; or Jaels breaking trust
in murdering Sisera, can dispense with killing enemies, after composition made
to save their lives) or lastly they were unjust. To run over the particulars
would be more tedious then profitable, because they are all clearly solved by
applying one of these three: They are impertinent, or extraordinary, or wicked.

Secondly, If we should grant that it were lawful for the Jews to resist
Tyrants in their own defense, this comes not home to us, who are called as
Saint Peter says, to bear the Cross, and to follow Christ's example. When we
are in danger of being killed for our Religion, all that is allowed to us is,
only to fly from one City to another. We may better submit to so high a
degree of patience, in consideration our well being is not provided for in this
world, and despise death, because the joys of eternal life are so plainly set
before us in the Gospel, whereas under the Law they were entertained with
promises of temporal blessings, and it must needs go to their hearts to loose
the proposed reward of keeping the Law, length of days, by their due
observance of it, and this upon a suspicion of a better life, rather then a
confidence grounded upon any plain promise.

deerant vires, They had a good will to rebel, but wanted power only.

could not lawfully resist, but if they had been countenanced with the
authority of the Senate, questionless they would not have submitted themselves
so tamely to the slaughter.



Secondly, that the Senate had no authority to wage War against their
Emperor, will be evinced from Romans 13. 1. and 1 Pet, 2.. 13. 14. applied to
the civil constitutions of the Roman Empire. Submit to the King as supreme,
that is, to the Roman Emperor, says Diodati, c. all'imperator Romano, detto
tal-uolta Re dalle natione stranieri. Vlpian acquaints us, there was not any
legal power but in him; what he determines has the force of law he adds the
reason, because the people in whom the Senate are included, by the lexregia,
gave unto him the right to manage all their power. Vtpote cum lege Regia, quae
de imperio ejus lata est, populus ei and in eum (which signifies in se, says
Theophilus) omne suum imperium and potestatem conferat. l. quod princ. D. de
constable. princ. Justinian clearly decides the case; if the Emperor shall take
any cause into his cognizance, omnes omnino judices, let all judges whatsoever
know, that this sentence is law to all effects, not only in the particular
cause, but it becomes a rule to decide all like cases by. For what is greater,
what more sacred then the Imperial Majesty? or who is so insolent, ut regalem
sensum contemnat? The sense even of the Senate was not to stand in competition
with Royal constitutions. l. si imperial. D. de legib.

We may fitly observe, that some Emperors did by Acts of grace limit their
legislative power, which was solely in them, and bind themselves from the use
of it, without the advice of the Senate, as is to be seen, l. humanum. Cod. de
legib. and may be collected from Auth. Habita quidem. C. ne fili. and diverse
other constitutions; yet this gave no power to the people, to be employed
against them, if they should not perform their duty. This grant made the Roman
Empire like the Kingdom of England, (for we have a clear and full testimony
from our Common Law, that the legislative power is only in the King, though
the use of it be restrained to the consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, le Roy fait les leix avec le consent du Seigneurs and Communs, and
non pas les Seigneurs and Communs avec le consent du Roy. The King makes Laws
with the consent of the Lords and Commons, and not the Lords and Commons with
the consent of the King.) or that which Virgil describes, -- gaudet regno
Trojanus Acestes,
Indicitque forum, and Patribus dat jura vocatis.


It is the most unreasonable thing that ever was fancyed, that Subjects
assembled, should have greater authority then their King, without whose call
they could not have met together, and at whose pleasure they are dissolved in
Law, and bound to depart to their own homes.

Anticavalier does pitifully entangle himself with this objection, and first
he tells us, he is confident Tertullian did not speak the truth, when he
imputes their patience to the power of godliness, which prohibited resistance,
and not their want of force to withstand; He might as easily have given the lie
to Cyprian, to the Ecclesiastical writers, who relate the story of the Theban
Legion, and aquaint us, that the greatest part of Julians Army against the
Persians consisted of Christians. But supposing, as he had good reason, this
bold denial would not give satisfaction, it not being likely his credit should
go farther then the records and evidences out of Holy Fathers and Church
story, after several fruitless essays to solve it, he pitches at last upon
this; That honest liberty was hid from them for some special ends, which since
God has revealed to this latter age, and therefore he gave to them an
extraordinary spirit of patience and courage* which is inconvenient for these
days wherein God has afforded a more plentiful light, and shows us our
liberty, and that there is no necessity of being Martyrs. It is now the wickeds
turn to suffer. I will set down his words at large, for they are so strange,
sober men might doubt the faith of a relater.

Certain it is, That the frame and tenor of Gods after dispensations did
require, that such a liberty should be hid from them; or at least, that they
should not make use of it; as on the contrary, the nature and purport of those
dispensations which God has now in hand, requires that this liberty should be
manifested, and made known unto Christians. We know, that according to the
counsel and foreknowledge of God, Antichrist was then to come into the world:
as now we know that he is about to be destroyed, and cast out of the world.
Now this is a general rule, look what truths were necessary to be shut up,
and concealed from the Churches of Christ, that Antichrist might pass by, and
get up into his throne; the discovery and letting out of the same into the
world, are necessary for his pulling down, etc. But God causing a dead sleep
(as it were) to fall upon those truths which should in special manner have
opposed him, he had the opportunity without much contradiction or noise to
steal and convey himself into that cathedram pestilentiae, that chair of
Papal state, which yet he possesses. Now amongst many other truths which were
of necessity to be laid a sleep, for the passing of this beast unto his great
power and authority, and for the maintaining and safeguarding of him in the
possession hereof, this is one of special consideration; That Christians may
lawfully in a lawful way, stand up to defend themselves, in case they be able,
against any unlawful assaults; by what assailants, or by what pretended
authority soever made upon them. For had this opinion been timeously enough,
and substantially taught in the Church, it would certainly have caused an
abortion in Antichrists birth, and so have disappoynted the Devil of his first
borne. Had not the spirits, and judgments and consciences of men been as it
were cowed and marvailous^y imbased and kept under (and so prepared for
Antichrists lure) by doctrines and tenants, excessively advancing the power of
superiors, over inferiors, and binding Iron yokes and heavy burdens upon those
that were in subjection, doubtless they would never have bowed down their
backs so low, as to let such a beast over them, they would never have resigned
up their judgments and consciences into the hands of such a spiritual Tyrant
as he. So that you see, there was a special necessity for the letting of
Antichrist into the world, yea and for the continuance of him in his throane,
that no such opinion as this which we speak of, whether truth or untruth,
should be taught and believed; I mean, which vindicateth and maintains the
just rights and liberties, and privileges of those that live under authority
and subjection unto others.

Whereas, now on the contrary, that time of Gods preordination and purpose, for
the downfall of Antichrist, drawing near, there is a kind of necessity, that
those truths which have slept for many years, should now be awakened; and
particularly that God should reveal and discover unto his faithful Ministers,
and other his servants the just bounds and limits of authority and power, and
consequently the just and full extent of the lawful liberties of those that
live in subjection. Evident it is that they are the Commonalty of Christians, I
mean Christians of ordinary rank and quality that shall be most active, and
have the principal hand in executing the judgments of God upon the Whore.
Consider that place, Revel. 18* 4. 5,. 6. Now that this service shall be
performed unto God by them (Christians I mean of under rank and quality)
contrary to the will, desires, or commands of those Kings and Princes under
whom they live, it appears by that which immediately follows, v. 9. page 30,
31,. 32. The peremptory conclusion of all is, that the lawfulness of Rebellion
is now discovered to Gods Church, as the necessary means to ruin Antichrist;
for the Kings will never be persuaded to effect this great and holy work, and
therefore the People must.

Whereas the Text says expressly, That the ten Kings shall hate the Whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, Revel. 17. 16,. 17.
Least the people should be frighted by this (as they justly ought) from making
rebellious attemps against lawful authority, because that in Gods good time
will arm them, and fight jointly the Lords battle against the Beast, he
labors to remove this scruple. I conceive, says he, this is not meant of the
persons of Kings, but of their States and Kingdoms (id est) of the generality
of the people under them. Master Goodwin, page 32. The Kings shall hate the
Beast, that is, the people shall hate their Kings, and religiously rebel
against them in order to the destruction of Antichrist.

The same Doctrine is delivered by Master Buroughs. There is a necessity that
in these times peoples consciences should be further satisfied in their
liberties then formerly, because the time is (we hope) at hand for the pulling
down of Antichrist, and we find by Scripture this work at first will be by
the people, Revel. 18. page 144. and for a close, page 145. Surely the right
knowledge of these liberties God has given the people, will much help forward
the great things God has to do in this latter age.

I must confess, my heart is filled with sorrow, when I consider how far the
reformed Religion is degenerated, which can be no longer pure then it continues
peaceable. But alas! it is become the mother and nurse of Rebellion; it foments
sedition; and advances the rvine of States. What a sad thing is it that
factious Preachers should so far bewitch the people by strong delusions, as
to prevail with them to neglect plain duties of subjection and obedience upon
the strength of obscure prophecyes? whereas they ought to live according to
precept, not predictions; many of which shall not be fulfilled but by the
sins of wicked men: Bless me O Lord from being an instrument to bring such
thy works to pass. It is our only safe way, not to do evil that good may
come of it. The Apostle forbids it, and the reason may be this, God has no
need of the sinful man. Why should thou cease to be good, for fear God else
would not be true? Babylon will certainly fall, though we walk uprightly; to
fear God and honor the King, are no stops to the destruction of that man of
sin. After such fiery spirits have engaged the Kingdom into probable ways of
utter ruin and desolation; after your hands have been imbrued in the blood of
the ancient Nobility, and you have miserably torn in pieces the brave and
honest Gentry, and exposed the seduced Commons to those fatal mischiefs, which
accompany the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, and the bleeding State shall at
length grow wise, and unite again for the preservation (if it be possible) of
the ruinous remainder, rather out of a weariness of the insupportable
calamityes of War, then out of a Christian love, which would have continued
unto us the blessings of peace; All the satisfaction which these false Prophets
can give, for the unspeakable mischiefs which they have pulled upon their
unhappy Country, will be only this; We were mistaken in those places of
Daniel and the Revelation; The time, it seems, is not yet come, The Saints
must still expect, and Gods holy ones must wait and pray for a more happy
opportunity to perfect the great work by Rebellion.



Deuteronomy. 17.) was no dispensation for them to Rebel, as was evidenced formerly.
The Kings of Persia though confessedly Supreme, and not responsable to their
subjects, yet took an oath, at their inauguration, as Zenophon and Diodorus
Siculus inform us, and it was not lawful for them to alter certain laws, as
appears in Daniell, nevertheless their miscarriages in government, did not
dispense with their Subjects loyalty. If a Father promise any thing to his
children, they have a full right to his performance; but in case he prove
dishonest, he does not thereby loose his right to govern them, nor are they
excused from their duty of honor and obedience: So there is a contract
between Husband and Wife, the violation of which on the man's part does not
bereave him of his dominion over the woman. I confess, a great obligation lies
upon Kings, not only from their Oaths and promises, and agreements, but
expressly from Gods law also, to govern the people committed to their charge,
with justice and equity. And if they abuse their power, Gods punishment will be
as high as their ingratitude. The greatest temporal favor which God bestows
upon any single man, is to make him his Vicegerent, his immediate Deputy,
Christum suum, his anointed; and the greatest blessing he has given to mankind
is government, by which he has provided for the common good of all. Now if he
turn this blessing into a curse, if he who is set over a people to punish
evil doers persecute those who do well, he must expect a fearful judgment
from the Almighty, it is pathetically expressed in Wisdom. 6. Hear therefore O
ye Kings, and understand, learn ye that be Judges of the ends of the earth.
Give ear you that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For
power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the highest who shall try
your works, and search out your counsels. Because being ministers of his
kingdoms, you have not judged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the
counsel of God. Horribly and speedily shall be come upon you: for a sharp
judgment shall be to them that are in high places. For mercy will soon pardon
the meanest: but mighty men shall be mightily tormented. For he which is Lord
over all, shall fear no man's person: neither shall be stand in awe of any man's
greatness, for he has made the small and the great, and cares for all alike:
but a sore trial shall come upon the mighty.

Thus much is granted, but to conclude from this obligation that a not
performance induces a forfeiture of his crown, and that we may make hostile
resitance against unjust commands, is a very weak way of reasoning* For
consider with your selves; is there not a mutual duty between husband and
wife, parents and children? Fathers must not provoke their children to wrath:
but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord Ephesians. 6. 4. Husbands
should give honor to their wives a unto the weaker vessels 1 Pet 3. 7.
Suppose some fathers prove froward, some husbands unkind, yet cannot their
faults dispense with the duty of children and wives. The King -- Vrbi pater est
urbique maritus is both husband and father, not to single persons, but to the
Commonwealth. There are many resemblances in matrimony which will afford great
light to the better understanding the duty of Subjects. The consent of the
woman makes such a man her husband, so the consent of the people is now
necessary to the making Kings (for conquest is but a kind of ravishing, which
many times prepares the way to a wedding, as the Sabine women chose rather to
be wives, then concubines, and most people prefer the condition of Subjects
though under hard laws to that of slaves) If we apply their arguments their
Sophistry will clearly appear. For Quicquid effic^t tale, est magis tale, and
constituens est major constituto, bestows upon women the breeches, as well as
the Crown upon the people, and unumquodque eadem potestate dissolvitur, qua
constituitur, gives the same license to a woman to cast of the bonds of
wedlock, as to subjects those of subjection. As in marriage, so in monarchy
there are two parties in the contract; though without a mutual agreement there
could be no covenant, yet after it is once made the dissent of the inferior
party, let it be not upon fancyed, but real discontents, cannot dissolve the
compact. Consent therefore joynd man and wife, King and people, but divine
ordinance continues this union; marriages and governments both are ratified in
heaven. Quae Deus conjunxit, homo ne separet, whom God has joined, let not man
put asunder; They must take their King for better for worse. It is very
observable though it was permitted to the man in some cases, to give a bill of
divorce, yet this license was never allowed to women; so fathers might abdicate
their children, not they their fathers, women cannot unmarry, nor the people
unsubject themselves. If any shall mistake with the disciples, if the case be
so, it is good not to marry, it is good to live without a King; they ought to
consider that God is wiser then they, and best knows how to order things for
the good of mankind.

That I may (if it be possible) undeceave the misled multitude; I shall grant
if a people choose one man, and bestow the name of King upon him, yet if they
retain the supreme power in themselves, and express it by making a law that
in case he shall do such and such things, he shall forfeit his right to
govern, then it is very lawful to depose him upon breach of such conditions.
For then this state is a Democracy, and the legal power is in the people. Such
a case is very possible, for if the royal line in any Kingdom should fail,
and there want one descended from his loins to sit upon the throan, then, as a
woman after the death of her husband is free to marry to whom she will in the
Lord, so the people may make what government they please, they may call one
King, and place their Ephori or Demarchi and tribunes over him. It is not
material that this is not so wise a government, for it is not prudence, but
such a consent, not the understanding, but the will of the people that
constitutes the form, In such a state hostile resistance against him (though
called King) may be a just war, because the law enables them to fight, and
the Prince may be a rebel and Traitor.

Let them prove that England is no monarchy; that they are not bound to bear
true alleagiance by a necessary obligation flowing from the civil
constitutions of this realm; that they may lawfully kill him, whose life they
have sworn to defend with their utmost power, let them produce any law which
gives power to English Subjects to train, array, muster without the Kings
authority, that I may not say against his express command, and to the end they
may destroy him; when they have done this and confuted their oaths of
supremacy and fealty, and made it appear to the world they were forsworn, I
will cease to preesse them with that of St Paul, you must needs be subject not
only for wrath, but also for conscience. I will then direct my speech to the
King, and endeavor to persuade him to submit to the People, under whom he
governs. But since they do not so much as pretend any law but justify their
Rebellion only by (that word fatal to this Kingdom) necessity, and lay down a
Principal, sit to disturb the peace of all nations, that when dangers
threaten, laws must give place to discretion, and the subjects birthright,
liberty and property must be sacrificed to a few ambitious men's ragioni di
stato: I think I am bound in charity to admonish them in what a desperate
condition they are. Those who resist, shall receave to themselves damnation.
All that they gain by mannaging the ruin of their Country, will not
countervaile the loss of their souls. I remember the saying of the Prophet.
The prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time. Amos. 5.
13. But I value not safety, in comparison of honest (though weak) endeavors
to do service to the public.

Some state it thus; elective Kingdoms are subject to forfeiture but not
successive. These men give but small satisfaction, because they build upon a
very unsound foundation. For succession is no enlargement of right, but only a
continuance of that which the first had; elective Kingdoms are not
forfeitable, except there be some express law, which places a power in the
people to rule their King, and govern their governor. It is plain, the Roman
Emperors though chosen, were absolute: and successive Kingdoms, if there be
any such express law are forfeitable; it is as plain, the Spartan Kings, who
were haereditary, might be legally deposed in some cases.

The unlawfulness of hostile resistance against the King of England is
supported by a surer foundation, viz. the known Laws of this Realm
strengthened by divine ordinance: the necessity of our allegiance is
demonstrable from the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. I shall only desire
my readers to consider the nature of this government, and they must evidently
discern, to fight against the King is Treason and Rebellion.

I will lay down nothing, but what sober men shall have as little reason to
doubt of, as to believe, that the King was despised and scorned, in order to be
made glorious, and that they endeavored to kill him in order to his
preservation. So at Edgehill, but before they were more cruel, and reserved
for him something worse then death, to live under their command; Instrumentum
servitutis, haberent Regem, they would make him the unhappy instrument, to
raise them to honors in the ruin of his good Subjects. The Duke of Normandy
invaded England with a potent Army, and made himself King; what our Laws were
under the Danes or Saxons (by whom we were likewise conquered) does not much
concern us to examine, (no more indeed then it does to know the ancient
British Laws and Privileges, which were taken away by them, and the true
owners were beaten out of their rightful possessions and inheritances) for he
inverted the Government, altered the Laws, disposed of Possessions to his
Norman followers, (whose blood runs in the veins of our most ancient Gentry)
and made all, as well English as his native Subjects, feudaries to him, so that
he remained Directus dominus, Lord Paramont, or overlord in the whole Land;
that we may make no scruple of this truth, the Laws given us by him, and which
we are to live by now, are written in his language. However we state his
entrance, whither by the sword, or to avoid the envy of that title, by a
voluntary submission of all to him, as to their Sovereign; the conclusion
cannot vary, because the duty of non-resistance arises from their own act,
they taking an oath to be his true and loyal Subjects. It is objected, If he
came in by force, he may be turned out by the same title. De jure he cannot; in
this case, Quod fieri non debuit, factum valet; for though conquest be a name
of greater strength only, and be not it self a right, yet it is the mother of
it. Because when the people are in their power, for fear o^ harder usage, they
pass their consent to be his faithful Subjects, and to be peaceably governed
by such Laws, as he shall, or has given them: This subsequent Act gives him a
full right to the Crown. To speak to the present case, he for his own
security, and because it was the necessary means to enable him to protect his
Subjects, retains the right to dispose the Militia of the Kingdom, which
continued in his Successors even to this day (though now violently invaded by
Subjects through virtue of an Ordinance, of which no times can afford a
president) and all Subjects of what condition soever, were bound to do homage,
and bear fealty to him, which was inconsistent with taking up Arms against
him. That he might sweeten their subjection, Quaedam jura pactis minuit, he
restraines his absolute right by compact, and bestows some liberties and some
privileges upon the people (who commonly nec totam servitutem pati possunt,
nec totam libertatem) and these Acts of Grace he confirms unto them by such
security as should not endanger his person nor regal authority, that is, by
promise and oath, and not by giving to his Subjects legal power to un king
him, if he should not perform covenant; knowing full well, that though he
should not really break it, yet a pretense he did so, might upon the first
opportunity create a civil war; (and therefore his Subjects had as little
reason to accept, as he to offer so pernicious security, as would put both
parties in far worse condition) for if Rebellion should be allowed in any
case, that case would be always pretended, and though the Prince were just,
and wise, and religious, yet ambitious men to compass their own ends, would
impute to him oppression, weakness, and that notwithstanding his exemplary
practice in his public devotions to the contrary, he did but handsomely
dissemble, and favored a false religion in his heart.

The method of that Rebellion in the reign of Henry the third, which made
France extremely miserable, is very observable. A factious party of the
Nobility and Gentry, a seditious party of the Clergy, and an unfortunate party
of the seduced Commonalty, entered into a holy league against their lawful
Sovereign, upon pretense he was misled by evil Counselors, and favored the
reformed doctrine, notwithstanding he was even superstitiously strict in his
devotions, in conformity to what the Roman Church enjoined. When potent Armies
were raised, ready to swallow him up, yet out of a vehement desire to undeceive
his people, and to discover to the whole world the ungrounded malice of his
adversaries in such unreasonable imputations, he refused the honest assistance
of faithful Subjects, because Protestants, to his own and their probable
destruction.

Many of King Williams Successors did enlarge the Subjects Privileges by
diverse Acts of Grace, which they swore to maintain, but never gave them such
security as should alter the nature of Monarchy, by granting authority to their
Subjects to force them to observe promises, and to make satisfaction for true
or fancyed violations.

Hence it appears, that the original was conquest (as it is of almost all the
Kingdoms in the world) which occasionally conveyed to him full right, because
they yielded themselves, and consequently what they had to the Victor; the
Laws which he or after Princes made for the benefit of the Subject, were
several limitations of this right, and therefore where Laws cannot be
produced to the contrary, there the Kings power is absolute, and no special
cases can be determined by the Subject to the Kings disadvantage. The
moderation of his power was by his own compact, which he could not violate
without injustice, yet the breach of it could not endanger his personal
safety, because he gave no jurisdiction to his Subjects to force him by strong
hand to do them right; and if he had done so, he had made himself in such
cases their subject. What ever we can claim as due now, is by virtue of the
Kings grant, and therefore it is said by Hen. 3d, in his ratification of the
great Charter, We have granted and given to all the free men of our Realm
these liberties. 9. H. 3. The whole Land was the Conquerours, he gave part of
it as a reward for their service to his Normans, and other parts to the ancient
Inhabitants, and their heirs after them, yet so as he altered the tenure, and
made it descend with such burdens, as he pleased to lay upon them: They hold
them but in fee, and therefore are bound to certain services, and to do such
and such duties upon pain of forfeiture; in case of Treason and Rebellion
their lands are his own again, and return into his disposal. If Subjects
break their Covenant and prove disloyal, all their rights are forfeited by
express Law; if Kings break their compact, no forfeiture follows: The reason
of this inequality is, because the King gave Law to the Subject, the Subject
did not give Law to him.

Another exception is, If a King exercising tyranny over his people, may not be
resisted, he and his followers may destroy the Kingdom.

King perishes in the ruin of his people, and the man only survives, exposed
to the hatred and scorn, and revenge of mankind. Sint quibus imperes, is a
strong antidote against this unreasonable fear. Secondly, no policy can give
an absolute security; we must trust some body, by which a way lies open to a
possible mischief, but many most probable and certain inconveniences are
thereby avoided. Thirdly, we have good grounds to rely upon divine providence,
if we do our duty; for the hearts of Kings are in the hand of the Lord, he
will put a hook into the nostrils of Tyrants, and though we may be chastised
for a trial of our patience, or punished for our sins, yet he will not
permit them to bruise his children to pieces.



concerue all such as mean to go to heaven; they may as well tell us,
Magistrates may lawfully steal, or commit adultery, if they sin for the
Commonwealth, that is, plunder in hopes to find letters amongst malignant
goods, or lie with other men's wives, to unlocke their breasts, and discover such
secrets, whereby they may more easily cut their husbands throats, as being in
their Catalogue of evil councillors or enemies to the State: They may as well
challenge a Privilege to break all the Commandments for the Saints
advantage. If then we may not do evil, though we propose a real good as the
fruit of sin, certainly those, whom divine ordinance commands to be subject,
cannot usurp office and rule, and take upon them to judge their Judges. If
revenge be unlawful in private men acted upon private men, how much is it a
higher sin, upon the Magistrate? By whom alone Christians can right
themselves, and therefore their hands are bound from being used against him.



Jure hoc evenit, ut quod quisque ob tutelam corporis sui fecerit, jure fecisse
existimetur. L. ut vim. D. de just. and jur. But this will nothing advantage
them in the present case. For by that which they call Law of nature is meant
only right of nature, which is not a command, but a permission only, and
therefore it may be, and indeed it is actually restrained by positive
constitutions, whether divine or civil. For example, all things were common
iure naturali, by the right of nature, and yet the laws of property are now
binding to us. Hence is discovered the hollownesse of their discourses upon
this principle. It is the most natural work in the world for every thing to
preserve it self, and therefore when a Commonwealth shall choose a Prince or
a State officer, though they trust him with their welfare, then that act of
their trust is but by positive law, and therefore cannot destroy the natural
law, which is self preservation, cum humana potestas supra jus naturae non
existit, seeing that no humane power is above the law of nature. So Master
Bridge in his wounded conscience. p. 2. Upon the same principle he must
conclude, Society, which was regulated by the pactions of men, cannot take away
our native liberty. For jure naturaliomnes homines ab initioliberi nascebantur.
instit. de just. and iu. t. 2.. 5. nor can property which was established by
positive agreement destroy the right of natural community. He must needs
perceive the weakness of his reasoning. The answer to it is this, Humane
power is not above the law of nature peremptorily commanding to do such a
thing, and abstain from such things (of this law Cicero spoke, haec lex
diffusa est in omnes, est sempiterna, a qua homines neque per senatum, neque
per populum possunt solui and liberari. l. 3. de Rep. and Ovid makes it
unalterable. Naturam vero appello, legem omnipotentis
Supremique patris, quam prima ab origin rerum.
Cunctis imposuit rebus, jussitque teneri
Inviolabiliter.


But humane power is above the law or rather the right of nature, which does
permit a freedom of doing or not doing according to discretion. Else no
contracts could be of force, because by the law of nature men were free, and
the obligation is positive, as arising from promise, which it was in our power
not to make, but having once made it, we have tied our hands from using native
liberty. Of this permissive law Aristotle spoke pol. 7. cap. 13. Homines
adductos ratione multa praeter mores and naturam agere, si aliter agi melius
esse sibi persuaserint and again, some things of nature depend upon our choice
and cease to be of force, when we please, to part with our natural rights, not
all things. (...), Ethic l. 5. cap. 7.

Secondly it concludes it lawful for any private man to kill the King or his
own Father, in his own defense, which most of that side have disavowed, and
therefore they must acknowledge this argument is very hollow.

For the clearer understanding of the controversy, because I take no delight in
confuting, but only in the hopes of satisfing them and I request them for
their own sakes, to weigh my reasons with the same moderation, and calmness,
wherewith they are written: Self preservation is natural, that is, Nature
does not forbid any man to defend himself, though he must thereby kill
another; his destruction was not primarily intended but he was forced to make
use of such unfortunate means, in pursuance of no dishonest end, to retain
his own right of living. But though nature does not forbid it, yet the Gospel
does, as it restraines us of many innocent delights, if we measure them only
by natural right. Private revenge is unanswerably prohibited by the
Evangelicall law; Recompense to no man evil for evil; dearly beloved avenge
not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath* (...), it is not lawful to
right your selves, to do your selves justice. Romans 12.

Saevitia est voluisse mori --)

with heaven for. Perfect charity is the fulfilling of the law, and as
effectual as universal obedience to Christ's praecepts, the condition of the
Gospel. To resign our lives, (that is, the capacity of serving God longer)
out of conscience to obey him though against the strongest temptation, is such
an heroical act, that the excellency of it, may supply the want of duration.
It is an infallible sign of hearty repentance, and a most certain argument of
our serious turning from all sin. For here is not only godly sorrow for
offenses past, which is the door and entrance into Christianity, but the
perfection of it also, amendment of life, which is true repentance. For we
sacrifice the pleasures and profits of this world, and what ever was dear unto
us, while we remained carnal, nay we yield up life it self against the most
violent assault, the flesh can make, to the will of God, who assures that to
dye thus, is gain, as also, whosoever will save his life, shall loose it, and
whosoever will loose his life for my sake, shall find it. For these reasons
private revenge is unlawful though upon private men, and therefore much more
has Christ disarmed us, from recompencing evil to the Magistrate, because
there is some equality between mine and my neighbors life, but public
tranquillity, the common peace of a whole Kingdom (which is destroyed by
civil war) and the life of a single man, though innocent, are very unequal.
Naturally we love society below our selves, for the end of it was to convey to
us such and such goods, and that which is loved in order to something else, is
less amiable; But morally and in Christianity we are bound to prefer the
public good to whatever private Interest. And the obligation is very
reasonable; For if we submit nature to religion, and be content to loose our
lives for the present, we shall receive them hereafter with great advantage. So
that charity to our neighbor and love of our selves do sweetly kiss each
other.

Jerusalem by disturbing that of Babylon.

are very unfit means to beget devotion in the hearts of others; this way is
so unlikely to attain to perfect godliness, that I am much afraid, by the
unspeakable scandal of these not-christian courses, it destroys even common
honesty amongst men. Since the time of these unnatural distractions, there
has been a general ebb in our devotion, Ex illo fluere, and retro sublapsa
referri
Res Coeli


Some with Nadab and Abihu offer strange fire before the Lord, which he
commanded them not; God in his good time may quench these flames, which
sensibly consume both Church and State, and the unhappy incendiaries may be
devoured in that fire, which themselves have kindled. Others are not at leisure
to offer up the ordinary incense of prayer and thanksgiving, (though too many
have been over grateful, and when beaten in the field, they have triumphed in
the Church, and instituted solemn praises for the Almightyes preserving their
party, in such a sense as they endeavored to preserve their Sovereign) If any
time be spared to make their addresses to Heaven, their usual voice is as
harsh in Gods ears as the drum and trumpet, for he is generally invoked as
the Lord of Hosts, who takes greater delight to be worshipped as the God of
peace. Mutual fears and mutual injuries have so exasperated the minds of
most men, that the defection from charity is much more common then that from
allegiance. So that how religion thrives, be you judges; I am certain there is
a great decay of godliness.

But to examine this color of preservation of true Religion.]

First all the Anabaptists and Brownists and other Sectaries, who believe us
Idolaters for using the sign of the Cross in Baptism, and all such as join
with them in fighting against the book of Common Prayer and Episcopacy,
established by the fundamental laws of this Kingdom, are evidently engaged
in this Rebellion, not for defense of their old Religion, but to introduce a
better and new Creed. Let me ask them, with what face they can hereafter
object to Papists that their Religion is Rebellion, who may justify rising up
in arms against their lawful Sovereign, for the Catholic cause, upon these
Puritan principles. The truth is, not all Jesuits do maintain it, and many
Papists abhor this seditious doctrine, agreeing with Roffensis, that sicut
evangelium non dat regnum, sic nec auferre potest, lib, de potest, papae in
tempor. Christ came not to dispose of Kingdoms, nor to make them subject to
forfeiture. The University of Paris has very christianly determined it,
seditiosum, impium, ac haereticum, quocunque quaesito color, a quocunque
subdito, vassallo aut extraneo, sacris regum ac principum personis vim habere,
a seditious, impious, and heretical thing, for any Subject, Vassal, or
forreigner, upon what pretexts or color soever, to offer violence to the
sacred persons of Kings and Princes, in their censure past, June the 4th, 1610.

A more dangerous tenent for turning States upside down, and bringing all to
confusion, was never invented then this, that Regnum fundatur in orthodoxa
Religione, Subjects may cast from of their neck the royal yoke, if he will
not submit to the yoke of Christ. Their late Pamphlets speak out and tell us
plainly, the quarrel is, whether Jesus shall be King. By this means those who
manage Christ's scepter, will command the Kings, and he must lay down his Crown
before the Presbyters. They have another principle nearely allied to this,
which has too great influence upon their practice, Dominium fundatur in
gratia, only the Saints, Gods elect, have right to the creature: wicked men and
reprobates do but usurp the portion of the godly, and thereby increase their
own damnation, for they are the true heirs, for our Savior bestowed all upon
them, The meek shall inherit the earth. When we think they plunder, they do
but distreine upon their own goods; it is a recovery of what was due to them
by the Gospel; to measure right by laws is but to break evangelicall
privileges: It is not theft, but charity, to put the wicked in such a
condition, as that they shall have less to answer for. If men of these
opinions be tolerated, both reason and experience show the peace of the realm
is apparently dangered.

Secondly, as it is unlawful (and some of their own writers confess thus
much, see Master Buroughs, page 123.) to fight for Religion if the Laws of
the Land be against it, (yet this is clearly their case, for they go the
destructive way, and would root out part of the established worship, though
very much has been indulged to tender consciences even in this case) so it is
against the civil constitutions of this Realm, and consequently against
divine ordinance to take up arms against their King, though he should really
favor another Religion, and countenance by his practice superstitious rites;
nay, though the professors of the true and settled religion should be illegally
grieved. Here were an opportunity to show their christian fortitude, to make
use of their spiritual militia, faith, humility, and patience, and not to
contradict their calling, and discredit the cross of our Savior by taking up
carnal weapons. I wish from my soul, all such as pretend to the Reformed
Protestant Religion, had been unblamable in this respect, and that they had
rather chosen to manifest their christian, then their martial spirit. Wherever
arms have been lifted up against their lawful Magistrates, though they were
unjustly afflicted for the testimony of a good conscience, I cannot excuse them
from resisting the ordinance of God, who would have been glorified in their
martyrdom. I am sorry to meet with objections drawn from the unwarrantable
practice of some, which do not conclude you innocent, but that others were
likewise faulty. I am certain the primitive Christians were better catechized,
and we read the same doctrine of true patience in their lives as in their
schools, which taught them to take up Christ's cross, and to follow him in
that yoke in which he drew; They fought not against their Arrian Emperors in
defense of the Nicene Creed; no rebellion was undertaken by them under color
of preventing their consciences from being forced: which is indeed an
impossible thing; we may be robbed of our goods, we cannot be plundered of our
religion. Did not Christianity thrive upon persecutions? Sanguis martyrum,
semen ecclesiae, The blood of the Saints made their surviving brethren
fruitful in good works. Their patience wearied the cruelty of their
adversaries and gained innumerable converts, who began to suspect christianity
was true, when they saw it so powerful as to make the professors live with so
much innocence, and dye with so great meekness, and to neglect all earthly
interests in expectation of Heaven.

Though private men should not, yet Inferior Magistrates may force him who has
the Supreme power, to rule according to justice and the established Laws.

inferior in superiorem non habet imperium) they are but private persons. It is
an unreasonable, impossible thing, that men should be obliged to obey two
Masters commanding contrary duties, because this would impose upon them a
necessity of sinning, which must be laid upon him who was the author of that
necessity; And therefore God has appointed a convenient subordination in all
authorities. Vt sol delet minora sydera, as the lesser lights are extinguished
by the greatest Luminary, the fountain of all light; so minor jurisdictions
must give place to him who is the fountain of justice. If God command one
thing, the King another, we must be obedient to divine ordinance, because we
cannot be subject to man's command for conscience sake, against him who has the
sole authority to oblige conscience. So if the King command one thing, and his
Ministers, inferior Magistrates another, we must submit to regal power either
by obeying, or suffering, because they can challenge our obedience only by
virtue of his authority, and this cannot be set up in an hostile way against
his person. Whether it be reasonable to obey the Kings Officers, who can do
nothing but in his name, against the King, judge ye. Soldiers are bound to
execute the commands of their Captain, yet not if they are contradicted by
their Colonel, and he must not be obeyed against an express order from the
General. In thus doing, St Augustine and reason also assure us, we despise
not the power, but choose to submit to the higher; lesser Magistrates have no
just grounds of complaint, if we prefer the supreme, for in reference to the
highest, their magistracy ceases, and they become our fellow Subjects. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers says Saint Paul. We must obey the
King, and His Officers also, as they represent the King, (for quod per
officiarios facit per se facere videtur) and they must be obedient as well as
we, as they represent Subjects. Thus Nehemiah receiving commission from
Artaxerxes, armed his contrymen against those who governed under the King.
Saint Peter very appositely differences this duty in respect of King and
Magistrates. Submit your selves unto the King as Supreme, but unto Governors
as unto them, that are sent by him, and derive their power from him, and are
His Ministers to execute His commands, 1 Pet. 2. 13,. 14.

It is objected, (but very impertinently) if a King command against established
Laws, and inferior Magistrates according to the Law, they ought to be obeyed.

England which dispenses with their Alleagiance in such cases, and show that
our civil constitutions are so framed, as to make Bellum Civil, Bellum
utrinque justum, a Civil War, a just War of both sides in the law notion,
which cannot be, except there be two supreme authorities to proclaim and
manage it. That this is not so, the Houses shall give testimony against
themselves, for they acknowledge themselves in their addresses to His Majesty,
His humble and loyal Subjects assembled in Parliament.

Another maine exception, and which they most triumph in, is this, (I will
deliver the words of one of them, who has expressed it the most fully) As it
is a Parliament, it is the highest Court of Justice in the Kingdom, therefore
has power to send for by force, those that are accused before them, that they
may come to their trial, which (if I mistake not) power inferior Courts have,
much more the highest. It Is out of doubt agreed on by all, that the Parliament
has a power to send a Sergeant at Arms to bring up such an one as is accused
before them, and if they have power to send one Sergeant at Arms, then twenty,
if twenty be accused, and then a hundred, then a thousand, then ten thousand,
if ten thousand be accused, and so more or less as occasion serves; for there
is the same reason for two as for one, for a hundred as for twenty, for a
thousand as for a hundred, and take away this power from the Parliament, and
it is no longer a Parliament. But the King and His Forefathers have by Law
settled these Liberties of Parliament, and therefore according to Laws they
have ae power to send for by force those that are accused to be tried before
them, which they cannot do, unless they raise an Army, when the accused are
kept from them by an Army. Master Bridge in his Wound. consci. page 6.

accused and others past by, though of known guilt in the very same
particulars, as having an hand in monopolies etc. and so not the cause but the
person, he made the measure of right and wrong) yet this misused authority has
the effects of justice and right, and makes the act legally valid. But the
House of Commons has no jurisdiction over those who are without, except at
most in case of breach of Privilege; it cannot judge or condemn any, no not
so much as examine upon oath: so that the argument is, the Parliament, that is
the House of Lords, as the highest Court of justice, may legally raise an army,
without the consent, nay against the command of the King, it concludes too
without the consent, and if they please, against the express will of the
Commons declared to the contrary. This doctrine once since this Parliament
sat, would not have been so pleasing to the lower House, that they would have
taken care for printing it by Order from their Committee. There was a time when
one of this House professed openly, he hoped to see that sky fall too, and the
Lords were put in mind, they sat but in personal capacities (whereas Knights
were shires, and Burgesses were towns and Cities) and therefore it was thought
fit to give them warning and to admonish them to take heed how they thwarted
the representative Kingdom.

Secondly, by the same reason Judges of inferior Courts, out of Parliament at
least, may raise an army to fetch in delinquents; if the framers of this
objection, had consulted with those Sages, they would have better instructed
them in the laws. In cases of such high consequences, it was the custom of
the House of Peers to advise with these Oracles, to take directions from them,
at least to know their opinion and the reasons of it, because they had employed
their whole time and studies to find out the true meaning of the laws.

Thirdly, To discover their mistake and the inconsequence of the argument,
There is the same reason for twenty as for one, and so for an hundred, for a
thousand, for an army, etc.

The reason is not the same; because when a few are sent out, the
administration of justice does not endanger the common peace. But because a
war does put the whole Kingdom in manifest peril of being ruined, therefore
when either real delinquents, or pretended to be so, are so many, as to make
the trial doubtful, the liberty and right of inferior Magistrates to fetch
them in by force, is in this case restrained by express laws, which provides
very prudently, that no war shall be made, except authorized by the supreme
governor. And therefore also the laws permit the King to pardon all offenses
against his crown and dignity, supposing he will do it, as sometimes out of
goodness of nature, so sometimes out of the strength of his understanding,
because not mercy only, but wisdom and prudence may prevail with him to
forget offenders, when they are so potent, that the uncertain punishment of
nocents, (for the worst cause may prevail, as in the case of the tribe of
Benjamin, so Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed victa (^atoni)
must be bought with the unavoydable destruction of many innocent and gallant
persons. Wherefore Sergeants at arms and officers may be sent by the House of
Peers, and consequently by Judges of inferior Courts, and ordinary Justices,
to force delinquents to appearance (though their crime ought to be specified,
for to call them malignants or delinquents, is no legal charge) if they be not
so many, as that they make such resistance, as cannot be punished without an
Army; for a civil war endangers all, and begets more faults then it
punishes, and therefore the laws refer the ordering of the commonwealth to
him who is supreme, least inferior magistrates violently carried on, should
out of indiscreet zeal to justice, expose the Kingdom to contributions,
plunderings, and thousand remediless injuries, more grievous then those they
seek to punish.

Buchanan right; Non igitur hic Paulus de iis qui magistratum gerunt, agit, sed
de ipso magistratu, h. e. de functione and officio eorum qui alis praesunt,
dial. de jur. reg.

bella plusquam civilia, the King in this army fighting against himself in the
opposite army) is made without all color or shadow of reason, for though the
authority of the King be some times where his person is not, yet his person
cannot be where his authority is not, This is evident by the 25. Edw. 3. c. 2.
which makes it Treason to compass the Kings death, by which must be meant to
endeavor his personal ruin, because Regal authority never dies in England.
I have showed formerly, that by not resisting powers, is meant, not resisting
persons invested with such power. For when Saint Paul has forbid to resist the
power, he explaines it by adding a reason drawn from the persons in authority,
to encourage them to obedience; for Rulers are not a terror to good works, and
so after, for they are Gods Ministers, (...) in the masculine gender which
cannot be applied to (...), that he might leave no ground of scruple, but
plainly instruct us, that honor is due to their persons, and that all
resistance to their persons is sin, because of their authority, Saint Peter
is as clear, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him. Deodate expresses it very fully in his Italian translation, Siate
adunque suggetti ad ogni Podesta criata dagli huomini per l'amor del signore:
al Re, come al sourano, ed a governadori come a person mandate da lui. That
we may not mistake he tells us, that by Power or Ordinance is meant Persons
endued with power ad ogni Podesta is says he in his gloss upon the place, a
Principi, Magistrati, Rettori created by or amongst men, dagli huomini, o fra
gli huomini per la conservatione e condotta della societa humana.

Jude when he condemns despisers of dominion, and such as, (...), speak evil
of dignities, v. 8. means to commend to us the same duty which Paul taught us
out of the law, which is free from all ambiguity, and concludes for the
persons. When Ananias the high Priest, whose duty was to judge after the law,
commanded him to be smitten contrary to the law, he (as was supposed by them)
in passion returns ill language, and being justly rebuked by the bystanders,
he confesses he ought not to revile the Priest, though he did evidently abuse
his authority (much less ought he to strike again, with pretense of honoring
his authority, but not being bound to submit to his personal commands contrary
to the law. I wist not brethren that he was the high Priest; for it is written,
thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, Act. 23. 5. St Paul was
unacquainted with this subtility, which allows to speak evil; nay, to make
hostile resistance against men in authority, so they profess to honor the
authority of those men. It is (...), not (...), (so Master Buroughs) his
personal strength, not any legal power which is resisted, if he do any thing
against law, and this, says he, is not forbidden, we may resist men, though
not powers, we must not be subject to will, but to law. p. 113.

His mistake lies in this, that he thinks (...), power, signifies the right
and honest use of authority, whereas it signifies the right to use his
authority, whether well or ill, it is all one to us for matter of submission to
it, either by obedience or patience, because no resistance can be lawful for
want of a superior jurisdiction, by which only we can be enabled to call him
to an account for his actions. The truth of this is made evident in Joh. 19.
10, 11. Pilate faith unto him, know thou not that (...), I have power to
crucify thee, and (...), I have power to release thee? Jesus grants it* and
answers, (...), etc. thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above.

By (...), therefore are meant persons invested with authority. The reason
which made Paul call Magistrates by the Abstracts, Powers was this, he wrote to
Christians living in the Roman Empire, and it was the custom of the Latin
Language to call persons endued with power, potestates, by the name of powers.
You may observe it in Vlpian, l. quid sit. D. de Aedil. edict.. 19. and in
Augustine, epist. 48. who says, sive potestas veritati favens, aliquem
corrigat, laudem habet ex illa, qui fuerit emendatus: sive inimica veritati in
aliquem saeviat, laudem habet ex illa qui fuerit coronatus. Mark that, potestas
inimica veritati, this must needs signify a man abusing his authority. And in
Juvenal, An Fidenarum, Gabiorumque esse potestas, and in Suetonius,
Jurisdictionem de fidei commissis quotannis and tantum in urbe delegari
magistratibus solitam, in perpetuum atque etiam per provincias potestatibus
delegavit. The modern languages, Italian and French, which were bred out of
the Latin retain the ancient use of speaking, for potestat in French and
podesta in Italian, express not the function only, but the person which
manages it. Thus anciently the Latin word for a Justice of peace, who now is
called justitiarius, was justitia, as you may find in Glanv. lib. 2. cap. 6.
and Roger Hovedens Annals: so our King is called in the abstract Majesty, as
the Grecian Emperors, (...).

Many ridiculous consequences flow from hence, but I list not to make sport
with that unhappy distinction which has almost ruined as flourishing and
strongly temperd a Kingdom as any in the Christian world. It exposes
Magistrates, and all in authority to the contempt and injuries of the baser
sort of people. For when discontented, it is very obvious for them to tell them
a reverence is indeed due to their function, and therefore that they setting
their office aside, will take liberty only to kick their persons, and that the
Magistrate is not at all affronted, though the man be soundly beaten. It is
against common sense to put such a difference between the person and the
authority of the King, for if it were real, neither God, nor the Laws of the
Land have made any provision for the Kings safety; for His authority is not
capable of receiving any benefit, and therefore it must be acknowledged by all
sober and reasonable men, that His authority does but convey such and such
privileges upon the person, who only can be sensible of them, and
consequently whatever is attempted against his person, is attempted against his
authority likewise.

Another cavil is taken from these words in Romans 13. For Rulers are not a
terror to good works, but to the evil; will thou then not be afraid of the
power, do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. For he
is the minister of God to thee for good. Their Argument is framed thus. A
Magistrate is the Minister of God for our good, therefore he which is not a
Minister for our good, is no Magistrate, and to resist him, is not to resist
the ordinance of God, (which instituted Rulers for the peoples happiness) but
the faults and exorbitances of men, which endeavor to rob them of the
blessings of divine providence, orderly government, and to make them bow down
under the heavy burdens of an arbitrary sway. Their conclusion (contradictory
in it self) is plainly this, A bad Magistrate is no Magistrate, (as being a
terror to good works, and giving praise to the evil, contrary to Saint Paul's
definition of Rulers,) and therefore no honor is due to him, no resistance is
forbidden.

Caesar, as his due, the end of which was, that he should mind their good,
though he neglected that duty, and his acknowledgment of Pilates power, or
right to judge, though he exercised it to the condemnation of the innocent, and
Saint Paul's confession, that notwithstanding the high Priest commanded him to
be smitten illegally (which in their language was abuse of will, not power) yet
he must not return ill language, because he was the Ruler, do clearly evince
their argument not concluding. Saul was a bloody tyrant, he made the Priests a
sacrifice to his cruelty, yet notwithstanding he continued Gods anointed. It
were easy to instance in many examples, which show the vices of man making ill
use of the power do not void the ordinance of God.

There are, who answer these places very piously, but, as I think, not
altogether to what Saint Paul aimed at. Rulers are not a terror to good
works, and he is the minister of God to thee for good, that is, though they
oppress, nay kill innocent men, yet they cannot hurt them; For God will
recompense their sufferings, it is in bonum afflictis, though affligentibus in
malum, because all things work together for good to them that love (that is,
are obedient to) God. Romans 8.

It seems to me more probable, that the scope of the Apostle was to enforce
the duty of subjection, pressed in verse. 1. by a second reason (for he had
urged before, the ordinance of God) drawn from the benefits which will be
reaped from Governors. And the motive is, the consideration of that
happiness, which we have reason to promise our selves from the preservation
of order, the end of which is public tranquillity. This is enjoyed under very
bad Princes, which will abundantly recompense some particular sufferings,
whereas if we should go about to right our selves, when power is abused (to
say nothing, that it would always be pretended to be so by ambitious men, who
have this advantage, that the common people have but weak judgments in State
matters (and yet appeals are especially directed to them, and since our
miseries have grown upon us, the contrivance of our calamity was very visible;
the fatal arts which ruined this Kingdom were to make the meaner sort of men
Judges of Policy, and women generally the Judges of Religion) and they are
easily persuaded to reckon misfortunes amongst crimes, and to confound ill
intentions with ill success) If I say we should take upon us to govern our
Governors, because they rule not for our advantage, we should pull upon our
heads much greater mischiefs. Experience shows, that Kingdoms suffer
infinitely more by Civil War, then by the most Tyrannical Princes: If we
call to mind the most vicious King that ever reigned in England, we shall
find, though he did injure some particulars, indulging to some inordinate
affections against the tenor of Law, yet justice was favored in the general,
and the greatest part of the Kingdom reaped the fruits of order. Whereas
illegal endeavors to force him to amendment, introduce a cessation of all law
and justice, and the Subjects will be plundered more in one night then the
greatest monopolyes and most unjustifiable taxes of many years robbed them of.
The Apostles sense is expressed fully by Tacitus, Ferenda Regum ingenia, neque
usui esse crebras mutationes. The reason why it is better for a people, though
oppressed, to submit with patience even to a Tyrant, is this; if he be put to
recover his own by conquest, and prevail, he may be tempred (as highly
provoked) to rule them with a rod of iron, and to provide for future safety, by
utter disabling them to hurt him: but if they get the better, their victory
does but confirm our calamity; we cannot see any probable end of our unhappy
distractions. Because foreign Princes will certainly afford supplies for
recovering his just rights (for it might suddenly be their own case, and they
are bound to it in State interest; that they send not aid sooner, is, because
it is for their advantage to have a neighbor Kingdom weakened, but not the
Prince ruined) and it is very unlikely he should ever want a very considerable
party at home, many out of conscience, more out of discontent and envy toward
their fellow Subjects, prosperous treason, endeavoring to restore their
injured Sovereign, to his undoubted Rights and Prerogative. So that England
would be the unhappy scene, where the tragedies of Germany would be reacted.
But grant a total extirpation, and that they shall be able to go through with
their wicked design, and not only branch, but even root Monarchy also (for
this is aimed at by some, who fear it may sprout again, if the stock be left)
have we yet at last any hopes of peace, when we are so undone by war, that
we have nothing left to loose but our lives? truly no, then like thieves,
when once secure of their booty, we should have thousand differences in
dividing the prey, all of them challenging preferments great as their sins,
and setting such a price upon their wickedness, as the estates of all honest
men will not be able to pay; it is not possible, what they have gotten can be
pleasant to them, when they consider much more might be enjoyed, and sadly
recollect the inequality of the recompense to the adventure; for their lives
were exposed to the danger of the law, their reputation is lost with all good
men, and their souls are eternally ruined. They would fall out amongst
themselves, who was the greatest Traitor, and never yield precedence in
mischiefs, because that is the measure of Sharing. Some would plead, they
contrived, others, they acted the Treason, and think a subtle brain should
have no privilege above a courageous heart, it being more easy to fright the
people by inventing false dangers, then to lead them on, and make them stand
the brunt of true. It is beyond my skill to proportion the wages of sin, and
determine, whether the slye and cunning setter or the stout thief can claim
greatest share in the spoil. But commonly the speculatively malicious men are
miserably deceived of their expected requital. For though they set the
mischiefs on foot, yet their journey-men, quickly apprehending the mystery,
are easily tempted to set up for themselves. It has been often seen, that to
end such quarrels, he that was head of the conspiracy in reference to the
active part of it, and who had force enough to oppress a Tyrant, would use the
same to establish himself their Lord and Master, and his government was so
much the more rigid, severe, and miserable, because he was frighted with his
own example upon his predecessor.

This I conceive to be the Apostles sense, that we must submit even to bad
Governors (such they were when he wrote this Epistle) not only out of honesty,
but prudence also, because if we go about to make them better, we shall put
the Kingdom, and consequently our selves, in far worse condition.

After this explanation, I will reduce their Argument into form, that I may
thereby give more distinct satisfaction.

Non resistance is forbidden only to the powers ordained of God;

But powers used tyrannically are not ordained of God, therefore we are not
forbidden to resist them.

The assumption is absolutely false: For though tyranny be not the ordinance of
God, yet the power (which is commanded to rule justly, but withal enabled to
do otherwise, for the use is left indifferent in respect not of the
Magistrates, but Subjects duty, so that abuse does not void authority, when
swerving from laws) is of divine constitution. The obligation not to resist
superior powers receives not strength from man's justice, nor is it weakened or
made null by injustice. Saul was Gods anointed, and Pilate had authority from
Heaven, notwithstanding the extreme abuse of it. Had the Apostle meant as they
endeavor to persuade the world, considering what Governors the Christians
then lived under, he had laid down a doctrine of rebellion, whereas he labors
to teach them patience.

Thus much in answer to their objections against what was delivered in the
second Section; I shall now examine their exceptions against what was assumed
in the precedent Section,

The King of England has Supreme power.



mixed Monarchy is a contradiction, and that by this name can only be meant, a
restrained and limited Monarchy, that is, that such a King, though he have
Supreme, yet has not absolute power. By reason of this restraint from his own
grant and positive constitutions, active obedience is not due to his illegal
commands, and by reason of his supreme power and sole right to make War and
Peace, passive obedience is necessary.

Monarchy compounded of three coordinate Estates, in plain English, speaks
this nonsense, the power which one only has, is in three jointly and equally.

The ground of this invention, and so much fancyed coordination, which our
ancient Lawyers never dreamt of, may be this. If they mean by it, that the
consent of all three Estates (I will not alter the new manner of expressing
this government, but only take notice by the way, that heretofore, the
Parliament was taken for an Assembly of the King and the three Estates, and
that in all other Kingdoms likewise there are three States, the Clergy, the
Nobility, and the Commonalty, distinct from the Head) are equally required for
transacting such businesses as the King has obliged himself not to do
without them and that they have the right of a negative voice, we shall
indulge to them the name of coordination to two purposes, which are, making
new, repealing old laws, and supplying the Kings necessities, in such
proportion as they shall think fitting. These are great democraticall
advantages, but include no authority of making hostile resistance against their
sovereign, in case he should do contrary to the established laws, These are
still in force, till abrogated by joint consent, and bind his conscience, but
he cannot be forced to put them in execution, because he has no superior in
jurisdiction; and he has no equal in managing jus gladii, the material
sword, which is necessary to distinguish their resistance from rebellion, and
give it the title of a just war. For except they can prove themselves not be
His Subjects, I am forced to tell them, if they fight against him, they are by
the law of Nations and of this land worthily reputed Rebels, and by divine law
they are assured of damnation.

Thus therefore; the two Houses, or two Estates of Lords and Commons, are not
bound to submit their consent to the Kings command in matter of Subsidy, or
taking away any ancient Law, if they conceive it disadvantageous to the
Commonwealth; Par in parem non habet imperium, in those things in which they
are equal, as a rather and a son being joined in commission; in this sense
let them be called coordinate. Yet they are subject in all other things, and
therefore may not take up arms without his consent, for this is destructive of
their alleagiance.

If there be a Coordination in the supremacy, that is, if the King and Lords
and Commons are jointly the supreme governor, the Correlatum is wanting, none
are left over whom they should Reign, we should have a Kingdom without a
Subject, because all may challenge a share in sovereignty.

The Parliament not sitting, they will not deny the supremacy to be solely in
the King, and certainly by calling His great Council together, he does not
empty himself of any regal power; it were very strange our laws should be
guilty of such vanity to make a useless coordination, for if His rivalls
should make any attempts upon His Prerogatives, He can legally dissolve them,
(except when he has past a particular grant for their continuance, and then
the enlargement of their time of setting, does not enlarge their power) and
after He has dismissed the Assembly, (as the right to do so is unquestionable)
then He is Supreme again, none being left to stand in competition. The clear
business is this, all marks of supremacy are in the King, nor is it any
Argument of communicating His power, that He restraines Himself from
exercising some particular acts without consent of Parliament, for it is by
virtue of His own grant, that such after acts shall not be valid. He has not
divided His legislative faculty, but tied Himself from using it, except by the
advice and consent of the Peers, and at the request of the Commons, their
rogation must precede His ratification. I showed this in the Roman Empire
likewise, and yet none fancyed, an equality between Subjects and the King or
Emperor was thereby introduced.

As the houtefeus of France argued from the denomination of Pares Franciae, to
make them equal with the King, so our Incendiaries from Peers and Comites, to
bring in a coordination whereas it is evident that Peers, referres not to the
King, but signifies (as the Persian (...) mentioned in Zenophon) Subjects in
the same rank of honor, and enjoying equal privileges, one is another. And
to make Comites is called by Lampridius in conubernium imperatoriae majestatis
asciscere, our lawyers derive them from having that special honor to be in
comitatu regis, Suetonius calls them comites peregrinationum, expeditionumque
Tiberii, They were of three ranks under the Emperors, Comites intra
consistorium were the highest, and in the nature of privy councillors, but
created by the Emperor, the fountain of all honor, and so not similes
altissimo, equal to him, though exalted above fellow Subjects.

The brief is, the frame of government, as it is established by our laws,
clearly condemns their undertakings, and therefore they have laid such a
foundation, as will support the building. For if they can but prove that
Parliament men, and those who are stirred up to fight against their Sovereign,
are not the Kings Subjects, they have acquitted them from being Rebels.

We have seen the ground work, and shall now take the superstructure into due
consideration; the whole fabric is comprised in that exiome so frequently
applied to justify all illegal proceedings. Coordinata se invicem supplent,
Coordinates ought mutually to supply each others failing, that we may not
suffer whether by necessary or voluntary defects, and that the Kingdom may not
run the hazard of being ruined for want of supplementall laws, and therefore
when the King is perverse and will not join with them for the common good,
they have full authority without him.

This would conclude as strongly for the power of enacting laws without the
King, which the Houses have disclaimed. It is true, this legislative authority
is exercised under another name, let the Authors answer for practicing what
themselves have expressly disallowed. For it is but small satisfaction to the
injured Subject, to tell them they challenge not a power to make standing
Laws, but only temporary Ordinances: That is, they will take away their
estates for the present, and then their votes shall be no longer binding, was
not this the reason why such Proclamations are justly accounted grievances, as
do entrench upon the Subjects liberties or property? The Subjects are equally
miserable, whither their birthright, the laws of this land, are overthrown by
Royal Proclamations or Ordinances of one or both Houses.

Coordinata se invicem supplent, Coordinates supply each others failings;
therefore if one refuse, the other two are enabled to do it without him.

By the same logique, if the King and House of Lords join, the consent of the
House of Commons is legally supplied, and they may constitute what they please
without them. This is the evident doctrine of it, which yet is commanded by the
House to be printed. If the King had said this, it had been the greatest
breach of Parliamentary privileges that ever had been made. Posterity will
have no reason to be thankful to them for disputing themselves out of the
right of a negative voice, only that they may with some small color (making
use of an accidental advantage, the major part of those few Lords, which
remain in the House now, joining with them) take away from the King (what is
as much his by law as the crown he wears) his right to reject any Bill, never
questioned by our Ancestors, and it is very strange it should now; Sir Thomas
Smith tells us quibus princeps derogatum vult, haud pluribus verbis utitur, quam
le Roy, aut la Royne s'advisera; quaepropterea extincta penitus, abolitaque
censentur. l. 2. c. 3. descript. Ang. If the Kings denial did not extinguish
them, all those bills, which have slept for many ages, as laid down by our
knowing forefathers out of a necessary modesty and a just valuation of their
Sovereigns right, would rise up laws to the extreme confusion of the present
government. And secondly, if his authority must be involved or swallowed up in
their votes, if his part in Parliament be the same with the flatterers in the
comedy, Ais, aio, negas, nego; if he be but a State echo, it is manifest he
has not so great a hand in the managery of his Kingdom, as the meanest
fellow, who has but 40l per annum freehold, for he governes by proxy, whereas
the King is represented by none, and yet must not speak for himself and for
his own Interest, which is altogether the same with the public. The greatest
security the Subject has, that equal laws shall be preserved, is from his
negative voice. The interests of the major part in the House of Commons may be
opposite to the good of the Kingdom in general. For if we reckon those many
that serve for, and are (or would be, in future elections, if the power were
thus enabled to effect what ever advantageous designs) of Corporations, and
those few in comparison, who serve for Shires, we shall easily believe, the
privileges of Cities and Towns, may be enlarged by them to the great
discouragement and loss of the honest farmer and painful husbandman; So the
Burgesses for the West are so many, that upon an unanimous conspiracy amongst
themselves, and laboring some single persons, who may be easily won out of
relation of acquaintance, friends, or kinsmen, or their inadvertency, and not
fully weighing, or not understanding the consequences of it, they may easily
carry by vote, what is very beneficial to themselves, though extremely
prejudicial to the other parts of this Kingdom.

To go higher, it is very easy to conceive, that the major part of the lower
House, may be very mean men chosen to make more profitable laws for the
poorer sort, and to keep the Gentry under by laying subsidies and all burdens
of the Commonwealth upon them, not without a specious pretense, that they
spend more in superfluities then would discharge all public expenses, and
exempting themselves from all payments, as being such, who take great pains,
and work very hard, even for necessaries. The possibility of such a choice is
apparent, because (consideriug how small means are required to a capacity of
voting in the election of Parliament men (it may perhaps be more warily ordered
hereafter by the wisdom of that great Court, who may think it fit to raise
40l per annum freehold to such a proportion as that estate was valuable at, in
the first constitution, when the scarcity of money made it a competent fortune)
the greater part of those which choose them are poor contry-men and beggarly
tradesmen. Such a choice then is very possible, neither is it improbable, if
Parliaments shall be governed by these new principles. For the reason why such
an election was never yet made, is this, such a power was never heretofore
challenged, as could enable them to go through with any such design. If
either the Lords perceived any motion from the Commons disadvantageous to
themselves, or the King thought it prejudicial to the public, and so
necessarily unprofitable for him (as if the merchant should be discouraged, by
laying too greatburdens upon foreign trade, or the Clergy impoverished, by
taking away those means which should make men able, and keep them honest) it
was presently rejected, and so not to be stickled in further, sitting that
Parliament. If some factious spirits wrought upon their discontents, and
persuaded them to pass nothing, whether by granting subsidies, or consenting
to new laws, which might be beneficial for the present State, till they
received satisfaction in their desires, though such a perverseness (which I
suppose only and do not say it ever was) might be very unhappy for the
Kingdom (for by making the King poor, it would probably put his friends upon
some unwarrantable courses, whereby to supply his wants, and this would create
a misunderstanding between him and his people, and breed ill humors, which
fomented by crafty men, would break out in such violent distempers, that there
would be a necessity of calling physicians; These politic physicians when
once entertained in such an extremity, will be sure so to manage the disease,
that they will be paid as much as they please to demand. They will desire such
offices, such commands, not for themselves, but only in order to the recovery
of their patients; The denial of which shall put the people in danger of a
relapse, and they will prescribe the ways of prevention and make use of the
impatience of distempered men, to compass their own ends) though I say, such
a sullenness would make the Kingdom miserable, yet it is their right to deny
the most reasonable proposal, and there is not any legal remedy against
inconveniences, which will certainly flow from hence. Neither necessity nor
propterea quod regnum nostrum periclitatur, which is the same with saius populi
suprema lex, can enable the King justly to provide for the Kingdoms safety, by
raising money against the known Laws: he may in this case dissolve the
assembly, and only use such means, as are not contrary to Law. By reason of
these negative voices, and the Kings right, as to call together, so to break
up that great council, there was not any hope of new moulding this State to
particular Interesses, and therefore these unequal compositions of the House
of Commons had no influence to the disadvantage of the Commonwealth. Yet now
we may probably suffer under them, if this new doctrine take place, That the
Kings consent is past, and involved in the Lords and Commons; for the next rub
of the Lords negative is removeable by the same Logic of Coordinata se
supplent, and that the people may not perish for defect of a supplementall Law;
it was essayed formerly, that they sitting in personal capacities, should not
oppose what conduced to the safety of the Kingdom, represented by the Commons,
and those two grounds being laid, as the King and Lords are voted out of
Parliament, so it is very probable, the Gentry would be but very thin in the
House of Commons, upon new election hereafter, because the disposal of all
would be put into their hands, whose interests are most disjoined from the
public tranquillity, as enjoying least by the present establishment in this
State. From hence it is apparent, what confusion were likely to follow, and the
short experience we have had, has already too fully acquainted us with the
miserable consequences.

To answer distinctly to their axiom coordinates supply each others failing;
if it should be understood in that sense, which they plead for, that the King
failing to perform his duty, the Lords and Commons are enabled to transact
businesses without him by virtue of this rule, upon the very same grounds the
King and House of Commons may exclude the Lords, the King and Lords may exclude
the Commons; but this being destructive of the fundamental privilege and
right of either House this only can be meant by it in the present case, that
the power of any one or two of them, is defective to some purposes expressly
named in our laws, (as for enacting new laws, or raising money upon the
Subject) without a joint consent of all three. This interpretation is very
reasonable, but it concludes against them, and forth King; for he requires
nothing, but (what our Laws grant him, and what he always acknowledged
equally their due) a right to a negative voice in those things to which the
three estates are coordinate. The use of it cannot be injurious, for a denial
to bring in a new government, does not take away the old, it leaves us in that
happiness, which our Fathers were content with.

Militia or arms of the Kingdom.

The King though he be singulis major, yet he is universis minor. I am forced
to take notice in the first place of that lamentable sophistry, which yet has
deceived many,#and though it has bin often discovered, they still persist to
abuse the people with it. The strength of all their discourses depends upon
this syllogism, the Parliament is greater then the King, (the assumption is
built upon a false foundation, The two Houses are the Parliament. Ergo, the two
Houses are greater then the King.

The proposition is granted, because Parliament includes King and Lords and
Commons, and his legislative power, as to the use of it, is so restrained, that
it cannot be legally exercised without their consent, and this obtained in
Parliament, it becomes absolute to those purposes, to which they pass their
assent. 25. H. 8. 21. So that the only meaning is, he can do more in
Parliament, then out of it.

But the minor is absolutely false, for the King is caput Parliamenti, and so
an essential part of Parliament. I am ashamed to bring quotations out of the
lawyers, to prove what is so manifestly true. For if the King were not a
necessary part of the Parliament, and the Parliament (as it is being rightly
understood for the head and body) were the whole Realm, then we should have a
Kingdom without any King.

One objection is frequently urged; there must be a Parliament somewhere, for
it cannot be dissolved without their consent, which is not yet past,but it is
not at Oxford, nor no other place, London excepted, therefore it is there, and
consequently the Houses are the Parliament without the King, or else His
authority is in their votes.

Oxford, were the House of Commons thereby excluded from being a part, or could
they be concluded the whole Parliament? It is not an union in respect of place,
but an union of their assent and the Royal ratification, which actuates the
power into a law. The Kings absence does not destroy the being of Parliament
(no more then if he should dissent being present) nor does it forfeit his power
into their disposal, as you may see 33. H. 8. c. 21. His assent by his letters
patent is and ever was of as good strenght and force, as though the Kings
person had been there personally present, and had assented openly and
publicly to the same.

But what if he dissent from them and refuse to confirm their votes? Then they
ought not to have the force of laws, no more then if the King and Lords should
agree on any thing the Commons contradicting it; neither is a legal
establishment* If they say, his obstinate refusal voides the Parliament, for
it is made of no use, if it may not be active, when deserted by him, and except
he please to establish their ordinances; The King might as well press the
Commons to consent to what he and the Lords shall think fitting, because
otherwise they void the Parliament, for it is of no use, if it may not be
active without their assent which they resolve not to pass.

This constitution of the negative voice in either of the three estates, was
made in favor of the present government, the goods of which were known by
experience, that no innovation (the evils of which are hardly discovered
before trial) might be introduced without a joint consent of all three.

The whole Kingdom is greater then the King.

universitas subjectorum est major Rege. The same reason which makes him above
one, makes him above two, and so above ten, and so ten thousands, and so ten
millions of thousands; for their assembling together does not dispense with
their duty of alleagiance, many or few alters not the quality of the act, an
universal revolt from a lawful Sovereign is equally Rebellion, as a
particular defection of one or more Countyes.

The Orators art is much used in these unhappy times (...) and (...),
misdemeanors were once raised into high Treason, and now evident treason is
lessened into necessary defense. That rhapsody of quotations, entitled the
treachery, and disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns, etc. brings a very
merry plea to take them off from being Traitors. The stat, of the 25 Edw. 3. c.
2. runs in the singular number, if a man shall levy war against the King,
etc. it ought to be judged high Treason, therefore it extends not to the
Houses, who are many and public persons, p. 31. If he had sadly considered,
how deeply conscience is engaged in the present war against the King, he
would not have endeavored to seduce so many into Rebels, and make them forfeit
their souls upon such pitiful subtilties.

If forraigners should inquire under what kind of government we live, the
answer must be, we live over a King. Certainly they will much wonder at the
unnecessary humility of the Houses, (they challenging to themselves superiority
as the representative all) and conclude them very great Courtiers, who in their
addresses to the Prince, their Subject, style themselves His Majesty's most
loyal and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament. They will
shrewdly suspect, if Majesty be His due, that Supremacy is so also: while Rome
was a popular State, the supreme dignity being in the people, was expressed by
majestas populi Romani, and after when they had resigned up their power to
Emperors, it was changed into Augustalis Majestas, taken for the person of the
Emperor. C^ubi and apud quem. l. cum scimus. or Imperialis majestas. C. de
quadriennii praesc. I been a Zenone. and so Keyserlich Maiestaet at this day
for the German Emperor.

The custom of petitioning him, and such humility in the title of their
addresses and the preface, (suppose it should reach no further, yet it) cannot
be wholely taken of by the imperiousness of the matter. Some of that side
seem to be scrupled at it, and therefore plain scottish tells you, they hold
Declarations to be more suitable to the sovereignty of so supreme a Court, whose
power is coordinate with Princes (we must hold superior) then petitions.

I have proved in a former discourse, that the King is supreme head, not in
respect of single persons, but the universitas subjectorum. For this is
comprehended in body politic compact of all sorts, and degrees of people,
which is said to owe next to God a natural and humble obedience, 24 H. 8. c.
12. And it is evident, that he is not the head of this or that man, but of all
the members in conjunction, of the whole body, for else he would be the head of
millions of bodies, and by consequence have as many distinct Kingdoms, as
particular Subjects. It is needless to multiply quotations, as the 25. H. 8.
21. This your Graces Realm recognizes no superior under God, but only your
Grace, or Queen Elizabeth's public declaration, that she had next under God,
the highest and supreme government and power over all Estates of the Realm of
England, Ecclesiastical or Temporal. Camd. hist. page 31.

I will sum up the reasons in brief, which prove, that the King is not minor
universis. First, if the Houses are above Him, He has no right of Empire upon
them, because inferior in superiorem non habet imperium, but this is false, for
they are subject by Law to His commands, when he bids them come, they are bound
to come; and when he bids them go, they are bound to go, that is when he calls
them by his Writ, they ought to attend praescriptis die and loco, and he
prorogues the assembly, or dissolves it when he thinks fitting. It is no
prejudice to this right, that he was graciously pleased to restrain the
exercise of it in this present Parliament without their consent, to the end
those vast debts which were brought upon this Kingdom might be discharged, and
in order to that, good security might be given to such persons as were willing
to engage their estates, for the benefit of the commonwealth. I will make no
advantage by urging their abuse of trust, by which they were enabled to take
off that great burden, which they have made infinitely more heavy, and whereas
they might in short time have eased this State, our debts hourly grow upon us,
and the Subjects estates are but the fuel to feed that fire which sensibly
consumes this unhappy Nation. Notwithstanding, they have deceived both King and
people, yet His Majesty cannot satisfy Himself in their Logique, and suffer
Himself to be persuaded, he may lawfully reassume His right, because they do
contrary to trust. Though the perpetuity of this Parliament was never intended,
and it has been of most pernicious consequence, yet the King will not allow
Himself any liberty (to dissolve it) against law, upon most real good
intentions. Because the president is full of danger, and though in the present
case it would be used for the benefit of His people, yet hereafter, it probably
might be abused to their greater disadvantage.

Secondly, the division of all persons in this Land is into King and Subjects,
liege Lord and liege people, and therefore they must be placed in the latter
rank. It is a strange fancy to abstract the body politic from all the
particulars whereof it is compacted, and to salve the Oath of Allegiance, by
telling us the universe or body politic never swore alleagiance or supremacy
to the King, neither is it possible it should. Reply to answer to the
observations, page 17. and again, page 18. (in answer to the 24. Hen. 8. cap.
12. The King is supreme head, unto whom a body politic compact of all sorts
and degrees of people are bounden and owe next to God a natural and humble
obedience) we must not understand this, that the body politic does owe
obedience, but that the several sorts and degrees of people, of which this
body is compacted and made, that they do owe obedience, for to take it
otherwise, were to make an absurd and impossible construction. etc. If every
particular man perform his duty of alleagiance as he stands obliged by oath,
let him oppose his met a physical body to the King even as he pleases. If the
body politic have not sworn allegiance or supremacy, because it is a body
only in consideration of law, that has neither life or motion, like other
invidualls p. 17. and for the same reason does not owe homage and obedience p.
18. How is it capable of rebelling against the Head? for it cannot fight but by
the hands of particular men, and all these are tied up by divine law, and their
own oaths.

3. They acknowledge themselves his subjects as united in Parliament; and if
they should deny it, they could not challenge any benefit from his royal
protection.

4. The laws entrust him, not the Houses to protect us.

5. The Houses represent only subjects opposed to the King, who is their
superior by humane and consequently divine law, both as their natural King
and as Gods anointed, his representative.

6. There is a great difference between the real and representative all; for
though it were true, (as it is not) that he were less then the whole people,
yet this would not bring the conclusion home to the Houses. Who are the people
only to such purposes as the law nominates, viz. for consenting to Laws or
Taxes upon the Subject. To all other purposes (wherein Regal power is not
expressly limited) the King is the whole people, and what he does is legally
their Act. Aristotle tells us of some Kings, that had as full right over their
whole realm, as a popular state can have over it self, and all things
belonging thereto 3. pol. 14. To such an one that of the Tragaedian is truly
and properly applied. (...),
(...).


You are the whole City, the whole Commonwealth, and therefore not responsable
for any actions. This shows the falsehood of their principles, Quicquid
efficit tale, est magis tale, and constituens est major constituto, etc. for
though they mean to make advantage of them only in this Kingdom, yet they
conclude against the possibility of making any King absolute, which reason and
experience have clearly confused. For a people if conquered, (their lives and
all they have being then in the hand of the victor) or if in fear to be
swallowed up by a more potent enemy, they may and often have very prudently
consented to place all the legal power of the Kingdom in one man, that he may
thereby be enabled to protect them, and where the legislative power is
unrestrained, there the rule is absolute.

To apply this doctrine; In those things wherein the King of England is not
absolute, as in the exercise of his legislative power, and raising money
without consent, The Houses together with him, represent the people; but in
such matters, wherein he is absolute, (that is, wherein he is not restrained by
laws which are but limitations of Regal power) there he is Populus
Anglicanus, legally the English Nation. For example sake, I will instance in
the power of making War and Peace, if any take up Arms by virtue of any
other then his Commission, they oppose not the King alone, but the King and
People as, People is to be understood in law, for their hands are tied up, and
all their legal strength is in the Kings disposal.

Let us examine their Argument, The whole people are above their King,
therefore the Houses, because they represent them.

The Antecedent I have showed false, because the whole people are but such a
number of Subjects, who can have no color of pretense to be above him, whom
God and the law has placed over them.

The consequence is as infirm, and the reason of it fallacious, for if
representatives might challenge all rights appertaining to the persons by them
represented, then a Jury shall be concluded as honorable as the House of
Commons, and then too because the Emperor of Germany, may challenge of the
King of France or England (not superiority, for they are as supreme and
independent Princes, as he is, but) praecedence, (an honor due to the
antiquity of the Empire, for nations as well as persons enjoy the benefit of
primo geniture) his ambassadors also might sit above those Kings, which the
Court of honor guided by the law of nations, and reason would pronounce very
absurd.

Again they represent the people only to some purposes; to make war is none
of them; The King alone can declare the peoples mind in this case, they have no
legal way of expressing themselves but in his Commissions, and therefore the
war is not between King and People, but so many particular persons exceeding
the trust committed to them, against the duty of allegiance, oppose both King
and People. It is very remarkable, that in the beginning of these unhappy
contrivances, some multitudes appearing in tumultuous ways, what ever they
desired or did was called the Act of the People, providing for their own
safety. But after the sense of miseries had bettered their understandings, to
make them discern, this unnatural war was not like to improve the means of
preservation, many of them make a Covenant to live peaceably and honestly
amongst themselves, so in Yorkshire long since, and lately between Cornwall
and Devonshire, and now the Houses interpose, and will not permit the people
who were stirred up and encouraged to raise a war against law, to make a
peace according to law; let them trouble the waters as much as they please,
they shall be borne out in it; but they must not think of settling them, till
they have done fishing; This would be a breach of Privilege. The People are
now forced to defend themselves, and their goods violently taken from them, for
their security; who might soon be happy again, if their friends would be
less careful of their safety. It is well known who began to appeal to the
People; withal my heart (if law must be suspended) let them arbitrate the
differences. The certain way to know their judgment, and whom they apprehend
to be a real defender of what both pretend, our laws and property, and
liberty, and the established religion, is to cease plundering of both sides,
and leave them to their natural inclination. That side which confesses it
cannot subsist without using violence and oppression, and forcing their estates
from them, acknowledges that the people, whom they pretend to fight for, is
clearly against them, and they have small reason to challenge a privilege of
breaking all Laws, by virtue of that paramount Law, populi salus, when as
their unwarrantable courses ventured on in order to the safety of the people,
do manifestly conduce (even the People being Judges, and repenting their
former folly) to the poverty, slavery, and ruin of all.

It remains, I lay down my promised conclusion of the whole, that
notwithstanding such a power of resistance, as they or any others have yet
openly pleaded for, should be granted lawful (as when in their own defense,
or when he that has the highest authority, and is bound by the Law of God and
his own promise or oath, to administer justice equally, after frequent
representations of their grievances, and most just complaints of their great
sufferings affords no redress) yet this can be no justification of the present
war against the King, nor acquit the Actors in it from being rebels; Because
this case is evidently not now.

The Arms taken up against the King, were not (as is pretended) defensive, nor
in maintenance of any thing which the Subject can challenge as of right.

If we call to mind that unhappy time, This war offensive of the Subjects
part.
when His Majesty (forced to preserve himself by flying the City, that he
might be free at least by absence, from the scorns and dangers of
unreprehended, I will not say, encouraged tumults) was immediately accused to
have rebelled against himself, At Kingston upon Thames.
and was furnished with an Army by Vote, when he had not so much means left
him, as could honestly feed his family, and it was Ordered that this formidable
Host should be apprehended by the ordinary Ministers of justice in that
County; if our memories will but render a faithful account of this contempt,
harder to be digested then the former popular fury, we may perceive their
behavior toward him, was a sufficient confutution of their fears of him.
They told the people, they were afraid of His power, and yet answered their
own jealousies by showing to the world, they were able to take it from Him; He
was so far from being in a condition to invade their rights, He had not
wherewith to defend His own. His inability to revenge indignities was so
notorious, they durst be even wanton in abusing Him. When He wooed them in that
gracious Message from Windsor, His yielding so much did but tempt them to use
greater rigor. Nothing would satisfy, unless he would make their votes the
measure of His obedience; for what privilege had they above private
Counselors, if their advice should not sway with Him more then reason? when He
requested them only to make known what was wanting to the Kingdoms
happiness, and He would chearefully supply it, they think it loss of time to
represent particular defects, but put him into such a way as will effect it, to
be guided in all things as they shall direct, that is, to let them manage His
Royal power, who knew better how to govern. Because He will not submit to
their blanke desires, by confessing His Vote to be legally involved in their
Orders, nor resign up that power which the law has entrusted Him with, and
which cannot be separated from the Crown without dissolution of this
government, and therefore He is obliged both in justice and honor to preserve
it as the necessary means, whereby He is enabled to protect His people;
Because, I say, He will still be King, and not part with those Rights which God
and the Law gives Him, they will dispense with their duty of being Subjects,
and challenge a privilege to take away those Rights, which He will not, when
petitioned, fairly deliver. After this, he retires to York, only desirous to
live safely, and contented to suffer such an eclypse of glory, till such time
as the abused people should recover their understandings, and these clouds
should be dispelled by a clear apprehension of His innocence, and undeserved
sufferings. Thither the storm pursues Him, His Rents are stopped, that He
might become a burden to the Northern people, and that they might be tempted
to part with Him, with as much cheerfulness, as they would be rid of the poor
of their County. Commissioners were picked out, and sent amongst them to incense
the less knowing, and to awe the more honest party, from receiving their naked
Sovereign into their protection. The dangers they would incur by their
perverse loyalty are laid open. They will certainly be Voted high Malignants,
and notorious Delinquents, if they frustrate the pretended Parliaments
injustice by their charity; for to what purpose did they take his revenues from
him, if others should be allowed to give Him sufficient wherewith to cloth and
feed Himself. Though such order was taken, by seizing His demaines, He should
not live amongst them as a King, yet the sweetness of His private and familiar
conversation with them, made Him an extremely popular Gentleman. And therefore
misdoubting a general defection to obedience upon trial of so great
goodness, which increased with their injuries, and finding the people (not
able to conceal their love of His extraordinary virtues) openly betraying an
honest pity of their much wronged Master, they thought it necessary to give law
to their fears, by usurping His power, and exercising it in their oppression
whom unwary respect toward their Sovereign had made suspected for loyal
Subjects. Accordingly all His Arms (and those of the Kingdom besides, least
the people should prevent their own wrongs by a timely revenge of His) are
seized on, and they possess themselves of His Forts, Castles, Towns, and
Navy. After such unparalleled usurpations, Regal power being invaded by
private hands, a small Guard of honest Yorkshire gentlemen attend the King for
His Personal safety, not knowing where their injuries would stop, for the
bonds of law being once shaken off, their power to oppress, or ruin, was as
unbounded as their will; by the same justice He was kept out of Hull, they
might have kept him in what Village, what House, what Prison they pleased. This
Guard of a much smaller number then they had kept together many Months was
scornfully Voted an Army, and Commissions are illegally issued out to raise
Forces to suppress this second War, made by the King upon Himself. The
public motive was fear of violence intended by His Majesty, the private
encouragement to less forward Soldiers was the Kings inability to make the
least opposition. An Army is levied against Him upon public pretense of His
strength, and persuaded to march against Him, upon their private assurance of
His weakness. Thousands are listed not to fight, but travel, and are promised
to know nothing of war besides the wages, but to enjoy the security and
delights of a progress. After all this (to prevent effusion of blood, and
these visible calamities which the wild ambition of a few men, has pulled upon
their unhappy country) He twice sues for Peace* in those most gracious
Messages from Nottingham, with offer of such large conditions, that if more
should be required from Him, though when conquered, the Subjects would be
loosers by it, and they would gain that by a miserable War, which will much
diminish the happiness of Peace. They will not now descend to a Treaty with
their King; they like His humility, but are not well pleased it was not shown
sooner: only some slender hopes are given, that their General shall have
commission to pardon His former unwillingnesse to suffer, if He can redeem
those errors which have put them to expense and trouble, by a constant
tamenesse for the future. From Nottingham he slyes to Shrewsbury (for they are
contented to give Him line enough, being confident they can strike Him when
they please; in the mean time, it is good sport to see Him wearying Himself
with fruitless indeavous to escape, when at last being tired with long and
vain strivings. He must be forced to deliver Himself quietly into their hands.

Thus was he accused to be the assaulter, who was so long time unable to resist
their violence. Ei fuit saluti, quod videbatur certo periturus, his apparent
weakness did deliver him from that power which was ready to swallow him up;
they had then destroyed him, if they had not been more wanton, then
conscientious.

This narration is abundantly sufficient to prove the war to be defensive of
the Kings part. But I will examine it further by the rules of Justice.

Albericus Gentilis defines war very accurately (presupposing the laws of
society, and excluding private Duells) publicorum armorum justam contentionem,
a just dispute of differences by public swords, l. 1. c. 2. de jure bell.
just, negante sensu, for that which is not unjust, and in the law notion, in
reference not to the causes, (for this is called pium bellum) but the authors
waging it. Wherefore he shows, that it cannot be but between independent
States and Princes; Citizens or Subjects cannot be lawful enemies opposed to
their Prince, because they want supreme authority, without which the war is
not public, nor can it be justified. The reason is, because war is only
excused by necessity, that is, when there is no legal way to end controversies
by prohibiting farther appeals, as amongst distinct States, or several
Princes, who acknowledge no superior, and are not bound to submit to any Court,
and may perhaps not agree upon arbitrators, because in some cases none can be
named, who are uninterressed in the decision. But I will not insist upon the
injustice of Subjects making war for any cause whatever, upon the supreme
power, because this was evidenced at large in the second Section, where I
proved, that a liberty of resistance, does destroy the nature of sovereignty or
supremacy, and introduces regnum in regno, civitatem in civitate, by dividing
the civil power, which can be but one, if the State or Kingdom be but one.

That of Cyprian shall be the entrance into our iniquirie, concerning the
injustice of this present war of the Subjects part (setting aside their duty
of non-resistance by divine law applied to our constitutions, and supposing an
equality or independancy between King and Subjects) for want of a reasonable
cause which might excuse those great mischiefs, as being a necessary remedy to
prevent greater. Homicidium quum admittunt singuli, crimen est, virtus vocatur,
quum public geritur. And there is some ground in reason, that shedding though
the blood but of one man should deserve an ignominious death, and to kill
thousands by public authority should make our lives glorious. Because there
is as vast a difference, as between the guilt of murderers, and the gallantry
of men undertaking the administration of justice with personal hazard for
preservation of public rights. First therefore a jurisdiction is required,
where laws are wanting to make use of force for recovery of right (which
Subjects cannot have over their Prince) and this does make justum bellum. And
secondly, a sufficient cause is necessary; there must be reasonable motives, or
else it cannot be pium bellum. Except we have (...), we commit murder with
the sword of justice. The method of the Romans was to demand their rights in a
peaceable way by their Heralds, and in case restitution was denied, then war
was proclaimed, and the cause likewise declared, (nec dederunt, nec solverunt,
nec fecerunt, quas res dari, fieri, solvi oportuit, as we find in Livy) that
the world might be satisfied in the innocence of their unwilling violence. So
careful were they to preserve their credit with mankind, whom it universally
concerned, that war should not be waged upon light and unjustifiable grounds.
There must be belli causa gravis, a sober inducement to make the war
defensive, and if this were not wanting, real injuries having been offered;
yet if this cause were taken away, by an after readiness to make full
satisfaction, if the offended parties would not accept of restitution, the
war was then esteemed offensive of their part, and they became guilty before
God for the causeless effusion of so much blood, and worthily infamous amongst
all good men. Melior causa ad partem poenitentem transibat.

To apply briefly these unquestionable rules of justice to the present case:
for I find that long reasons do as little satisfy the common sort, as none at
all, they having but narrow memories, and it being the same thing not to know,
and not to remember.

I will put but one interrogatory to such as take up Arms against the King,
Why they are Rebels and Traitors, cui bono? (for that they are so, I appeal to
the Judges of the Land, or refer them to the plain and evident Law, 25. Edw.
3. Let them suppose themselves arraigned, and the Judge to ask what they can
say for themselves, why sentence should not pass for their condemnation
according to express law. Certainly they could not make a fairer plea then the
Earl of Essex, who had not proceeded to offer violence to the Queen, and yet
was adjudged a Traitor for appearing in Arms, only with intention to remove
evil Counselors.)

The pretext is, in defense of Liberty, Laws, Property, Privileges of
Parliament and Religion.

But the real cause is, the preferment of a few ambitious persons, who will
not permit the Laws to have their free and uninterrupted course, the known
security of the Subjects happiness, because the orderly administration of
justice does not signify, that the King will bestow such offices upon them, as
their inordinate desires aim at. He cannot doubt the truth of this, who has
read and observed the conditions without which they will not suffer peace, and
to compass which His Majesty has left no reasonable ways unattempted. I am
confident, He has offered so much to His Subjects as would content honest and
moderate conquerours.

Concerning Laws, there shall not be any other measure of men's actions,
besides those known rules. Neither Royal Proclamations, nor fellow Subjects
Ordinances shall make the people miserable under an Arbitrary sway. Do you
desire to be as happy as your progenitors? you shall. For you shall enjoy all
the same laws by the benefits whereof they lived peaceably, plentifully,
gloriously. And besides this for a futher improvement of your happiness, all
those new Laws enacted this Parliament, and the several additional favors by
parting with many known rights, (which exceed the Acts of Grace from all His
Royal Ancestors though put together) shall be confirmed to you.

Do you desire to be as free as your Ancestors? you shall. His Majesty
passionately requires the Liberty of the Subject should be restored, and will
take care the people shall not loose their birthright, by being imprisoned
upon His, or, which is worse, their fellow Subjects illegal displeasure. He
will contribute His utmost endeavors, that His own Castles, the Bishops
houses, and all other not long since honest habitations, may be disgaoled, and
the English may be again acquainted with the comfort of life, freedom of
their persons, and of conversation, and not be banished from their Wives and
children for presuming to make the Laws the rule of their obedience.

Do you desire the establishment of your Property? you shall have it. His
Majesty challenges no right to your estates, and is unwilling Subjects should
claim a privilege to take them from you, only that they may be better enabled
to withhold His. No pretenses of unknown dangers, or unseene necessity shall
justify the violation of Laws, which alone can secure your inheritances.

Do you desire Privileges of Parliament should suffer no diminution? They
shall enjoy them in as high a way, as the Subject in the freest and most happy
days ever challenged.

And lastly, that Religion which was sealed with the blood of many holy Martyrs
since the Reformation, and which stands established by Acts of Parliaments, and
flourished in the purest times of Queen Elizabeth, which no sober man can
think guilty of any inclination to Popery, shall be confirmed to you by an
impartial execution of all legal penaltyes appointed against offenders.

Thus whatever can reasonably be pleaded for, is cheerfully offered to us, and
we are wooed to accept, what the contrivers of our ruin pretend is fought
for, Laws, Liberty, Property, Privileges of Parliament and Religion.

Would you have security for performance of this promised happiness? you shall
have as great as in justice you can require, or in reason expect; the same
security with which the modesty and wisdom of former Parliaments were fully
satisfied, and the Kingdom enjoyed the benefits of their well grounded
confidence.

And to complete all, you shall have certain provision for a Trienniall
Parliament. We are restored to such a high degree of health, as our Fathers
were never acquainted with, and moreover such a course is taken to time this
State Phisique (it was never intended Parliaments should be our constant diet)
as will probably prevent future distempers.

What fury has robbed men of their understandings, that they cannot be
persuaded to be happy! that their malice should increase with their calamities!
that they should hate, and tear, and kill one another they know not why! For
upon my soul a great part of their army would not impose upon others, nor
admit themselves of the Brownists, or Anabaptists Creeds; neither would they
think this Kingdom unhappy (so they might get some honest employment, as
honorable opportunities would not be wanting in foreign nations, if we had
once recovered our former reputation, with that wealth and quiet we lately
enjoyed) though 8 or 10 men should loose their mischiefs, and not get those
offices, which they valued, above the riches, and quiet and honor of their
nation.

What one thing has His Majesty denied them, which he had not full right so
to do? And, qui jure suo utitur, nemini injuriam facit; except they can
allege (...), very considerable injuries offered to them, and a refusal to
give satisfaction, the war is manifestly unjust on their side; we at the
worst shall fall martyrs, and they at best will live murderers, all the blood
which has been shed will be brought in upon their account, all those rapines
and sacriledges, the robbing God, and men will lie upon their heads.

In matters of Law he has not rejected any thing, and in matters of mere
grace and favor, he has been bountiful above all his royal Ancestors, and
so extremely tender is he in giving all content to His two Houses, that he
could not prevail with himself to deny, but he reserves his assent till such
time, as they can show him some reasonable motive, whereby he may be invited to
grant.

As he has been constant in his love and prosecution of peace, so he has
taken extraordinary pains in soliciting His Houses to cut off the unnecessary
injuries of war, by laying down plunderings and other causeless violences
committed upon Estates or persons on both sides, his Royal heart bleeding even
for the unavoidable pressures the people have pulled upon themselves. His
Soldiers will rule their actions by the counsel of John the Baptist, and be
content with their wages, and cheerfully hazard their lives in defense of so
honest a cause, by as honest means. If they are not able to pay their Army,
what secret moath and canker has consumed that vast treasure? Their want of
money is a great argument of the unsearcheable judgment of God, who can make
them still poor, though they take a liberty to seize the wealth of the
Kingdom. O that the people would but yet consider how unlikely it is the State
can thrive hereafter under such Stewards!

He that sadly calls to mind the height of happiness from which we are lately
fallen, all past grievances being fully remedyed, and future pressures probably
prevented, and considers how often His Majesty has entreated, importuned us to
accept again of that blessed condition, may well wonder, that our calamities
should yet continue, that they should hourly grow upon us. I would willingly
banish from my thoughts those melancholy observations of Historians, Quos Deus
vult perdere, prius dementes facit, and Quorum fortunam Deus mutare constituit,
consilia corrumpit. But they have so strongly possessed my fancy, that I am
almost tempted to fear, such a general loss of men's reason, is but the
fatal forerunner of an universal destruction.

Our condition stands thus; though the King has not yet, nor ever will
hereafter deny any thing of right, (those desires which are regulated by laws
shall be no sooner presented to Him, then granted) and though he has indulged
extremely much of favor (more then our Fathers had the boldness to crave)
nevertheless we cannot prevail with our selves to enjoy so great blessings,
unless He will consent likewise to their other requests, some of which He may
think He is obliged not to pass in justice, there being no light motives to
induce Him to believe, He has sworn against it, at His Coronation; and some,
He cannot grant with honor, and without betraying that trust committed to Him
by God and the Law for the benefit and protection of His people.

He is desired of sign the Bill for abolition of Episcopacy (that which
acquainted this Land with Christianity) and to diminish the Rights of the
Church, and take away Ecclesiastical revenues, that He may be remembered in
story, as the unfortunate instrument to pull down what the charity of many
ages has been building, and to destroy many pious Monuments and glorious
testimonies of our forefathers christianity, and to ruin what the devotion of
our godly Ancestors has contributed for the encouragement of learning and
advancement of Religion.

To say nothing to the politic part, how the Ecclesiastical and Civil State
are so interwoven, that the foundation of the whole may thereby be shaken, and
how there are very good reasons to suspect a Presbyteriall Government will
prove extremely prejudicial to Monarchy; I shall speak only to the religion
of this request. And first, I would willingly know, whether there be such a
sin, as we have hitherto used to call Sacrilege (so severely punished upon
the Heathens, the violation of things dedicated to false Deities, being
notoriously revenged by the true God, and so extremely abhorred by all good
Christians in former ages) and then, whether Magistrates have any dispensation
to commit Sacrilege innocently, by which private men incur a lasting
infamy, and eternal damnation.

Secondly, I would willingly be satisfied in this Quaere, whether the King
having sworn to preserve the Rights and Immunities of the Church entire, can
innocently consent (supposing Him fully informed in the nature of that right
which belongs to His Clergy, for the most religious Prince may be subject to
mistake) to lessen or abrogate them, except released by the consent of that
Body, to whom He is obliged? This point rightly stated (I shall only offer it
to be seriously meditated on, without any peremptory determination) may
confirm, the Lands of the Church for the future to the great improvement of
our civil happiness. For (besides that we might reasonably promise to our
selves a blessing from the Almighty, if we show our selves as careful, to
setle those Rights which tend to the advancement of his worship by a firm
establishment of a certain and honorable maintenance for his more immediate
servants, as we are justly sollicitous to secure our secular interests, by
making provision, that no man's Rights shall be alienated without the owners
consents) a great temptation, and that which seems to have the strongest
influence in all attempts of innovation, would thereby be cut off, the hopes of
repairing their decayed fortunes with the spoils of the Church, We shall find
in stories, that most of those storms which disturbed former calmes, and by
which this Kingdom sundry times has been miserably shaken, were raised only
with intention to sink the Church by such as promised to themselves
considerable shares in the wreck.

Some answer; He is equally sworn to the observation of Laws, but these He
may alter, with advice of both Houses. Thus one, I do not conceive Him more
bound to defend them by His Oath, then the rest of the Laws enacted, any of
which when the Kingdom desires should be abrogated, I hope is done without
perjury. That which is commonly called the Lawyers Answer to D^ Fern. p. 31.
This does by no means take of my scruple, because His Oath to defend the Laws
enacted, is made populo Anglicano, to His people, and so (as all other promises
by consent of the parties to whom a right was transferred) may be, and really
is forgiven by them represented in Parliament to that purpose. But this other
Oath is made to such a part of His people, Clero Anglicano, and particularly
taken by Him after His Oath to the whole Realm, which were needless, except
it meant some other obligation. This seems to prove it a distinct Oath, and
not releasable without their consent. Upon the same grounds that these Rights
are pleaded void, if Voted down, notwithstanding they to whom they belonged,
express not their will to part with them, the strongest security England can
give is weakened and discredited, that is the engagement of the Kingdom to
repay such sums by consent of King and Lords and Commons, which and which only
is public Faith. In such a case, can the City be Voted paid, except they
willingly release the debt? if they should be told, their rights are not
stronger then laws, but these are made null at the desire of the Kingdom in
Parliament, they would soon apprehend their logique to be extremely faulty,
and it is probable they would maintain, that the representative Kingdom in
Parliament cannot dispense with the Kings obligation to a particular body of
His Subjects, in whom alone the power of releasement does lie.

He is desired to nominate such Officers to manage the great affairs of state,
as they shall confide in; that is to yield up His undoubted right, happily
enjoyed by all His Royal Progenitors, into their disposal, and to determine
His choice by arbitrary fears. If they will confide in those, whom the laws
do not distrust, the King has satisfied even this request, for he will not
prefer any against whom they can bring just and legal exceptions. But he
thinks it no good argument to induce him to turn able honest Ministers (who
may challenge from His accustomed goodness that privilege of quam diu se been
gesserint) merely because others desire to have their places. They themselves
would conceive it very hard usage to be put out again upon the same title,
when no legal exceptions were produced against them, and therefore they press
His Majesty to secure them (when once in) by law, and yet will not permit him
to be ruled by their advice out of equity* and to continue His favors to those
men, who by a faithful discharge of their places, have showed themselves
worthy of that trust; if it will be reasonable then, it is so now, to encourage
faithful servants by making their own offenses only, and not other men's
fears, the rule by which they shall suffer. Nemo illis sic timere permisit.
They might as well tell the world in plain english (but that advantages are
still made of the peoples blindness) except the King will grant such
preferments to us and our favorites (for let Him nominate whom He will, they
will never confide, unless He guide His nomination by their instructions, who
are to approve them, and the truth is, when they have gained one, He has
reason to request them to take the other, for they will save Him the trouble of
naming in vain, and He may thereby conceal His hurtful affection, and not
expose His best friends to dishonorable repulses) except we may be Patrons
(they would once have been contented to be only the present incumbents, and
suffer Him to retain the right to bestow them freely for the future time) we
shall never endure peace, and yet we must be forced to cast the envy of so
miserable a war upon him.

All understanding and dis-interessed persons must clearly discern, it is the
same injustice, not to consent, the people should be happy, and to keep up
these public calamities, ununtill they shall be satisfied in their illegal,
unreasonable proposalls. Though it be a more politic way, duris conditionibus
pacem pati velle, to express a desire of peace, but not to admit it, but upon
unequitable and unjust conditions, yet it is equally dishonest, as to deny it
downeright. They are altogether inexcusable, unless they will make such
proposals, whereby it may appear, they covet not another, but only to
preserve their own rights. Which the King freely offers to them without
diminution of the least title, and with unpresidented enlargements by many
additionall favors in this present Parliament.

He is desired to make the Houses sharers with him in ordering the Militia, and
to grant them a right to suppress all forces but such as shall be raised by
their consent.

This request is evidently destructive of that fundamental Law, which intrusts
this power in the Crown alone to enable the King to protect His Subjects and
the Laws. The benefits of which constitution our happy Ancestors enjoyed, and
the greatest pressures the English nation at any time suffered under, did
spring from this fountain, when Subjects undertook the managery of this
regal right.

Because their desire is discountenanced by Law (and being so though it were as
really beneficial, as it is truly pernicious to the peace and quiet of a
State, opening a gap to civil dissentions, necessarily arising from the
opposite interests of consorts in power; though it might be reasonably wished,
yet it cannot be innocently fought for) They endeavor to justify it by reason
of State, and plead the necessity of it, as being the only cure of fears and
jealousies.

The recovery of this Kingdom were certainly desperate, if His Majesty too
should grow fearful and jealous, who has been more unanswerably tempted to
give admitance to these unhappy passions. For if they might seize on his power
by the Law of fears, if that it is taken from him, becomes a motive to
persuade him to give them right to keep it, might not he with greater show of
reason, require an enlargement of his former power, because it is manifest
(though they pretended to be afraid of it) it was not able to secure him from
their violence. Much more might be pleaded, why he should be enabled to keep,
what the Law gives him, then they not to restore what they have illegally taken
from him. But he contents himself with the ordinary means of safety appointed
by Law, and will not make himself justly formidable, by giving entertainment
to unjust fears, and challenging a privilege to do injuries, because it is
not impossible, he may suffer them, and may loose his own rights, except he
disable others by invading theirs. If this principle should once prevail,
peace and justice were lost to mankind; for it would still be some-bodies
turn to be afraid, and that would give them a right to greater power, which
right would cease as soon as they were possessed of it, and the true title to
power would always be in those who wanted it. There is no other way to get out
of this maze and confusion, to which their wild fears inavoydably betray a
State, but by prevailing with our reason, not to suspect those whom the Laws
have not suspected. For as jealousies against Law are causeless, so they are
altogether remediless. The fuller answer to Doctor Fern, endeavors to excuse
them by virtue of a commission from this principle, abundans cautela non nocet,
but woeful experience has evidenced the contrary; he tells us further, State
jealousy has no right hand error, none on the excess side, the more the
better. page 27. It is much worse then private jealousy, because this is but
the misery of a family, that the unhappiness of a Kingdom.

To sum up all, though some have gone so far, to indulge to Subjects a
liberty to take up arms in maintenance of old laws, yet no sober author can be
produced, who makes it lawful to fight against their Sovereign for the
establishment of new laws. It is not possible a strong desire of innovation
should take off the guilt of so unnatural a war.

The King requires nothing but (what the Subject cannot deny without injustice,
without perjury, and consequently, the guilt of all that blood which is, or
shall, or might be spilt,) his known legal rights, and he denies nothing
which the Subject can by Law challenge, and has indulged so much of grace, as
all ages cannot parallel, and yet is still ready to consent farther, if any
reasons shall be produced to invite greater favors.

How will posterity hate this example, and blush at the unworthy story of our
proceedings, who have discouraged good Kings by these ungrateful requitalls of
such eminent deservings toward his people! If we had not with our peace, and
plenty, and innocence, lost our reason too, we should quickly be persuaded to
accept of so great happiness, and not perversely hazard an ignominious death,
only to make our lives miserable. How are we become beasts in our
understanding, as if only capable to suffer without any apprehension of the
causes or remedies.

The result of all is; life and death are set before the people, it is in their
election to be again happy, but they chose these miserable things and are
active in their own ruin. For it will come to that, if they stop not in their
wild progress, The husbandmans store being consumed, the pastures unstocked,
though we escape the sword or bullet, we shall be devoured by famine, or else
perish by plagues, or fluxes, the fatal productions of unholsome diet.

It concerns us to pray unto Almighty God that he would be pleased to restore
us to our wits, for if he would make us wise, we should soon make our selves
happy, by bringing the pernicious authors of these our miseries to a legal
trial; we should then clearly see, that the preferment of a few men ought
not so to sway with us, that we should sacrifice our Liberty and Property, and
suffer the Laws to be violated, the Protestant Religion to be dishonored,
only in order to satisfy some particular men's ambition. That indignation of
the people in Virgil (engaged in a miserable war, to gain that with blood
and ruin, the want whereof was no diminution to their happiness) would too
well fit the English nation, Scilicet ut Turno contingat Regia conjux,
Nos animae viles, inhumata, infletaque turba
Sternamur campis!
Must we dye like dogs, that they may live like princes! How are the oppressed
commons concerned in those men's illegal gainings, that they should be
contented to loose their estates, and lives, and souls, in prosecution of none
of their own interests? They fall unlamented, unregarded, while the contrivers
of these mischiefs, sit safe, exposing others to the dangers, grow rich, while
the impoverished Kingdom is re^dy to sink under the burden of its debts, and
are even wanton in our oppressions.

Since therefore the only ground of this unnatural war is, that His Majesty
will not permit us to be less happy then our Ancestors, choosing rather to
suffer so many injuries, and to expose His Royal Person to the dangers of open
hostility, then to wrong His Subjects and purchase safety or plenty, by making
such Laws, as private interests would force upon Him and the Kingdom,

Since He denies nothing but the abolition of our good old customs which long
experience has confirmed to be extremely beneficial to this Nation.

Since they reject peace, upon pretext, it comes not accompanied with truth,
and mean by truth not the Protestant Religion as it is settled in this Kingdom
and established by Act of Parliament, but some moveable Creed, the Articles
whereof it shall be their privilege to abrogate, and to make it speak new
doctrines, according as they will suit best with their civil interests,

Since they fight, not for certain and known Laws, not for a certain and
known Religion, that is, not to restore, but to take away, and which is more
intolerable, that they may add as yet they know not what,

It is evident, the resistance now made is most offensive of the Subjects part,
and does unavoidable incur the Apostles sentence, damnation.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. lin. 16. del.: p. 5 l. 12 read life. p. 15: l. 26. r. (...). p. 17. l.
36. dele it. p. 36. l. 20. for his r. your. p. 42. l. 28. for not r. no. p. 77.
l. 22. r. quod p. 86. l. 2. for the r. our. p. 95. l. 2. r. whom. p. 98. l. 11.
for (against which r. against (which. p. 123. l. 34. for eo r. to. p. 134. l.
6. r. Grecian. p. 135. l. 21. for not altogether. r* not altogether consonantly
to. p. 139. l. 15. for that r. the. ib. l. 34 for not be r. not to be. p 158. l
17. inquiry.


