A Dialogue betwixt the DEVIL AND THE Ignoramus Doctor.
Devil. BEhold from the Infernal Lake I Am come,
To fright thy Soul to its Eternal doom:
To tell thee, Villain, that thy Reign's expired,
And now be sure thou shall no longer hired
Be by me, no, nor any of the damned,
To drench in Innocent Blood this mournful Land.
Hence then be gone, and do no more pursue
Villainies Hell could never act but by you:
Now Heaven stops my power, and I thy hand,
And now I tell thee, Doctor, thou art damned.

Doctor. O Spectre I spare a while my dreadful doom!
Go back and tell the damned, I come, I come,
Only let me complete the Ils I Have begun,
Then Heaven farewell, and unto You I come.

Dev. The Blood of the Innocent aloud does cry,
Revenge, Revenge, on cursed Doctor Ti --
No more of the Innocent shall bleed, nor die.

Dr. Well, the time's come, the fatal day's at hand,
That I for ever, ever must be damned:
O cursed Revenge! what Mischiefs I have done?
Abjured the Father, and Blasphemed the Son.
The sacred Spirit of Truth at once have I
Banished; and that my Vengeance I might buy,
I Have caused the best of Innocents to dye.
See where their Ghosts appear in Purple ray'd,
Victims, by Perjury alone betrayed:
See how they shake their Heads, and bleed afresh,
Their wounds gape wide in their new murdered flesh;
And these most frightful Visions come, 'cause I
The bloody Villainous Murderer stand by.
It Is true, that I the cruel Murderer am,
And thousands more by Perjury to trepan
I solemnly did vow, and often swear,
And none to escape, from the Peasant to the Peer;
Nay Sacred Prelates, Princes, Queens and Kings,
Should have made up my Bloody Offerings.
Ten Thousand more of Innocents had died,
'Cause I King, Queen, and Duke had Sacrificed:
Cities and Towns I Would Fired, if not withstood,
And quenched the Flames with Innocent Blood.
Let me but live in this world three years more,
This Island then shall swim in Christian gore;
I Will subvert Governments, and murder Kings,
Sow discord among Friends; I Will do such things
Shall make the World believe there is not that
Villainous thing I have not power to act:
I Will make the World believe (let me but stay)
That Light is Darkness, and that Night is Day;
That I the Savior of the Nation am,
And that Christ was of no avail to Man;
Then I the Sacred Gospels will destroy,
Swear they are but fictious Stories, and a Lie;
Persuade them that the Bible's but a Farce,
No more to be esteemed then is my A --
So I Will improve the Art of Perjury,
That none who are not skilled in Villainy
Shall live; thus will I fit this Isle for Hell,
And then adieu the World, and Heaven farewell.
Thus I a Learned Doctor will commence,
And by the People be adored for Nonsense,
And with Sedition I their Souls will influence.

Devil. Peace thou profane wretch, hold Villain hold.
For know with Heaven and Earth thou art too bold,
And I must tell thee, another Winter old
Thou shall not be, thy Life and Soul are sold:
When flat on The Altar Thou thy self did lay,
Remember that thou gav'st thy Soul away
To me; and swor'st for ever thoud'st be mine,
Might thou but compass thy Hellish design;
To imbrue thy hands in Innocent blood,
And murder all who had the face of good:
Devils and Hell in this Thou have outdone,
By thy damned Perjury in the face oth' Sun.
Hence then be gone to Hell, away, away,
For in this place thou shall no longer stay.
[Spoken by an old Acquaintance.] Why how now Doctor, vanished, fled and gone,
What none but Monsieur Devil and You alone?
Are all your Projects come to this damned end,
Thus to be hampered, and ridden by a Fiend?
Unpitied lie; blaspheme and groan thy last,
Belch forth thy unhallowed Soul, and blast
Hell it self, with thy unsanctify'd breath,
And grovelling in the shades of Eternal death,
I leave thee. Ha, ha, ha, ha, poor Doctor,
Good Night little good Mr. Devil's Doctor.

FINIS.

