A DISCOURSE Concerning the VEGETATION OF PLANTS.

Spoken by Sir KENELME DIGBY, at Gresham College, on the 23. of January, 1660.

At a Meeting of the Society for promoting Philosophical Knowledge by
Experiments.

LONDON: Printed by J.G. for John Dakins near the Vine Tavern in Holborn, 1661.

OF THE VEGETATION OF PLANTS.
THe Subject upon which you have commanded me now to discourse unto you (most
honored President, and most worthy Academists) is of so large an extent, and
of so abstruse a (...) they may continue the same individuation, and be again
the same identicall body, after so many strange changes, and after having put
on so many different habits and shapes, as we daily see in the course of
Nature. To aim at performing all this, would be as fond a thought, as to put
to Sea in a pair of Oars, with design to circle the whole Earth, and visit both
the Poles. Yet since upon Mr. Surveyours motion to you, (upon occasion of what
was just now, so ingeniously delivered by our acute, learned, and judicious
Associate Dr. Goddard about the growing of Trees) you have thought good to
command me to entertain you with my reflections upon this subject, I will in
obedience thereunto give you such hints as may stir up others, by following
them, to make a complete and polished piece of that whereof I shall set before
you only a rough draught; yet it shall be composed of such natural and assured
strokes, as may persuade you that there is no insuperable difficulty, nor
inscrutable darkness in all this so admired progress.

But let us look upon it, step by step; and consider at every joint or change,
what new shape ought in reason appear next, and what new product is likely from
time to time to arise out of the immediately preceding composition, so
tempered, so qualified, and so accompanied with all its Concomitant accidents;
and we shall presently conclude, that it would have been impossible any other
thing imaginable should have resulted out of these principles and
circumstances, then what has been thus born out of Natures fertile womb: And
be the seed never so remote from any appearing affinity with the Plant or Tree
that at the last grows out of it; yet by this heedfull survey it will be
evident unto us, that as long as water performs the action of wetting, fire
that of burning, the Earth that of constipating and giving consistence to fluid
bodies, and the air that of mellowing and ripening what is exposed to his
embraces; in a word, that as long as nature proceeds in her regular course to
perform these familiar actions which we are daily witnesses of, and which we
find no difficulty to understand; so long (I say) it is impossible, that any
other thing in the World should grow (for example) out of a little shrunk
Akehorne, then a spread vast Oak; or out of a single Bean, then that tall,
green, tender Plant so furnished with stalk, leaves, flowers, buds, seeds, (all
in their several seasons) which appears so differing from that dry, hard
grain first thrown into the Earth. Let us date the beginning of our observation
from thence. This dry shrunk compacted substance, being buried slightly in the
moist ground, at a season when the approaching Sun (the great Archeus and fire
of nature) beginning to dilate and sublime up to the Superficies of the Earth,
that volatile and balsamic salt which his remoteness during the Winter had
suffered to be shrunk up together, and condensed and sunk deeper toward the
Center; must of necessity receive into its substance, that saline humidity
which environeth it, is contiguous to it, and on all hands presses upon it.
The immediate effect of this humecting of the Bean or Akehorne, must
necessarily be that it swells and grows bigger: for the substance of the
water getting into the very substance of the grain that lies soaking in it;
those two substances cannot choose but take up a larger room then formerly did
belong long to only one of them single. And from thence it will follow, that
the skin which wrappeth up and contains the substance of the Bean, must needs
crack and tear to afford way and liberty to the dilatation of the swelled body:
which having thus obtained room for it self to perform such actions as in those
circumstances are natural and necessary to it (whereas, before it was shut up
and fettered in a cold, dry, and hard outside) it follows presently its own
swing; and in that little natural body, we may read the fate which hangs
over political ones* when the inferior Members that should study nothing but
obedience, have gotten the power into their hands: for then every one of them
following their impetuous inclinations, the whole is brought into confusion;
and that is destroyed which every one in their tumultuary way aimed to gain the
Mastery of; unless a superior Architect, as in the present case of our
bleeding Nation, everso missus succurere seclo, do come to draw light and
order, out of that darkness and confusion. It will happen then to this swollen
Bean, now broken prison, that the fiery parts of it will work to gain dominion
of the watery ones; and they calling the cold and dry ones to their several
aides, will make a violent agitation through the whole mass, working and
kneading the one into the other. This intestine motion, will cause a greater
dilatation of the body so in combustion, then the first humecting of it did.
For, the natural action of fire being to stream out from its Center on all
hands in a continued flood of extremely rarifyed atoms; and they carrying
along with them as continued a sequel of moist and viscous ones; it will
necessarily follow, that they must have a larger field then originally they had
to play their game in. Thus far of this work belongs to fermentation, which
if it grow so violent that the fiery and spiritual parts do get quite loose
from the viscous ones; then that which follows, is a total Putrefaction,
Dissolution, and Destruction of the compound: But if it be kept within its due
limits, then the body in which it was wrought, is raised to a nobler pitch, and
the Ethereall spirits of it are actuated, and put in possession of their native
virtue; and the feculent, insipide, earthy ones are cast out from having any
Society with them. But you do not expect from me (my honored hearers) that I
should discuss the Doctrine of fermentation to the utmost scope and extent of
it; which as it is one of the noblest and excellentest works of nature, and
indeed the key to enter into the knowledge of all the actions and changes that
are wrought under the Sun; so it requires a particular treatise entirely to it
self, and will take up a whole man to draw a complete Map of its Empire. He
will find that there is no disease in man's body, but springs from
fermentation; which when it grows so violent and unruly, that the fermented
humors can no longer be contained within their oppressed vessels, or that it
is continued so long, that the spirits fly quite away, and thereby deliver over
the remaining Mass to Putrefaction and Rottenness; Death, which is an
essential dissolution of the whole compound, must necessarily follow. He will
find that the cures of all diseases do proceed from sometimes raising
fermentaton to a due pitch, that it may cast off what is hurtful to the whole
compound; and otherwhiles precipitating it, so that all the tumultuary motions
of it may be composed, and a perfect calm may be induced in place of it. And
lastly, (not to trouble you with too many particulars, arising out of a
digression) he will find that when ever nature intends the betterment of any
body, she begins with dissolving and fermenting it in its due liquor; that
so each essential part may be severed from his fellow, and refined to a nobler
state then it enjoyed before; and then joined again in a much perfecter society
with his equally ennobled companions, after the incorrigible faeces are thrown
from their harmony and union. Thus plain Clay with water from Heaven, may be
brought to a christaline purity and permanence; and Gold to one of those gems,
which in the Apocalips we are told serve for the Pavement of the heavenly
Jerusalem. Find but a menstruum of its own nature, in which it may be radically
dissolved and fermented; and the rest of the work will be easy. But to make
our Bean grow, we need not so great curiosity; and yet give me leave to say,
the linear way of the one, is not more plain and easy than that of the other,
to him that knows them. But be this how it will: As to the Bean, although the
swelling and bursting forth of the fiery and viscous parts of it, will be
toward all sides, according to the nature of fire, which streameth out from
the center every way to the circumference, yet it will be most efficacious
upwards toward the air, because it meets with less resistance that way,
than any other: For downwards the Earth lies more compacted than it does over
the grain, it having been stirred and broken to make the Mould loose and
porous; and besides, there is a great quantity of it, which the further you go
downwards, grows the more difficultly penetrable; whereas, from the grain to
the superficies of the Earth, and to the free air, the journey is very small,
and no obstacles in the way, by reason the Sun, Air, Dew and Rain do still work
upon it to make it light and spungy. Upwards then, and toward the air must be
the speediest and the greatest concourse of these hot and viscous streams;
which coming into the cold air, and being invaded by it on every hand, they
contract themselves into such a figure, as is fittest to resist the assaults of
such an enemy; which is the circular one: for (to speak physically) the ambient
air pressing these streams on all sides, reduces them into the narrowest room
possible to serve them: and the circular figure being the most capacious of all
others whatsoever, the cold air condenseth them into it, that so most matter
may be contained in least space. In the mean time, the streams out of the
cracked skin of the Bean downwards and sidewards, are not altogether
inefficacious, though not so vigorous as those that ascend upwards toward the
air. There will be this difference between the ascending and the descending or
spreading parts, which flow out of the fermenting mass; that the first will be
hot, moist, aerie, and consequently green and tender ones; the others will be
more dry, cold, earthy; and therefore rough, hard and white; whose hardness
and roughness will also be increased by the Earths pressing upon it. Thus then
the root is formed, which drawing continually new juice to it from the moist
Earth that environeth it, and abounding with heat that still digesteth and
sublimeth up the moisture it sucketh in; and the outward agents (that is, the
Sun and Air) performing also their parts; it follows that new digested and
spiritual juice is continually sublimed up into that round, green, tender part,
which was sprung up out of the Earth into the air; and that now we may call
the stalk. Thus both the innate and the extern heat, do concur to enlarge this
plant, by filling both the root and the stalk of it with continual new
moisture: whereof the one being exposed to the Sun and Wind, must needs grow
rough and hard on the outside; to defend from outward injuries of weather, the
inner-part that remains tender and juicy, and would else be soon nipped in
its ascending; and the other thrusts down continually hard parts deeper into
the Earth, whereby it remains firm and able to resist the agitations of the
wind, without being easily eradicated. Now it fares with the plant, as with a
kindled fire of wood; the more fuel is applied to feed it, the more grows
the heat: so here, the daily and hourly accrewing of new balsamic juice,
increases the heat that is within the plant; and consequently there is
continually more and more juice sent upwards. Thus the stalk grows higher.
But the further that this ascending juice goes from the maine Center of it
that sublimed it up, the weaker and fainter it becomes, and the less able to
resist the invasions of the cold ambient air. So that, when it can creep up no
higher, it settleth there: Yet continually the innate heat sublimeth up more
and more juicy, which not being able to pierce the skin that it meets with at
its journys end, it swells there into a button, that grows continually
bigger and bigger, till at length the skin that enwrappeth this subliming and
daily more digested juice, not being able any longer to contain the quantity
and activity of it, breaks; and from that cloven button or knot, new juice
ascends in the same manner and progress as before; till at a just distance,
proportioned to the causes that produce it, a new knot is made; And so from one
to another, every one less then the other, till at length there wants juice
to drive the Plant any higher; and withal, the subliming heat grows fainter
at so great a distance; and the Sun begins to grow less active upon it; And
in a word, the whole economy of nature conspireth to set here a period to the
extension of the Plant. Some plants do use to shoot only upwards; but in
others, when the button is forced asunder by the ascending juice; that juice
pusheth out as well to the sides as upwards; and so a branch is made, breaking
out of the main stock: And it happens that there do break out so many such
branches, as there are concurrent circumstances and accidents (such as we have
here mentioned) to form them. But when nature has set a period to the extent
of her growing Plant, and is as it were weary of teeming any longer with such
strong and nervous issues (that is to say, that the innate heat, the juice, and
the Sun, do begin to flag in their operations, (for the reasons I have touched)
and yet never consenting to be idle and sit still, she betaketh her self to
works of less robustuous force; and refining still more and more by gentle
sublimations and depurations, the juice she has brought up thus high, she
continually makes it cast off the grosser parts, which stick by the way as not
being nimble enough to rise higher, nor subtle enough to pass through those
straight channels which afford the refined spirits an easy course. Yet are not
these gross parts without employment (I call them gross, only in respect of
the purer spirit; for otherwise they are much more subtle and concocted, then
those which remain in the stalk, trunk, or bark of the plant) it is true, they
are not able to go along with the ethereal spirit, which takes a higher
flight, as you shall by and by hear. And they are continually increased with
hourly supplies of like gross or subtle parts as you will please to call them:
for indeed they are either, or both; subtle in respect of the grosser juice
they are sublimed from, and that remains below in the body and trunk of the
plant; And gross in respect of the ardent spirit and balsamic oil that is
rectifyed from them. This perpetual new concourse of fresh matter to the
branches, which grow too full to contain it, is the cause of their cleaving in
several places where this juice pusheth to get out. If it be very viscous and
unctuous, and have been long concocted by the Sun without and the innate heat
within, before it breaks out; it shows it self in a gummy substance, that
retains in it the nature of the whole Plant; as I shall hereafter convince
experimentally, besides the evidence of the reason that concludes it must be
so. But if nothing have intervened to hinder or alter the ordinary course;
then, this more watery then unctuous juice, making its way into the air through
the tender skin of the branch or st^lk, suffers all the like actions upon it
as were formerly wrought upon the first juice that broke out of the original
Bean or Akehorne; and so it begins to be formed there into a new Plant, of a
shape, figure, and nature proportioned to the great one it shoots from.
First, a thridde shoots out in a direct line, that we may fitly call the
stalk of this new little Plant; and at a distance adequate to the heat that
sublimeth and pusheth it out, and to the cold air that nippeth and shrinketh
it into a button, ^he first knot is formed in this little stalk: from whence
new streams or thredds are pushed out, both forwards and side-wayes, as we
have formerly explicated in the first gross forming of the bulky plant. These
thredds that are thus spun out every way one from another, do grow to be so
near one another, that the steams which necessarily must accompany them (for
wheresoever heat drives out store of moisture, there cannot choose but be an
atmosphere of emanations environing and besieging, as I may say the main
stream) do easily mingle with one another; and being of a viscous and adhaesive
nature (as all such moist and hot emanations must necessarily be) they fill up
with their glewy matter the intervalls between the main threads. Which we may
compare, not improperly to a curious Work-womans filling up of Flanders-lace
with fine thread: in the doing whereof, she interweaveth so cunningly the thread
she brings, with those standerds of threads (as I may call them) that she
already finds in her work before her, that whiles she fills up all the
vacuities, she still leaves those main threads so discernable, that your eye
can after all distinguish the work of the Pattern as clearly as if there had
been nothing done to it. And so in this filling up the interstices of the new
little Plant, you see plainly all the sinews and threads of it after the viscous
steames which hang about them are plaited and wrought into a continuate
substance, that is jagged or dentelated according as the main threads are pushed
forth to be longer or shorter, which depends upon the heat that carries the
viscous parts with it. And thus the leaf, a second Plant is formed out of the
branches and twigs of the first, retaining the shape, figure, and other
qualities of it. Now all the while that this is doing with the grosser parts,
which the rectifyed spirit casts off; The heat which rectifyeth and sublimeth
it, pusheth forth this elaborate juice into more tender substances, more
abounding with vigor and spirits; Especially at the extremity of the branches,
where the solidest part of the abounding humor grows (as before in the
rising of it in the stalk of the Bean, or in the body of the Oak) into a
button; but the more volatile and less substantial part of this highly
rectifyed juice or rather new spirit, is spread round about it in thin sheets;
which being full of the aereal and sulphurous parts of this rectifyed spirit
(which here by the iterated rectifications, becomes like an ardent water)
delights the eyes with variety of colors, and the nose with pleasantness of
smell (for sulphur is the universal great painter and perfumer of the world)
but being of so volatile a nature as the much refining and often rectifying it,
reduces it to be of; these flowers are not of long durance, but soon fade and
fall away, as also their beautiful and odorous spirits exhale from their dead
and withered habitations. But all this while that this ethereal or wild spirit
recreateth himself thus in these transitory flowers; a more solid and
substantial one, and that endures a more vigorous concoction, (as in
distillations, where the balsamic oil comes last) fills and swells the
button that has by this time lost his gay companions, the faded flowers. And
as it grows bigger, it grows also softer and tenderer in the whole bulk of
it. For, the Sun still draws to the outside, the subtilest, the most jucy,
and the most aereall parts of it: and therefore all that substance must be
soft, mellow, and tender; only the extremity and the last superficies of the
outside, must needs have contracted some hardness and roughness, from the
coldness of the air, and the biting sharpness of the wind, which makes the
skin of a Pear, or Apple, or Walnut, rougher and harder then the pulpy tender
substance next adjoining to it. Yet out of the course here set down, it will
follow that toward the center of this tender substance there must needs be
some hard, dry, and rough matter. For, seeing that the Sun from without
attracteth to the superficies of the fruit the most spiritfull and aerie parts
of the ascending juice; and that on the other side the innate heat from within
drives it out, and extends it from the Center to the superficies: It is
impossible but that about the middle from whence all this attraction and
expulsion of tender juice is made, there must remain store of Earthy parts
deprived of moisture, and baked into a hard nucleous substance, containing much
of fire; though little of air and water in it. For it is the nature of fire to
incorporate it self with the substance it baketh and calcineth; as you have a
sensible experience in the calcining of Antimony by a burning-glasse, when the
calcined body increases much in weight, though at the same time the fire
drives away a wonderful quantity of the moist and volatile parts of the
smoking mass. This button, thus dilated and brought to this pass, we call the
fruit of the plant: whose harder part, encloseth oftentimes another that is not
so hard as it is dry. And the reason of this is, that the outside or
superficies of this Earthy substance, is become so exceeding hard by the
concurring causes which make it so, that no moisture (or at least in no
considerable quantity) can soak through it. And then, the action of heat being
continually prevalent upon what ha^h no supply of moisture, it must necessarily
follow that all the substance which is enclosed within that hard superficies,
must needs grow dryer and dryer; till at length it becomes like fine subtle
dust compacted together; which shows it self to be so, asoon as it is bruised
out of the husk that contains it: as we daily see in Corn ground at a Mill;
and it is as evident in the kernells or little seeds of Pears, Apples,
Orenges, Almonds, and the like; if you work in like manner upon them, after
they are thoroughly dried. Yet this dryness is not to such a degree, as when in
Calcination by violence of fire the moist and volatile Essential parts of a
body are entirely driven away. For here the agents being gentle and natural
ones, and the ambient moisture and cold defending the seed from excess of
drought and heat, and the whole course of this progress tending rather to
Fixation then to Calcination; It happens that in every parparcell of this
compacted dust, the nature of the whole Plant resideth perfectly and entirely;
as it were, contracted into a small quantity. For, the juice which was first in
the button, (that is now become the fruit) and had passed from the root through
the manifold varieties of the diverse parts of the Plant, and had suffered much
concoction and depuration, partly from the Sun and partly from the inward heat
imprisosed in that harder stony part about the middle of the fruit; is by these
passages, strainings, concoctions, and sublimations, become at length to be of
the nature of a tincture extracted out of the whole plant; and is at last dried
up into a kind of Magistery, full of Fire and of Salt. This is that which we
call the Seed; which being buried in the Earth, and soaked with fitting
humidity, in such sort as we have here at large declared, sets on foot this
work anew, and repeateth over again all that we have hitherther observed in
this long progress: in which the steadiness of the Supreme Architects hand
that steereth and governs it, is never enough to he admired; who has set on
foot such an exact concurrence of diverse and most distinct causes, to conspire
all to one and the same end, that still in general nature ariveth to her
destined period without being frustrated of the scope she levelleth at. Whereas
a man that should stay his consideration at every joint of this long carreer,
and should reflect how easily some little circumstance in so vast a
multiplicity of them might be turned awry (as when an atome of dust falls
among the wheels of a nice clock) or rather, how difficult it must needs be
for one single governor to keep them all in their due aequilibrity; might be
apt to conclude that not one of ten thousand should prove as it does. And he
that should look barely upon the two extreme terms, the beginning and the
completing of a plant, might think there were a perpetual miracle in the
production of vegetables, and might be excused for having recourse to a vis
formatrix, and such other insignificant terms. But another that considers the
whole course of nature set on foot by God Almighty for this admirable work; and
fixes his foot at every particular joint, not stirring it from thence till he
have fully examined and discussed what must necessarily follow out of such or
such matter, in such or such circumstances, so and so tempered, and so and so
wrought upon; will evident^y discern that it is throughout impossible, any
thing should happen in it otherwise then just what and how it does. And it is
want of consideration and of judgment, which makes men fly to occult and
imaginary quali^ies, to shroud their ignorance under inconceiveable terms:
Whereas nature in her self is pervious and open to humane discovery, if a due
course be taken to dissect and survay her.

Out of what I have discoursed of the progress of Nature in the growth of
Trees, and of all manner of Plants, it will be easy to satisfy such Questions
and Doubts concerning them, as at the first sight may seem full of difficulty.
As for example; why the grain of a tree should affect such or such a situation
and tendence in respect of the great Universe, which some shallow Clerks will
have pass among the recondite Mysteries of Nature, shut up to mortal eyes;
further then that they will have a secret instinct and sympathy to be between
Plants and the polar Star. All which is nothing but this, that the tender plant
at its first pushing forth, being checked by the ambient air, and warmed by
the enlivening Sun; is most straightened by the cold Earthy atoms which are
drawn by the Sun from the Poles to the Equator. For there being a constant
perpetual course of them that way (as I have showed in my Book of Bodies) such
things as lie in their Channel must necessarily be affected with their
continually repeated strokes. And that side of them which is exposed to their
immediate blows, must be most sensible of them. On the other side the Sun
with his warm and moist Regiment of atoms, embracing the opposite part of the
plant, must needs work a contrary effect to the other. And thus you see a plain
and evident reason, why one side of the plant cannot fail of being close, hard,
and heavy in respect of the other, and tending to some acuteness rather then
perfect round. The other will be spungy, tender, light, and dilated; having its
Figure enlarged beyond roundnesse. Now this first impression serving for a Rule
to what afterward shall follow, and the outward case of the plant, being as it
were a mould to cast the succeeding juice in; it will follow that at every
Year, or Month, or Week, (according to the nature of the plant) when new juice
is sublimed up into the hardened case, and that this new juice discendeth the
case to make room for it self, it will take such ply and Figure, acuminated on
the one side and obtuse on the other, as the case already has, and is apt to
give. This will be repeated every year in Trees and in such plants as count
their livelihood by years. And by these circles of the grain, you shall not
only know how the Tree grew, where it was planted in regard of North and
South; but also how old it is. And if you will transplant it to another place,
you must have a care to set it in the same Situation it first grew in; for
otherwise, exposing the tender, mellow, South Side of the Tree, to the sharp,
hard wedges of the Northern air, they will so cleave and batter it, that in a
little while it will exhale its spirits and dye. And the same reason obliligeth
also, that every piece of wood, even after it is dead and hewed out, be
Magneticall and have respective Poles to the Universe. For, the constant course
of one sort of atoms running one way through it, must needs have bored and
wrought such figured Channells as are proportionate to admit such figured and
qualified atoms as they are, and to reject and repel others of a different
nature and formation: In such sort as I have at large discoursed in my above
mentioned Treatise, where I set down the whole Doctrine of the Loadstone and
its Phoenomens, and do give the reasons of them. From the same cause it will
follow, that if you turn a piece of wood into a Sphere, or Cylinder, or other
Regular Figure, and put it into the water, one precise side of it will always
sink, and the other swim out of the water. And out of what I have said, the
reason is evident, why after much drought in a hot Summer, Trees and Plants
will languish, wither and look as though they were dead, till some Rain do fall
to cure their sickness; and then all Vegetables take a new green habit, as
though a second Spring were come to animate them. All which is nothing else but
that the long continued scorching Beams of the Sun had Exhausted all
Humidity from the Plants: And then, fresh moisture coming to the Roots, it is
sublimed thence into the stalks, and makes a new Germination and Leaves in
the manner I have declared.

Many other such consequencies would irrefragably follow out of the premised
principles, which would be too long to pursue further here. It is enough to
have given the hint of thus much; after which any ordinary reflection will
retrive innumerable other conclusions. But I think it will not appear tedious
to you that I touch a little upon what course may repair a decaying Plant; or
exceedingly augment the virtue of a prosperous one; since not only the
Philosophy of it is pleasing and considerable; but also the practice of it may
be profitafitable to the Commonwealth, and useful (with due Analogy) even to
humane bodies. The Sickness, and in the end the Death of a Plant, in its
natural course, proceeds from want of that balsamic Saline juice which I
have said makes it Swell, Germinate, and Augment it self. This want may
proceed, either from a Destitution of it in the place where the Plant grows,
as when it is in a barren soil or bad air; or from a defect in the Plant it
self, that has not vigor sufficient to attract it though it be within the
sphere of it, as when the Root is become so hard, obstructed and cold, as that
it has lost its Vegetative Functions. Now both these may be remedyed in a
great measure, by one and the same Physic. It is not every humidity that is of
a prolifike nature. If water have not her fire in her, she will avail little
to make Plants fructify. The watering of soil with cold hungry springs, does
little good. Whereas muddy Saline waters brought to overflow a piece of ground,
do enrich it much. Gentle showers, especially in the Aequinox Seasons, are very
fruitful. But above all, well digested Dew, makes all Plants luxuriat and
prosper most. Now what may it be that endeweth these Liquors with such
prolifike virtue? The mere water which is common to them all, cannot be it.
There must be something else enclosed within it, unto which the water serves
but for a Vehicle. Examine it by the Spagyrick Art, and you will find it is
nothing else but a nitrous salt which is dilated in the water. It is this Salt
which gives foecundity to all things. And from this Salt (rightly understood)
not only all Vegetables, but also all Mineralls draw their origin.

Here, it were not from the purpose to put you in mind how the Ancient Poets
(who comprised their deepest wisdom in familiar Fables) tell us long stories
of their Salt-begotten Goddess, and adumbrated their best knowledge of nature
under Saline veiles. But I should be too prolixe if I hunted too far every
chase that rises before me in this copious Forest. I will come back to my own
and others plain experiences. By the help of plain Saltpeter, dilated in water
and mingled with some other fit Earthy substance that may familiarize it a
little with the corn into which I endeavored to introduce it, I have made the
barrenest ground far out-goe the richest in giving a prodigiously plentiful
harvest. I have seen hemp seed soaked in this Liquor, that has in the due time
made such Plants arise, as for the tallnesse and hardness of them, seemed
rather to be Coppice wood of fourteen years growth at least, then plain hemp.
The Fathers of the Christian Doctrine at Paris, do still keep by them for a
Monument (and indeed it is an admirable one) a Plant of Barley consisting of
249. stalks, Springing from one Root or Grain of Barley, in which they counted
above 18000. Grains or seeds of Barley. But do you think that it is barely the
Saltpeter imbibed into the Seed or Root, which causes this Fertility? no;
that would be soon exhausted, and could not furnish matter to so vast a
progeny. The Saltpeter there, is like a Magnes which attracteth a like Salt
that Foecundateth the Air, and that gave cause to the Cosmopolite to say,
there is in the Air a hidden food of life. Such Aires as are most impregnated
with this benign fire, are healthful to live in. Others, which abound with
Earthy exhalations or Marishy vapors, and have little balsamic Salt in them,
are as unsound. This is the food of the Lungs, and the nourishment of the
Spirits. Cornelius Drebell, having contracted a great quantity of this into a
narrow room, could recreate and revive his languishing guests in his strait
house under water, when they had fed upon all the balsome that was in the Air
shut up with them; by opening a Fiole that dilated it self with fresh Spirits
into that stale depredated and exhausted Air. This spirit then that is in the
Air, is drawn (as it were by a Loadstone) by the Saline Liquor that is imb^bed
into the Seed which is full of it. My own eyes are witnesses of the wonderful
corporifying of it. I have seen it grow in a strange proportion; In a Villa at
Rome, I sowed some Barley thus prepared; And what with the Dew, what with the
Air, and what with the Sun, I should in the mornings, by then the Sunbeams
had dried up the superfluous moisture, see sproutings up of pure Saltpeter of
a prodigious height all about and over the Seeds that lay slightly covered with
the loose mould. They would be above an inch, nay two inches long, of the
pur^st Christaline Salt-Pe- that could be seen. And it is upon this principle
that the Pope in his State, and the old Duke of Bavaria in his, did first make
and then nourish, M^nes of Saltpeter; whose Roots and Quarries are quite
different from other Mineralls: For, they are under-foot in the Earth; and
these over our heads, in the Air: This is the Earth flying over men's heads,
which a late subtle Philosopher prescribes to be taken for his great work.
Now in this Salt are enclosed the Seminary virtues of all things. For, what is
it, but a pure extract drawn by the Suns-beames from all the bodies that he
darteth his Rays upon, and sublimed up to such a height of place as leaves
all feculence behind it, and is there in that exalted R^g^on of the Limbeck
baked and incorporated with those very beams themselves which refined this
extract out of its drossie Oar? Therefore I wonder not to see any sort of
herb grow upon the highest Towers, where it is certain no man ever came to
sow that Plant. And the Loadstone or Magnes of a like substance (though nothing
near so pure) that is in the Earth, the creeping toad there, sucketh and
pulls down this flying Dragon to it; and both of them do become one body. And
thus you see plainly and familiarly explicated the great Aphorism of the
Smaragdine Table; That what is above, is like what is below. The Sun is the
Father, the Moon is the Mother; the Earth is the Matrix wherein this product is
hatched; and the Air conveyed it thither. This Universal Spirit then being
Homogeneall to all things, and being in effect the Spirit of Life, not only to
Plants, but to Animals also: were it not worth the labor to render it as
useful to men's bodies, as to the reparations of Plants? Albertus Magnus
purchased the reputation of a Magician, for making all sorts of Fruit grow
plentifully and perfectly, in the depth of a hard Winter in Germany, by means
of this aethereall balsome. If it were made proportionable to men's bodies,
there is no doubt, but it would work alike effect upon them. Gold is of the
same Nature as this aethereall Spirit; or rather, it is nothing but it, first
corporifyed in a pure place, and then baked to a perfect Fixation. Raymund
Lully in his excellent Treatise de intention operanti^m, describes admirably
well the Genealogy of it. If then this perfect body (I mean Gold) could be
rendered familiar and disgestible to ours, there is no doubt but it would prove
a kind of Tree of Life to us. It is of it self too firmly composed for any
Agent upon Earth to dissolve it. But peradventure the Mother that bore him, may
reincrudate him and reduce him back into his first volatile principles.

Enough, if not too much is said of these Curiosities by way of digression, and
to entertain you (Noble Auditors) with pleasing variety; Let us come back to
our Plant, and enquire if it be not possible to render it perpetual, or rather
to convert it into a permanent substance and state, no longer subject to the
Vicissitudes of time; and outward Agents, that destroy all things: So to bring
it to a kind of glorified body, such as we hope ours will be after the
Resurrection. Quercetanus the famous Physician of King Henry the fourth tells
us a wonderful story of a Polonian Doctor that showed him a dozen glasses
Hermetically Sealed, in each of which was a different Plant; for example, a
Rose in one, a Tulip in another, a Clove-Gilly-flower in a third; adso of the
rest. When he offered these Glasses to your first view, you saw nothing in them
but a heap of Ashes in the bottom. As soon as he held some gentle heat under
any of them, presently there arose out of the Ashes, the Idaea of a Flower; the
Flower and the Stalk belonging to those Ashes; and it would shoot up and spread
abroad to the due height and just dimensions of such a Flower; and had perfect
Color, Shape, Magnitude, and all other accidents, as if it were really that
very Flower. But when ever you drew the heat from it, as the Glass and the
enclosed Air and matter within it grew to cool by degrees, so would this
Flower sink down by little and little, till at length it would bury it self in
its bed of Ashes. And thus it would do as often as you exposed it to moderate
heat, or withdrew it from it. I confess it would be no small delight to me to
see this experiment, with all the circumstances that Quercetan sets down.
Athanasius Kircherus at Rome assured me he had done it; and gave me the
proc^sse of it. But no industry of mine could effect it. Another I did, by
instructions from the former Author; and I found it exactly true as he
recounteth it. It is worth your knowing. I calcined a good quantity of Nettles,
Roots, Stalks, Leaves, Flowers; in a word the whole Plant. He produces the
example in this very Plant; and I would not vary in the least circumstance from
what he taught. With fair water I made a lie of these Ashes; which I filtred
from the insipide Earth. This lie was exposed by me in the due season to have
the Frost congeale it. I performed the whole work in this very house where I
have now the honor to discourse to you. I calcined them in the fair and large
Laboratory, that I had erected under the Lodgings of the Divinity Reader: And I
exposed the lie to congeale in the Window of my Library, among my Lodgings at
the end of your Great Gallery. Hans Hunneades the Hungarian, was my operator.
And it is most true, that when the water was congealed into ice, there appeared
to be abundance of Nettles frozen in the ice. They had not the color of
Nettles. No greenness accompanied them. They were white. But otherwise, it is
impossible for any Painter to delineate a throng of Nettles more exactly, then
they were designed in the water. As soon as the water was melted, all these
Idaeall shapes vanished: but as soon as it was congealed again, they presently
appeared afresh. And this game I had several times with them, and brought
Doctor Mayerne to see it; who I remember was as much delighted with it as my
self. What could be the reason of this Phoenomen? There is no doubt but that a
main part of the Essential substance of a Plant is contained in his fixed
Salt. This will admit no change into another Nature; but will always be full
of the qualities and virtues of the Plant it is derived from; but for want of
the volatile Armoniacall and Sulphureall parts, it is deprived of color. If
all the Essential parts could be preserved, in the severing and purifying of
them, I see no reason but at the reunion of them, the entire Plant might
appear in its complete perfection, so one could find a fit medium to dilate
it in. Were not this then a true Palingenesis of the original Plant? I doubt
it would not be so. For speaking rigorously, I cannot allow Plants to have
Life. They are not Se Moventia, They have not a principle of motion within
them. It is the operation of outward Agents upon them, that seteth on foot all
the dance we have above so heedfully observed, and which so near imitateth the
motions of Life. And if it be not a living thing, then it is all of it in
perpetual Flux and Change, without having any part of it enjoy a fixed and
permanent Being, for the least moments space; and consequently, there can be no
Resurrection of it after once it is destroyed, since it never was at any time a
determinate It, or Thing; But as Coals are made of wood by the action of Fire
upon it; and Ashes again of them, and Glass of Ashes; each of them a quite
different substance from what the precedent was: So, I conceive that a new
aereall body and thing is made out of the Plant that furnished matter for this
new substance, and whose substantial form is totally destroyed, and a new one
produced into the World; which is accompanied with many accidents like unto
many of those that belonged to the precedent substance. I remember another
pretty experiment that Doctor Davisson showed me in his Laboratory at Paris. He
had been drawing the Oil and Spirit of a certain kind of resinous Gum: And
it so happened that the Glass along which it rose; was all covered over on the
inside with Portraitures of Firre-Trees (from whence that resin distilled) so
exactly done that no Painter in the World could have drawn their shapes more
completely. The like happened to me once in distilling the Gum of
Cherry-Trees. But none of these Idaeas do come so near unto the real
Palingenesis, as what I have done more then once upon Cray-Fishes. Wash them
clean from any Earthinesse; and boil them very thoroughly (at least two hours
space) in sufficient quantity of fair water. Keep this decoction, and put
Crevisses into a Glasse-Limbeck, and distill all the Liquor that will arise
from them; which keep by it self. Then calcine the Fishes in a reverberatory
Furnace, and extract their Salt with your first decoction; which filter, and
then evaporate the humidity. Upon the remaining Salt pour your distilled
Liquor, and set i^ in a moist place to putrify; and in a few days you shall
find little animals moving there, about the bigness of Milet Seeds. These you
must feed with blood of an Ox, till they be as big as pretty large buttons,
then put them into a wooden paile of Riverwater and Ox blood, changing the
water and blood every third day; and so you may bring them on to what bigness
you please.

All this leads me to speak something of the Resurrection of humane bodies.
There we may find some firm and solid footing. Hitherto we have wandered up and
down in the Mazes of Fleeting matter, quae nunquam in eodem statu permanet. And
with great truth did Job apply that expression to the State of men living in
this World. But as soon as we shall have put off our frail Mortality, we shall
be in a state of permanence and immutability. Not only whiles the Soul is
separated from her Earthy Companion, but when she shall be clothed again, that
new flesh will partake of the constancy of her glorious Mate. But why do I
call it new flesh? I may be pardoned for doing so, when I consider the new
qualities and endowments it shall have put on. But otherwise, in substance and
reality, it is the same, the very same, that (for example) accompanied me in
this long and tedious Pilgrimage upon Earth. How is this? If a Caniball should
feed upon my body, and convert it into the substance of his, can both of us
rise again with the same bodies we enjoyed here? Yes, without doubt we may. And
I conceive, that the taking away of this difficulty, which has so highly
perplexed even the best Christians, will be so welcome a performance to them
who yet have not met with it; that for its sake you will pardon the
tediousness and coursenesse of all I have hitherto said. And with that, I will
cease further troubling you. But let us first rightly understand one another. I
do not undertake to show here how this great work is wrought: nor much less
to determine that it will follow out of the force of nature, after the great
days Conflagration has calcined the whole Mass of Matter into a formlesse
heap of Ashes: So disposing it, by excluding and destroying all particular
forms, to admit the action of subsistent ones upon it. But my undertaking is,
to convince that there is no impossibility nor contradiction in nature, against
this great and amazing Mystery. If there were contradiction in it, it could not
be true; it were not the subject of a Miracle. But if I prove that there is no
repugnance against the feasibility of it, I am confident I shall not miss of
hearty thanks from those sincere believers who have nothing to shake the
firmness of their Faith, but the suspected impossibility of the Mystery. Thus
then. I shall begin with enquiring what it is that makes a body continue still
the same. All bodies are composed of matter and form. In saying of which I do
not mean that there are two distinct entities, which being put together like
meal and water do concur jointly to compose a body, as they make bread. But
they are notions which are grounded upon a real Foundation in the object from
whence they arise. In the object there is that, which correspondeth adaequatly
to the notions we frame of these two principles. We see that this which is now
Coal, was larely wood, somewhat must be common to both these distinct
substances; else, we must allow the first to have been anihilated by the
change, and that nothing remains of it after the action of fire: And
consequently that the second is absolutely created, without any praeexistent
matter to serve for a Basis to this production. This obliges us to have
recourse to somewhat that is common to both these things. This that is thus
common to both, is of it self neither the one nor the other: But is that, which
may be either the one or the other. So that truly it is not this nor that nor
any determinate thing: But it is a Capacity to be this or that or any thing
whatsoever. And this capacity, is called in the Schools, Matter. Now that
which fills and actuateth this capacity, and makes it be a determinate
thing, is that which they call the Form. So that the Form, is the completing
and perfecting of a body, and makes it to be this or that, and fixes it in
the State of Being: whereas the matter abstracted from the Form, has no
determinate being, no individuation, is in effect and actually nothing; but
has, or rather is a capacity to be any thing. It must not then be on the side
of Matter, that we must look for the individuation and Identification of our
bodies after the Resurrection. All matter is indifferent to every Form. There
is no this or that in matter; otherwise then as the Form engrosseth it to it
self; and thereby makes it this or that. And consequently as long as the Form
remains the same, the thing is the same, and the matter is the same. Were it
not for this, how could any body under Heaven remain the same even but for a
short Moments space? All sublunary things are in a perpetual Flux. The
contrast of the Elements among themselves, within every body; and other bodies
without it, working also perpetually upon it, are causes that out of every body
there are continual emanations, and that there are continual supplies
advenient to it. Every thing is like a River that is in a perpetual course.
Which though we account it the same River to day as it was yesterday; yet in
truth there is not one drop of water in it to day that was in it yesterday. But
because it is filled out of the same common Magazine of (in it self)
undistinguished water which filled it yesterday and a hundred years agone; and
that it is comprised in the same Channel; It is still esteemed to be the same
River. I remember to have seen in the King of Frances Garden at Saint Germain,
very curious Grottos; whereof one was adorned with a cast of water, so
contrived, that as fast as the water fell down into the reserve or Basin which
was at the bottom of the Pipe that cast it up with force a pretty height, the
water was still conveyed up again into that casting Pipe; and so made a kind of
perpetual motion. The Gardener to entertain his Spectators* did use to put
sundry hollow instruments of different shapes and Figures upon the mouth of the
Pipe that did cast up the water, so that the coarcted stream would spread it
self abroad as soon as the instruments afforded it liberty, sometimes like a
Bell, sometimes like a Crown, otherwhiles like a Flower de Luce, and the like,
according to the Form of the Instrument that comprised and governed the course
of the water. There were several Bells and several Crowns, with peculiar
differences belonging to them; and so of the rest of the Machines. If now after
I had seen two or three differently appearing Bells, or Crowns; I should
desire to see again that Bell, or that Crown, which the Gardener showed we
first, and he should put on that Machine which he did put on the first time;
should I not have reason to say it were the same Bell or Crown I saw first? The
water that furnishes matter to all these varieties and games, is still the
same. As long as it is in its great bulk, there is no this or that part of it:
all of it is one Mass, that has no this or that distinguished any where in
it. But if you take never so few drops of it in a particular vessel, that
divides it from the rest; then, there is this glass-full (for example)
distinct from the rest of the common Magazine. And so, whiles the first Engine
or Pipe to represent a Bell, is put on a second time; it denominateth truly
that Bell to be the same that it was at first; and while it is in continual
fl^x of new parts of water succeeding those which run down into the Basin, and
that rise again to continue that figure; it is still the same Bell. Much more
rigorously is it true that my eyes, my ears, my whole body, now after near 60.
years durance in nature, are the same, the very same, they were, when I lay a
weak Embryon in my Mothers womb. The continual flood of transpiration, and the
continual supply of augmentation, do nothing hinder the Identity of this body
of mine, as long as the Form which makes it to be what it is, remains still
the same. If then the Form of Man, which is his soul, remains the same after
its separation from the body* as it was whiles it was co-partner with the body;
what difficulty is there to allow her to have the same body she had in this
World, if she be built up again to a whole Man, out of the general Magazine of
matter which furnished her with a body before; and which has no this or that
belonging to her, otherwise then as some form engrossing her makes her to be
this or that body? There is nothing more clear, nothing more evident, nothing*
more rigorously true.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 9. all this now, would p. 17. l. 4. are thrown out p. 24. last l.
more juice, p. 36. l. 2. rather now spirit, p. 43. l. 7* in every parcel, p.
52. l. 10. new juice distendeth, p. 53. l. 4. grew when it was planted, p. 54.
l. 18. formation, p. 67. l. 9. Saltpeter that, p. 68. l. 18. exalted Region
of, p. 90. l. 13.14. wood. Somewhat.


