A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO PORTERS, Upon Dr. O -- -- -- s's removing from
White Hall into the City.
ROBIN and NICK.
R. HOw now, Nick, art thou there? Art thou to be my Partner in removing the
Doctor's matters and businesses.


N. So it seems, Robin; He sent one of his Lifeguard for me to day, before I
could get out of Bed.


R. Ay, thou may see what it is to lie lazing so long in Bed in a morning;
for if thou had come but never so little sooner, thou might have had thy
mornings drink here on Free cost.


N. Prithee how so?


R. Why, Sir, I went yonder to the next Shop, to fetch this Cord, to cord that
Box of -- God knows what; and when the Master of the Shop asked me who it was
for, and I said for Dr. O --, God a mercy for that, honest Porter, (says he;)
Is it come to that? Here take the Money again; present my Service to the
Doctor, and tell him, He shall never want for a Cord, as long as I have one in
the Shop.


N. And prithee what said the Doctor to that?


R. Why, you Coxcomb, I never told him a word on it; but went directly to Wil's
and he and I drank the Shilling that was to pay for it.


N. That Shopkeeper was some Rogue of a Tory, I Will lay my Life on it; But
prithee what do people say concerning the Doctor's removing?


R. Why faith, to tell thee the truth, so many men so many minds, I think; Some
say this, and some say that; but God knows who is in the right on it. Some say the
Air at White Hall does not agree with him; and the Physicians think it is
because he was never brought up in it.


N. That may very well be; for ever since he has been there (some curious
Obsenvers say) he has been declining; especially since his last Journey to
Oxford, where it is feared he did himself no good.


R. There are some that think he removed that he might be a little nearer
Richard's Coffee-House, or that he might with less time and trouble visit my
Lord S -- y and my Lord H -- d; and if by chance it should come to his own
fortune to be sent to the Tower too, he would be so far on his way.


N. Alas! Alas! Robin, do thou think it will ever come to that? Were it not
a sad thing, think thou, that the Goose which saved the Capitol should be
first fed fat, and then roasted?


R. Ay, why should she not, if she had no more wit but to be caught in the
Corn afterward? But there are others, I must tell you, that attribute it to
his natural inclination and disposition to change; Others, that think it was
because there was more need of Counsel in the City than at Court; and that his
words would have more weight among the Petitioning-Apprentices than among the
Peers of the Kingdom.


N. Why truly, I confess such a man as he is extremely wanted in the City, to
compose their heats, and make a mutual right understanding among I is Majesty's
Loyal-Apprentice-Subjects and the Tory-Party; for they never stood in more need
of a Tutor.


R. There are others yet believe it was none of his own voluntary act; but that
the Higher Powers, considering the continual Complaints against Favorites and
Pensioners, c'en took away his Salary, and showed him the Gate, to please the
people.


N. I like that last key to the story very well, for though (as you know my
Principles) I love Dr. O --; yet I hate he should be a Pensioner.


R. Some tell us, that at White Hall there was such a continual noise and do,
that he had scarce the quiet and leisure to moke a Sermon that had neither
Nonsense or somewhat worse in it; and that was so much taken notice of, that
Care's Lying Rogue (that ill-natured Observator) could not forbear speaking of
it.


N. Now you talk of the Observator; what do you think he will say of this? And
then those Mad Fellow there, what do ye call 'em, Raclitus and Ridens, that lay
their Heads together (folk say) to make Sport, what work shall we have with
them this Week? But I hope the Rogues will Laugh themselves into a ^it of the
Spleen, and die like those men that Sawey Jack the Seaman used to Talk of, that
were Bitten by the Tarantula's; or else the Brethren shall never have one quiet
Hour this nine Heeks to come.


R. But what would thou say now if all these Conjecturs fall short of a real
Truth, and the Doctors Deserts; for I Will assure thee I saw some Brave Gentlemen
Whisper, and Point at him as he went out, but God knows what they said: And who
can tell but they may be mistaken too? For the Doctors whole Life has been a
Riddle, and almost as fatal as the Riddle of Sphingibus, that our Parson was
talking of last Sunday but one; for I Will assure you it has cost some Heads as
well as that did.


N. Peace man, for fear of being Overheard; for without doubt these are not
Matters for Porters handling: All that I am thinking is this, that if the Poor
Doctor should have no better Luck among the Citizens then he has had among the
Courtiers he may even retreat and march off, but God knows whither; except it
be to Geneva, for (the more pity) he has already banished himself out of the
greatest part of Christendom.


R. Come, come, I would advise him to Troop off, and make no noise; for I do
not believe, that though he should stay here as long as the Sun and Moon, he
could ever recover some men's good Opinion.


N. Some men's good Opinion say thou; What needs he care for some men's good
Opinion? As long as he stands fair with the City and the Godly Party, no matter
what all the world besides says.


R. I am not altogether of that persuasion; for both the City and the Godly
Party are but uncertain Friends, (as you know who found them) when they come to
the test; and run away from the miserable, as men do from the Plague, or as
Rats they say do from a falling House.


N. Who do thou think then shall maintain the Doctor? For the man must not
starve.


R. Must not starve, (quoth he,) but he must, except he can get Victuals; and
(to tell you plainly) I cannot see whence it should come. The Papists are very
charitable people, but they have done their parts to him already they say. The
Phanaticks are not certain (as one said in another case) that he is theirs. And
the Church of England utterly disclaims him, for abusing his Mother, and
calling her names. I was somewhere the other day, where two or three Gentlemen
were talking of the Doctor; and one that sat by told them he thought the
Doctor was a good Son of the Church; He a Son of the Church, (says another) he
a Son of a -- Weaver; and then they fell all a laughing.


N. So then, it seems you think there is no other way for him, but to be gone;
But is it not as good for him to stay here and starve, (like Jane Shore) as
cross the Sea (like Woodcocks) only to be knocked of the head. For my part, if I
were in his case, I should even tie the fatal knot my self, and defy my ^ate.


R. Bravely spoken indeed, but that is the way to go directly to the Devil (God
bless us.) Now I am so much a well-wisher to the Doctor, that I had rather see
him live to repent, and then with a great deal of satisfaction, both to himself
and every body else, die like a good Christian, by his hands that preferred
Coleman, and Sainted the Jesuits.


N. Thou art a bitter Fellow, and methinks much sitter for a Porter than a
Judge; and therefore prithee lift there, and let us be gone.


LONDON: Printed for A. Banks, 1681.


