OF BODIES, AND OF Man's Soul TO DISCOVER THE IMMORTALITY OF REASONABLE SOULS.

With two Discourses Of the Powder of Sympathy, AND Of the Vegetation of Plants.

By Sir KENELM DIGBY Knight.

(...)
(...)
(...)
Animae naturam, absque totius natura,
Sufficienter cognosci posse existimas?
Plato in Phoedr. LONDON, Printed by S. G. and B. G. for John Williams, and are
to be sold in Little Britain over against St. Buttolphs-Church, M. DC. LXIX.

TO MY SON KENELM DIGBY.
SON,
THe calamity of this time being such, as has bereft me of the ordinary means
of expressing my affection to you; I have been casting about to find some other
way of doing that, in such sort as you may receive most profit by it. Therein I
soon pitched on this consideration, That Parents owe their Children, not not
only Material Subsistence for their Body, but, much more, Spiritual
Contributions to their better part, their Mind. I am much bound to God, that he
has endued you with one, very capable of the best instructions: and withal, I
therefore esteem my self obliged to do my utmost, for moulding it to its most
advantage. If my aim therein prove successful, you will with more ease digest
those inconveniences and distresses, which already you have begun to be
acquainted with, and that threaten daily worse to you; For, how can a man
suffer his heart to be dejected at the privation of any temporal blessings;
while he considers the inanity of them, and that nothing is worthy his serious
thought, but what may accomapnie him to his Eternal habitation? What needs he
fear the desolations of War, and the worst they can do against him, who have
his Estate in their power; when he may be rich with a much more nobler
treasure, that none but himself can rob him of? without doubt, he that shall
seriously reflect on the excellency of his own nature, and upon the admirable
perfect and happy state he shall most certainly arrive to, if he but wean
himself from those worldly impediments that here clog his souls flight; cannot
choose but look, with a disdainful eye, upon the glittering trifles, that weak
spirits delight themselves with. If e deem it not requisite (as of old, the
fahous Wise man did) to throw away those encumbrances, to the end he may the
more freely attend to divine contemplation, (for worldy goods, duly, used, may
be very advantageous both to ones self and to others); yet, at least, he will
not repine at Fortunes recalling what she formerly had but lent him, and
permitted him the use of.

That, then, you may be armed against the worst may arrive to you, in this
unhappy state of affairs, in our distressed Country; I send you those
considerations of the Nature and Immortality of Humane Souls, which, of late,
have been my chief entertainment. The progress you have already made in the
study of Philosophy has (I am persuaded) enabled you to benefit your self,
with what I have written on this subject: on the serious examining of which, if
you will employ but half the time, that I have done in spining out my thoughts,
and weaving them into the piece you see; I doubt not but you will thereby
receive so much contentment, as well as profit, that you will not repent you of
your pains. Besides that, Intellectual entertainments are the purest, and the
noblest, and the most proportionate to Man's Nature, and prove the most
delightful to him, when they are duly relished. You will presently agree, that
the matter I handle is the most important and weighty, within the whole Extent
of humane nature, for a worthy person to employ himself about. The advantage
that Man has over unreasonable creatures is, that what he does is by election:
and he is himself master of all his actions; whereas they are impelled by
outward causes, to all they do. It is properly said of them, that aguntur magis
quam agunt: He only is free; and in all varieties of circumstances, has the
power to choose one and reject another. Now, to have this election wisely made,
and becoming a Man, requires that it be steered by knowledge. To do any thing
well, a man must first know thoroughly all that concerns the action he is about;
and chiefly the end of it. And certainly, of all his actions, the government of
himself is the most important, and nearliest concerning him. The end of that
government, and of all a Man's aims is by all men agreed to be Beatitude; that
is, his being completely well, and in a condition of enjoying the most
happienss that this nature is capable of. For arrival whereto, it is impossible
to pitch upon the direct and sure means, unless it be first determined, whether
the Beatitude we speak of belong to this life, or be not to be attaind'd til we
come to the next: or rather, whether or no there be another life, besides this,
to be happy in. For, if there remains an Eternity to us, after the short
revolution of time we so swiftly run over here on Earth; it is clear, that all
the happiness which can be imagined in this fleeting state is not valuable, in
respect of the future; nor any thing we do here is considerable, otherwise than
as it conduces to the making our condition, then better or worse. Now, the way
to be sure of this is either Infallible Authority, or Evident Science. They
that rely on the first depend of others: and they only know, are absolutely
complete of themselves; and have within themselves the Principles whereby to
govern their Actions, in what is of highest consequence to them. It Is true,
every body is not of a strain of Wit and Judgment to be of this Rank: and who
are not, must be contented to believe others, and be satisfied with what is
taught them. But he, that will be of a superior Orb must make this his study.
This is the adequate entertainment of a worthy person.

To conceive how high and excellent this Science of governing a Man in order to
Beatitude in the next world is, we may consider how, among all arts that
concern this life, the art of a Statesman, to whom belongs to see a
Commonwealth well governed, is by much the noblest: All other arts are but
ministerial to him. He makes use of the Soldier, of the Lawyer, of the Orator,
of the Antiquary, of the Physician, as best conduces to the end he aims at, of
making the Common wealth he governs happy and flourishing. All other meaner
Trades serve him in a yet lower degree. Yet after all, he must take his
measures from the Metaphysician or Divine. For, since the government of a
Society of men aims at giving them the best being they are capable of; and,
since Man's well-being here in this life is but instrumentally good, as being
the means for him to be well in the next life; it is evident, the States-man's
art is but instrumental to That, which shows how every particular man must
govern his life, to be partaker of a happy Eternity: And consequently, if a
Statesman has not this Science, he must be subject to a braver man, than
himself, whose province is to direct all his actions to This end. We are told,
how reverently great Caesar listened to the discourses of learned Achoreus, how
observant Alexander was of his Master Aristotle, how secure Nero trod whiles
Seneca guided his steps, how humble Constantine was to St. Sylvester's
precepts, how Charlemain governed himself in his most important actions by
Alcuine's advice: In a word, all the Greatmen of Antiquity, as well among the
Romans as among the Grecians, had their Philosophers and Divines, in their
kind, belonging to them; from whom they might derive rules of living and doing
as they ought upon all occasions, if themselves were not Masters in that
superior and all-directing Science. He that sees not by his own light, must,
in this dangerous Ocean, steer by the Lantern which another hangs out to him.
If the person he relies on, either withholds the light from him, or shows him a
false one, he is presently in the dark, and cannot fail of losing his way. How
great an authority had the Augurs and Priests among the rude Romans, to forbid
any Public act or break any Assembly, upon pretense of Religious duties; when
they liked not the business in agitation? The like may interessed Divines among
Christians do, if the Ministers of State have not some insight into Divinity.
He leads a vexatious life, who, in his noblest actions, is so gored with
scruples that he dares not make a step, without the authority of another to
warrant him.

Yet, I do not conclude that he, whom I design by the character of a Brave Man,
should be a professed or complete Metaphysician or Divine, and consummate in
every curious circumstance that belongs to this Science; it suffices him to
know it in bulk, and have so much Divinity, as, in common occurrents, to be
able to govern himself, and, in special ones, to understand what and why his
Divine persuades him to any thing; so that even then, though not without help,
yet he governs himself, and is not blindly governed by another. He that aims at
being a perfect Hors-man, is bound to know in general (besides the art of
Riding) the nature and temper of Horses; and to understand the different
qualities of Bits, Saddles, and other utensils of a Hors-man: But, the utmost
exactness in these particulars belongs to Farriers, Sadlers, Smiths, and other
Tradesmen; of all which the judicious Rider knows how to make due use, when he
has occasion, for his principal end, which is, orderly governing his Horse. In
like manner, he, whom we design by a complete Brave Man, must know solidity,
the main End he is in the World for: and withal, how to serve himself, when he
pleases and needs, of the Divine's high Contemplations, of the Metaphysician's
subtle Speculations, of the Natural-Philosopher's minute Observations, of the
Mathematician's nice Demonstrations, and whatever else of particular
Professions may conduce to his End; though without making any of them his
professed business.

To lay grounds for such knowledge as this is the scope of my ensuing Discourse.
My first aim was to beget it in my self: to which end the digesting my thoughts
into Order, and the setting them down in Writing, was necessary; for, without
such strict examination, as the pening them affords one means to make, they
would hardly have avoided being disjointed and roving ones. Now, that I have
done that, my next aim is, that You, to whom I wish as much good as to my self,
may reap as much benefit by the Studying it, as I have done by the Composing it.

My end then being a private one, (as looking no further, than You, my Son, and
my Self) I have not endeavored to express my Conceptions, either in the Phrase
or Language of the Schools. It will serve our turn to comprehend the Substance,
without confining our selves to any scrupulous exactness in what concerns only
form And, the same consideration has made me pass slightly over many
particulars, in my First Treatise, of the Nature of Bodies; on which learned
and witty men might spin out large Volumns. For, in that part I aim no further,
than to show what may be effected by Corporeal Agents. There, Possibility servs
my turn, as well as the determinate indivisible point of Truth. I am obliged to
that, only in my main great Theme, the Soul, in regard of which, the numerous
crooked narrow cranies, and the restrained flexuous rivolets of Corporeal
things, are all contemptible; further than the knowledge of them serves to the
knowledge of the Soul: And a Gallant man, whose thoughts fly at the highest
Game, requires no further insight into them, than to satisfy himself by
whatway they may be performed; deeming it far too mean for him, to dwell upon
the subtilest of their mysteries for Science sake,

Besides this liberty that the scope I aim at allows me, of passing very
cursorily over sundry particulars; I find now, at my reading all over together
what I have written (to deliver it to the Printer) that, even in that which I
ought to have done to comply with my own design and expectation, I am fallen
very short: so that, if I had not unwarily too far engaged my self for the
present publishing it, truly, I should have kept it by me, till I had once
again gone over it. I find the whole piece very confusedly done; the style
unequal and unpolished; many particulars (when they are not absolutely
necessary to my main drift) too slightly touched, and far from being driven
home: and, in a word, all of it seems to be rather but a loose model and
roughcast of what I design to do, than a complete Work thoroughly finished.

But, since, by my overforward promising of this piece to several Friends that
have been very earnest for it, I have now brought my self to that pass, that it
would ill become me to delay any longer the publishing of something on this
Subject; and that, obligations, of another nature, permit me not at present to
dwell any longer upon This, (besides that so lazy a brain, as mine is, grows
soon weary when it has so entangled a skean, as this to unwind): I now send it
you as it is; but, with a promise that, at my first leisure, I will take a
strict survey of it, and then, in another Edition, will polish, correct and add
what shall appear needful to me. If any man shall take the Book out of my hand,
invited by the Title and Subject to look into it; I pray you in my behalf
represent to him, how distant my profession is, and how contrary my Education
has been to writing of Books. In every Art, the plainest that is, there is an
Apprentiship necessary, before it can be expected one should work it in a
fashionable piece. The first attempts are always very imperfect aimings; and
scarce discernable what they are meant for, unless the Master guide his
Scholars hand. Much more will the same happen in so difficult and spiny an
affair, as the writing on such a nice and copious Subject as this is, to one
who is so wholly ignorant of the Laws of Method as I am.

This free and ingenuous acknowledgment on my side will, I hope, prevail with
all ingenuous person, who shall read what I have written, to advertise me
fairly (if they judge it worth their while) of what they dislike in it: to the
end that, in another more accurate Edition, I may give them better
satisfaction. For, besides what failings may be in the Matter, I cannot doubt,
but even in the Expressions of it, there must often be great obscurity and
shortness; which I, who have my thoughts filled with the things themselves, am
not aware of: So that, what peradventure may seem very full to me, because
every imperfect touch brings into my mind the entire notion and whole chain of
circumstances belonging to that thing I have so often beaten upon; may appear
very crude and maimed to a Stranger, that cannot guess what I should be at
otherwise, than as my direct words lead him.

One thing more I shall wish you to desire of them who happily may peruse these
two Treatises; as well for their own sakes, as for mine: And that is, that they
will not pass their censure upon any particular piece, or broken parcel of
either of them, taken by itself. Let them draw the entire Third through their
fingers, and examine the consequentness of the Whole Body of the doctrine I
deliver; and let them compare it, by a like survey, with what is ordinarily
taught in the Schools: and, if they find in theirs, many bracks and short ends,
which cannot be spun into an even piece, and in mine, a fair coherence
througout; I shall promise my self a favorable doom from them, and that they
will have an acquiescence in themselves to what I have here presented them.
Whereas, if they but ravel it over looslie, and pitch upon dispuiting against
particular Conclusions, that, at the first encounter of them single, may seem
harsh to them; which is the ordinary course of Flashy Wits, who cannot fadome
the whole extent of a large discourse: it is impossible, but that they should be
very much unsatisfied of me; and go away with a persuasion, that some such
Truths, as, upon the whole matter, are most evident (one stone in the Arch
supporting another, and the whole), are mere Chymeras and wild Paradoxes.

But (Son) it is time my Book should speak it self, rather than I speak any
longer of it here. Read it carefully over, and let me see, by the effects of
your Governing your self, that you make such right use of it, as I may be
comforted in having chosen you to bequeath it to. God in Heaven bless you.
Paris the last of August, 1644.

Your loving Father, KENELM DIGBY.

TABLE Of the First TREATISE CONCERNING BODIES.
PREFACE.

CHAP. I. A Preamble to the whole Discourse; Concerning Notions in general.
1. Quantity is the first, and most obvious affection of a body. 2. Words do
not express things as they are in themselves, but only as they are painted in
the minds of men. 3. The first error that may arise from hence; which is a
multiplying of things, where no such multiplication is really found. 4. A
second error: the conceiving many distinct things as really one thing. 5.
Great care to be taken to avoid the errors which may arise from our mannner of
understanding things. 6. Two sorts of words to express our notions, the one
common to all men, the other proper to scholars. 7. Great errors arise by
wresting words from their common meaning to express a more particular or
studied notion.
CHAP. II. Of Quantity
1. We must know the vulgar and common notion of Quantity, that we may
understand the nature of it. 2. Extension or divisibility is the common notion
of Quantity. 3. Parts of Quantity a^e not actually in their whole. 4. If parts
were actually in their whole, Quantity would be composed of indivisibles. 5.
Qantity cannot be composed of indivisibles. 6. An objection to prove that parts
are actually in Quantity; with a declaration of the mistake from whence it
proceeds. 7. The solution of the former objection: and that sense cannot
discern whether one part be distinguished from another, or no. 8. An
enumeration of the several specieses of Quantity, which confirms that the
essence of it is divisibility.
CHAP. III. Of Rarity and Density.
1. What is meant by Rarity and Density. 2. It is evedent that some bodies are
rare and others Dense; though obscure, how they are such. 3. A brief
enumeration of the several properties belonging to rare and dense bodies. 4.
The Opinion of those Philosophers declared, who put rarity to consist in an
actual division of a body into little parts. 5. The former opinion rejected,
and the ground of their error discovered. 6. The opinion of those Philosophers
related, who put rarity to consist in the mixtion of vacuity among bodies. 7.
The opinion of vacuities refuted. 8. Rarity and Density consist in the several
proportions which Quantity has to its Substance. 9. All must admit in Physical
bodies, a Metaphysical composition.
CHAP. IV. Of the four First Qualities: and of the four Elements:
1. The notions of Density and rarity have a latitude capable of infinite
variety. 2. How moistness and dryness are begotten in dense bodies. 3. How
moistness and dryness are begotten in rare body. 4. Heat is a property of rare
bodies, and cold of dense ones. 5. Of the two dense bodies, the less dense is
more cold: but of the two rare ones, the less rare, is less hot. 6. The extreme
dense body is more dry, than the extreme rare one. 7. There are but four simple
bodies: and these are rightly named Elements. 8. The Author does not determine
whether every Element does comprehend under its name one only lowest species,
or many: nor whether any of them be found pure.
CHAP. V. Of the operations of the Elements in general. And of their Activities
compared with one another.
1. The first operation of the Elements is division, out of which results local
motion. 2. What place is, both notionally and really. 3. Local motion is that
division, whereby a body changes its place. 4. The nature of quantity of it self
is sufficient to unite a body to its place. 5. All operations amongst bodies
are either local motions, or such as follow out of local motion. 6. Earth
compared to Water in activity. 7. The manner whereby fire gets into fuel,
proves that it exceeds earth in activity. 8. The same is proved by the manner,
whereby fire comes out of fuel and works upon other bodies.
CHAP. VI. Of Light, what it is.
1. In what sense the Author rejects qualities. 2. In what sense the Author
admits of qualities. 3. Five arguments proposed to prove that light is not a
body. 4. The two first reasons to prove Light a body, are, the resemblance it
has with fire; and because if it were a quality, it would always produce an
equal to it self. 5. The third reason, because if we imagine to our selves the
substance of fire to be rarefied, it will have the same appearances which Light
has. 6. The fourth reason, from the manner of the generation and corruption of
light, which agrees with fire. 7. The fifth reason, because such properties
belong to light as agree only to bodies.
CHAP. VII. Two Objections answered a against light being fire; a more ample
proof of its being such.
1. That all light is hot, and apt to heat. 2. The reason why our bodies for
the most part do not feel the heat of pure light. 3. The experience of burning
glasses, and of soultry gloomy weather, prove light to be fire. 4. Philosophers
ought not to judge of things, by the rules of vulgar people. 5. The different
names of light and fire proceed from different Notions of the same Substance.
6. The reason why many times fire and heat are deprived of light. 7. What
becomes of the body of light when it dies. 8. An experiment of some, who
pretend that light may be precipitated into powder. 9. The Authors opinion
concerning Lamps, pretended to have leen found in Tombs, with inconsumptible
lights.
CHAP. VIII. An answer to three other Objections formerly proposed, against
Light being a Substance.
1. Light is not really in every part of the room it enlightneth, nor fills
entirely any sensible part of it, though it seem to us to do so. 2. The least
sensible point of a diaphanous body has room sufficient to contain both air
and light, together with a multitude of beams issuing from several lights,
without penetrating one another. 3. That light does not enlighten any room in
an instant, and that the great celerity of its motion makes it imperceptible to
our senses. 4. The reason why the motion of light is not discerned coming
toward us, and that there is some real tardity in it. 5. The Planets are not
certainly ever in that place where they appear to be. 6. The reason why light,
being a body, does not by its motion shatter other bodies into pieces. 7. The
reason why the body of light is never perceived to be fan'd by the wind. 8. The
Reasons for, and against lights being a body compared together. 9. A summary
repetition of the reasons which prove that light is fire.
CHAP. IX. Of Local Motion in common.
1. No local motion can be perfored without succession. 2. Time is the common
measure of all succession. 3. What velocity is, and that it cannot be infinite.
4. No force so little, but is able to move the greatest weight im^nable. 5. The
chief principle of Mechannicks, deduced out of the former discourse. 6. No
movable can pass from rest to any determinate degree of velocity, or from a
lesser degree to a greater, without passing through all the intermediate degres
which are below the obtained degree. 7. The conditions which help to motion, in
the movable, are three; in the medium, one. 8. No body has any intrinsecal
virtue to move it self toward any determinate part of the Universe. 9. The
increase of motion is always made in the proportion of the odd numbers. 20. No
motion can increase for ever, or without coming to a period. 11. Certain
Problems resolved, concerning the proportion of some moving Agents compared to
their effects. 12. When a movable comes to rest, the motion decreases according
to the Rules of increase.
CHAP. X. Of Gravity and Levity; and of Local Motion commonly termed Natural.
1. Those motions are called natural which have constant causes, and those
violent which are contrary to them. 2. The first and most general opeperation
of the Sun is the making and raising of atoms. 3. The light rebounding from
the earth with atoms causes two streams in the air, the one ascending, the
other descending; and both of them in a perpendicular line. 4. A dense body
placed in the air between the ascending and descending stream, must needs
descend. 5. A more particular explication of all the former doctrine touching
gravity. 6. Gravity and Levity do not signify an intrinsecal inclination to
such a motion in the bodies themselves which are termed heavy and light. 7. The
more dense a body is, the more swiftly it descends. 8. The velocity of bodies
descending does not increase in proportion to the difference that may be
between their several densities. 9. More or less gravity produces a swifter or
a slower descending of a heavy body. Aristotle's argument to disprove motion in
vacuo is made good. 10. The reason why, at the inferior quarter of a circle, a
body descends faster by the Arch of that quarter, than by the cord of it.
CHAP. XI. An answer to objections against the causes of Natural Motion* avowed
in the former Chapter; and a refutation of the contrary opinion.
1. The first objection answered; why a hollow body descends slower than a
solid one. 2. The second objection answered and the reason shown, why atoms do
continually overtake the descending dense body. 3. A curious question left
undecided. 4. The fourth objection answered; why the descent of the same heavy
bodies is equal in so great inequality of the atoms which cause it. 5. The
reason why the shelter of a thick body does not hinder the descent of that
which is under it. 6. The reason why some bodies sink, others swim. 7. The
fifth objection answered; concerning the descending of heavy bodies in streams.
8. The sixth objection answered; and that all heavy elements do weigh in their
own spheres. 9. The seventh objection answered; and the reason why we do not
feel the course of the air and atoms that beat continually upon us. 10. How,
in the same body, gravity may be greater than density, and density than
gravity; though they be the same thing. 11. The opinion of gravities being an
intrinsecal inclination of a body to the centea, refuted by reason. 12. The
same opinion refutedly several experiences.
CHAP. XII. Of Violent Motion.
1. The State of the question touching the cause of violent motion. 2. That the
medium is the only cause which continues violent motion. 3. A further
explication of the former doctrine. 4. That the air has strength enough to
continue violent motion in a moveable. 5. An answer to the first objection;
that air is not apt to conserve motion: and how violent motion comes to cease.
6. An answer to the second objection; that the air has no power over heavy
bodies. 7. An answer to the third objection, that an arrow should fly faster
broad ways than long ways.
CHAP. XIII. Of three sorts of Violent motion, Reflection, Undulation, and
Refraction.
1. That reflection is a kind of violent motion. 2. Reflection is made at equal
angles. 3. The causes and properties of undulation. 4. Refraction at the
entrance into the reflectent body is toward the perpendicular, at the going
out, is from it; when the second superficies is parallel to the first. 5. A
refutation of Monsieur des Carts his explication of refraction. 6. An answer
to the arguments brought in favor of Monsieur des Carts his opinion. 7. The
true cause of refraction of light, both at its entrance, and at its going out
from the refleing body. 8. A general rule to know the nature of reflection and
refractions, in all sorts of surface. 9. A body, of greater parts and greater
pores, makes a greater refraction, than one of lesser parts and lesser pores.
10. A confirmation of the former doctrine, out of the nature of bodies that
refract light.
CHAP. XIV. Of the composition, qualities, and Generation of mixed Bodies.
1. The connection of this chapter with the rest, and the Authors intent in it.
2. That there is a least sise of bodies; and that this least sise is found in
fire. 3. The first conjunction of parts is in bodies of least sise; and it is
made by the force of Quantity. 4. The second sort of conjunction, is
compactedness in simple Elements, and it proceeds from density. 5. The third
conjunction is of parts of different Elements, and it proceeds from quantity
and density together. 6. The reason why liquid bodies do easily join together,
and dry ones difficultly. 7. That no two hard bodies can touch one another
immediately. 8. How mixed bodies are framed in general. 9. The cause of the
several degrees of solidity in mixed bodies. 10. The Rule whereto are reduced
all the several combinations of Elements, in compounding of mixed bodies. 11.
Earth and water are the basis of all permanent mixed bodies. 12. What kind of
bodies those are, where water is the basis, and earth the predominant Element
over the other two. 13. Of those bodies where, water being the basis, air is
the predominant Element. 14. What kind of bodies result, where water is the
basis, and fire the predominant Element. 15. Of those bodies where water is in
excess; it alone being both the basis and the predominant Element. 16. Of those
bodies; where earth alone is the basis, and also the predominant in excess over
the other three Elements. 17. Of those bodies where earth is the basis, and
water is the predominant element over the other two. 18. Of those bodies where,
earth being the basis, air is the predominant. 19. Of those bodies where, earth
being the basis, fire is the predominant. 20. All the second qualities of mixed
bodies arise from several combinations of the first qualities; and are at last
resolved into several degrees of rarity and density. 21. That in the Planets
and Stars there is a like variety of mixed bodies caused by light, as here on
earth. 22. In what manner the Elements work on one another, in the composition
of mixed bodies: and, in particular, fire, which is the most active. 23. A
particular declaration touching the generation of Metals.
CHAP. XV. Of the Dissolution of Mixed Bodies.
1. Why some bodies are brittle and others tough, or apt to withstand outward
violence, the first instrument to dissolve mixed bodies. 2. How outward
violence does work on the most compacted bodies. 3. The several effects of
fire, the second and chiefest instrument to dissolve all compounded bodies. 4.
The reason why some bodies are not dissolved by fire. 5. The reason why fire
melts gold, but cannot consume it. 6. Why Lead is easily consumed, and
calcinted by fire. 7. Why, and how some bodies are divided by fire into
Spirits, Waters, Oils, Salts, and Earth. And what those parts are. 8. How
water, the third instrument to dissolve bodies, dissolvs calx into salt, and so
into terra damnata. 9. How water, mingled with salt, becomes a most powerful
Agent to dissolve other bodies. 10. How putrefaction is caused.
CHAP. XVI. An Explication of certain Maxims touching the operations and
qualies of bodies: and whether the Elements be found pure in any part of the
world.
1. What is the Sphere of activity in corporeal agents. 2. The reason why no
body can work in distance. 3. An objection answered, against the manner of
explicating the former axiom. 4. Of re-action: and first, in pure local
motion, that each Agent must suffer in acting, and act in suffering. 5. The
former Doctrine applied to other local motions designed by particular names.
And that Suisseths argument is of no force against this way of doctrine 6. Why
some notions do admit of intension and remission; and others not. 7. That, in
every part of our habitable world, all the four elements are found pure in
small atoms, but not in any great bulk.
CHAP. XVII. Of Rarefaction and Condensation, the two first motions of
Particular bodies.
1. The Authors intent in this and the following chapters. 2. That bodies may
be rarefied, both by outward and inward heart; and how this is performed. 3. Of
the great effects of Rarefaction. 4. The first manner of condensation by heat.
5. The second manner of condensation by cold. 6. That Ice is not water
rarefied, but condensed. 7. How Wind, Snow, and Hail are made; and wind by rain
allaid. 8. How parts, of the same or diverse bodies, are joined more strongly
together by condensation. 9. Vacuities cannot be the reason, why water,
impregnated to the full with one kind of salt, will notwithstanding receive
more of another. 10. The true reason of the former effect. 11. The reason why
bodies of the same nature do join more easily together than others.
CHAP. XVIII. Of another motion belonging to Particular bodies, called
Attraction; and of certain operations termed Magical.
1. What Attraction is, and from whence it proceeds. 2. The true sense of the
Maxim, that Nature abhors from vacuitys. 3. The true reason of attraction. 4.
Water may be brought by the force of attraction to what height soever. 5. The
doctrine touching the attraction of water in Siphons. 6. That the Siphon does
not prove water to weigh in its own orb. 7. Concerning attraction caused by
fire. 8. Concerning attraction made by virture of hot bodies, amulets, etc 9.
The natural reason given for diverse operations, esteemed by some to be magical.
CHAP. XIX. Of three other motions belonging to particular bodies, Filtration,
Restitution, and Electrical attraction.
1. What is Filtration, and how it is effected. 2. What causes the water in
Filtration to ascend. 3. Why the filter will not drop, unless the label hang
lower than the water. 4. Of the motion of Restitution; and why some bodies
stand bent, others not. 5. Why some bodies return only in part to their natural
figure; others entirely. 6. Concerning the nature of those bodies which shrink
aand stretch. 7. How great and wonderful effects proceed from small, plain, and
simple principles. 8. Concerning Electrical attrat^on and the causes of it. 9.
Cabeus his opinion refuted, concerning the cause of Electrical motions.
CHAP. XX. Of the Loadstones generation; and its particulas motions.
1. The extreme heat of the Sun under the Zodiac, draws a stream of air from
each Pole, into the torrid Zone. 2. The atoms of these two streams coming
together, are apt to incorporate with one another. 3. By the meeting and
mingling together of these streams at the Equator, diverse Rivolets of Atoms of
each Pole are continuated from one Pole to the other. 4. Of these Atoms,
incorporated with some fit matter in the bowels of the earth, is made a stone.
5. This stone works by emanatitions, joined with agreeing streams that meet
them in the air; and, in fine, it is a Loadstone. 6. A Method for making
experiences upon any subject. 7. The Loadstones generation, by Atoms flowing
from both Poles, is confirmed by experiments observed in the stone it self. 8.
Experiments to prove that the Loadstone works, by emanations meeting with
agreeing streams.
CHAP. XXI. Positions drawn out of the former doctrine, and confirmed by
experimental proofs.
1. The operations of the Loadstone are wrought by bodies, and not by
qualities. 2. Objections against the former position answered. 3. The Loadstone
is imbued with his virtue from another body. 4. The virtue of the loadstone is
a double, and not one simple, virtue. 5. The virtue of the Loadstone works more
strongly in the Poles of it, than in any other part. 6. The loadstone sends
forth its emanations spherically. Which are of two kinds; and each kind is
strongest in that hemisphere, through whose polary parts they issue out. 7.
Putting two loadstones within the sphere of one another, every part of one
loadstone does not agree with every part of the other loadstone. 8. Concerning
the declination, and other respects of a needle, toward the loadstone it
touches. 9. The virtue of the loadstone goes from end to end in lines almost
parallel to the axis. 10. The virtue of a loadstone is not perfectly spherical,
though the stone be such. 11. The intention of nature, in all the operations of
the loadstone, is to make an union betwixt the attractive and the attracted
bodies. 12. The main Globe of the earth not a loadstone. 13. The loadstone is
generated, in all parts or climates of the earth. 14. The conformity betwixt
the two motions of magnetic things, and of heavy things.
CHAP. XXII. A solution of certain Problems concerning the Loadstone; and a
short sum of the whole doctrine touching it.
1. Which is the North, and which the South Pole of a loadstone. 2. Whether any
bodies besides magnetic ones be attractive. 3. Whether an iron placed
perpendicularly toward the earth, does get a magnetical virtue of pointing,
toward the North, or toward the South, in that end that lies downwards. 4.
Why loadstones affect iron better than one another. 5. Gilbert's reason
refuted, touching a capped loadstone that takes up more iron, than one not
capped and an iron impregnated, that in some case draws more strongly than the
stone it self. 6. Galileus his opinion touching the former effects refuted. 7.
The Authors solution to the former questions. 8. The reason why, in the former
case, a lesser Load stone draws the interjacent iron from the greater. 9. Why
the variation of a touched needle from the North, is greater the nearer you go
to the Pole. 10. Whether, in the same part of the world, a touched needle may
at one time vary more from the North, and at another time less. 11. The whole
doctrine of the load stone summed up in short.
CHAP. XXIII. A description of two sorts of Living creatures; Plants and
Animals: and how they are framed in common to perform vital motion.
1. The connection of the following Chapters with the precedent. 2. Concerning
several compositions of mixed bodies. 3. Two sorts of living creatures. 4. An
engine to express the first sort of living creatures. 5. An other engine by which
may be expressed the second sort of living creatures. 6. The two former engin^,
and some other comp^risons upplyed express (...) of living creatures. 7. How
plants are framed. 8. How Sensitive creatures are formed.
CHAP. XXIV. A more particular survey of the generation of Animals; in which is
discovered what part of the animal is first generated.
1. The opinion that the seed contains formally every part of the parent. 2.
The former opinion rejected. 3. The Authors opinion of this question. 4. Their
opinion refuted, who hold that every thing contains formally all things. 5. The
Authors opinion concerning the generation of Animals declared and confirmed.
6. That one substance is changed into another. 7. Concerning the ^atching of
Chickens, and the generation of other animals. 8. From whence it ^ppens that
the defi^ (...) ^scences of the (...) seen in their children. 9. The difference
between the Authors opinion and the former. 10. That the heart is i^ued with
the general^ sp^ific virtues of the whole body (...) confirmed the doctrine of
the two former paragraphs. 11. That the heart is the first part generated in a
living creature.
CHAP. XXV. How a Plant or Animal comes to that Figure it has.
1. That the Figure of an Animal is produced by ordinary second causes, as well
as any other corporeal effect. 2. That the several figures of bodies proceed
from a defect in one of the three dimensions, caused by the concurrence of
accidental causes. 3. The former doctrine is confirmed by several instances. 4.
The same doctrine applied to Plants. 5. The same doctrine declared in leafs of
trees. 6. The same applied to the bodies of Animals. 7. In what sense the
Author admits of Vis formatrix.
CHAP. XXVI. How motion begins in Living creatures. And of the Motion of the
Heart, Circulation of the Blood, Nutrition, Augmentation, and corruption or
death.
1. From whence proceeds the primary motion and growth in Plants. 2. Monsieur
des Carts his opinion touching the motion of the heart. 3. The former opinion
rejected. 4. The Authors opinion concerning the motion of the heart. 5. The
motion of the heart depends originally of its fibers irrigated by blood. 6. An
objection answered against the former doctrine. 7. The circulation of the blood
and other effects that follow the motion of the heart. 8. Of Nutrition, 9. Of
Augmentation. 10. Of death and sickness.
CHAP. XXVII. Of the motions of Sense and of the Sensible Qualities in gegeral;
and in particular of those which belong to Touch, Taste, and Smelling.
1. The connection of the subsequent Chapters with the precedent. 2. Of the
senses and sensible qualities in general: And of the end for which they serve.
3. Of the sense of touching: and that both it and its qualities are bodies. 4.
Of the taste and its qualities; that they are bodies. 5. That the smell and its
qualities are real bodies. 6. Of the conformity betwixt the two senses of
smelling and tasting. 7. The reason why the sense of smelling is not so perfect
in man as in beasts: with a wonderful history of a man who could wind sent as
well as any beast.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of the sense of Hearing, and of the sensible quality, Sound.
1. Of the sense of hearing: and that sound is purely motion. 2. Of diverse arts
belonging to the sense of hearing: all which confirm that sound is nothing but
motion. 3. The same is confirmed by the effects caused by great noises. 4. That
solid bodies may convey the motion of the air, or sound, to the Organe of
hearing. 5. Where the motion is interrupted, there is no sound. 6. That not
only the motion of the air, but all other motions coming to our ears, make
sound. 7. How one sense may supply the want of another. 8. Of one who could
discern sounds of words with his eyes. 9. Diverse reasons to prove sound to be
nothing else but a motion of some real body.
CHAP, XXIX. Of Sight and Colors.
1. That colors are nothing but light mingled with darkness; or the
disposition of a bodies superficies apt to reflect light so mingled. 2.
Concerning the disposition of those bodies which produce white or black
colors. 3. The former doctrine confirmed by Aristotle's authority, reason, and
experience. 4. How the diversity of colors do follow out of various degrees of
rarity and density. 5. Why some bodies are diaphanous, others opacous. 6. The
former doctrine of colors confirmed by the generation of white and black in
bodies.
CHAP. XXX. Of luminous or apparent Colors.
1. Apparitions of colors through a prism or trianglar glass are of two sorts.
2. The several parts of the object make several angles at their entrance into
the prism. 3. The reason why sometimes the same object appears through the
prism in two places; and in one place more lively, in the other place more dim.
4. The reason of the various (...) lou^ that appear in looking th^rough a
prism. 5. The reason why the prism, in one position, may make the colors
appear quite contrary to what they did, when it was in another position. 6. The
reason of the various colors in general, by pure light passing through a
prism. 7. Upon what side every color appears that is made by pure light
passing through a prism.
CHAP. XXXI. The causes of certain appearances in luminous Colors; with a
conclusion of the discourse touching the Senses and the Sensible Qualities.
1. The reason of each several color in particular, caused by light passing
through a prism. 2. A difficult problem resolved touching the Prism. 3. Of the
rainbow, and how, by the color of any body, we may know the composition of the
body it self. 4. That all the sensible qualities are real bodies, resulting out
of several mixtures of rarity and density. 5. Why the senses are only five in
number: with a conclusion of all the former doctrine concerning them.
CHAP. XXXII. Of Sensation, or the motion whereby sense is properly exercised.
1. Monsieur des Carts his (...) 2. The Authors opinion touching sensation.
3. Reasons to persuade the Authors opinion. 4. That vital spirits are the
immediate instruments of sensation by conveying sensible qualities to the
brain. 5. How sound is conveyed to the brain by vital spirits. 6. How colors
are conveyed to the brain by vital spirits. 7. Reasons against Monsieur des
Carts his opinion. 8. That the symptoms of the palsy do no way confirm
Monsieur des Carts his opinion. 9. That Monsieur des Carts his opinion cannot
give a good account, how things are conserved in the memory.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of Memosy.
1. How things are conserved in the memory. 2. How things conserved in the
memory are brought back into the fantasy. 3. A confirmation of the former
doctrine. 4. How things renewed in the fantasy return, with the same
circumstances that they had at first. 5. How the memory of things past is lost,
or confounded; and ^en it is repaired again.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of Voluntary motion, Natural faculties, and Passions.
1. Of what matter the brain is composed. 2. What is voluntary motion. 3. What
those powers are which are called natural faculties. 4. How the attractive and
secretive faculties work. 5. Concerning the concoctive faculty. 6. Concerning
the retentive and expulsive faculties. 7. Concerning expulsion made by Physic.
8. How the brain is moved to work voluntary motion. 9. Why pleasing objects do
dilate the spirits, and displeasing ones contract them. 10. Concerning the five
senses, for what use and end they are.
CHAP. XXXV. Of the material instrument of Knowledge and Passion; of the
several effects of passion; of pain and pleasure; and how the vital spirits are
sent from the brain into the intended parts of the body, without mistaking
their way.
1. That Septum Lucidum is the seat of the fancy: 2. What causes us to
remember, not only the object it self, but also that we have thought of it
before. 3. How the motions of the fantasy are derived to the heart. 4. Of
pain and pleasure. 5. Of Passion. 6. Of several pulses caused by passions. 7.
Of several other effects caused naturally in the body by passions. 8. Of the
Diaphragma. 9. Concerning pain and pleasure caused by the memory of things
past. 10. How so small bodies as atoms are, can cause so great motions in the
heart. 11. How the vital spirits sent from the brain do run to the intended
part of the body without mistake. 12. How men are blinded by passion.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of some actions of Beasts that seem to be formal acts of reason;
as doubting, resolving, inventing.
1. The order and connection of the subsequent Chapters. 2. From whence proceeds
the doubting of beasts. 3. Concerning the invention of Foxes and other beasts.
4. Of Foxes that catch Hens by lying under their roost, and by gazing upon
them. 5. From whence proceeds the foxes intention to rid himself of fleas. 6.
An explication of two other inventions of Foxes. 7. Concerning Montagu's
argument, to prove that Dogs make Syllogismes. 8. A declaration how some tricks
are performedly Foxes, which which seem to argue discourse. 9. Of the
Jaccatray's invention in calling Beasts to himself. 10. Of the Jaccals design
in serving the Lion. 11. Of several inventions of fishes. 12. A discovery of
diverse thing done by Hares, which seem to argue discourse. 13. Of a Fox
reported to have weighed a Goose, before he would venture with it over a River;
and of Fabulous stories in common. 14. Of the several cryings, and tones of
beasts: with a refutation of those Authors who maintain them to have complete
languages.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Docility of some irrational Animals; and of certain
continuate actions of a long tract of time, so orderly performed by them, that
they seem to argue knowledge in them.
1. How Hawks and other creatures are taught to do what they are brought up to.
2. Of the Baboon that played on a Guittar. 3. Of the teaching of Elephants, and
other beasts to do diverse tricks. 4. Of the orderly train of actions performed
by beasts in breeding their young ones.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Prescience of future events, Providence, the knowing of
things never seen before; and such other actions, observed in some living
Creatures, which seem to be even above the reason that is in man himself.
1. Why Beasts are afraid of men. 2. How some qualities, caused at first by
change in beasts, may pass by generation to the whole off spring. 3. How the
Parents fantasy oftentimes works strange effects in their issue. 4. Of
Antipathies. 5. Of Sympathies. 6. That the Antipathy of beasts toward one
another, may be taken away by assuefaction. 7. Of longing marks seen in
children. 8. Why diverse men hate some certain meats, and particularly Cheese.
9. Concerning the providence of Ants in laying up in store for winter. 10.
Concerning the foreknowing of beasts.
The Conclusion of the first Treatise.

TABLE Of the Second TREATISE CONCERNING Man's Soul.
PREFACE.

CHAP. I. OF simple Apprehensions.
1 what is a right apprehension of a thing. 2. The very thing it self is truly
in his understanding, who rightly apprehends it. 3. The apprehensions of
things, coming to us by our senses, are resolvable into other more simple
apprehensions. 4. The apprehension of a Being is the most simple, and Basis of
all the rest. 5. The apprehension of a thing is in next degree to that of
Being, and it is the Basis of all the subsequent ones. 6. The apprehension of
things known to us by our senses, consists in certain respects betwixt two
things. 7. Respect or relation has not really any formal being, but only in
the apprehension of man. 8. That Existence or Being is the proper affection of
man; and that man's soul is a comparing power. 9. A thing by coming into the
understanding of man loses nothing of its own peculiar nature. 10. A multitude
of things may be united in man's understanding, without being mingled or
confounded together. 11. Of abstracted and concrete terms. 12. Of universal
notions. 13. Of apprehending a multitude under one notion. 14. The power of the
understanding reaches as far as the extent of Being.
CHAP. II. Of thinking and knowing.
1. How a judgment is made by the understanding. 2. That two or more
apprehensions are identified in the soul, by uniting them in the stock of
being. 3. How the notions of a substantive and an adjective are united in the
soul by the common stock of being 4. That a settled judgment becomes a part of
our soul. 5. How the soul comes to deem, or settle a judgment. 6. How opinion
is begotten in the understanding. 7. How faith is begotten in the unstanding.
8. Why truth is the perfection of a reasonable Soul: and why it is not found in
simple apprehensions, as well as in Enuntiations. 9. What is a solid judgment,
and what a slight one. 10. What is an acute judgment, and what a dull one. 11.
In what consists quickness, and clearness of judgment; and their opposite
vices.
CHAP. III. Of Discoursing.
1. How discourse is made. 2. Of the figures and moods of syllogisms. 3. That
the life of man as man consists in discourse; and of the vast extent of it. 4.
Of humane actions; and of those that concern our selves. 5. Of humane actions,
as they concern our neighbors. 6. Of Logic. 7. Of Grammar. 8. Of Rhetoric.
9. Of Poetry. 10. Of the power of speaking. 11. Of arts that concern dumb and
insensible creatures. 12. Of Arithmetic. 13. Of Prudence. 14. Observations
upon what has been said in this Chapter.
CHAP. IV. How a Man proceeds to Action.
1. That humane actions proceed from two several principles, understanding and
sense. 2. How our general and inbred maxims concur to Humane Actions. 3. That
the rules and maxims of arts works positively in us, though we think not of
them. 4. How the understanding casts about, when it wants sufficient grounds
for action: 5. How reason rules over sense and passion. 6. How we recall our
thoughts from distractions. 7. How reason is sometimes overcome by sense and
passion.
CHAP. V. Containing proofs out of our Single apprehensions, that our Soul is
Incorporeal.
1. The connection of the subsequent Chapters with the precedent. 2. The
existence of corporeal things in the soul, by the power of apprehension, proves
her to be immaterial. 3. The notion of Being, which is innate in the Soul,
proves the same. 4. The same is proved by the notion of respects. 5. That
corporeal things are spiritualized in the understanding, by means of the souls
working in and by respects. 6. That the abstracting of Notions from all
particular and individual accidents proves the the immateriality of the soul.
7. That the universality of abstracted notions proves the same. 8. That
collective apprehensions proves the same. 9. The operations of the soul drawing
always from multitude to unity, prove the same. 10. The difference betwixt the
notion of a thing in our understanding, and the impression that corresponds to
the same thing in our fancy, proves the same. 11. The apprehension of
negations and privations proves the same.
CHAP. VI. Containing proofs out of our souls operations, in knowing or deeming
any thing, that she is of a spiritual nature.
1. The manner of judging or deeming, by apprehending two things to be
identified, proves the soul to be immaterial. 2. The same is proved by the
manner of apprehending opposition in a negative judgment. 3. That things in
themselves opposite to one another, having no opposition in the soul, proves the
same. 4. That the first truths are identified to the soul. 5. That the soul
has an infinite capacity, and consequently is immaterial. 6. That the
opposition of contradictory propositions in the soul, proves her immateriality.
7. How propositions of eternal truth, prove the immateriality of the soul.
CHAP. VII. That our Discoursing proves our Soul to be incorporeal.
1. That in discoursing, the soul contains more in it at the same time, than is
in the phantasy; which proves her to be immaterial. 2. That the nature of
discourse proves the soul to be ordered to infinite knowledge; and consequently
immaterial. 3. That the most natural objects of the soul are immaterial, and
consequently the soul her self is such.
CHAP. VIII. Cantaining proofs out of our manner of proceeding to action, that
our Soul is incorporeal.
1. That the souls being a power to order things, proves her to be immaterial.
2. That the Souls being able to move without being moved, proves her to be
immaterial. 3. That the souls proceeding to action with an universality and
indifferency, proves the same 4. That the quiet proceeding of reason proves the
same. 5. A conclusion of what has been said hitherto in this second Treatise.
CHAP. IX. That our soul is a Substance, and Immortal.
1. That Man's soul is a substance. 2. That man is compounded of some other
substance, besides his body. 3. That the Soul subsists of it self,
independently of the body. 4. Two other arguments to prove the same; one
positive, the other negative. 5. The same is proved, because the soul cannot be
obnoxious to the cause of mortality. 6. The same is proved because the Soul
has no contrary. 7. The same is proved from the end for which the Soul was
created. 8. The same is proved, because she can move without being moved. 9.
The same is proved from her manner of operation, which is grounded in being.
10. Lastly, it is proved from the science of Morality; the principles whereof
would be destroyed, if the soul were mortal.
CHAP. X. Declaring what the Soul of a man, separated from his body, is, and of
her knowledge and manner of working.
1. That the Soul is one simple knowing act, which is a pure substance, and
nothing but substance. 2. That a separated Soul is in no place, and yet is not
absent from any place. 3. That a separated Soul is not in time, nor subject to
it. 4. That the Soul is an active substance, and all in it is activity. 5. A
description of the Soul. 6. That a separated Soul knows all that which she
knew, whilst she was in her body. 7. That the least knowledge which the Soul
acquires in her body, of any one thing, causes in her, when she is separated
from her body, a complete knowledge of all things whatever. 8. An answer to the
objections of some Peripateticks, who maintain the Soul to perish with the
body. 9. The former Peripateticks refuted out of Aristotle. 10. The operations
of a separated soul compared to her operations in her body. 11. That a
separated soul is in a state of pure being, and consequently immortal.
CHAP. XI. Showing what effects the diverse manners of living in ths world do
cause in a soul, after she is separated from her body.
1. That a Soul in this life is subject to mutation, and may be perfected in
knowledge. 2. That the knowledge which a soul gets in this life, will make her
knowledge in the next life more perfect and firm. 3. That the soul of men
addicted to science, whilst they lived here, are more perfect in the next
world, than the souls of unlearned men. 4. That those souls which embrace
virtue in this world, will be most perfect in the next; and those which embrace
vice, most miserable. 5. The state of a vicious soul in the next life. 6. The
fundamenatl reason why as well happiness as misery is so excessive in the next
life. 7. The reason why man's soul requires to be in a body, and to live for
some space of time joined with it. 8. That the misery of the soul in the next
world proceeds out of the inequality, and not out of the falsity of her
judgments.
CHAP. XII. Of the perseverance of a soul, in the state she finds her self in,
at her first separation from her body.
1. The explication and proof of that maxim, that, If the cause be in act, the
effect must also be. 2. The effects of all such agents as work instantaneously
are complete in the first instant that the agents are put. 3. All pure spirits
work instantaneously. 4. That a soul separated from her body cannot suffer any
change, after the first instant of her separation. 5. That temporal sins are
justly punished with eternal pains.
The Conclusion.

Preface.
THis Writing was designed to have seen the light under the name of One
Treatise. But afer it was drawn in Paper, as I cast a view over it, I found the
Proaemial part (which Treats of Bodies) so ample in respect of the other (which
was the End of it, and for whose sake I meddled with it) that I readily
apprehended my Reader would think I had gone much astray from my Text, when,
proposing to speak of the Immortality of Man's Soul, three parts of four of the
whole Discourse should not, so much as in one word, mention that Soul, whose
nature and proprieties, I aimed at the discovery of. To avoid this incongruity,
occasioned me to change the Name and Unity of the Work; and to make the survay
of Bodies, a body by it self; though subordinate to the Treatise of the Soul:
Which, notwithstanding it be less in bulk, than the other, yet I dare promise
my Reader, that if he bestow the painsr equisite to perfect himself in it, he
will find as much time well spent in the due reading of it, as in the reading
of the former Treatise, though far more large.

But, I discern an Objection obvious to be made, or rather a Question; Why I
should spend so much time in the consideration of Bodies, whereas none, that has
formerly written of this Subject, has in any measure done the like?

I might answer, that they had, on other occasions, first written of the nature
of Bodies: as I may instance in Aristotle: and sundry others, who either have
themselves professedly treated the Science of Bodies, or have supposed that part
sufficiently performed by other pens. But truly, I was by an unavoidable
necessity hereto obliged; which is, a current of doctrine that, at this day,
much reigns in the Christian Schools, where Bodies and their overations are
explicated after the manner of spiritual things. For we, having very slender
knowledge of Spiritual Substances, can reach no further into their nature, than
to know that they have certain Powers or Qualities; but can seldom penetrate so
deep, as to descend to the particulars of such Qualities or Powers. Now, our
Modern Philosophers have introduced such a course of learning into the Schools,
that, to all questions concerning the proper natures of Bodies and their
operations, it is held sufficient to answer, they have a Quality or a Power to
do such a thing: And afterward they dispute, whether this Quality or Power be
an Entity distinct from its subject, or no, and how it is separable or
unseparable from it, and the like. Consormable to this, who will look into the
Books, which are in vogue in these Schools, shall find such Answers, and such
controversies every where, and few others. As, of the Sensible Qalities: ask
what it is to be white or red, what to be sweet or sour, what to be odoriferous
or stinking, what to be cold or hot? And you are presently paid with, that it
is a Sensible Quality, which has the power to make a Wall, white or red, to
make a Meat agreeable or disagreeable to the taste, to make a grateful, or
ungrateful Smell to the nose, etc. Likewise they make the same Questions and
Resolutions, of Gravity and Levity: as, whether they be qualities, that is,
Entities distinct from their subjects; and whether they be active or passive:
which when they have disputed slightly, and in common, with Logical arguments,
they rest there, without any further searching into the Physical causes or
effects of them. The like you shall find of all strange Effects of them. The
Loadstone and Electrical bodies are produced for miraculous, and not
understandable things; and which must be acknowledged to work by hidden
Qualities, that man's wit cannot reach to. And, ascending to Living Bodies, they
give it for a Maxim; that Life is the action of the same Entity upon it self;
that Sense is likewise a work of an intrinsecal power, in the part we call
Sense, upon it self: Which our predecessors held the greatest absurdities that
could be spoken in Philosophy. Even some Physicians, that take upon them to
teach the curing of our Bodies, often pay us with such terms among them: you
have long discourses of a retentive, of an expulsive, of a purging, of a
consolidating Faculty; and so of every thing that either passes in our body, or
is applied for remedy. And the meaner sort of Physicians know no more, but that
such faculties are, though indeed they that are truly Physicians know also in
what they consist; without which knowledge it is much to be feared Physicians
will do more harm than good.

But, to return to our subject: This course of doctrine in the Schools has
forced me to a great deal of pains, in seeking to discover the nature of all
such actions (or of the main part of them) as were famed for incomprehensible.
For, what hope could I have, out of the Actions of the Soul to convince the
nature of it to be incorporeal; If I could give no other account of Bodies
Operations, than that they were performed by qualities occult, specifical, or
incomprehensible? Would not my Adversary presently answer, that any operation
out of which I should press the Souls being spiritual, was performed by a
corporeal occult quality? and that, as he must acknowledge it to be
incomprehensible, so must I likewise acknowledge other qualities of Bodies to be
as incomprehensible: and therefore could not with reason press him, to show how
a Body was able to do such an operation, as I should infer must of necessity
proceed from a spirit; since that neither could I give account how the
Loadstone drew Iron, or looked to the North, how a stone and other heavy things
were carried downwards, how sight or fantasy was made, how Digestion or
purging were effected, and many other such questions which are so slightly
resolved in the Schools?

Besides this Reason, the very desire of knowledge in my self, and a
willingness to be available to others (at the least so far as to set them on
seeking for it, without having a prejudice of impossibility to attain it) was
to me a sufficient motive, to enlarge my discourse to the Bulk it is risen to.
For, what a misery is it, that the Flower and best Wits of Christendom (which
flock to the Universities under pretense, and upon hope of gaining knowledge)
should be there deluded; and, after many years of toil and expense, be sent
home again, with nothing acquired, more than a faculty and readiness to talk,
like Parrats of many things; but not to understand so much as any one, and
withal with a persuasion that in truth nothing can be known? For, setting
knowledge aside, what can it avail a man to be able to talk of any thing? What
are those wranglings, where the discovery of Truth is neither sought nor hoped
for, but merely Vanity and Ostentation? Does not all tend, to make one seem and
appear that which indeed he is not? Nor let any body take it ill at my hands,
that I speak the of the Modern Schools: for indeed it is rather themselves, than
I that say it. Excepting Mathematics, let all the other Schools pronounce
their own minds; and say ingenuosly, whether they themselves believe they have
so much as any one Demonstration, from the beginning to the end of the whole
course of their Learning: And if all, or the most part, will agree that any one
position is demonstrated perfectly, and as it ought to be, and as thousands of
conclusions are demonstrated in Mathematics; I am ready to undergo the blame
of having calumniated them, and will as readily make them amends. But, if they
neither will, nor can; then their own Verdict clears me: and it is not so much
I, as they, that make this profession of the shallowness of their Doctrine. And
to this purpose I have often heard the Lamentations of diverse, as great wits as
any that converse in the Shools, complaining of this defect. But, in so great
an evidence of the effect, proofs are superfluous.

Wherefore, I will leave this Subject, to declare what I have here designed, and
gone about toward the Remedy of this inconvenience. Which is, that, whereas in
the Schools there is a loose method, (or rather none; but) that it is lawful,
by the liberty of a Commentator, to handle any Question in any place (which is
the cause of the slightness of their doctrine, and can never be the way to any
Science or Certitude); I have taken my beginnings from the commonest things
that are in Nature. Namely from the Notions of Quantity, and its first
Differences, which are the most simple and radical Notions that are, and in
which all the rest are to be grounded. From them I endeavor, byimmediate
composition of them, and derivation from them, to bring down my discouse to the
Elements, which are the primary and most simple bodies in nature: From these I
proceed to Compounded Bodies, first, to those that are called Mixed, and then
to living bodies; declaring in common the Proprieties and operations that
belong to them. And by occasion, as I pass along, I light here and there on
those operations which seem most admirable in nature, to show how they are, or
at least, may be performed; that, though I miss in particular of the industry
of Nature, yet I may nevertheless hit my intent which is, to trace out a way,
how these, and such like Operations may be effected, by an Exact disposition
and ordering (though intricate) of Quantitative and Corporeal parts; and to
show, that they oblige us not to recur to hidden and unexplicable qualities.
And, if I have declared so many of these, as may beget a probable persuasion in
my Reader, that the rest, which I have not touched, may likewise be displayed
and showed to spring out of the same grounds; if curious and constant searchers
into Nature will make it their task to penetrate into them; I have therein
obtained my desire and intent. Which is only, to show from what principles all
kinds of corporeal operations proceed; and what kind of operations all these
must be, which may issue out of these principles: to the end, that I may from
thence make a step to raise my discourse to the contemplation of the Soul, and
show, that her Operations are such as cannot proceed from those principles;
which, being adequate and common to all Bodies, we may rest assured, that what
cannot issue from them cannot have a Body for its source.

I will therefore end this Preface, with entreating my Reader to consider, that
in a discourse proceeding in such order as I have declared, he must not expect
to understand and be satisfied with what is said in any middle or latter part,
unless he first have read and understood what goes before: Wherefore, if he
cannot resolve with himself to take it along orderly as it lies from the
beginning; he shall do himself (as well as me) right, not to meddle at all with
this Book. But, if he will employ any time upon it, to receive advantage by it,
he must be content to take the pains to understand thoroughly every particular
as it is set down: And, if his memory will not serve him to carry every one
along with him, yet, at least, let him be sure to remember the Place where it
is handled, and, on occasion, return a look back upon it, when it may stand him
in stead. If he thinks this diligence too burthensom, let him consider that the
writing hereof has cost the Author much more pains. Who, as he will esteem them
exceedingly well employed, if they may contribute ought to the content or
advantage of any free and ingenuous mind; so, if any others shall express a
neglect of what he has with so much labor hewed out of the hard Rock of
Nature, or shall discourteously cavil at the Notions he so freely imparts to
them; all the resentment he shall make thereof will be, to desire the first to
consider, that their slight esteem of his Work obliges them to entertain their
thoughts with some more noble and more profitable subject, and better treated,
than this is; and the Later sort, to justify their dislike of his doctrine, by
delivering a fairer and more complete body of Philosphy, of their own. Which if
hereupon they do, his being the occasion of the ones bettering themselves, and
of the others bettering the world, will be the best success he can wish his
Book.

To Sir KENELME DIGBY ON His two Incomparable Treatises OF PHILOSOPHY.
TRuth's numerous Proselytes in such pompous state
With captived judgments on your Triumph wait;
And, moved by your clear Copy, Wits so rare
Blot out their former notions to write fair:
That 'twere a needless duty to set forth,
In paper-gageants, your soul-conquering worth.
Nor may Truth's Champion admit a Muse,
(Who feigns, his commendation's but abuse.
Unless Lucretius had bequeathed to me
His, the sworn Maid to Dame Philosophy.
Yet there is a Law of gratitude, which says,
He must pay thanks, who may not offer praise.
When with your work you entertained my mind,
I was your Guest; there I at once did find
A Banquet and a Meal; solid and sweet,
The rarely mingled, in one dish did meet.
(Such diet sure, had Mankind escaped offense,
Had bin his meat in the State of Ignorance,)
And now I here give thanks; which who will not give,
Who your perpetual Boarder means to live?
The reading your expressions forced me speak;
A fancy thus charged needs must silence break:
Wherefore, as Brooks to the Sea return their streams,
I only here reflect your borrowed beams.
Clear-faced Truth, that rare unbodied light,
Sun to our souls, (wrapped in a sin-caus'd night
Of ignorance) who from her radiant face
Darted forth naught but day, had found no place
In Nature's Lordships; had not you, in fine;
Placed the obscured Goddess in a Crystal shrine.
We stood like men ere they begin the Mask,
Whose wit does only serve to doubt and ask;
Until your courteous hand removed the Screen,
Withdrew the curtains, and revealed Truth's Scene.
Some, quite despairing in her quest, did say
She in Astraea's Coach was flown away.
Some said that Nature's work, on purpose ti'd
Like to the Gordian knot, did ^ub'tly hide
It Is causes and effects, none could unty't,
As if contrived to puzzle, not delight.
But most avouch't Truth in her old pit lay;
And our Cleantheses did often assay
With huge-long-Cart-rope Arguments to draw
Her upwards with their Logick-clunched paw:
Bur, ah! their Syllogistick links all brake,
Yet the obstinate piece would not her hole forsake*
Until your Silken Linos, or deep Wit whether,
Reasoned, not brawl'd her thence, and wooed her hither.
Trimmed up thus natively, she scorns the nighr,
Nor fears t'intrust her beauty to the light:
She through your Amber words does brighter shine,
Like those in Heaven, at once both nak't and fine.
Clad in such Tiffany-language, she grows proud
To see her self in Clothing, without Cloud.
The Schools dressed her in Linsy-Woolsy words;
A style not spun of threads, but writhed of cords:
Expressive barbarisms, fancy-woven air,
Whose uncouth moustrousness would make one stare:
An antic weed, patch't up, as they shall please,
Of Unionss Moods, and Senoreities,
Who, if they do not Priscian the disgrace,
To break his head, they foully scratch his face:
Tor'tring poor innocent Grammar, to confess
The truth they hide by their dark wordishness.
But no such stuff your noble Treatise wears:
It neither injures Languages, nor ears.
Yours is a Flower-pot paved by Truth's rich Gold,
While they in Dunghils rake for the precious mold.
Your Stile's both pure and gallant, in such sort
I^ makes the Schools speak finer than the Court:
With such enlihtning Metaphor, as teach
What sense-deluded fancy could not reach.
Such moving Rhetoric needs no Truth desire,
Such conquering Truths no Rhetorick's aid require,
Yet here both joyntl' embrace, as if it was
Truth's Legend writ by Sunbeams on clear Glass.
So that your Work all points of art affords,
Where equally are learned neat Truths, true Words.
Fancy, our Moon, (as Reason is our Sun,)
Which wax't and wan'd still as she wandering run,
Whose visage with unconstant Aspects shone,
Now shuffling many things, now cutting one,
Is taught at once 'to acknowledge and correct
Her fault, which gulled the credulous Intellect;
And now at length is shown her double error,
In the smooth steady Glass of Reason's mirror.
Here Words, whose whistle called us often awry,
Are taught their Origin, true sense, and why.
Blind Prejudice, cured by a blessed amaze,
Opes wide her sullen eyes, and stands at gaze.
All what the Universal Womb does spawn
Is by your Pen thence to the Life out-drawn.
Your Grounds are firm and sure; who stirs the same
May shake the World's, or stronger Reason's frame.
Nature asserts them, whose Daedalean hand,
Changing Particulars, makes your Generals stand.
Here we may learn the antientest Descents,
And the cross Marriage of the Elements;
Whence Nature's numerous Family is bred,
In Kindred's different lines distinguished.
You show the secret gins, the springs and wires
Which the vast Engine's motion requires.
You naught suppose; but start your early quest,
Where Phoenix Nature first does build her Nest:
Thence trace her laying, hatching, until she
Brings her raw Embryo to maturity*
The sprouting Sap, we without fiction, see
Creepingly metamorphos'd to a Tree.
We see how Eggs yield Flesh, and Bone, and Blood,
Like creatures peece-meal shaped in Nile's fat mud.
Our quivering grounds might have driven some perforce
To believe A sop, and grant beasts discourse;
Had not your Art the pretty Knack unscrew'd
And it is wheels, driven by blood in order, showed.
Now their strange actions we may freel, admire,
Yet not about an hidden Soul enquire;
No more than once Architas' wooden Dove
Ask't an Intelligence to make it move.
Imaginary Uacuums, which are
New terms for nothings, emptier than air,
With Moods and Qualities, now pack away
To lurk at home in Terr' Incognita.
Crab'd Aristotle, who did make it his sporr
Industrious wits should his obscureness court;
Whom like a darksome Cave, none durst adventure
Without a Lantern, and a Guide to enter:
Your grounds enlightening him, does easier sound;
As Hebrew Conso'nants, when the Points were found.
The Soul of Man, that intellectual All,
Whose recreation is the World's great Ball,
Reading her self at large here, does descry
An object worthy her far-spreading eye;
And of her nature such true notions frame,
That she salutes her self with a new name.
Here she may scan her Thoughts, view either State,
How linked to matter, how when Separate;
Through Fancie's glass, her noble Essence spy,
A shoreless Sea of Immortality;
In which unbounded Main you sail so fast
Till you both lose and find your self at last.
Yet Sir, you are justly accused by this age,
Plain truths in difficulties to engage:
What needed you to such nice cost proceed?
A Quality at first word had done the deed.
But you may nobly pity them, and grant
Nought's easier, than to be ignorant:
They take the surface of the doubt, while you
Laboriously first pierce, then dig it through.
In moving questions Talk not Truth's their aim;
As Lords start Hares, not for the prey, but game.
They spring, then stoop at some slight Butter-fly;
Thus some in hunting only love the Cry.
This is the utmost art with which they are stored,
To call Truth some unanswerable word;
Which holds the field, until some active wit,
Working at Fanci's mintage, chance to hit
Upon a quainter, which cuts that in twain,
And triumphs, till a third cleaves it again.
Thus these Tenedian Axes hew each other;
Like Cadmu's armed crop, each slays his brother.
Since with Distinctions they so nicely pare,
They subtilize it quite away to air.
These Authors yet, voluminously-vain,
Stuff Libraries With Monsters of their brain;
Whose fruitless toil is but the same, or less,
To plant bryar-fields t'enlarge a wilderness.
How hard to rectify that ravell'd clue,
On your own bottom winding't up a new!
Yet this you did by th'guidance of his light,
Who was your Plato, you his Stagyrite;
(Save that his Doctrine's such, you could invent,
In Truth's behalf, no reason to dissent.)
Even Mr. Thomas White.
That Great Soul, which fathoms the Universe,
Does, to the center, Natures entrails pierce;
Girdles the World, and, as a pair of beads,
On Reason's link the Starry bodies threads;
Uuspells the Heaven's broad volume, views so clear
Of active Angels, th'higher Hemisphere,
And this of Bodies, 'cause he first begun
His search by studying Man, their Horizon:
Whom Heaven reserves Divinity to weed
From Words o'regrowing the Diviner Seed.
To use your own, 'cause no expression's higher,
These sparks you kindled at his great fire,
And round about in thorow-light papers hurled,
Will shortly enlighten and inflame a World.
John Sergeant.

FIRST TREATISE: DECLARING THE NATURE and OPERATION OF BODIES.
CHAP. I.
A Preamble to the whole discourse: Concerning Notions in general.

IN delivering any Science, the clearest and smoothest Method, and most
agreeable to Nature, is to begin with the 1 Quantity is the first and most
obvious affection of a Body.
consideration of those things that are most Common and obvious; and by the
dissection of them, to descend by orderly degrees and S^epps (as they lie in
the way) to the examination of the most Particular and remote ones. Now, in our
present intended Survey of a Body, the first thing, which occurs to our Sense
in the perusal of it, is its Quantity, bulk, or magnitude. And this seems to be
conceived by all Mankind so inseparable from a Body, as that, when a man would
distinguish a Corporeal Substance from a Spiritual one (which is accounted
indivisible), he naturally pitches on an apprehension of its having bulk, and
being solid, tangible, and apt to make impression on our outward senses:
according to that expression of Lucretius, who, studying Nature in a familiar
and rational manner, tells us, Tangere enim and tangi, nisi C^rpus nulla potest
res. And therefore, in our inquiry of Bodies, we will observe that plain Method
which Nature teaches us; and begin with examining what Quantity is: as being
their first and primary affection) and that which makes the things we treat of
be what we intend to signify by the name of Body*

But, because there is a great (...) of Apprehensions framed by learned men of
the nature of Quantity (though indeed nothing 2 Words do not express things as
they are in themselves, but only as they are painted in the minds of men.
can be more plain and simple then it is in it self) I conceive it will not be
amiss, before we enter into the explication of it, to consider how the mystery
of discoursing and expressing our Thoughts to one another by Words (a
prerogative belonging only to Man) is ordered and governed among us: that so we
may avoid those rocks, which many, and for the most part such as think they
spin the finest threads, suffer shipwreck against in their subtilest discourses.
The most dangerous of all which assuredly is, when they confound the true and
real Natures of things, with the Conceptions they frame of them in their own
minds. By which fundamental miscarriage of their reasoning, they fall into
great errors and absurdities: and whatever they build on so ruinous a
foundation proves but useless cobwebs or prodigious Chymaeras. It Is true, words
serve to express things; but, if you observe the matter well, you will perceive
they do so, only according to the Pictures we make of them in our own
thoughts, and not according as the Things are in their proper natures. Which is
very reasonable it should be so, since the Soul, that gives the Names, has
nothing of the things in her but these Notions, and knows not the Things
otherwise then by these Notions: and therefore cannot give other Names, but
such as must signify the Things by mediation of these Notions. In the Things
all that belongs to them is comprised under one entire Entity; but in Us there
are framed as many several distinct formal Conceptions, as that one Thing shows
it self to us with different faces: Every one of which conceptions seems to
have for its object a distinct Thing; because the Conception it self is as much
severed and distinguished from another Conception or Image, arising out of the
very same Thing that begot this, as it can be from any image painted in the
understanding by an absolutely other Thing.

It will not be amiss to illustrate this matter by some familiar 3 The first
error that may arise from hence, which is a multiplying of Things, where no
such multiplication is really found.
Example. Imagine I have an Apple in my hand; the same Fruit works different
effects upon my several Senses: my Eye tells me it is green or red; my Nose that
it has a mellow scent, my Taste that it is sweet; and my Hand that it is cold
and weighty. My Senses, thus affected, send messengers to my Fantasy with
news of the discoveries they have made: and there, all of them make them
several and distinct pictures of what enters by their doors. So that my Reason
(which discourses on what it finds in my fantasy) can consider greenness by
it self, or mellowness, or sweetness, or coldness, or any other quality
whatever, singly and alone by it self; without relation to any other that is
painted in me by the same Apple: in which none of these have any distinction at
all, but are one and the same Substance of the Apple, that makes various and
different impressions on me, according to the various dispositions of my
several Senses; as hereafter we shall explicate at large But, in my mind, every
one of these Notions is a distinct Picture by it self; and as much severed from
any of the rest arising from the same apple, as it would be from any impression
or image made in me by a Stone or any other substance whatever that, being
entire in it self and circumscribed within its own circle, is absolutely
sequestered from any communication with the other. So that, what is but one
entire thing in it self, seems to be many distinct things in my understanding:
whereby, if I be not very cautious, and in a manner, wrestle with the bent and
inclination of my Understanding, which is apt to refer the distinct and
complete stamp it finds within it self, to a distinct and complete original
Character in the Thing, I shall be in danger before I am aware, to give actual
Beings to the quantity, figure, color, smell, taste, and other accidents of the
Apple, (each of them distinct one from another, as also from the Substance
which they clothe), because I find the notions of them really distinguished, as
if they were different Entities in my mind. And from thence I may infer, there
is no contradiction in nature to have the Accidents really severed from one
another, and to have them actually subsist without their Substance* and such
other mistaken subtilties, which arise out of our unwary conceiting that things
are in their own Natures, after the same fashion as we consider them in our
Understanding.

And this course of the minds disguising and changing the impressions it
receives from outward objects, into appearances quite 4. A second error; the
conceiving of many distinct things, as really one thing.
differing from what the things are in their own real natures, may be observed
not only in multiplying Entities where in truth there is but one; but also, in
a contrary manner, by comprising several distinct Things under one single
Notion: which, if afterward it be reflected back upon the things themselves, is
the occasion of exceeding great errors, and entangles one in unsuperable
difficulties. As for example; Looking upon several Cubes or Dyce, whereof one is
of gold, another of lead, a third of ivory, a fourth of wood, a fifth of glass,
and what other matter you please: all these several things agree together in my
Understanding, and are there comprehended under one single notion of a Cube;
which (like a Painter, that were to design them only in black and white) makes
one figure that represents them all. Now, if removing my consideration from
this impression which the several cubes make in my understanding, to the cubes
themselves, I shall unwarily suffer my self to pin this one notion upon every
one of them, and accordingly conceive it to be really in them; it will of
necessity fall out, by this misapplying of my intellectual notion to the real
things, that I must allow Existence to other entities, which never had nor can
have any in nature.

From this conception Plato's Idea's had their birth. For, finding in his
understanding one Universal notion, that agreed exactly to every Individual of
the same Species or Substance which imprinted that notion in him; and
conceiving that the picture of any thing must have an exact correspondence with
the thing it represents; and not considering that this was but an imperfect
picture of the individual that made it: he thence conceived, there was actually
in every individual Substance one universal Nature running through all of that
species, which made them be what they were. And then, considering that
corporeity, quantity, and other accidents of Matter, could not agree with this
universal subsistent Nature, he denied all those of it; and so, abstracting
from all materiality in his Idea's, and giving them a real and actual
subsistence in nature, he made them like Angels, whoce essences and formal
reasons were to be the Essence and to give Existence to corporeal individuals;
and so each Idea was embodied in every individual of its species. To which
opinion (and upon the same grounds) Averroes leaned, in the particular of men's
Souls. Likewise Scotus, finding in his understanding an Universal notion
springing from the impression that Individuals make in it, will have a like
Universal in the thing it self; so determining Universals (to use his own
language and terms) to be a part rei, and expressing the distinction they have
from the rest of the thing, by the terms of actu formaliter, sed non realiter:
and thereby makes every individual comprise an universal subsistent nature in
it. Which inconvenience other modern Philosophers, seeking to avoid, will not
alsow these Universals a real and actual subsistence, but lend them only a
fictitious Being; so making them, as they call them, Eutia rationis. But herein
again they suffer themselves to be carried down the stream, before they are
aware, by the understanding (which is apt to pin upon the objects the notions
it finds within it self resulting from them); and consider an Unity in the
things, which indeed is only in the Understanding.

Therefore one of our greatest cares in the guidance of our discourse, and a
continual and sedulous caution therein, ought 5. Great care to be taken, to
avoid the errors which may arise from our manner of understanding things.
to be used in this particular; where every error is a fundamental one, and
leads into inextricable labyrinths, and where that which is all our level to
keep us upright and even (our Understanding) is so apt, by reason of its own
nature and manner of operation, to make us slide into mistaking and error. And
(to sum up in short what this discourse aims at) we must narrowly take heed,
left, reflecting upon the notions we have in our mind, we afterward pin those
aerie superstructures upon the material things themselves that begot them, or
frame a new conception of the nature of any thing by the negotiation of our
understanding, upon those impressions which it self makes in us; whereas we
should acquiesce and be content with that natural and plain notion, which
springs immediately and primarily from the thing it self: which when we do not,
the more we seem to excel in subtilty, the further we go from reality and
truth; like an Arrow which, being wrong levelled at hand, falls widest when
shot in the strongest bow.

Now, to come to another point that makes to our present purpose. We may
observe there are two sorts of language Two sorts of words to express our
notions; the one common to all men, the other proper to Scholars.
to express our notions by. One belongs in general to all mankind, and the
simplest person, that can but apprehend and speak sense, is as much judge of it
as the greatest Doctor in the Schools; and, in this, the words express the
things properly and plainly, according to the natural conceptions that all
people agree in making of them. The other sort of language is circled in with
narrower bounds, and understood only by those that, in a particular express
manner, have been trained up to it: and many of the words which are proper to
it have been, by the Authors of it, translated and wrested from the general
conceptions of the same words, by some metaphor, or similitude, or allusion, to
serve their private turns. Without the first manner of expressing our notions,
mankind could not live in society together, and converse with one another:
whereas, the other has no further extent, then among such persons as have agreed
together, to explicate and design among themselves particular notions peculiar
to their arts and affairs.

Of the first kind are those ten general heads, which Aristotle calls
Predicaments: under which he (who was the most judicious orderer of notions and
director of men's conceptions, that ever lived) has comprised whatever has, or
can have, a being in nature. For, when any object occurs to our thoughts, we
either consider the essential and fundamental Being of it; or we refer it to
some species of Quantity; or we discover some Qualities in it; or we perceive
that it Does, or Suffers something; or we conceive it in some determinate Place
or Time, and the like: Of all which every man living, that injoys but the use
of reason, finds naturally within himself, at the very first naming of them, a
plain, complete, and satisfying notion; which is the same, without any the
least variation, in all mankind, unless it be in such as have, industriously,
and by force, and with much labor, perplexed and depraved those primary and
sincere impressions, which nature had freely made in them.

Of the second sort are the particular words of art, by which learned men use
to express what they mean in Sciences; and the names of Instruments, and of
such things as belong to Trades, and the like: as a Sine, a Tangent, an
Epicycle, a Deferent, an Axe, a Trowel, and such others; the intelligence of
which belongs not to the generality of mankind, but only to the Geometricians,
Astronomers, Carpenters, Masons, and such persons as converse familiarly and
frequently with those things. To learn the true signification of such words, we
must consult with those that have the knowledge and practice of them: as, in
like manner, to understand the other kind of plain language, we must observe
how the words that compose it are apprehended, used, and applied by mankind in
general; and not receive into this examination the wrested or Metaphorical
senses of any learned men, who seek oftentimes (beyond any ground in nature) to
frame a general notion that may comprehend all the particular ones, which in
any sense, proper or improper, may arise out of the use of one word.

And this is the cause of great errors in discourse; so great and important,
as I cannot too much inculcate the caution 7. Great errors arise, by wresting
words from their common meaning, to express a more particular or studied notion
requisite to the avoiding of this rock. Which that it may be the better
apprehended, I will instance in one example of a most plain and easy
conception, wherein all mankind naturally agrees; how the wresting it, from its
proper, genuine, and original signification, leads one into strange
absurdities: and yet they pass for subtle speculations. The notion of being in
a place is naturally the same in all men living. Ask any simple Artisan, Where
such a man, such a house, such a tree, or such a thing is? and he will answer
you in the very same manner as the learnedest Philosopher would do. He Will tell
you, the Man you ask for is in such a Church, sitting in such a Piew, and in
such a Corner of it;) that the House you inquire after is in such a Street, and
next to such two Buildings on each side of it;) that the Tree you would find
out is in such a Forest, upon such a Hill, near such a Fountain, and by such a
Bush; that the Wine you would drink of is in such a Cellar, in such a Part of
it, and in such a Cask: In conclusion, no man living, that speaks naturally and
freely out of the notion he finds clearly in his understanding, will give you
other answer to the question of, where a thing is, then such a one as plainly
expresses his conceit of being in place to be no other, then bodies being
environed and enclosed by some one or several others, that are immediate to it;
as the place of a liquour is the vessel that contains it, and the place of the
vessel is such a part of the chamber or house that it rests on, together with
the ambient Air, which has a share in making up the places of most things. And
this being the answer, that every man whatever will readily give to this
question; and every asker being fully satisfied with it: we may safely
conclude, That all their notions and conceptions of being in a place are the
same; and consequently, that it is the natural and true one.

But then, some others, considering that such conditions as these will not
agree to other things, which they likewise conceit to be in a place (for they
receive it as an axiom from their sense, that whatever is, must be somwhere,
and whatever is no where is not at all); they fall to casting about how they
may frame some common notion, to comprehend all the several kinds of being in
place, which they imagine in the things they discourse of. If there were
nothing but Bodies to be ranked by them in the Predicament of Place, then that
description, I have already set down, would be allowed by them as sufficient.
But, since that Spirits and Spiritual things (as Angels, Rational Souls,
Verities, Sciences, Arts, and the like) have a being in Nature; and yet will
not be comprised in such a kind of place as a Body is contained in; they rack
their thoughts to speculate out some common notion of being in place, which may
be common to these, as well as to Bodies; like a common accident agreeing to
diverse subjects. And so, in the end, they pitch on an Entity, which they call
an Ubi: and they conceit the nature and formal reason of that to be, the
ranking of any thing in a place, when that Entity is thereto affixed. And then
they have no further difficulty, in settling an Angel, or any pure Spirit, or
immaterial Essence, in a place as properly, and as completely, as if it were a
Corporal Substance. It Is but assigning an Ubi to such a Spirit, and he is
presently riveted to what place you please: And, by multiplying the Ubis, any
individual body, to which they are assigned, is, at the same instant, in as
many distant places, as they allot it different Ubis: And, if they assign the
same Ubi to several bodies, so many several ones, as they assign it to, will be
in one and the same place: And, not only many bodies in one place, but even a
whole body in an indivisible, by a kind of Ubi that has a power to resume all
the extended parts and enclose them in a point of place. All which prodigious
conceits and impossibilities in nature spring out of their mistake, in framing
Metaphysical and abstracted conceptions; instead of contenting themselves with
those plain, easy, and primary notions, which Nature stamps alike in all men
of common sense and understanding. As, who desires to be further instructed in
this particular may perceive, if he take the pains to look over what Mr. White
has discoursed of Place, in the first of his Dialogues De Mundo. To which Book
I shall from time to time (according as I shall have occasion) refer my Reader,
in those subjects the Author takes upon him to prove: being confident that his
Metaphysical Demonstrations there are as firm, as any Mathematical ones, (for
Metaphysical Demonstrations have in themselves as much firmness, certainty, and
evidence as they); and will appear as evident to whoever shall understand them
thoroughly, and frame right conceptions of them: which (how plain soever they
seem) is not the work of every pretender to learning.

CHAP. II. Of Quantity.
AMong those primary affections which occur in the perusal of a Body, Quantity
(as I have observed in the 1. We must know the vulgar and common notion of
Quantity, that we may understand the nature of it.
precedent Chapter) is one, and, in a manner, the first and root of all the
rest. Therefore (according to the caution we have been so prolix in giving,
because it is of so main importance), if we aim at right understanding the true
nature of it, we must examine what apprehension all kinds of people (that is,
mankind in general) make of it. By which proceeding, we do not make the
ignorant Multitude judge of that Learning, which grows out of the consideration
of Quantity: but only of the natural notion, which serves learned men for a
basis and foundation to build Scientifical superstructures on. For, though
Sciences be the works and structures of the understanding, governed and levelled
by the wary and strict rules of most ingenuous Artificers; yet the ground on
which they are raised are such plain notion of things as, naturally and without
any art, present themselves to every man's apprehension: without which for matter
to work upon, those artificial reflections would leave the understanding as
unsatisfied;) as a Cook would the appetite, by a dish upon which he should have
exercised all his art in dressing it, but whose first substance were not meat
of solid nutriment. It Is the course Market that must deliver him plain
materials to employ his cunning on: And, in like manner, it is the indisciplin'd
Multitude that must furnish learned men with natural apprehensions and notions
to exercise their wits about. Which when they have, they may use and order and
reflect upon them as they please: but they must first receive them in that
plain and naked form, as mankind in general pictures them out in their
imaginations.

And therefore the first work of Scholars is, to learn of the People (Quem penes
arbitrium est and jus and norma loquendi) what is the true meaning and
signification of these primary names; and what notions they beget, in the
generality of mankind, of the things they design. Of the Common People, then,
we must enquire What Quantity; is and we shall soon be informed, if we but
consider what answer any sensible man will make on the sudden, to a question
whereof that is the subject; for, such unstudied replies express sincerely the
plain and natural conceptions which they that make them have of the things they
speak of. And this, of Quantity, is the plainest and the first that nature
prints in us, of all the things we see, feel, and converse with; and that must
serve for a ground to all our other inquiries and reflections: for which cause
we must be sure not to receive it wrested or disguised from its own 2.
Extension or Divisibility is the common notion of Quantity.
nature.

If then any one be asked, What Quantity there is in such a thing, or how great
it is; he will presently in his understanding compare it with some other thing
(equally known by both parties) that may serve for a measure to it: and then
answer, That it is as big as it, or twice as big, or not half so big, or the
like, in fine, that it is bigger or lesser then another thing, or equal to it.

It Is of main importance to have this point thoroughly and clearly understood;
therefore it will not be amiss to turn it and view it a little more
particularly. If thou ask what Quantity there is of such a parcel of Cloth, how
much Wood in such a piece of Timber, how much Gold in such an Ingot, how much
Wine in such a Vessel, how much Time was taken up in such an Action? he that is
to give you an account of them measures them by else, by feet, by inches, by
pounds, by ounces, by gallons, by pints, by days, by hours, and the like; and
then tells you, how many of those parts are in the whole that you inquire of.
Which answer every man living will at the instant, without study, make to this
question; and with it every man, that shall ask, will be fully appay'd and
satisfied: so that it is most evident, it fully expresses the notions of them
both, and of all mankind, in this particular.

Wherefore, when we consider that Quantity is nothing else, but the Extension of
a thing; and that this Extension is expressed by a determinate number of lesser
extensions of the same nature; (which lesser ones are sooner and more easily
apprehended then greater, because we are first acquainted and conversant with
such, and our understanding grasps, weighs and discerns such more steadily, and
makes an exacter judgment of them;) and that such lesser ones are in the
greater which they measure, as parts in a whole; and that the whole, by
comprehending those parts, is a mere capacity to be divided into them; we
conclude, That Quantity or Bigness is nothing else but Divisibility;) and that
a thing is big, by having a capacity to be divided, or (which is the same) to
have parts made of it.

This is yet more evident (if more may be) in Discrete Quantity (that is, in
Number) then in Continued Quantity, or Extension. For, if we consider any
number whatever, we shall find the essence of it consists in a capacity of
being resolved and divided into so many Unities, as are contained in it; which
are the parts of it. And this species of Quantity, being simpler then the
other, servs for a rule to determine it by: as we may observe in the familiar
answers to questions of Continued Quantity, which express by number the Content
of it; as, when one delivers the Quantity of a piece of ground, by such a
number of furlongs, acres, perches, or the like.

But we must take heed of conceiving, that those parts, which we consider to
discern the nature of Quantity, are actually and 3 Parts of Quantity are not
actually in their whole.
really in the whole of any continued one that contains them. Else, feet,
inches, are no more real Entities in the whole that is measured by them, and
makes impressions of such notions in our Understanding; then, in our former
example, color, figure, mellowness, taste, and the like, are several substances
in the Apple, that affects our several Senses with such various impressions.
It Is but one whole, that may indeed be cut into so many several parts; but
those parts are not really there, till by division they are parceled out: and
then, the whole (out of which they are made) ceases to be any longer; and the
parts succeed in lieu of it, and are every one of them a new whole.

This truth is evident out of the very definition we have gathered of Quantity.
For, since it is Divisibility, that is, a bare capacity to division; it
follows, that it is not yet divided: and consequently, that those parts are not
yet in it, which may be made of it; for, division is the making two or more
things of one.

But, because this is a very great controversy in Schools, and so important to
be determined and settled, as, without doing so, we 4 If parts were actually in
their whole, Quantity would be composed of indivisibles.
shall be liable to main errors in searching the nature and operations of
Bodies; and that the whole progress of our discourse will be uncertain and
wavering, if this principle and foundation be not firmly laid: we must apply
our selves to bring some more particular and immediate proof of the verity of
this assertion. Which we will do, by showing the inconvenience, impossibility,
and contradiction, that the admittance of the other leads to. For if we allow
actual parts to be distinguished in Quantity, it will follow that it is composed
of points or indivisibles, which we shall prove to be impossible.

The first will appear thus: if Quantity were divided into all the parts into
which it is divisible, it would be divided into indivisibles (for nothing
divisible, and not divided, would remain in it); but it is distinguished into
the same parts into which it would be divided, if it were divided into all the
parts into which it is divisible; therefore it is distinguished into
indivisibles. The major proposition is evident to any man that has eyes of
understanding. The minor is the confession, or rather the position, of the
adversary; when he says that all its parts are actually distinguished. The
consequence cannot be calumniated, since indivisibles, whether they be
separated or joined, are still but indivisibles; though that which is composed
of them be divisible. It must then be granted that all the parts, which are in
Quantity, are indivisibles; which parts being actually in it, and the whole
being composed of these parts only, it follows, that Quantity is composed and
made of indivisibles.

If any should cavil at the supposition, and say, we stretch it further then
they intend it, by taking all the parts to be distinguished: whereas they mean
only that there are parts actually in Quantity, abstracting from all; by reason
that all, in that matter, would infer an infinity, which, to be actually in any
created thing, they will allow impossible. Our answer will be, to represent to
them how this is barely said, without any ground or color of reason; merely to
evade the inconvenience the argument drives them to. For, if any parts be
actually distinguished, why should not all be so? What prerogative have some
that the others have not? And how came they by it? If they have their actual
distinction, out of their nature of being parts* then all must enjoy it alike,
and all be equally distinguished, as the supposition goes: and they must all be
indivisibles, as we have proved. Besides, to prevent the cavil upon the word
all, we may change the expression of the Proposition into a negative: for, if
they admit (as they do) that there is no part in Quantity but is distinguished
as far as it may be distinguished; then the same conclusion follows with no
less evidence; and all will prove indivisibles, as before.

But it is impossible that indivisibles should make Quantity, for if they
should, it must be done either by a finite and determinate 5. Quantity cannot
be composed of indivisibles.
number, or by an infinite multitude of them. If you say by a finite, let us
take (for example) three indivisibles, and, by adding them together, let us
suppose a line composed; whose extent being only longitude, it is the first and
simplest species of Quantity; and therefore whatever is divisible into parts
must be at least a line. This line thus made cannot be conceived to be divided
into more parts* then three; since doing so you reduce it into the indivisibles
that composed it But Euclide has demonstratively proved beyond all cavil (in
the Tenth Proposition of his Sixth Book of Elements), that any line whatever
may be divided into whatever number of parts; so that, if this be a line, it
must be divisible into an hundred, or a thousand, a million of parts: which
being impossible in a line, divided into three parts only, whereof every one is
incapable of further division: it is evident, that neither a line, nor any
Quantity whatever, is composed or made of a determinate number of indivisibles.

And, since this capacity, of being divisible into infinite parts, is a
property belonging to all extension (for Euclide's demonstration is universal);
we must needs confess that it is the nature of indivisibles, when joined
together, to be drowned in one another; for, otherwise, there would result a
kind of extension out of them, which would not have that property; contrary to
what Euclide has demonstrated. And from hence it follows, that Quantity cannot
be composed of an infinite multitude of such indivisibles: for, if this be the
nature of indivisibles, though you put never so great a number of them
together, they will still drown themselves all in one indivisible point. For,
what difference can their being infinite bring to them, of such force as to
destroy their essence and property? If you but consider how the essential
composition of any Multitude whatever is made, by the continual addition of
Unities, till that number arise; it is evident, in our case, that the infinity
of indivisibles must also arise, out of the continued addition of still one
indivisible to the indivisibles presupposed. Then, let us apprehend a finite
number of indivisibles, which (according as we have proved) make no extension,
but are all drowned in the first: and observing how the progress to an infinite
multitude goes on, by the steps of one and one, added still to this presupposed
number: we shall see that every indivisible added, and consequently the whole
infinity, will be drowned in the first number, as that was in the first
indivisible.

Which will be yet plainer, if we consider, that the nature of extension
requires one part be not in the same place, where the other is: then, if the
extension be composed of indivisibles, let us take two points of place in which
this extension is; and inquire, whether the indivisibles in each of these
points be finite or infinite. If it be answered that they are finite, then the
finite indivisibles in these two points make an extension, which we have proved
impossible: But if they be said to be infinite, then infinite indivisibles are
drowned in one point; and consequently have not the force to make extension.
Thus then it remains firmly established, That Quantity is not composed of
indivisibles (neither finite, nor infinite ones) and consequently, That parts
are not actually in it.

Yet, before we leave this point, though we have already 6 An objection to
prove that parts are actually in Quantity; with a declaration of the mistake
from whence it proceed.
been somewhat long about it, I conceive it will not be tedious, if we be yet a
little longer; and bend our discourse to remove a difficulty, that even Sense
it self seems to object to us. For, does not our eye evidently inform us, there
are fingers, hands, arms, legs, feet, toes, and variety of other parts in a
Man's Body? These are actually in him, and seem to be distinct things in him; so
evidently, that we cannot be persuaded, but that we see and f^l the distinction
between them* for, every one of them has a particular power of actual working
and doing what belongs to its nature; each finger is really there, the hand is
different from the foot, the leg from the arm, and so of the rest. Are not
these parts then actually and really in a man's body? And is not each of them as
really distinguished from any other?

This appears at first sight to be an insuperable Objection; because of the
confirmation and evidence that Sense seems to give it: But, looking nearly into
the matter, we shall find that the difficulty arises, not from what Sense
informs us of, but from our wrong applying the conditions of our notions, to
the things that make impressions upon our Sense. Sense judges not which is a
finger, which is a hand, or which is a foot. The notions agreeing to these
words, as well as the words themselves, are productions of the Understanding;
which, considering several impressions made upon the Sense by the same thing,
as it has a virtue and power to several operation, frames several notions of
it: as, in our former example, it does of color, figure, taste, and the like,
in an Apple. For, as these are not different bodies or substances distinguished
one from another; but are the same one entire thing, working severally upon the
Senses, and that accordingly makes these different pictures in the mind, which
are there as much distinguished as if they were pictures of different
substances: So, the parts considered in Quantity are not diverse things, but
only a virtue or power to be diverse things; which virtue, making several
impressions upon the Senses, occasions several notions in the Understanding.
And the Understanding is so much the more prone to conceive those parts as
distinct things, by how much Quantity is nearer to be distinct things, then the
Qualities of the Apple are. For, Quantity is a possibility to be made distinct
things by division; whereas the others are but a virtue to do distinct things.
And yet (as we have touched above) nothing can be more manifest, then that, if
Quantity be Divisibility (which is, a possibility that many things may be made
of it), these parts are not yet diverse things. So that, if (for example) a rod
be laid before us, and half of it be hid from our sight, and the other half
appear; it is not one part or thing that shows it self, and another part or
thing that does (...) show it self: but it is the same rod or thing which shows
it self according to the possibility of being one new thing; but does not show
it self according to the possibility of being the other of the two things it
may be made by division. Which example, if it be well considered, will make it
much more easily sink into us, that a hand, or eye, or foot, is not a distinct
thing by it self; but that it is the man, according as he has a certain virtue
or power in him to distinct operations. For, if you sever any of these parts
from the whole body, the hand can no more hold, nor the eye see, nor the foot
walk; which are the powers that essentially constitute them to be what they
are: and therefore they are no 7 The solution of the former objection: and that
Sense and not discern whether one part be distinguished from another, or no.
longer a hand, an eye, or a foot.

Now then, to come to the objection; let us examine how far Sense may be
allowed to be judge in this difficulty, and we shall find, that Sense cannot
determine any one part in a body; For, if it could, it would precisely tell,
where that part begins or ends: but, it being agreed on that it begins and ends
in indivisibles, it is certain, that Sense cannot determine of them. If then
Sense cannot determine any one part; how shall it see that it is distinguished
from all other parts? Again, considering that all that whereof Sense is capable
is divisible, it still tells us that, in all it sees, there are more parts then
one, and therefore it cannot discern nor inform us of any that is one alone,
nor knows what it is to be one, for it never could discern it: but what is many
is many ones, and cannot be known by that which knows not what it is to be one:
and consequently Sense cannot tell us, that there are many. Wherefore it is
evident, that we may not rely upon Sense for this question. And, as for Reason,
she has already given her verdict.

So that nothing remains but to show, why we talk as we do, in ordinary
discourse, of many parts: and that what we say in that kind is true,
notwithstanding the unity of the thing. Which will appear plainly, if we
consider that our Understanding has a custom, for the better discerning of
things, to impose on a thing, as it is under one notion, the exclusion of it
self as it is under other notions. And this is evident to all Scholars, when
the mark of exclusion is expressly put; as when they speak of a white thing,
adding the reduplication, as white; which excludes all other considerations of
that thing besides the whiteness of it. But when it comes under some particular
name of the thing, it may deceive those that are not cunning: though, indeed,
most men discover it in such names as we call abstracted; as Humanity,
Animality, and the like. But, it easily deceives when it comes in Concrete
names; as it does in the name of Part in general, or in the names of particular
parts, as an hand, an eye, an inch, an ell, and others of the like nature: for,
as you see that a part excludes both the notion of the whole, and of the
remaining parts; so does a hand, an eye, an ell, exclude all the rest of that
thing, whereof the hand is an hand, and the ell is an ell, and so forth. Now
then, as every man sees evidently that it cannot be said, the Wall, as white,
is Plaster or Stone: no more can it be said, that the Hand of a Man is his
Foot; because the word hand signifies as much in it self, as if the man were
taken, by reduplication, to be the man as he is hand, or as he has the power
of holding. So likewise, in the rod we spoke of before, it cannot be said that
the part seen is the part unseen; because the part seen signifies the rod, as
it is a possibility to be made by division such a thing as it appears to the
sight. And thus it is clear, how the difficulty of this point* arises out of the
wrong applying the conditions of our notions, and of names, to the objects and
things which we know: whereof we gave warning in the beginning. Chap (...). 8.
2. 3.


After which there remains no more to be said of this subject, 8. An
enumeration of the several specieses of Quantity; which confirms that the
essente of it is divisibilitie.
but to enumerate the several specieses of Quantity, according to that division
which Logitians, for more facility of discourse, have made of it. Namely,
these six, Magnitude, Place, Motion, Time, Number, and Weight. Of which, the
two first are Permanent, and lie still exposed to the pleasure of whoever has a
mind to take a survey of them. Which he may do by measuring what parts they
are divisible into; how many else, feet, inches a thing is long, broad, or
deep; how great a place is, whether it be not biger or lesser then such
another; and by such considerations as these; which all agree in this, that
they express the essence of those two Specieses of Quantity, to consist in a
Capacity of being divided into parts.

The two next, Motion and Time, though they be of a fleeting propriety, yet
it is evident that, in regard of their original and essential nature, they are
nothing else but a like divisibility into parts; which is measured by passing
over so great or so little distance, and by years, days, hours, minutes, and
the like Number, we also see is of the same nature; for it is divisible into so
many determinate parts; and is measured by unities, or by lesser numbers so or
so often contained in a proposed greater. And the like is evident of Weight,
which is divisible into pounds, ounces, drams, or grains; and by them is
measured. So that, looking over all the several specieses of Quantity; it is
evident, our definition of it is a true one, and expresses fully the essence of
it, when we say it is Divisibilitie, or a Capacity to be divided into parts:
and that no other notion whatever, besides this, reaches the nature of of it.

CHAP. III. Of Rarity and Density.
I Intend in this Chapter to look, as far as I can, into the nature and causes
of the two first differences of Bodies; which 1: What is meant by Rarity and
Densitie.
follow out of Quantity, as it concurs with Substance to make a Body: for, the
discovery of them, and of the various proportions of them among themselves,
will be a great and important step in the journey we are going. But the
scarcity of our language is such, in subjects removed from ordinary
conversation, (though, in others, I think none is more copious or expressive)
as affords us not apt words of our own to express significantly such notions as
I must busy my self about in this discourse: therefore I will presume to
borrow them from the Latin School, where there is much ado about them. I
would express the difference between bodies that, under the same measures and
outward bulk, have a greater thinness and expansion, or thickness and solidity,
one than another; which terms, (or any I can find in English) do not signify
fully those differences of Quantity which I intend here to declare: therefore I
will do it under the names of Rarity and Density; the true meaning of which
will appear by what we shall hereafter say.

It Is evident to us, that there are different sorts of Bodies, of which though
you take equal quantities in one regard, yet 2. It Is evident that some bodies
are rare and others dense; though obscure, how they are such.
they will be unequal in another. Their magnitudes may be the same, but their
weights will be different; or contrariwise, their weights being equal, their
outward measures will not be so. Take a pint of Air, and weigh it against a
pint of Water, and you will see the balance of the last go down amain; but if
you drive out the Air by filling the pint with Lead, the other pint in which
the Water is, will rise again as fast: which if you pour out, and fill that
pint with Quicksilver, you will perceive the Lead to be much lighter; and
again you will find a pint of Gold heavier then so much Mercury. And in like
manner, if you take away of the heavy bodies till they agree in weight with the
lighter, they will take up and fill different proportions and parts of the
measure that shall contain them.

But, whence this effect arises, is the difficulty we would lay open. Our
measures tell us their quantities are equal; and reason assures us there cannot
be two bodies in one and the same place; therefore, when we see a pint of one
thing outweighs a pint of another that is thiner, we must conclude there is
more body compacted together in the heavy thing than in the light; for else,
how could so little of a solid or dense thing be stretched out to take up so
great room, as we see, in a basin of water that, being rarefied into smoke or
air, fills the whole chamber? and again, shrink back into so little room, as
when it returns into water or is contracted into ice? But, how this
comprehension of more body in equal room is effected, does not a little trouble
Philosophers.

To find a way that may carry us through these difficulties 3. A brief
enumeration of the several properties belonging to rare and dense bodies.
arising out of the Rarity and Density of Bodies, let us do as Astronomers,
when they inquire the motions of the Spheres and Planets: they take all the
Phenomena or several appearances of them to our eyes, and then attribute to
them such Orbs, courses, and periods, as may square and fit with every one of
them; and, by supposing them, they can exactly calculate all that will ever
after happen to them in their motions. So, let us, take into our consideration
the chief properties of rare and dense bodies; and then cast with our selves to
find out an hypothesis or supposition (if it be possible) that may agree with
them all.

First, it seems to us that dense bodies have their parts more close and
compacted, than others have that are more rare and subtle. Secondly, they are
more heavy than rare ones. Again, the rare are more easily divided than the
dense bodies: for water, oil, milk, honey, and such like substances, will not
only yield easily to any harder thing, than shall make its way through them,
but they are so apt to division and to lose their continuity, that their own
weights will overcome and break it; whereas, in iron, gold, marble, and such
dense bodies, a much greater weight and force is necessary to work that effect.
And indeed, if we look well into it, we shall find that the rarer things are as
divisible in a lesser Quantity, as the more dense are in a greater: and the
same force will break the rarer thing into more and lesser parts, than it will
an equal one that is more dense. Take a Stick of light wood, of such a bigness
that, being a foot long, you may break it with your hands; and another of the
same bigness, but of a more heavy and compacted wood, and you shall not break
it, though it be two foot long: and, with equal force, you may break a loaf of
bread, into more and less parts, then a lump of lead that is of the same
bigness. Which also will resist more to the division of Fire (the subtillest
divider that is) then so much water will. For the little atoms of fire (which
we shall discourse on hereafter) will pierce and cut out the water, almost into
as little parts as themselves; and, mingling themselves with them, they will
fly away together, and so convert the whole body of water into subtle smoke:
whereas the same Agent, after long working upon lead, will bring it into no
less parts then small grains of dust, which it calcines it into. And gold that
is more dense then lead, resists peremptorily all the dividing power of fire;
and will not at all be reduced into a calx or lime, by such operation as
reduced lead into it.

So that, remembering how the nature of Quantity is Divisibility; and
considering that rare things are more divisible then dense ones; we must needs
acknowledge, that the nature of Quantity is some way more perfectly in things
that are Rare, then in those that are Dense. On the other side, more compacted
and dense things may happily seem to some to have more Quantity then those that
are rare; and that is but shrunk together, which may be stretched out and
driven into much greater dimensions then the Quantity of rare things, taking
the quantities of each equal in outward appearance. As gold may be beaten into
much more and thiner leaf, then an equal bulk of silver or lead. A wax candle
will burn longer with a small light, then a tallow candle of the same bigness;
and consequently, be converted into a greater quantity of fire and air. Oil
will make much more flame then spirit of wine, that 4. The opinion of those
Philosophers declared, who put Rarity to consist in an actual division of a
Body into little parts.
is far rarer then it.

These and such like considerations have much perplexed Philosophers, and
driven them into diverse thoughts to find out the reasons of them. Some,
observing that the dividing of a body into little parts makes it less apt to
descend, then when it is in greater, have believed the whole cause of lightness
and rarity to be derived from division. As for example, they find that lead cut
into little pieces will not go down so fast in water, as when it is in bulk:
and it may be reduced into so small atoms, that it will, for some space, swim
upon the water like dust of wood.

Which assumption is proved by the great Galileus: to whose excellent wit and
admirable industry the world is beholding, not only for his wonderful
discoveries made in the Heavens, but also for his acurate and learned declaring
of those very things that lie under our feet. He (about the 90. page of his
first Dialogue of Motion) clearly demonstrates, how any real medium must of
necessity resist more the descent of a little piece of lead, or any other
weighty matter, than it would a greater piece: and the resistance will be
greater and greater, as the pieces are lesser and lesser. So, that as the
pieces are made less, they will in the same medium sink the flower; and seem to
have acquired a new nature of lightness by the diminution: not only of having
less weight in them, than they had; as half an ounce is less than a whole
ounce; but also of having in themselves a less proportion of weight to their
bulk, than they had; as a pound of Cork is, in regard of its magnitude, lighter
than a pound of Lead. So as they conclude, that the thing, whose continued
parts are the lesser, is in its own nature the lighter and the rarer: and other
things, whose continued parts are greater, be heavier and denser.

But this discourse reaches not home: for, by it, the weight of any body being
discovered, by the proportion it has to the medium, 5. The former opinion
rejected, and the ground of their error discovered.
in which it descends, it must ever suppose a body lighter than it self, in
which it may sink and go to the bottom. Now, of that lighter body, I enquire,
what makes it be so; and you must answer, by what you have concluded, that it
is lighter then the other, because the parts of it are less and moreseverd
from one another: for, if they be as close together, their division avails them
nothing; since things sticking fast together work as if they were but one, and
so a pound of lead, though it be filed into small dust, if it be compacted hard
together, will sink as fast as if it were one bulk.

Now then, allowingthe little parts to be separated, I ask, what other body
fills up the spaces, between those little parts of the medium in which your
heavy body descends? For, if the parts of water are more severed then the parts
of lead, there must be some other substance to keep the parts of it asunder,
let us suppose this to be air: and I ask, Whether an equal part of air be as
heavy as so much water; or whether it be not? If you say it is; then the
compound of water and air must be as heavy as lead; since their parts one with
another are as much compacted as the parts of lead are. For, there is no
difference whether those bodies, whose little parts are compacted together, be
of the same substance or, of diverse, or whether the one be divided into smaller
parts then the other or not (so they be of equal weights), in regard of making
the whole equally heavy: as you may experience, if you mingle pin-dust with a
sand of equal weight, though it be beaten into far smaller divisions then the
pin-dust, and put them in a bag together.

But if you say, that air is not so heavy as water; it must be, because every
part of air has again its parts more severed by some other body, then the
parts of water are severed by air: And then, I make the same instance, of that
body which severs the parts of air. And so at last (since there cannot actually
be an infinite process of bodies, one lighter then another), you must come to
one, whose little parts, filling the pores and spaces between the parts of the
others, have no spaces in themselves to be filled up.

But, as soon as you acknowledge such a body to be lighter and rarer then all
the rest, you contradict and destroy all you said before: For, by reason of its
having no pores, it follows by your rule that, the little parts of it must be
as heavy, if not heavier, then the little parts of the same bigness of that
body whose pores it fills; and consequently, it is proved, by the experience we
alleged of pin-dust mingled with sand, that the little parts of it cannot, by
their mingling with the parts of the body in which it is immediately contained,
make that lighter then it would be if these little parts were not mingled with
it. Nor would both their parts mingled with the body which immediately contains
them, make that body lighter. And so, proceeding on in the same sort through
all the mingled bodies till you come to the last that is immediately mingled
with water; you will make water nothing the lighter for being mingled with all
these: and, by consequence, it should be as heavy and as dense as lead.

Now, that which deceived the Authors of this opinion was, that they had not a
right intelligence of the causes, which made little parts of bodies (naturally
heavy) descend slowly, in regard of the velocity of greater parts of the same
bodies descending: the Doctrine of which we intend to deliver hereafter.

Others therefore, perceiving this rule to fall short, have endeavored 6 The
opinion of those Philosophers related, who put Rarity to consist in the mixtion
of Vacuity among bodies.
to piece it out by the mixtion of Vacuitie among bodies; believing, it is that
which makes one rarer then another. Which mixtion they do not put always
immediate to the main body they consider: but, if it have other rarer and
lighter bodies mingled with it, they conceive this mixtion immediate only to
the rarest or lightest. As for example, a Crystal being lighter, and
consequently rarer, then a Diamond, they will not say there is more vacuity in
a Crystal then in a Diamond; but that the pores of a Crystal are greater, and
consequently there is more air in a Crystal to fill the pores of it, then is in
a Diamond: and the vacuities are in the air, which abounding in a Crystal more
then in a Diamond, makes that lighter and rarer then this, by the more vacuites
that are in the greater Quantity of air which is mingled with it.

But, against this suppsition, a powerful adversary is urged: for Aristotle (in
his 4. Book of Physics) has demonstrated that there can be no motion in
vacuity. It Is true, they endeavor to evade his demonstration (as not reaching
home to their supposition,) by acknowledging it to be an evident one in such a
vacuity as he there speaks of; which he supposed so great, that a body may swim
in it as in an Ocean, and not touch or be near any other body; whereas, this
opinion exclude all such vast inanity, and admit no vacuities but so little
ones, as no body whatever can come to, but will be biger than they, and,
consequently, must on some side orother touch the corporal parts which those
vacuities divide; for they are the separations of the least parts that are, or
can be, actually divided from one another: which parts must of necessity touch
one another, on some side, or else they could not hang together to compose one
substance; and and therefore the dividing vacuities must be less then the
divided parts. And thus, no body will ever be in danger of floating up and down
without touching any thing: which is the difficulty that Aristotle chiefly
impugns.

I confess I should be very glad that this supposition might serve our turn,
and save the Phenomena that appear among bodies, The opinion of Vacuities
refuted.
through their variety of Rarity and Density. Which if it might be, then would
I straight go on to the inquiring after what followed out of this ground; as
Astronomers (to use our former similitude) calculate the future appearances of
the Celestial bodies out of those motions and orbs they assign to the Heavens.
For, as this apprehension of vacuity in bodies is very easy and intelligible;
so the other (which I conceive to be the truth of the case) is exceedingly
abstracted, and one of the most difficult points in all the Metaphysics: and
therefore I would (if it were possible) avoid touching upon it in this
discourse, which I desire should be as plain and easy, and as much removed
from, Scholastic terms, as may be.

But indeed, the inconveniences that follow out of this supposition of
vacuities are so great, as it is impossible by any means to slide them over. As
for example; let us borrow of Gallileus the proportion of weight between water
and air. He Dialog. 1. del. Movim. page 18.
shows us how the one is 400 times heavier then the other And Marinus Ghetaldus
teaches us that gold is 19 times heavier then water: so that gold must be 7600
times heavier then air. Now then, considering that nothing in a body can weigh,
Archimed* promot.
but the solid parts of it, it follows, that the proportion of the parts of
gold, in a sphere of an inch Diameter, is, to the parts of the air of a like
dimension, as 7600 is to one. Therefore, in air it self, the vacuities that are
supposed in it will be, to the solid parts of it, in the same proportion as
7600 to one. Indeed, the proportion of difference shall be greater: for, even in
gold many vacuities must be admitted; as appears by the heating of it, which
shows that in every least part it is exceeding porous. But, according to this
rate, without pressing the inconvenience any further, the air will, by this
reckoning, appear to be like a net, whose holes and distances are to the lines
and threads in the proportion of 7600 to one: and, so, would be liable to have
little parts of its body swim in those greater vacuities; contrary to what they
strive to avoid. Which would be excedingly more, if we found, on the one side,
any bodies heavier and denser then gold, and that were so solid as to exclude
all vacuities; and, on the other side, should balance them withsuch bodies as
are lighter and rarer then air, as fire is, and as some say will have the
ether to be. But, already the disproportion is so great and the vacuity so
strangely exceeds the body in which it is, as were too great an absurdity to be
admitted.

And besides it would destroy all motion of small bodies in the air; if it be
true (as Aristotle has demonstrated, in the fourth Book of his Physics) that
motion cannot be made but among bodies, and not in vacuo.

Again, if rarity were made by vacuity, rare bodies could not be gathered
together, without losing their rarity and becoming dense. The contrary of
which, we learn by constant experience: as when the Smith and Glassemender
drive their white and fury fires, (as they term them); when air pierces most
in the sharp wind: and generally we see that more of the same kind of rare
bodies, in less place, works more efficaciously, according to the nature that
results out of that degree of rarity. Which argues, that every little part is
as rare as it was before (for else it would lose the virtue of working
according to the nature); but that, by their being crowded together, they
exclude all other bodies that before mediated between the little parts of their
main body; and so, more parts being gotten together, in the same place then
formerly there were, they work more forcibly.

Thirdly, if such vacuities were the cause of rarity, it would follow that
fluid bodies, being rarer then solid ones, would be of themselves standing, like
nets or cobwebs: whereas contrariwise, we see their natures are to run together,
and to fill up every little creek and corner; which effect, following out of
the very nature of the things themselves, needs must exclude vacuities out of
that nature.

And lastly, if it be true (as we have showed in the last Chapter) that there
are no actual parts in Quantity; it follows of necessity, that all Quantity
must of it self be one; as Metaphysics teach us: and then, no distance can be
admitted between one Quantity and another.

And truly, if I understand Aristotle right, he has perfectly demonstrated,
that no vacuity is possible in nature; neither great nor little: and
consequently, the whole machine, raised upon that supposition, must be ruinous.
His argument is to this purpose: What is nothing cannot have parts: but vacuum
is nothing, (because, as the Adversaries conceive it, vacuum is the want of a
corporeal substance in an enclosing body; within whose sides nothing is,
whereas a certain body might be contained within them; as if, in a pail or bowl
of a gallon, there were neither milk, nor water, nor air, nor any other body,
whatever): therefore vacuum cannot have parts. Yet those who admit it put it
expressly for a Space; which essentially includes Parts: and thus they put two
contradictories, nothing and parts, that is parts and no parts; or something
and nothing in the same proposition. And this I conceive to be absolutely
unavoidable.

For these reasons therefore, I must entreat my Readers favor, that he will
allow me to touch upon Metaphysics, a little 8. Rarity and Density consist in
the several proportions, which Quantity has to its Substance.
more than I desire or intended: but it shall be no otherwise, then as is said
of the Dogs by the River Nilus side; who being thirsty lap hastily of the
water, only to serve their necessity, as they run along the shore. Thus then
remembering how we determined that Quantity is Divisibility, it follows, that,
if besides Quantity there be a Substance or Thing, which is divisible, that
Thing if it be condistinguish'd from its Quantity or Divisibility, must of it
self be indivisible; or (to speak more properly) it must be not divisible. Put
then such Substance to be capable of the Quantity of the whole world or
Universe; and consequently, you put it of it self indifferent to all, and to
any part of Quantity: for in it, by reason of the negation of Divisibility,
there is no variety of parts, whereof one should be the subject of one part of
Quantity, or another of another; or that one should be a capacity of more,
another of ^ess.

This then being so, we have the ground of more or less Proportion between
Substance and Quantity: for, if the whole Quantity of the Universe be put into
it, the proportion of Quantity ^o the capacity of that substance, will be
greater, than if but half that quantity were imbibed in the same substance.
And, because proportion changes on both sides, by the single change of only one
side: it follows, that in the latter, the proportion of that Substance to its
Quantity is greater; and that in the former, it is less, though the Substance in
it self be indivisible.

What we have said thus in abstract will sink more easily into us, if we apply
it to some particular bodies here among us, in which we see a difference of
Rarity and Density; as to air, water, gold, or the like: and examine if the
effects, that happen to them, do follow out of this disproportion between
substance and Quantity. For example, let us conceive that all the quantity of
the world were in one uniform substance; then the whole universe would be of
one and the same degree of Rarity and Density: let that degree be the degree of
water; it will then follow that, in what part soever there happens to be a
change from this degree, that part will not have that proportion of quantity to
its substance, which the quantity of the whole world had to the presupposed
uniformsubstance. But, if it happens to have the degree of rarity which is in
the air; it will then have more quantity in proportion to its substance, then
would be due to it according to the presupposed proportion of the quantity of
the universe to the aforesaid uniform substance: which in this case is as it
were the standard to try all other proportions by. And contrariwise, if it
happens to have the degree of Density which is found in earth or in gold; then
it will have less quantity in proportion to its substance, then would be due to
it according to the aforesaid proportion, or common standard.

Now to proceed from hence, with examining the effects which result out of this
compounding of Quantity with substance; we may first consider, that the
Definitions, which Aristotle has given us of Rarity and Density, are the same
we drive at. He tells us, that that body is rare whose quantity is more, and
its substance less; that contrariwise, dense, where the substance is more and
the quantity less. Now, if we look into the proprieties of the bodies we have
named, or of any others; we shall see them all follow clearly out of these
definitions. For first, that one is more diffused, another more compacted; such
diffusion and compaction seem to be the very natures of Rarity and Density,
supposing them to be such as we have defined them to be; since substance is
more diffused by having more parts, or by being in more parts; and is more
compacted, by the contrary. And then, that rare bodies are more divisible then
dense ones, you see is coincident into the same conceit with their diffusion
and compaction. And from hence again it follows, that they are more easily both
divided into great, and, by the force of natural Agents, divisible into lesser
parts: for both these (that is, facility of being divided, and easy
divisibility into lesser parts) are contained in being more divisible; or in
more enjoying the effect of Quantity, which is divisibility. From this again
follows, that in rare bodies there is less resistance to the motion of another
body through it, than in dense ones; and therefore a like force passes more
easily through the one, than through the other. Again, rare bodies are more
penetrative and active than dense ones: because being (by their overproportion
of quantity) easily divisible into small parts, they can run into every little
pore, and so incorporate themselves better into other bodies, than more dense
ones can. Light bodies likewise must be rarer, because most divisible, if other
circumstances concur equally.

Thus you see decypher'd to your hand the first division of bodies, flowing
from Quantity as it is ordained to Substance for the composition of a Body:
for, since the definition of a Body is a thing which has parts, and quantity
is that by which it has parts, and the first propriety of quantity is to be
bigger or less, and consequently the first differences of having parts are to
have bigger or less, more or fewer; what division of a Body can be more
simple, more plain, or more immediate, than to divide it by its Quantity, as
making it have bigger or less, more or fewer parts, in proportion to its
Substance?

Neither can I justly be blamed for touching thus on Metaphysics, to explicate
the nature of these two kinds of Bodies: for, Metaphysics being the Science
above Physics, it belongs to her to declare the principles of Physics; of
which these we have now in hand are the very first step. But much more, if we
consider that the composition of quantity with substance is purely
Metaphysical, we must necessarily allow the inquiry into the nature of Rarity
and Density, to be wholly Metaphysical; since the essence of Rarity and Density
stands in the proportion of quantity to substance: if we believe Aristole, (the
greatest master that ever was, of finding out definitions and notions), and
trust to the uncontrollable reasons we have brought in the precedent discourse.

This explication of Rarity and Density, by the composition 9. All must admit,
in Physical bodies, a Metaphysical composition.
of substance with quantity, may peradventure give little satisfaction to such
as are not used to raise their thoughts above Physical and natural
speculations; who are apt to conceive there it no other composition or
resolution, but such as our senses show us in compounding and dividing bodies
according to quantitive parts. Now, this obliges us to show, that such a kind
of composition and division as this must necessarily be allowed of, even in
that course of doctrine which seems most contrary to ours. To which purpose,
let us suppose that the position of Democritus or of Epicurus is true; to wit,
that the original compositions of all bodies is out of very little ones of
various figures, all of them indivisible, not Mathematically, but Physically:
and, that this infinite number of indivisibles floats in an immense ocean of
vacuum or imaginary space. In this position, let any man, who conceives their
grounds may be maintained, explicate, how one of these little bodies is moved.
For, taking two parts of vacuum, in which this body successively is; it is
clear, that really, and not only in my understanding, it is a difference in the
said body, to be now here now there: wherefore, when the body is gone thither,
the notion of being here is no more in the body; and consequently, is divided
from the body. And therefore, when the body was here, there was a composition
between the body and its being here; which, seeing it cannot be betwixt two
parts of Quantity, must of necessity be such a kind of composition, as we put
between quantity and substance. And certainly, let men wrack their brains never
so much, they will never be able to show how motion is made, without some such
composition and division; upon what grounds soever they proceed.

And if then they tell us, that they understand not how there can be a
divisibility between substance and quantity; we may reply, that to such a
divisibility two things are required: first, that the Notions of Substance and
Quantity be different; secondly, that one of them may be Changed without the
other. As for the First, it is most evident, we make an absolute distinction
between their two notions: both when we say that Socrates was bigger a Man than
a Boy; and when we conceive that milk or water while it boyles, or wine while
it works, so as they run over the vessels they are in, are greater, and possess
more place, then when they were cool and quiet, and filled not the vessel to
the brim. For, however witty explications may seem to evade, that the Same
thing is now greater now lesser; yet it cannot be avoided but that ordinary
men, who look not into Philosophy, both conceive it to be so, and in their
familiar discourse express it so: which they could not do, if they had not
different notions, of the Substance and of the Quantity of the thing they speak
of. And, though we had no such evidences, the very names and definitions of
them would put it beyond strife: all men calling substance a Thing; quantity,
Bigness; and refering a Thing to Being (as who would say, that which is) but
Bigness, to some other of like nature to which it is compared, as, that it is
half as big, twice as big, or the like.

This then being unavoidable, that the Notions are distinguished; there remains
no difficulty but only in the Second, namely, that the one may be Changed, and
the other not: Which reason and demonstration convince, as we have showed.
Wherefore, if any shall yet further reply, that they do not understand how such
change is made; we shall answer, by asking them whether they know how the
change of being sometimes here sometimes there is made by local motion in
vacuum, without a change in the body moved. Which question if they cannot
satisfy, they must either deny that there is any local motion in vacuum; or
else admit a change in quantity without a change in substance: for this latter
is as evidently true, as they suppose the former to be; though the manner how
they are effected be alike obscure in both, and the reason of the obscurity the
same in both.

With which we will conclude the present Chapter; adding only this note: That,
if all Physical things and natural changes proceed out of the constitution of
rare and dense bodies, in this manner as we put them, (which the work we have
in hand intends to show); then, so manifold effects will so convince the truth
of this doctrine we have declared, that there can remain no doubt of it: nor
can there be any, of the divisibility of quantity from substance, without which
this doctrine cannot consist. For, it cannot be understood, how there is a
greater proportion of quantity than of substance, or contrariwise, of substance
then of quantity, if there be not a real divisibility between quantity and
substance. And much less can it be conceived, that the same thing has at one
time a greater proportion of Quantity, and at another time a less; if the
greater or lesser proportion be not separable from it, that is, if there be not
a divisibility betwixt it and substance, as well as there are different notions
of them. Which to prove, by the proper principle, belonging to this matter,
would require us to make a greater inrode into the very bowels of Metathysicks*
and to take a larger circuit, then is fitting either for the subject, or for
the intended brevity of this Treatise.

CHAP. IV. Of the four first Qualities: and of the four Elements.
THe subject of our discourse hitherto has been three 1. The notions of
density and rarity have a latitude capable of infinite variety.
simple notions, Quantity, Rarity, and Density. Now it shall be to enquire, if,
by compounding these with Gravity or Weight (which is one of the specieses of
Quantity above mentioned, and of which I shall speak at large hereafter) we may
beget any further qualities, and so produce the Four first Bodies, called
Elements. Inimitation of Logitians, who, by compounding such propositions as of
themselves are evident to man's nature as soon as they are proposed, bring forth
new knowledges: which threads they still entermix and weave together, till they
grow into a fair piece. And thus the Sciences they so much labor for, and that
have so great an extent, result out of few and simple notions in their
beginnings.

But, before we fall to mingling and comparing them together, I think it will
not be amiss to set down and determine, what kind of things we mean by rare,
and what by dense; that, when the names are agreed on, we may slip into no
error by mistaking them. So then, though there be several considerations, in
regard of which rarity and density may be differently attributed to bodies:
yet, because man's discerning them, to be able to discourse accordingly of them,
is the princpal respect for which their denominations are to be allotted them;
we may with reason call those things dense, wherein a man finds a sensible
difficulty to part them, and those rare, where the resistance is imperceptible.

And to these two notions of rarity and density we must allow a great latitude,
far from consisting in an indivisible state; for, since rare faction makes a
lesser body equal to a bigger; and all inequality betwixt two bodies, has the
conditions of a Body; it follows, that the excess of one body over another
consists of infinite parts, into which it might be divided; and, consequently,
that what is rarefied passes as many degrees, as the inequality or excess has
parts. And the same law being in condensations; both dense and rare things must
be acknowledged capable of infinite variety and diversity of states, in regard
of more and less in the same kind.

These things being premised; and calling to mind that it is the nature of
density to make the parts of a dense thing compact, 2. How m^istness and
dryness are begotten in dense bodies.
and stick together, and be hardly divisible; and, on the contrary side, that
it is the nature of rarity to diffuse and extend a rare thing, and prepare and
approach it to division, according to the proportion of the degree of rarity
which it has; and that weight abounds where there is excess of density, and is
very little or none in excess of rarity: we may now begin in our imagination to
put these Qualities into the scales one against another, to see what effects
they produce in Bodies. And first, let us weigh Gravity against Density or
sticking together of parts: which sticking or compactedness, being natural to
density, requires some excess of gravity in proportion to the density, or some
other outward violence, to break it. If then in a dense body the gravity
overcome the density, and make the parts of it break asunder; it will draw them
downwards toward the center that gravity tends to, and never let them rest
till they come thither, unless some impediment meet them by the way and stop
their journey: so that such a body will, as near as it possibly can, lie in a
perfect spherical figure in respect of the center; and the parts of it will be
changed and altered, and thrust on any side that is the ready way thither, the
force of gravity therefore working upon it, it will run as far as it meets with
nothing to hinder it from attaining this spherical superficies. Wherefore such
bodies, for the most part, have no settled outside of their own; but receive
their figure and limits from such lets as hinder them from attaining to that
sphericalness they aim at.

Now Aristotle (whose definitions are in these matters generally received, as
fully expressing the notions of mankind) tells us, and our own experience
confirms it, that we use to call those things moist, which run in such sort as
we have here set down: and that we term those things dry, which have a
Consistence within themselves, and which, to enjoy a determinate figure, do not
require the stop or hinderance of another body to limit and circle them in;
which will be the nature of those that have a greater proportion of density in
respect of their gravity.

And thus, out of the comparison of density with weight, we have found two more
qualities then we yet had met withal, namely wetness and dryness. For, though
a body be dense, (which of its own nature, singly considered, would preserve
the continuity of its parts, as making the body hardly divisible; whereby it
would be dry) yet if the gravity that works upon it be, in proportion, greater
then the density; it will sever the parts of it, and make them run to the
center, and so become fluide and moist: though not in the eminentest degree
that may be of fluidity and moisture: because that, if the like over proportion
of gravity happen in a rare body, it will there more powerfully work its
effect, then it can in a dense body; because a rare body will more easily obey
and yield to the gravity that masters it, then a dense one will, and
consequently, will be more fluide and moist then it.

Now on the other side, in weighing Rarity against Gravity, if it happen that
the Rarity overcome the Gravity, then the 3. How moistness and drieess are
begotten in rare bodies.
gravity will not change the figure of a body so proportioned; but what figure
it has from its proper natural causes, the same will still remain with it: and
consequently, such a body will have terms of its own, and not require an
ambient body to limit and circle it in; which nature we call dry.

But, if the proportion of the gravity be the greater and overcome the rarity,
then, by how much the rarity is greater, so much the more will the gravity
force it to apply it self equally and on all sides to the center; and such a
body will the more easily receive its figure from another, and will be less
able to consist of it self: which properties, we attribute to wetness or
moisture. So that it appears, how the qualities of wet and dry, which first we
found in things that were dense, are also common to that nature of bodies which
we term rare.

And thus, by our first inquiry after what kind of bodies result out of the
compounding of rarity and density with gravity, we discover four different
sorts: some dense ones that are dry, and others likewise dense that are moist;
then again, some rare ones that are likewise moist, and other rare ones that
are dry.

But we must not rest here: let us proceed a little further, to 4. Heat is a
property of rare bodies, and cold of dense ones.
search what other properties these four kinds of bodies will have; which we
shall best discover, if we apply them severally to some other compounded body
(of which nature are all those we converse with or see), and then consider the
effects which these work upon it. To begin with that, which we said is so
excessively Rare that gravity has no power over it. If we look on the multitude
of little parts it may be divided into, whereof every one will subsist by it
self (for we have already proved it dry, and then suppose them to be moved with
force and strength against the body we apply them to: it must necessarily
follow that they will forcibily get into the porousness of it, and pass with
violence between part and part, and of necessity separate the parts of that
thing one from another; as a knife or wedge does a solid substance, by having
their thinnest parts pressed into it. So that if, in the compounded thing, some
parts be more weighty, others more light, (as of necessity there must be); the
heaviest will all fall lowest, the lightest will fly uppermost, and those which
are of a mean nature between the two extremes will remain in the middle. In
sum, by this action an extreme rare body upon a compounded one, all the parts
of one kind that were in the compounded one will be gathered into one place;
and those of diverse kinds into diverse places: which is the notion whereby
Aristotle has expressed the nature of heat; and is an effect which daily
experience, in burning and boiling, teaches us to proceed from heat. And
therefore we cannot doubt, but such extreme rare bodies are as well hot as dry.

On the other side, if a Dense thing be applied to a compound, it will (because
it is weighty) press it together: and, if that application be continued on all
sides, so that no part of the body that is pressed be free from the siege of
the dense body that presses it, it will form it into a narrower room, and keep
in the parts of it, not permitting any of them to slip out: So that what things
soever it finds within its power to master, be they light or heavy, or of what
contrary nature soever, it compresses them as much as it can, and draws them
into a less compass, and holds them strongly together, making them stick fast
to one another. Which effect Aristotle took for the proper notion of cold; and
therefore gave for definition of the nature of it, that it gathers things of
diverse natures: and experience shows us in freezing, and all great coolings,
that this effect proceds from cold.

But, if we examine which of the two sorts of dense bodies, the fluide or the
consistent, is most efficacious in this operation, 5. Of the two dense bodies,
the less dense is more cold: but of the two rare ones, the less rare is less
hot.
we shall find that the less dense one is more capable of being applied round
about the body it shall besiege; and therefore will stop closer every little
hole, and more easily send subtle parts into every little vein of it; and by
consequence, shrink it up together and coagulate and constringe it more
strongly, then a body can that is extremely dense; which, by reason of its
great density and the stubbornness of its parts, cannot so easily bend and ply
them to work this effect. And therefore, a body that is immoderately dense is
colder then another that is so in excess; since cold is an active or working
power, and that which is less dense excells in working.

On the contrary side, rare bodies being hot, because their subtle parts,
environing a compounded body, will sink into the pores of it, and, to their
power, separate its parts; it follows that those, wherein the gravity overcomes
the rarity, are less hot then such others, as are in the extremity and highest
excess of rarity: both, because the former are not able to pierce so little
parts of the resisting dense body, as extreme rare ones are; and* likewise,
because they more easily take ply by the obstacle of the solid ones they meet
with, then these do.

So that out of this discourse we gather, that, of such bodies as differ
precisely by the proportion of Rarity and Density, those which are extremely
rare are in the excess of heat, and are dry withal: that weighty rare bodies
are extremely humid, and meanly hot: that fluide dense bodies are moist, though
not in such excess as rare ones that are so; but are coldest of any: and
lastly, that extreme dense bodies are less cold then fluide dense ones, and
that they are dry.

But, whether the extreme dense bodies be more or less dry, 6 The extreme dense
body is more dry then the extreme rare one.
then such as are extremely rare, remains yet to be decided. Which we shall
easily do, if we but reflect that it is density which makes a thing hard to be
divided, and rarity makes it easy: for, a facility to yield to division is
nothing else, but a pliableness in the thing that is to be divided, whereby it
easily receives the figure, which the thing that divides it does cast it into.
Now this plyablenss belongs more to rare then to dense things: and accordingly,
we see fire more easily bend, by the concameration of an oven, then a stone can
be reduced into due figure by hewing. And therefore, since dryness is a quality
that makes those bodies, wherein it reigns, conserve themselves in their own
figure and limits, and resist the receiving of any from another body; it is
manifest that those are driest wherein these effects are most seen, which is,
in dense dodies: and consequently, excess of dryness must be allotted to them,
to keep company with their moderate coldness.

Thus we see that the number of Elements assigned by Aristotle is truly and
exactly determined by him: and that there 7. There are but four simplebodies:
and these are rightly named Elements.
can be neither more nor less of them; and their qualities are rightly allotted
to them. Which to settle more firmly in our minds, it will not be misspent
time to sum up in short the effect of what we have hitherto said to bring us to
this Conclusion. First, we showed that a body is made and constituted a Body,
by Quantity. Next, that the first division of Bodies is into Rare and Dense
ones; as differing only by having more and less Quantity. And lastly, that the
conjunction of Gravity with these two breeds two other sorts of combinations;
each of which is also twofold: the first sort, concerning Rarity, out of which
arises one extremely hot and moderately dry, and another extremely humide and
moderately hot; the second sort, concerning Density, out of which is produced
one that is extremely cold and moderately wet, and another extremely dry and
moderately cold. And these are the combinations whereby are constituted, Fire,
Air, Water, and Earth.

So that we have thus the proper notions of the Four Elements; and both them
and their qualities driven up and resolved into their most simple Principles:
which are the notions of Quantity, and of the two most simple differences of
quantitive things, Rarity and Density. Beyond which man's wit cannot penetrate;
nor can his wishes aim at more in this particular: seeing he has attained to
the knowledge of what they are, and of what makes them be so, and that it is
impossible they should be otherwise; and this, by the most simple and first
principles which enter into the composition of their nature. Out of which it is
evident, these Four bodies are Elements: since they cannot be resolved into any
others, by way of physical composition; themselves being constituted by the
most simple Differences of a Body. And again, all other bodies whatever must of
necessity be resolved into them, for the same reason; because no bodies can be
exempt from the First defferences of a Body. Since then, we mean by the name of
an Element, a Body not composed of any former bodies, and of which all other
bodies are composed; we may rest satisfied that these are rightly so named.

But, whether every one of these four Elements, comprehend under its name one
only lowest Species or mady, (as, 8 The Author does not determine whether every
Element comprehends under its name one only lower species, or many: nor whether
any of them be found pure.
whether there be one only Species of fire, or several; and the like of the
rest;) we intend not here to determine. Yet we note, that there is a great
latitude in every kind; since Rarity and Density (as we have said before) are
as divisible as Quantity. Which Latitudes, in the bodies we converse with, are
so limited that, What makes it self and other things be seen (as being
accompanied by light) is called Fire: What admits the illuminative action of
fire, and is not seen, is called Air: What admits the same action, and is seen
(in the rank of Elements) is called Water: And what, through the density of it,
admits not that action, but absolutely reflects it, is called Earth.

And, out of all we said of these four Elements, it is manifest there cannot be
a fifth: as is to be seen at large in every Aristotelian Philosopher that
writes of this matter. I am not ignorant that there are sundry objections used
to be made, both against these notions of the First Qualities, and against the
division of the Elements: but because they and their solotions are to be found,
in every ordinary Philosopher, and not of any great difficulty, and that the
handling them is too particular for the design of this discourse, and would
make it too prolix; I refer the Reader to seek them, for his satisfaction, in
those Authors that treat Physic professedly, and have delivered a complete
body of Philosophy,

And I will end this Chapter with advertising him (lest I should be
misunderstood) that though my disquisition here has pitched on the four bodies
of Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; yet it is not my intention to affirm that
those which we ordinary call so, and fall daily within our use, are such as I
have here expressed them: or that these Phlosophicall ones (which arise purely
out of the combination of the first qualities) have their residence or
consistence in great bulks, in any places of the World, be they never so
remote; as Fire in the hollow of the Moons Orb, Water in the bottom of the Sea,
Air above the Clouds, and Earth below the Mines. But, these notions are only
to serve for certain Idea's of Elements; by which the forenamed bodies and the
compounds of them, may be tried and receive their doom of more or less pure
and approaching to the nature from whence they have their denomination. And yet
I will not deny, but that such perfect Elements may be foumd, in some very
little quantities, in mixed bodies; and the greatest abundance of them, in
these four known bodies that we call, in ordinary practice, by the names of the
pure ones: for they are least compounded, and approach most to the simpleness
of the Elements. But to determine absolutely their existence, or not existence,
either in bulk or in little parts, depends of the manner of action among
bodies; which as yet we have not meddled with.

CHAP. V. Of the operations of the Elements in general. And of their activities
compared with one another.
HAving by our former discourse inquired out, what degrees and proportions of
rarity and density compounded with 1. The first operation of the Elements is
division, out of which resulreth local motion.
gravity are necessary, for the production of the Elements: and first
qualities, whose combinations frame the Elements: our next consideration, in
that orderly progress we have proposed to our selves in this Treatise, (wherein
our aim is to follow successively the steps, which nature has printed out to
us), will be to examine the operations of the Elements, by which they work upon
one another. To which end, let us propose to our selves a rare and a dense body
encountering one, another, by the impulse of some exterior agent. In this case,
it is evident that, since rarity implies a greater proportion of quantity, and
quantity is nothing but divisibility; rare bodies must needs be more divisible
then dense ones: and consequently, when two such bodies are pressed one against
another, the rare body not being able to resist division so strongly as the
dense one is, and being not permitted to retire back, by reason of the extern
violence impelling it against the dense body; it follows, that the parts of the
rare body must be severed, to let the dense one come between them; and so the
rare body becomes divided, and the dense body the divider. And, by this we see
that the notions of divider and divisible, immediately follow rare and dense
bodies; and so much the more properly agree to them, as they exceed in the
qualities of Rarity and Density.

Likewise, we are to observe in our case, that the dense or dividing body must
necessarily cut and enter further and further into the rare or divided body;
and so, the sides of it be joined successively to new and new pars of the rare
body that gives way to it, and forsake others it parts from. Now, the rare body
being in a determinate situation of the Universe, (which we call being in a
place, and is a necessary condition belonging to all particular bodies); and
the dense body coming to be within the rare body, whereas formerly it was not
so: it follows, that it loses the place it had, and gains another. This effect,
is that which we call local motion.

And thus we see, by explicating the manner of this action, What place is, both
notionally and really.
that local motion is nothing else but the change of that respect or relation,
which the body moved has to the rest of the Universe, following out of
Division: and the name of Local Motion, formerly signifies only the mutation
of a respect to other extrinsecall bodies, subsequent to that division. And
this is so evident and agreeable to the notions that all mankind (who, as we
have said, is judge and master of language) naturally frames of place, as, I
wonder, much why any will labor to give other artificall and intricate
doctrine of this that in it self is so plain and clear. What need is there to
introduce an imaginary space (or, with Johannes Grammaticus, a subsistent
quantity) that must run through all the World; and then entail to every body an
aerie entity, an unconceiveable mood, an unintelligible Ubi, that, by an
intrinsecall relation to such a part of the imaginary space, must thereto pin
and fasten the body it is in? It must needs be a ruinous Philosophy that is
grounded upon such a contradiction, as is the allotting of parts to that, which
the Authors themselves (upon the matter) acknowledge to be merely nothing; and
upon so weak a shift (to deliver them from the inconveniences that, in their
course of doctrine, other circumstances bring them to) as is the voluntary
creating of new imaginary Entities in things, without any ground in nature for
them. Learned men should express the advantage and subtilty of their wits, by
penetrating further into nature then the vulgar; not by vexing and wresting it
from its own course. They should refine and carry higher, not contradict and
destroy, the notions of mankind, in those things it is the competent judge of;
as it undoubtedly is of those primary notions which Aristotle has ranked under
Ten Heads: which (as we have touched before) every one can conceive in gross;
and the work of Scholars is to explicate them in particular, and not to make
the Vulgar believe they are mistaken in framing those apprehensions that nature
taught them.

Out of that which has been hitherto resolvd it is manifest that Place really,
(and abstracting from the operation of the understanding), is nothing else but
the inward superficies of a body that compasses and immediately conteines
another. Which ordinarily, being of a rare body that does not show it self to
us (namely, the Air), is for the most part unknown by us. But, because nothing
can make impression on our minds and cause us to give it a name, otherwise then
by being known: therefore our understanding, to make a complete notion, must add
something else to this fleeting and unremarkable Superficies, that may bring it
to our acquaintance. And, for this end, we may consider further; that, as this
Superficies has in it self, so the body enclosed in it gains a certain
determinate respect to the stable and immovable bodies that environ it. As for
example, we understand such a Tree to be in such a place, by having such and
such respects to such a Hill near it, or to such a House that stands by it, or
to such a River that runs under it, or, to such an immovable point of the
Heaven that, from the Suns rising in the Equinox, is called East, and such
like. To which purpose, it imports not whether these, that we call immovable
bodies and points, be truly so, or do but seem so to mankind. For, man talking
of things according to the notions he frames of them in his mind (speech being
nothing else but an expression to another man, of the images he has within
himself; and his notions being made according to the seeming of the things, he
must needs make the same notions, whether the things be truly so in themselves,
or but seem to be so; when that seeming or appearance is always constantly the
same.

Now then, when one body, dividing another, gets a new immediate clothing; and
consequently new respects to the stable 3. Local motion is that division,
whereby a body changes its place.
and immovable bodies (or seeming such) that environ it; we vary in our selves
the notion we first had of that thing; conceiving it now accompanied with other
circumstances and other respects then formerly it had. Which notion we express
by saying, it has changed its place, and is now no longer where it was at the
first. And this change of place we call Local motion: to wit, the departing of
a body from that hollow superficies which enclosed it, and its changing to
another; whereby it gains new respects to those parts of the World that have, or
in some sort may seem to have, immobility and fixed stableness: So as hence
it is evident that the substance of* Local motion consists in Division; and
that the alteration of Locality follows Division; in such sort as the becoming
like or unlike of one wall to another follows the action whereby one of them
becomes white.

And therefore, in Nature, we are to seek for any entity or 4. The nature of
quantity of it self is sufficient to unite a body to its place.
special cause of applying the moved body to a place, as place, (which is but a
respect consequent to the effect of division); but only to consider, what real
and physical action unites it to that other body, which is called its place,
and truly serves for that effect. And consequently, they who think they have
discovered a notable subtilty, by bringing in an Entity to unite a Body to its
Place, have strained beyond their strength, and grasped but a shadow. Which
will appear yet more evident, if they but mark well, how nothing is divisible
but what of it self (abstracting from division) is one. For the nature of
Division is the making of many; which implies, that what is to be divided must
of necessity be not-many, before it be divided. Now Quantity being the subject
of division, it is evident that, purely of it self and without any force or
adjoined helps, it must needs be one, wherever some outward agent does not
introduce multiplicity upon it. And, whenever other things work upon quantity
as quantity, it is not the nature and power of their operation to produce unity
in it and make it one; for it is already one: but contrariwise, the immediate
necessary effect that flows from them in this case is, to make one quantity
many; according to the circumstances that accompany the divider and that which
is to be divided. And therefore, although we may seek causes, why some one
thing sticks faster together, then some other; yet to ask absolutely why a body
sticks together were prejudicial to the nature of quantity: whose essence is to
have parts sticking together; or rather to have such unity, as without which
all divisibility must be excluded.

Out of which discourse it follows, that, in local motion, we are to look only
for a cause or power to divide, but not for any to unite. For, the very nature
of quantity unites any two parts that are indistant from one another, without
needing any other cement to glue them together: as we see the parts of water
and all liquid substances presently unite themselves to other parts of like
bodies, when they meet with them, and to solid bodies if they chance to be next
them. And therefore it is vain to trouble our heads with Unions and imaginary
Moods to unite a body to the place it is in; when their own nature makes them
one as soon as they are immediate to each other. And accordingly, if, when we
see a Boul move, we would examine the causes of that motion, we must consider
the quantity of air or water it makes to break from the parts next to it, to
give place to it self: and not speculate upon an intrinsecall relation from the
body to a certain part of the imaginary space, they will have to run through
all things. And, by ballancing that quantity of air or water which it divides,
we may arrive to make an estimate of what force the Boul needs to have for its
motion.

Thus having declared that the locality of motion is but an extrinsecall
denomination and no reality in the thing moved; 5. All operations amongst
bodies, are either local motion or such as follow out of local motion.
we may now cast an eye upon a vast consequence that may be deduced out of what
we have hitherto said. For, if we consider the nature of a Body, that is, that
a Body is a Body by quantity; and that the formal notion of Quantity is
nothing else but Divisibility; and that the adequate Act of Divisibility is
Division, it is evident there can be no other Operation upon Quantity, nor (by
consequence) among Bodies, but must either be such Division as we have here
explicated, or what must necessarily follow out of such division. And Division
(as we have even now explicated) being Local Motion, it is evident, that All
operations among Bodies are either, Local Motion, or such as follow out of
Local motion. Which conclusion, however unexpected and at first hearing
appearing a Paradox, will nevertheless by the ensuing work receive such
evidence as it it cannot be doubted of; and that, not only by force of
argumentation and by necessity of notions, (as is already reduced), but also by
experience and declaratiosns of particulars, as they shall occur.

But now, to apply what we have said to our proposed subject: 6. Earth compared
to water in activity.
it is obvious to every man, that, seeing the Divider is the agent in division
and in Local motion; and dense bodies are by their nature dividers; the Earth
must in that regard be the most active among the Elements, since it is the most
dense of them all. But this seems to be against the Common judgment of all the
searchers of nature, who unamimously agree that Fire is the most active
Element: As also it seems to impugn what we our selves have determined, when
we said there were two active qualities, heat and cold; whereof the first was
in its greatest excess in Fire, and the latter in water.

To reconcile these, we are to consider, that the action of Cold in its
greatest height is composed of two parts; the one is a kind of pressing, and
the other is penetration which requires applicability. Of which two the former
arises out of density, but the latter out of moderation of density, as I have
declared in the precedent Chapter. Wherefore the former will exceed more in
Earth, though the whole be more eminent in Water. For though, considering only
the force of moving (which is a S. 6.
a more simple and abstracted notion, then the determination and
particularization of the Elements, and is precedent to it) therein Earth has a
precedence over water: yet, taking the action, as it is determined to be the
action of a particular Element, and as it concurs to the composition or
dissolution of mixed bodies; in that consideration (which is the chief work of
Elements, and requires an intime application of the Agents) Water has the
principality and excess over Earth.

As for Fire, it is more active then either of them: as will 7. The manner
whereby fire gets into fuel, proves that it exceeds earth in activity.
appear clearly, if we consider how, when Fire is applied to fuel, and the
violence of blowing is added to its own motion, it incorporates it self with
the fuel, and in a small time converts a great part of it into its own nature,
and shatters the rest into smoke and ashes. All which proceeds from the
exceeding smallness and dryness of the parts of fire; which being moved with
violence against the fuel and thronging in multitudes upon it, easily pierce
the porous substance of it, like so many extreme sharp Needles.

And, that the force of Fire is as great and greater then of Earth, we may
gather out of our former discourse; where, having resolved that density is the
virtue by which a body is moved and cuts the medium, and again considering that
celerity of motion is a kind of density (as we shall by and by declare) it is
evident that, since blowing must of necessity press violently and with a rapid
motion the parts of fire against the fuel, and so condense them exceedingly
there, (both by their celerity, and by bringing very many parts together
there,) it must needs also give them activity and virtue to pierce the body
they are beaten against.

New, that Celerity is a kind of Density, will appear, by comparing their
natures. For if we consider that a dense body may be dilated so, as to possess
and fill the place of a rare body that exceeded it in bigness, and, by that
dilatation, may be divided into as many and as great parts as the rare body was
divisible into; we may conceive that the substance of those parts was, by a
secret power of nature, folded up in that little extension in which it was
before. And even so, if we reflect upon two Rivers of equal channels and
depths, whereof the one goes swifter then the other; and determine a certain
length of each channel, and a common measure of Time: we shall see that, in the
same measure of time, there passes a greater bulk of water in the designed part
of the channel of the swifter stream, then in the designed part of the flower,
though those parts be equal.

Nor imports it that in Velocity we take a part of time, whereas in Density it
seems that an instant is sufficient; and, consequently, there would be no
proportion between them: For, knowing Philosophers all agree that there are no
Instants in time; and that the apprehension of them proceeds merely from the
manner of our understanding: And, as for parts in time, there cannot be assumed
any so little, in which the comparison is not true; and so, in this regard, it
is absolutely good.

And, if the Reader have difficulty at the disparity of the things which are
pressed together, in Density and in Celerity; for that in Density, there is
only Substance, and in Celerity there is also Quantity crowded up with the
substence; he will soon receive satisfaction, when he shall consider that this
disparity is to the advantage of what we say, and makes the nature of density
more perfect in celerity; and consequently more powerful in fire then in earth.
Besides, if there were no disparity, it 8. The same is proved by the manner,
whereby fire comes out of fuel and works upon other bodies.
would be a distinct species of density, but the very same.

By what we have spoken above, it appears how fire gets into fuel; now let us
consider how it comes out: for the activity of that fierce body will not let it
lie still and rest, as long as it has so many enemies round about it to rouse
it up. We see then that, as soon as it has incoporated it self with the fuel
and is grown master of it, by introducing into it so many of its own parts,
like so many Soldiers into an Enemies Town); they break out again on every
side with as much violence as they came in. For, by reason of the former
resistance of the fuel, their continual streaming of new parts upon it, and
one overtaking another there where their journey was stopped (all which is
increased by the blowing) does so exceedingly condense them into a narrower
room then their nature effects, that, as soon as they get liberty and grow
masters of the fuel (which at the first was their prison), they enlarge their
place, and consequently come out and fly abroad; ever aiming right forwards
from the point where they begin their journey: for, the violence wherewith they
seek to extend themselves into a larger room, when they have liberty to do so,
will admit no motion but the shortest, which is by a straight line.

So that if, in our fantasy, we frame an image of a round body all of fire;
we must withal presently conceive, that the flame proceeding from it would
diffuse it self every way indifferently in straight lines, so that, the source
serving for the Center, there would be round about it an huge Sphere and of
fire and light; unless some accidental and extern cause should determine its
motion more to one part then to another. Which compass, because it is round and
has the figure of a Sphere, is by Philosophers termed the Sphere of its
activity.

So that it is evident, the most simple and primary motition of fire is a flux
in a direct line from the center of it to its circumference, taking the fuel
for its center: as also that, when it is beaten against a harder body, it may be
able to destroy it; though that body be in its own nature more dense then fire.
For the body against which it presses either has pores, or has none (as, the
Elements have none:) if it has pores, then the fire, by reason of the violent
motion of the impellent, drives out the little bodies which fill up those
pores, and, succeeding in their room, and being multiplied there, causes those
effects which in our discourse of the Elements we assigned to heat. But, if it
has no pores, it will be either rare or dense: if it be rare, then, if the
force of the impellant be greater than the resistance of the rare body, it will
force the fire to divide the rare body. But if it be dense (as, some atome of
earth), then, though at the first it cannot divide it, yet, by length of time
and continual beating upon it, it may come to wear off some part of it; the
force of the impellent by little and little bending the atome of the earth, by
driving a continual stream of a lesser part of fire against some determinate
part of the atome. By which word, Atome, no body will imagine we intend to
express a perfect indivisible; but only the least sort of natural bodies.

CHAP. VI. Of Light: what it is.
HAving said thus much of fire; the near relation between it and Light invites
us, in the next place, to bend 1. In what sense the Author rejects Qualities.
our eyes, to that which uses to dazel theirs who look unwearily upon it.
Certainly, as, among all the sensible qualities, it is the principal; so, among
all corporeal things, it seems to aim rightest at spiritual nature, and to come
nearest it. And by some it has been judged to be spiritual; if our eyes be
capable to see Spirits. No meaner man then Aristotle leads the the dance to
hold light a quality; and mainly to deny it any bodily subsistence: And there
has followed him no fewer, then almost all the world ever since. And the
question imports no less, then the whole Doctrine of Qualities; for admit light
to be a body, and hardly any man will hold up his hand in defense of any other
quality; but if it be a quality then all others come in by parity and for
company.

But before we go any further, it will not be amiss to express what we mean,
when we reject qualities; and how, in some sense, we are content to admit them.
According to that descripion that Philosophers ordinarily make of them, (and
especially the Modern) we can by no means give way to them. I confess
ingeniously, I understand not what they mean by them; and I am confident, that
neither do they. For, the very notion, that their first words seem to express
of them, they contradict again, before they make an end of describing what they
are. They will have them to be real Entities or Things, distinct from the
bodies they accompany: and yet; they deny them a subsistence or self-being,
saying, they do but inhere in their subject which supports them; or, which is
all one, that their being is a dependence on a subject.

If they will reflect upon what they say, and make their thoughts and their
words agree, they will find that the first part of their description makes them
complete substances; which, afterward, in words they flatly deny: and it is
impossible to reconcile these two meanings. A real Entity or Thing must
necessarily have an Existence or Being of its own; which they allow them: and,
whatever has so becomes a substance; for it subsists by its own Existence, or
(to say plainer,) is what it is by its own Being, and needs not the existence
of another thing to give it a Being. And then presently to to say that it does
not subsist of it self, or that it requires the subsistence of a substance to
make it Be, is a pure contradiction to the former.

This arises from a wrong notion they make to themselves of substance,
existence, and subsistence: and from their not consulting sufficiently with
their own thoughts, as well as studying in Books. They meet there with
different terms; by help of which they keep themselves from contradiction in
words, but not in effect. If the terms were rightly conceived and notions duly
fitted to them, (which requires deep meditation on the things themselves, and a
brain free from all inaclination to siding, or affection to opinoins for the
Authors sakes, before they be well understood and examined) many of those
disputs would fall to the ground; in which oftentimes both sides lose themselves
and the question, before they come to an end. They are in the dark before they
are aware: and then they make a noise, only with terms; which, like too heavy
weapons that they cannot weild, carry their strokes beyond their aim. Of such
nature are the Qualities and Moods, that some modern Philosophers have so
subtilised on. And, in that sense, we utterly deny them: which being a
question appertaining to Metaphysics, it belongs not to our present purpose to
engage our selves further in it.

But, as they are ordinarily understood in common conversation, we allow them.
And our work is but to explicate and show the particulars in retail, of what
men naturally In what sense the Author admits of qualities.
spoke in gross. For that serves their turn, to know what one another means:
whereas, it belongs only to a Philosopher, to examine the causes of things.
Others are content with the effects: and they speak truly and properly, when
they design them. As for example: when they say that fire burns by a quality of
heat that it has, or that a Deye is square by the quality of a cubicall figure
that is in it; they speak as they should do. But, if others will take occasion
upon this, to let their understanding give a Being to these qualities, distinct
from the substances in which they conceive them; there they miss. If we
consider the same man hungry, or thirsty, or weary, or sleepy, or standing, or
sitting; the understanding presently makes within it self real things of
sleep, hunger, thirst, weariness, standing, and sitting: Whereas indeed, they
are but different affections or situations of the same body. And therefore we
must beware of applying these notions of our mind, to the things as they are in
themselves: as much as we must, of conceiving those parts to be actually in
Continued Quantity, whereof we can frame actually distinct notions in our
understanding. But as, when ordinary men say, that a Yard contains three feet;
it is true, in this sense, that three feet may be made of it, but, whiles it is a
yard, it is but one quantity or thing, and not three things: so they, who make
profession to examine rigourously the meaning of words, must explicate in what
sense it is true that Heat and Figure (our former examples) are qualities; for
such we grant them to be, and in no wise contradict the common manner of
speech, which enters not into the Phylosophicall nature of them.

We say then, that Qualities are nothing else but the Proprieties, or
Particularities, wherein one thing differs from another. And therefore Logicians
call substantial Differences, substantial Qualities; and say, they are
predicated in Quale quid. But, the Predicament of Quality is orderd, by
Aristole, to conclude in it those differences of things, which are neither
Substantial nor quantitative, and yet are intrinsecall and absolute. And so,
that which the understanding calls heat, and makes a notion of (distinct from
the notion of the fire from whence it issues to burn the wood that is near it)
is nothing else, in the fire, but the very sustance of it in such a degree of
rarity; or a continual stream of parts, issuing out of the main stock of the
same fire, that enters into the wood, and by its rarity makes its way through
every little part, and divides them. All which actions are comprised by the
understanding, under one notion of burning; and the power, (which is fire it
self) to do these actions, under one notion of the quality of heat: though
burning in effect, and explicated Philosophically, be nothing else but the
continuance of those material motions we have even now described. In like
manner, the cubical figure of a deye is nothing else but the very body of the
deye it self, limited by other bodies from being extended beyond those
dimentions it has: and so, the quality of figure or squareness, which in
common speech is said to be in it, is truly substance it self, under such a
consideration as is expressed by that word.

But, to come to our question, on the decision of which depends 3. Five
arguments proposed to prove that light i^ not a body.
the fate of all the fictitious Entities which the Schools are termed
Qualities. The chief motives that persuade Light to be one of those may, to my
best remembrance, be reduced to five several heads. The first is, that it
illuminates the Air in an instant, and therefore cannot be a body: for a body
requires succession of time to move in; wherereas, this seems to spread it self
over the whole Hemisphere in an instant. For, as far as the Sun is distant from
us, he no sooner raises his head above our Horizon, but his darts are in our
face: and generally, no imagination can be framed of any motion it has in its
dilatation.

The next is, that, whereas no body can admit another into its place without
being removed away it self, to leave that room to the advenient one; plain
experience shows us daily, that two lights may be in the same place; and the
first is so far from going away at the coming of the second, that the bringing
in of a second Candle, and setting it near the first, increases the light in
the room; which diminishes again, when the second is removed away. And, by the
same reason, if light were a body, it should drive away the air (which is
likewise a body) wherever it is admitted: for, within the whole sphere of the
irradiation of it, there is no point, wherein one may set their eye, but light
is found. And therefore, if it were a body, there would be no room for air, in
that place which light takes up. And likewise, we see that it penetrates all
solid bodies (and particularly glass); as experience shows, in wood, stone,
metals, and any other body whatever, if it be made thin enough.

The third argument why light cannot be a body is, that if it were so, it can
be none other but fire; which is the subtilest and most rarefied of all bodies
whatever. But, if it be fire, then it cannot be without heat; and consequently,
a man could not feel cold in a sun-shining day: The contrary of which is
apparent all winter long, whose brightest days oftentimes prove the coldest;
And Galileus, with diverse others since, did use from the Sun to gather light,
in a kind of stone that is found in Italy, (which is therefore by them called
la calamita della luce), and yet no heat appeared in it. A Glowworm will give
light to read by, but not to warm you any whit at all: And it is said, that
Diamonds and carbuncles will shine like fire in the greatest darks; yet no man
ever complained of being served by them as the foolish Satyr was, by kissing a
burning coal. On the contrary side; if one consider, how great heats may be
made without any light at all; how can one be persuaded that light and heat
should be the same thing, or indeed any whit of kin?

The fourth motive, to induce us to believe that light cannot be a body, is the
sudden extinction of it; when any solid body comes between the fountain of it,
and the place where it sends its beams. What becomes of that great expansion of
light that shined all about, when a cloud enterposes it self between the body
of the Sun and the streams that come from it? Or when it leaves our Horizon to
enlighten the other world? His head is no sooner out of our sight, but at the
instant all his beams are vanished. If that which fills so vast a room were a
body, something would become of it; it would at the least be changed to some
other substance, and some relics would be left of it, as when ashes remain of
burned bodies; for, nature admits not the annihilation of any thing.

And, in the last place, we may conceive that if light were a body, it would be
shaken by the winds and by the motion of the air; and we should see it quaver
in all blustering weather. Therefore summing up all we have said, it seems most
improbable, and indeed wholly impossible, that light should be a Body; and
consequently it must have his place among Qualities.

But, on the otherside; before we apply our selves to answer 4. The two first
reasons to prove light a body are, the resemblance it has with fire; and
because, if it were a quality, it would always produce an equal to it self.
these objections, let us make a short survey of those inducements, that
prevail with us to believe light a body, notwithstanding so forcible
oppositions. I admit so far of the third argument, as to allow light to be
fire; for indeed it cannot be imagined any thing else, all properties agreeing
so fully between them: But withal I must add, that it is not fire in every
form, or fire joined with every substance, that expresses it self by light; but
it is fire extremely dilated and without mixture of any other gross body. Let
me hold a piece of linen or paper close by the flame of a candle, and, by
little and little, remove it further and further off; and methinks my very eyes
tell me, that there is upon the paper some part of that which I see in the
candle, and that it grows still less and less, as I remove the paper further
from it: so that if I would trust my sense, I should believe it as very a body
upon the paper, as in the candle; though infeebled, by the laxity of the
channel in which it flows.

And this seems to be strengthened by the consideration of the adversaries
position: for if it were a quality, then, seeing it has no contrary to destroy
or stop it, it should still produce an equal to it self, without end or growing
feeble; whenever it meets with a subject capable to entertain it, as air is.

The better to apprehend how much this faint resemblance 5. The third reason;
because if we imagine to our selves the substance of fire to be rarefied, it
will have the some appearances which light has.
of flame upon the paper makes for our purpose, let us turn the leaf; and
imagine in our thoughts, after what fashion that fire which is in the flame of
a little candle would appear to us, if it were dilated and stretched out to the
utmost extent that excess of rarity can bring it to. Suppose that so much
flame, as would fill a cone of two inches height and half an inch Diameter,
should suffer so great an expansion, as to replenish with his light body a
large chamber: and then, what can we imagine it would seem to be? How would the
continual driving it into a thinner substance, as it streams in a perpetual
flood from the flame, seem to play upon the paper? And then judge whether it be
likely to be a body or no; when our discourse suggests to us, that, if it be a
body, those very appearances must follow, which our eyes give us evidence are
so in effect. If gold, beaten into so airy a thinness, as we see gilders use,
remains still Gold, notwithstanding the wonderful expansion of it: why shall
we not allow, that fire, dilated to its utmost period, shall still remain fire;
though extremely rarefied beyond what it was?

We know that fire is the rarest and the subtilest substance that nature has
made among bodies; and we know likewise, 6. The fourth reason, from the manner
of the generation and corruption of light; whcih agrees with fire.
that it is engendered by the destroying and feeding upon some other more gross
body: let us then calculate, when the oil, or tallow, or wax of a candle, or
the bulk of a faggot or billet, is dilated and rarefied to the degree of fire;
how vast a place must it take up?

To this let us add what Aristotle teaches us; that fire is not like a standing
pool, which continues full with the same water; and as it has no waste, so has
it no supply: but it is a fluent and brook-like current. Which also we may
learn, out of the perpetual nutriment it requires: for, a new part of fuel
being converted into a new part of fire (as we may observe in the little atoms
of Oil or melted wax, that continually ascend apace up the wieke of a burning
candle or lamp; of necessity the former must be gone to make room for the
latter; and so a new part of the river is continually flowing.

Now then, this perpetual flux of fire, being made of a gross body that, so
rarefied, will take up such a vast room, if it die not at the instant of its
birth, but have some time to subsist (be it never so short,) it must needs run
some distance from the fountain whence it springs. Which, if it do, you need
not wonder, that there should be so great an extent of fire as is requisite to
fill all that space which light replenishes; nor that it should be still
supplied with new, as fast as the cold of the air kills it. For, considering
that flame is a much grosser substance then gross fire, by reason of the
mixture with it of that viscous oily matter, which, being drawn out of the wood
and candle, serves for fuel to the fire and is, by little and little,
converted into it; and withal reflecting on the nature and motion of fire,
which is, to dilate it self extremely, and to fly all about from the center to
the circumference, you cannot choose but conceive that the pure fire, struggling
to break away from the oily fuel, which is still turning into new fire, does
at length free his wings from that birdlime; and then flies abroad with extreme
swiftness, and swells and dilates it self to a huge bulk, now that it has gotten
liberty: and so fills a vast room; but remains still fire till it die. Which it
no sooner does, but it is still supplied with new streams of it, that are
continually strained, and as it were, squees'd out of the thick flame, which
imprisoned, and kept it within it; till growing fuller of fire then it could
contain (by reason of the continual attenuating the oily parts of it, and
converting them into fire), it gives liberty to those parts of fire, that are
next the superficies, to fly whither their nature will carry them.

And, thus, discourse would inform a Blind man (after he has well reflected on
the nature of fire), how it must needs fill a mighty extent of place; though it
have but a narrow beginning at its spring head: and that there, by reason of
the condensation of it and mixture with a grosser body, it must needs burn
other bodies; but that, when it is freed from such mixture and suffers an
extreme expansion, it cannot have force to burn, but may have means to express
it self to be there present, by some operation of it upon some body that is
refined and subtilized enough to perceive it. And this operation a seeing man
will tell you is done upon his eyes: whose fitness to receive impression from
so subtle an Agent, Anatomists will teach you. And I remember, how a blind
Schoolmaster, that I kept in my house to teach my children, (who had extreme
subtle spirits, and a great tenderness through his whole body; and met with
few distractions to hinder him from observing any impression, never so nicely
made upon him) used often to tell me, that he felt it very perceptibly in
several parts of his body; 7. The fifth reason; because such properties belong
to light as agree only to bodies.
but especially in his brain.

But, to settle us more firmly in the persuasion of light's being a body, and
consequently, fire, let us consider, that the properties of a body are
perpetually incident to light: look what rules a ball will keep in its
rebounds, the same does light in its reflections; and the same demonstration
alike convinces the one and the other. Besides, light is broken like a body;
as, when it is snapped in pieces by a tougher body: it is gathered together in a
little room by looking or burning glasses; as water is, by ordering the gutters
of a house so as to bring into one cistern all that rains dispersedly upon the
whole roof. It is severed and dispersed, by other glasses; and is to be wrought
upon, and cast hither and thither at pleasure: all, by the rule of other
bodies. And what is done in light, the same will likewise be done in heat, in
cold, in wind, and in sound. And the very same instruments that are made for
light, will work their effects in all these others, if they be duly managed.

So that certainly, were it not for the authority of Aristotle and his learned
followers, that presses us on the one side; and for the seemingness of those
reasons we have already mentioned, which persuades us on the other side: our
very eyes would carry us by stream into this consent, that light is no other
thing but the nature and substance of fire, spread far and wide, and freed from
the mixture of all other gross bodies. Which will appear yet more evident, in
the solutions of the oppositions we have brought against our own opinion: for,
in them there will occur other arguments of no less importance to prove this
verity, than these we have already proposed.

CHAP. VII. Two objections answered against light being fire; with a more ample
proof of its being such.
HAving then said thus much to persuade us of the corporeity 1. That all light
is hot and apt to heat.
of this subtle thing, that so queintly plays with our eyes; we will in the
next place examine those objections that, at the beginning, we set down against
its being a body: and if, after a through discussion of them, we find they do
in truth conclude nothing of what at the first sight they bear so great a show
of, but that we shall be able perfectly to solve and enerve their force; no
body will think it rashness in us to crave leave of Aristotle, that we may
dissent from him in a matter that he has not looked to the bottom of; and whose
opinion therein cannot be defended from plain contradictions and
impossibilities. It Is true, never any one man looked fo far as he into the
bowels of nature; he may be rightly termed the Genius of it, and whoever
follows his principles in the main cannot be led into error: but we must not
believe that he or any man else, who relies upon the strength and negotiation
of his own reason, ever had a privilege of infallibility entailed to all he
said. Let us then admire him for what he has delivered us: and where he falls
short or is weary in his search, and suffers himself to be born down by popular
opinions against his own principles (which happens very seldom to him), let us
seek to supply and relieve him.

But, to pursue our intent: We will begin with answerin, the third objection;
which is, that if light were fire it must heat as well as enlighten, where it
shines. There Is no doubt but it does so* as is evident by the weatherglasses,
and other artificial musical instruments (as Organs and Virginals that played
by themselves) w^ch Cornelius Drebbel (That admirable master of Mechanics) made
to show the King. All which depends upon the rarefaction and condensation of
some subtle body, conserved in a cavity within the bulk of the whole
instrument: for, as soon as the Sun shined, they would have motion and play
their parts. And, questionless, that grew out of the rarefaction of the subtle
liquor he made use of; which was dilated as soon as the air was warmd by the
Sunbeams: Of whose operation it was so sensible, that they no sooner left the
Horizon, but its motion ceased; And if but a cloud came between the instrument
and them, the music would presently go slower time. And the ancient miracle of
Memnons statue seems to be a juggling of the Ethiopian priests, made by the
like invention.

But, though he and they found some spiritual and refined natter, that would
receive such notable impressions from 2. The reason why our bodies for the most
part do not feel the heat of pure light.
so small alterations of temper; yet it is no wonder that our gross bodies are
not sensible of them: for we cannot feel heat, unless it be greater then that
which is in our sense, And the heat there must be in proportion to the heat of
our blood; which is an high degree of warmth: and therefore it is very possible,
that an exceeding rarefied fire, may cause a far less impression, of heat then
we are able to feel. Consider how, if you set pure spirit of wine on fire, and
so convert it into actual flame; yet it will not burn, nor scarce warm your
hand: and then can you expect that the light of a candle, which fills a great
room, should burn or warm you as far as it shines?

If you would exactly know, what degree of heat and power of burning that light
has, which (for example) shines upon the wall in a great chamber, in the midst
whereof there stands a candle: do but calculate what overproportion of quantity
all the light in the whole room bears, to the quantity of the little flame at
the top of the candle; and that is the overproportion of the force of burning
which is in the candle, to the force of burning which is in so much light at
the wall as, in extension, is equal to the flame of the candle. Which when you
have considered, you will not quarrel at its not warming you at that distance:
although you grant it to be fire, streaming out from ^e flame as from the
spring that feeds it, and extremely dilated (according to the nature of fire,
when it is at liberty), by going so far without any other gross body to
imprison or clog it.

It Is manifest, that this rule of examining the proportion of burning in so
much of the light as the flame is (by calculating the proportion of the
quantity or extension of all the light in the room to the extension of the
flame of the candle, and then comparing the flame of the candle to a part of
light equal in extension unto it) is a good and infallible one, if we abstract
from accidental inequalities: since both the light and the flame are in a
perpetual flux; and all the light was first in the flame, which is the spring
from whence it continually flows. As in a river, where every part runs with a
settled stream; though one place be straighter, and another broader: yet of
necessity, since all the water that is in the broad place came out of the
narrow, it must follow that, in equal portions of time, there is no more water
where it has the liberty of a larg channel, then where the banks press it into
a narrow bed; so that there be no inequalities in the bottom.

In like manner, if, in a large stove, a basin of water be converted into
steam; that rarefied water, which then fills the whole Stove, is no more then
what the Basin contained before: and consequently, the power of moistening,
which is in a foots extension (for example) of the stove wherein that steam is,
must be, in proportion to the virtue of wetting in the foot extension of water,
as the quantity of that great room, which the steam fills, is to the quantity
of the water contained in the basin. For, although the rarefied water be not in
every least part of that great place it seems to take up, by reason that there
is Air in which it must swim; yet the power of wetting that was in the Basin of
water is dilated through the whole room, by the conjunction of the Mist or Dew
to all the sensible parts of the Air that is in the room: and consequently the
power of wetting, which is in any foot of that room, is, in a manner, as much
less then the power of wetting which was in the foot of water, as if the water
were rarefied to the quantity of the whole room, and no air were left with it.

And, in the same manner it fares with dilated fire, as it does with dilated
water: with only this difference, peradventure, that Fire grows purer and more
toward its own nature, by dilatation: whereas water becomes more mixed, and is
carried from its nature, by suffering the like effect. Yet, dilated water will,
in proportion, moisten more then dilated fire will burn, for the rarefaction of
water brings it nearer to the nature of air (whose chief propriety is
moisture,) and the fire that accompanies it, when it raises it into steam,
gives it more powerful ingression into what body it meets withal: whereas fire,
when it is very pure, and at entire liberty to stretch and spread it self as
wide as the nature of it will carry it, gets no advantage of burning by its
mixture with air; and although it gains force by its purity, yet, by reason of
its extreme rarefaction, it must needs be extremely faint. But if, by the help
of Glasses, you will gather into less room what is diffused into a great one,
and so condense it as much as it is (for example) in the flame of a candle:
then that fire or compacted light will burn much more forcibly then so much
flame: for there is as much of it in quantity (excepting what is lost in the
carriage of it, and it is held in together in as little room, and it has this
advantage besides, that it is clogged with no gross body to hinder the activity
of it.

It seems to me now, that the very answering this objection does (besides
repelling the force of it) evidently prove, that 3. The experience of burning
glasses, and of soultry gloomy weather prove light to be fire.
light is nothing but fire, in its own nature, and exceedingly dilated: for, if
you suppose fire (for example, the flame of a candle) to be stretched out to
the utmost expansion that you may well imagine such a gross body is capable of;
it is impossible it should appear and work otherwise then it does in light, as I
have showed above. And again, we see plainly that light gathered together burns
more forcibly then any other fire whatever, and therefore must needs be fire.

Why then shall we not confidently conclude, that what is fire before it gets
abroad, and is fire again when it comes together, does likewise remain fire
during all its journey? Nay, even in the journey it self we have particular
testimony that it is fire: for light, returning back from the earth charged
with little atoms (as it does in soultry gloomy weather), heats much more than
before; just as fire does when it is imprisoned in a dense body.

Philosophers ought not to judge by the same rules that the common people does.
Their gross sense is all their guide; and 4. Philosophers ought not to judge of
things by the rules of vulgar people.
therefore they cannot apprehend any thing to be fire that does not make it self
to be known for such by burning them: But, he that judiciously examines the
matter, and traces the pedigree and period of it, and sees the reason why* in
some circumstances, it burns, and in others, not; is too blame, if he suffer
himself to be led by others ignorance, contrary to his own reason. When they,
that are curious in perfumes, will have their chamber filled with a good scent,
in a hot season that agrees not with burning perfumes; and therefore make some
odoriferous water be blown about it, by their servants mouths that are
dexterous in that ministry, (as is used in Spain in the Summer time): every
one that sees it done (though on a sudden the water be lost to his eyes and
touch, and is only discernable by his nose, yet) is well satisfied that the
scent which recreates him is the very water he saw in the glass, extremely
dilated by the forcible sprouting of it out from the servants mouth; and will,
by little and little, fall down and become again palpable water as it was
before; and therefore doubts not but it is still water, whiles it hangs in the
air divided into little atoms. Whereas, one that saw not the beginning of this
operation by water, nor observed how in the end it shows it self again in
water, might the better be excused, if he should not think that what he smel'd
were water blown about the air; nor any substance of it self (because he
neither sees nor handles it), but some adventitious quality, he knows not how,
adhering to the air. The like difference is between Philosophers that proceed
orderly in their discourses, and others that pay themselves with terms which
they understand not: The one see evidence in what they conclude; whiles the
others guess wildly at random.

I hope the Reader will not deem it time lost from our main drift, which we
take up thus in examples and digressions: for, if 5. The different names of
light and fire proceed from different notions of the same substance.
I be not much deceived, they serve exceedingly to illustrate the matter. Which
I hope I have now rendered so plain, as no man, that shall have well weighed it,
will expect that Fire, dilated into that rarefied substance which mankind (who,
according to the different appearance of things to their sense, gives different
names to them) calls Light, should burn like that grosser substance which, from
doing so, they call fire; nor doubt, but that they may be the same thing more
or less attenuated; as leaf-gold that flies in the air, as light as down, is as
truly gold as that in an ingot, which, being heavier then any other substance,
falls most forcibly to the ground.

What we have said of the unburning fire (which we call light) streaming from
the flame of a Candle, may easily be applied to all other lights deprived of
sensible heat; whereof some appear with flame, others without it. Of the first
sort are the innoxious flames that are often seen on the hair of men's heads and
horses manes, on the Masts of ships, over graves, and fat marish grounds, and
the like: and of the latter sort are Glowworms, and the light-conserving
stones, rotten wood, some kinds of fish and of flesh when they begin to
putrify; and some other things of the like nature.

Now, to answer the second part of this objection, That we 6.
daily see great heats without any light, as well as much light without any
heat; and therefore light and fire cannot be the The reason why many times fire
and head are deprived of light.
same thing: You may call to mind, how Dense bodies are capable of great
quantities of Rare ones; and thereby it comes to pass that bodies, which repugn
to the dilatation of flame, may nevertheless have much fire enclosed in them.
As, in a stove, let the fire be never so great, yet it appears not outward to
the sight; although that stove warm all the rooms near it: So, when many little
parts of heat are imprisoned in as many little cells of gross earthly
substance, (which are like so many little stoves to them), that imprisonment
will not hinder them from being very hot to the sense of feeling; which is most
perceptible of dense things. But, because they are choked with the closeness
of the gross matter wherein they are closed, they cannot break out into a body
of flame or light, so to discover their nature: which (as we have said before)
is the most unfit way for burning; for we see that light must be condensed to
produce flame and fire, as flame must be, to burn violently.

Having thus cleared the third objection, (as I conceive,) let us go on to the
fourth; which requires that we satisfy their inquisition, 7. What becoms of
the body of light when it dies.
who ask, what becomes of that vast body of shining light (if it be a body)
that fills all the distance between heaven and earth; and vanishes in a moment,
as soon as a cloud or the Moon interposes it self between the Sun and us, or
that the Sun quits our Hemisphere? No sign at all remains of it after its
extinction as does of all other substances, whose destruction is the birth of
some new thing. Whither then is it flown? we may be persuaded that a mist is a
corporeal substance, because it turns to drops of water upon the twigs that it
invirons: and so we might believe light to be fire, if, after the burning of it
out, we found any ashes remaing; but experience assures us, that, after it is
extinguished, it leaves not the least vestigium behind it of having been there.

Now, before we answer this objection, we will entreat our Adversary to call to
mind, how we have, in our solution of the former, declared and proved that the
light, which (for example) shines from a candle, is no more then the flame is,
from whence it springs, the one being condensed and the other dilated; and that
the flame is in a perpetual flux of consumption about the circumference, and of
restoration at the center where it sucks in the fuel; and then we will
enquire of him, what becomes of the body of flame which so continually dies
and is renewed, and leaves no remainder behind it; as well as he does of us,
what becomes of our body of light, which in like manner is always dying and
always springing fresh? And when he has well considered it, he will find that
one answer will serve for both.

Which is, That, as the fire streams out from the fountain of it, and grows
more subtle by its dilatation, it sinks the more easily into those bodies it
meets withal: the first of which, and that environs it round about, is air.
With air, then, it mingles and incorporates it self, and, by consequence, with
the other little bodies that are mingled with the air; and in them it receives
the changes which nature works: by which it may be turned into the other
Elements, if there be occasion; or be still conserved in bodies that require
heat.

Upon this occasion, I remember a rare experiment, that a 8. An experiment of
some who petend, that light may be precipitated into powder.
Nobleman of much sincerity, and a singular friend of mine, told me he had
seen: which was, That, by means of glasses made in a very particular manner,
and artificially placed one by another, he had seen the Sunbeams gathered
together, and precipitated down into a brownish or purplish red powder. There
could be no fallacy in this operation: for, nothing whatever was in the glasses
when they were placed and disposed for this intent; and it must be in the hot
time of the year, else the effect would not follow. And of this Magistry he
could gather some days near two ounces in a day. And it was of a strange
volative nature, and would pierce and imprint his spiritual quality into gold
it self (the heaviest and most fixed body we converse withal) in a very short
time. If this be plainly so, without any mistaking; then men's eyes and hands
may tell them what becomes of light when it dies, if a great deal of it were
swept together. But, from what cause soever this experience had its effect, our
reason may be satisfied with what we have said above; for I confess, for my
part, I believe the appearing body might be something that came along with the
Sunbeams, and was gathered by them; but not there pure substance.

Some peradventure will object those lamps, which both ancient and modern
writers have reported to have been found in Tombs and Urns; long time before
closed up from men's repair 9. The Authors opinion concerning lamps pretended to
have been found in Tombs, with inconsumptible lights.
to them, to supply them with new fuel: and therefore they believe such fires
to feed upon nothing; and consequently, to be inconsumptible and perpetual.
Which if they be, then our doctrine, that will have light to be nothing but the
body of fire perpetually flowing from his center and perpetual dying, cannot be
sound: for, in time, such fires would necessarily spend themselves in light;
although light be so subtle a substance, that an exceeding little quantity of
fuel may be dilated into a vast quantity of light. However, there would be
some consumption; which, how imperceptible soever in a short time, yet, after a
multitude of revolutions of years, must needs discover it self.

To this I answer: That, for the most part, the witnesses, who testify
originally the stories of these lights, are such as a rational man cannot
expect from them that exactness or nicitie of observation, which is requisite
for our purpose. For, they are usually gross laboring people, who, as they dig
the ground for other intentions, Stumble upon these Lamps by chance before they
are aware: and commonly they break them in the finding, and imagine they see a
glimpse of light; which vanishes before they can in a manner take notice of it,
and is, peradventure, but the glistering of the broken glass, or glazed pot,
which reflects the outward light, as soon as, by rummaging in the ground and
discovering the Glass, the light strikes upon it, (in such manner as sometimes
a Diamond, by a certain incountring of light in a dusky place, may, in the
first twinkling of the motion, seem to sparkle like fire.) And afterward, when
they show their broken Lamp, and tell their tale to some man of a pitch of wit
above them, who is curious to inform himself of all the circumstances that may
concern such lights; they strain their memory to answer him satisfactorily unto
all his demands: and thus, for his sake, they persuade themselves to remember
what they never saw; and he again, on his side, is willing to help out the
story a little. And so after a while, a very formal and particular relation is
made of it. As happens in like sort in reporting of all strange and unusual
things; when even those, that in their nature abhor from lying, are naturally
apt to strain a little and fashion up in a handsome mould, and almost to
persuade themselves they saw more then they did: so innate it is to every man,
to desire the having of some preeminence beyond his neighbors; be it but in
pretending to have seen something which they have not.

Therefore, before I engage my self in giving any particular answer to this
objection of pretended inconsumptible lights, I would gladly see the effect
certainly averred and undoubtedly proved: For, the testemonies which Fortunius
Licetus produces (who has been very diligent in gathering them; and very
sub(...) in discoursing upon them; and as the exactest Author that has written
upon this subject) do not seem to me to make that certainty, which is required
for the establishing of a ground in Philosophy. Nevertheless, if there be any
certain experience in this particular, I should think there might be some Art,
by circulation of fuel, to maintain the same light for a great company of
years: But, I should not easily be persuaded, that either flame or light could
be made, without any manner of consuming the body which serves them for fuel.

CHAP. VIII. An Answer to three other Objectious formerly proposed, against
Light being a Substance.
HAving thus defended our selves from their Objections, 1. Light is not really
in every part of the room it enlightens, nor fills entirely any sensible part
of it, though it seem to us to do so.
who would not allow light to be fire; and having satisfied their inquisition,
who would know what becomes of it when it dies, if it be a body: we will now
apply our selves to answer their difficulties, who will not let it pass for a
body, because it is in the same place with another body; as, when the Sunbeams
enlighten all the air, and when the several lights of two distinct Candles are
both of them every where in the same room. Which is the substance of the second
main objection.

This, of the justling of the air, is easily answered thus: that the air,
being a very divisible body, does without resistance, yield as much place as is
requisite for light. And that light, though our eyes judge it diffused every
where, yet is not truly in every point or atome of air: but, to make us see it
every where, it suffices that it be in every part of the air which is as big as
the black or sight of our eye; so that we cannot set our eye in any position,
where it receives not impressions of light. In the same manner as Perfumes,
which, though they be so gross bodies that they may be sensibly wasted by the
wind, yet ^o fill the air, that we can put our nose in no part of the room,
where a perfume is burned, but we shall smell it: And the like is of mists; as
also of the sprouted water to make a perfume, which we mentioned above.

But, because pure discourses, in such small thrids as these, (...) but weakly
bind such Readers as are not accustomed to them; and I would (if possible)
render this Treatise intelligible to every rational man, how ever little versed
in Scholastic learning (among whom I expect it will have a fairer passage,
then among those that are already deeply imbued with other principles): let us
try if we can herein inform our selves by our sense, and bring our eyes for
witness of what we say. He then, that is desirous to satisfy himself in this
particular, may put himself in a dark room, through which the Sun sends his
beams by a cranie or little hole in the wall: and he will discover a multitude
of little atoms flying about in that little stream of light; which his eye
cannot discern, when he is environed on all sides with a full light. Then, let
him examine whether or no there be light in the midst of those little bodies;
and his own reason will easily till him, that, if those bodies were as
perspicuous as the air, they would not reflect upon our eyes the beams by which
we see them: And therefore he will boldly conclude, that at the least such
parts of them as reflect light to us do not admit it, nor let it sink into
them. Then let him consider the multitude of them, and the little distance
betwixt one another; and how nevertheless they hinder not our sight, but we
have it free to discover all objects beyond them, in what position soever we
place our eye. And, when he thus perceives that these opacous bodies, which are
every where, do not hinder the eye from judging light to have an equal plenary
diffusion through the whole place that it irradiates; he can have no difficulty
to allow air, (that is diaphanous, and more subtle far then they, and,
consequently, divisible into lesser atoms, and, having lesser pores, gives
less scope to our eyes to miss light, then they do) to be every where mingled
with light, though we see nothing but light, and cannot discern any breach of
it.

Especially, when he shall add to this consideration, that the subtle body,
which thus fills the air, is the most visible thing in the world; and that
whereby all other things are seen: and that the air it mingles it self with, is
not at all visible, by reason of the extreme diaphaneity of it, and easy
reception of the light in every pore of it, without any resistance or
reflection: and that such is the nature of light, as it easily drowns an
obscure body, if it be not too big: and not only such, but even other light
bodies; for so we know as well the fixed Stars as the Planets are concealed
from our sight, by the nearness to the Sun, neither the lightness of the one,
nor the bigness of the other prevailing against the darkning of an exuperant
light; and we have daily experience of the same in very pure crystal glasses,
and in very clear water, which though we cannot discern by our sight if they be
certain positions, nevertheless by experience we find that they reflect much
light, and consequently have great store of opacous parts. And then he cannot
choose but conclude, that it is impossible but light should appear as it does,
to be every where, and to be one continued thing; though his discourse withal
assure him it is every where 2. The least sensible point of a diaphanous body
has room sufficient to contain both air and light, together with a multitude
of beams issuing from several lights, without penetrating one another.
mingled with air.

And this very answer, I think, will draw with it, by consequence, the solution
of the other part of the same objection; which is, of many lights joining in
the same place; and the same is likewise concerning the images of colors every
where crossing one another without hindrance. But, to raise this contemplation
a strain higher, let us consider, how light, being the most rare of all known
bodies, is, of its own nature, (by reason of the divisibility that follows
rarity) divisible into lesser parts then any other; and particularly then
flame, which, being mixed with smoke and other corpulency, falls very short of
light: And this, to the proportion in which it is more rare then the body it is
compared to. Now, a great Willibrord Snell.
Mathematician, having devised how to measure the rarefaction of Gunpowder
into flame, found the Diameter fifty times increased; and so concluded, that
the body of the flame was, in proportion to the body of the Gunpowder it was
made of, as 125000. is to one. Wherefore, by the immediately proceeding
consequence, we find that 125000 parts of flame may be couched in the room of
one least part of gunpowder; and peradventure many more, considering how porous
a body Gunpowder is. Which being admitted, it is evident that, although light
were as gross as the flame of Gunpowder, and Gunpowder were as solid as gold;
yet there might pass 125000. rays of light, in the space wherein one least part
of Gunpowder might be contained: which space would be absolutely invisible to
us, and be contained many times in the bigness of the sight of a man's eye. Out
of which we may gather, what an infinity of objects may seem to us to cross
themselves in the same indivisible place; and yet may have room sufficient for
every one to pass his way, without hindering his fellow. Wherefore, seeing that
one single light could not send rays enough to fill every little space of air
that is capable of light, (and the less, the further it is from the flame);
it is obvious enough to conceive how, in the space where the air is, there is
capacity for the rays of many candles.

Which, being well sum'd up, will take away the great admiration how the beams
of light, though they be corporeal, can in such great multitudes, without
hindering one another, enter into bodies and come to our eye: and will show,
that it is the narrowness of our capacities, and not the defect of nature, which
makes these difficulties seem so great. For, she has sufficiently provided for
all these subtle operations of fire; as also for the entrance of it into
glass, and into all other solid bodies that are Diaphanous (upon which was
grounded the last instance the second objection pressed): for, all such bodies
being constituted by the operation of fire, (which is always in motion); there
must needs be ways left for it both to enter in, and to evaporate out. And,
this is most evident in glass: which, being wrought by an extreme violent fire
and swelling with it, (as water and other things do, by the mixture of fire)
must necessarily have great store fire in it self whiles it is boiling; as we
see by its being red hot. And, hence it is that the workmen are forced to let
it cool by degrees in such relentings of fire, as they call their nealing
heats; lest it should shiver in pieces, by a violent succeeding of air in the
room of the fire; for, that, being of greater parts then the fire, would strain
the pore of the glass too suddenly, and break it all in pieces to get
ingressions; whereas, in those nealing heats the air being rarer, lesser parts
of it succeed to the fire, and leisurely stretch the pores without hurt. And,
therefore, we need not wonder, that light passes so easily through glass; and,
much less, that it gets through other bodies; seeing the experience of
Alchymists assures us. it is hard to find any other body so impenitrable as
glass.

But now, to come to the answer of the first, and, in appearance, 3. That light
does not enlighten any room in an instant; and that the great celerity of its
motion does make it imperceptible to our senses.
most powerful objection, against the corporeity of light; which urges, that
its motion is performed in an instant, and therefore cannot belong to what is
material and clothed with quantity. We will endeavor to show how unable the
sense is to judge of sundry sorts of motions of Bodies, and how grossly it is
mistaken in them: And then, when it shall appear that the motion of light must
necessarily be harder to be observed, then those others; I conceive, all that
is raised against our opinion, by so incompetent a judge, will fall flat to the
ground.

First then, let me put the Reader in mind, how, if ever he marked children
when they play with firesticks, they move and whirle them round so fast, that
the motion will cosen their eyes, and represent an entire circle of Fire to
them: and were it somewhat distant, in a dark night, that one played so with a
lighted Torck, it would appear a constant Wheel of fire, without any
discerning of motion in it. And then, let him consider how slow a motion that
is, in respect of what it is possible a body may participate of: and he may
safely conclude, that it is no wonder though the motion of light be not
descried; and that indeed no argument can be made from thence, to prove that
light is not a body.

But, let us examine this consideration a little further, and compare it to the
motion of the earth or heavens. Let the appearing circle of the fire be some
three foot Diameter, and the time of one entire circulation of it be the
sixtieth part of a minute; of which minutes there are 60. in an hour; so that,
in a whole day, there will but be 86400. of these parts of time. Now, the
Diameter of the wheel of fire being but of three foot, the whole quantity of
space that it moves, in that atome of time, will be at the most ten foot, which
is three paces and a foot; of which parts there are near eleven millions, in
the compass of the earth: so that, if the earth be moved round in 24. hours, it
must go near 130. times as fast as the Boy's stick, which by its swift motion
deceives our eye. But, if we allow the Sun, the Moon, and the fixed Stars to
move; how extreme swift must their flight be, and how imperceptible would their
motion be, in such a compass as our sight would reach to? And this being
certain, that, whether the earth or they move, the appearances to us are the
same; it is evident, that, as now they cannot be perceived to move (as
peradventure they do not) so it would be the very same in show to us, although
they did move. If the Sun were near us and galloped at that rate, surely we
could not distinguish between the beginning and ending of his race: but there
would appear one permanent Line of light from East to West, without any motion
at all; as the Torch seems to make, with so much a slower motion, one permanent
immovable wheel of fire.

But, contrary to this effect, we see that the Sun and Stars, by only being
removed further from our eyes, do cosen our sight so grossly, that we cannot
discern them to be moved at all. One would imagine, that so rapid and swift a
motion should be perceived in some sort or other, (which; whether it be in the
earth or in them, is all one to this purpose.) Either we should see them change
their places whiles we look upon them, as Arrows and Birds do, when they fly in
the Air: or else, they should make a stream of light bigger then themselves, as
the Torch does. But, none of all this happens. Let us gaze upon them so long
and so attentively, that our eyes be dazzled with looking; and all that while
they seem to stand immovable: and our eyes can give us no account of their
journey, till it be ended; They discern it not while it is in doing: So that,
if we consult with no better counselor then them, we may wonder to see that
body at night setting in the West, which in the morning we beheld rising in the
East.

But, that which seems to be yet more strange is, that these bodies move cross
us, and nevertheless are not perceived to have any motion at all: Consider,
then, how much easier it is for a thing that moves toward us to be with us
before we are aware. A nimble Fencer will put in a thrust so quick, that the
^oil will be in your bosom, when you thought it a yard off: because in the
same moment you saw his point so far distant; and could not discern it to move
toward you, till you felt the rude salutation it gave you. If then you will
compare the body of light, with these others that thus deceive us in regard of
motion; you must needs agree it is much rashness to conclude it has no motion,
because we cannot discern the succession of it. Consider that it is the
subtilest of all the bodies that God has made. Examine the paths of it, which,
for the smalness of their thrids, and the extreme divisibility of them, and
their pliant application of themseles to whatever has pores, are almost
without resistance. Calculate the strange multiplication of it, by a perpetual
momentary renovation of its streams. And cast with your self, with what extreme
force it springs out and flies abroad. And, on the other side, reflect how all
these things are directly opposite and contrary, in those other great bodies;
whose motion nevertheless appears, not to us, till it be done and past. And,
when you have well weighed all this, you must needs grant, that they, who in
this case guided themselves merely by what appears to their eyes, are ill
judgers of what they have not well examined. 4. The reason why the motion of
light is not discerned coming toward us; and that there is some real tardity
in it.


But, peradventure, some, who cannot all of a sudden be weaned from what their
sense has so long fed them with, may ask yet further, How it chances that we
have no effects of this motion? It shows not it self in the air, coming to us a
far off. It stays not a thought or slackens its speed, in flying so vast a
space, as is from the Sun to us. In fine, there is no discovery of it.

But, if Galileus his conception be well grounded, that Lightning gives us an
inkling of its motion, beginning from a little and increasing to a greater; or,
if Monsieur des Carts his opinion, that it goes slower in refraction, be true:
we shall not need to study long for an answer. But, in Galileus his experience,
it may be the breaking of the cloud which receives that succession of motion we
see: and, no slowness that light can acquire, by the resistance of the
refracting body, can be so great as to make that difference of lines, which
Monsieur des Carts most ingeniously (though, I much doubt, not truly) has
applied to yield the reason of refraction; as will appear in our further
discourse.

Therefore, these being uncertain, we will, to show the unreasonableness of
this question, suppose there may be some observable tardity in the motion of
light; and then ask of them, how we should arrive to perceive it? What sense
should we employ in this discovery? It is true, we are satisfied that sound
takes up time in coming to our ears: but it is, because our eyes are nimbler
then they, and can perceive, a good way distant, the Carpenters ax falling upon
the timber that he hews or the fire flashing out of the cannon, before they
hear any news of them: but shut your eyes, or inquire of a blind man; and then
neither you nor he can tell, whether those sounds will fill your ears at the
very instant they were begotten, or have spent some time in their journey to
you. Thus, then, our eyes instruct our ears. But is there any sense quicker
than the sight? or means to know, speedier than by our eyes? Or can they see
light, or any thing else, until it be with them? We may then assuredly
conclude, that its motion is not to be discerned as it comes upon us; nor it
self to be perceived, till its beams are in our eyes.

But, if there be any means to discover its motion, surely it must be in some
medium, through which it must struggle to get, as fire does through Iron;
which, increasing there by degrees, at last (when it is red hot) sends beams of
light quite through the plate, that, at the first, refused them passage. And it
makes to this purpose, that the light-conserving stones, which are gathered in
Italy, must be set in the Sun for some while, before they retain light: and the
light will appear in them, when they are brought back into the dark, greater or
lesser, (until they come to their utmost period), according as they have been
longer or a lesser while in the Sun. And our eyes, the longer they remain in
the light, the more dazel'd they are if they be suddenly passed into the dark.
And, a curious Experiencer did affirm, that the likeness of any object (but
particularly, he had often observed it of an iron grate), if it be strongly
enlightened, will appear to another, in the eye of him that looks strongly and
steadily upon it till he be dazel'd by it; even after he shall have turned his
eyes from it. And, the wheel of fire could never be made appear to our eye, by
the whirling of the firestick we even now spoke of; unless the impression, made
by the fire from one place, did remain in the eye, a while after the fire was
gone from the place whence it sent that ray. Whence it is evident, that light,
and the pictures of objects, do require time to settle and to unsettle in a
subject. If then light makes a greater impression with time, why should we
doubt but the first comes also in time; were our sense so nimble as to perceive
it?

But then, it may be objected, that the Sun would never 5. The Planets are not
certainly ever in that place where they appear to be.
be truly in that place, in which to our eyes it appears to be: because, it
being seen by means of the light which issues from it, if that light required
time to move in, the Sun (whose motions is so swift) would be removed from the
place where the light left it, before that could be with us to give tidings of
it. To this, I answer, allowing that peradventure it may be so: Who knows the
contrary? Or, what inconvenience would follow, if it be admitted? Indeed, how
can it be otherwise? In refraction, we are sure it is so: and therefore at no
time, but when the Sun is Perpendicularly over our heads, we can be certain of
the contrary; although it should send its light to us in an instant. Unless
happily the truth of the case should be, that the Sun does not move about us,
but 6. The reason why light being a body, does not by its motion shatter other
bodies into pieces.
we turn to his light: and then the objection also loses its aim.

But, the more we press the quickness of light, the more we engage our selves
in the difficulty, why light does not shatter the air in pieces; as likewise
all solid bodies whatever: for, the Masters of Natural Philosophy tells us,
that a softer thing with a great velocity, is as powerful in effect, when it
gives a blow, as a harder thing going slowly: And accordingly experience
teaches us, that a tallow candle, shot in a Gun, will go through a board or
kill a man. Wherefore light, having such an infinite celerity, should also have
an unresistable force, to pierce and shatter, not only the air, but even the
hardest bodies that are. Peradventure some may think it reasonable to grant the
consequence (in the circumstances), since experience teaches us, that the
congregation of a little light, by a glass, will set very solid bodies on
fire, and will melt metals in a very short space; which shows a great activity:
and the great activity shows a great percussion; burning being effected by a
kind of attrition of the thing burned. And the great force which fire shows in
Guns and in Mines (being but a multiplication of the same) evidently convinces
that, of its own nature, it makes a stong percussion, when all due
circumstances concur. Whereas it has but little effect if the due circumstances
be wanting; as we may observe in the insensible burning of so rarefied a body
as pure spirit of wine converted into flame.

But, we must examine the matter more parrticularly, and seek the cause, why a
violent effect does not always appear, wherever light strikes. For which we are
to note, that three things concur to make a percussion great: The bigness, the
density, and the celerity of the body moved. Of which three, there is only one
in light; to wit, celerity: for it has the greatest rarity, and the rays of it
are the smallest parcels of all natural bodies, and therefore, since only
celerity is considerable in the account of lights percussions, we must examine
what celerity is necessary, to make the stroke of a ray sensible. First then,
we see that all the motes of the air, nay even feathers and straws, do make no
sensible percussion when they fall upon us: therefore we must in light have, at
the least, a celerity that may be, to the celerity of the straw falling upon
our hand (for example,) as the density of the straw is to the density of light;
that the percussion of light may be in the least degree sensible. But, let us
take a corn of gunpowder instead of a straw (between which there cannot be much
difference): and then, putting that the density of fire is, to the density of
Gunpowder, as 1. to 125000. and that the density of the light we have here in
the earth is, to the density of that part of fire which is in the Suns body, as
the body of the Sun is to that body which is called Orbis magnus (whose
Semidiameter is the distance between the Sun and the Earth), which must be in
subtriple proportion of the Diameter of the Sun to the Diameter of the great
Orb; it follows that 125000. being multiplied by the proportion of the great
Orb to the Sun (which Galileo tells us is as 106000000. to one) will give a
scantling of what degree of celerity light must have, more then a corn of
Gunpowder, to recompense the excess of weight which is in a corn of Gunpowder,
above that which is in a ray of light, as big as a corn of Gunpowder. Which
will amount to be much greater than the proportion of the Semediameter of Orbis
magnu^ to the Semidiameter of the corn of Gunpowder: for if you reckon five
grains of Gunpowder to a Barly-corns breadth, and 12. of them in an inch, and
12. inches in a foot, and 3. feet in a pace, and 1000. paces in a mile, and
3500. miles in the Semidiameter of the earth, and 1208. Semidiamiters of the
earth in the Semidiameter of the Orbis magnus, there will be in it but 913
2480000000. grains of Gunpowder; whereas the other calculation makes light to
be 13250000000000 times rarer then gunpowder, which is almost ten times a
greater proportion then the other. And yet this celerity supplies but one of
the two conditions, wanting in light to make its percussions sensible; namely,
density. Now, because the same velocity, in a body of a lesser bulk, does not
make so great a percussion as it does in a bigger body, and that the littleness
of the least parts of bodies follows the proportion of their rarity; this vast
proportion of celerity must again be drawn into it self, to supply for the
excess in bigness that a corn of gunpowder has over an atome of light: and the
product of this multiplication will be the celerity required to supply for both
defects. Which evidently shows, it is impossible that a ray of light should
make any sensible percussion; though it be a body. Especially, considering that
sense never takes notice of what is perpetually done in a moderate degree. And
therefore, after this minute looking into all circumstances, we need not have
difficulty in allowing to light the greatest celerity imaginable, and a
percussion proportionate to such a celerity in so rare a body; and yet not fear
any violent effect from its blow unless it be condensed, and many parts of it
be brought together to work as if they were but one.

As concerning the last objection, that, if light were a body, It would be
fanned by the wind: we must consider, what is the cause 7. The reason why the
body of light is never perceived to be fanned by the wind.
of a thing appearing to be moved; and then examine what force that cause has
in light. As for the first part, we see that, when a body is discerned now in
one place, now in another; then it appears to be moved. And this we see happens
also in light; as when the Sun or a candle is carried or moves, the light
thereof, in the body of the Candle or Sun, seems to be moved along with it. And
the like is in a shining cloud or comet.

But, to apply this to our purpose: We must note, that the intention of the
objection is, that the light which goes from the fire to an opacous body far
distant, without interruption of its continuity, should seem to be jog'd or put
out of its way by the wind that crosses it. Wherein the first failing is, that
the Objector conceives light to send species to our eye from the midst of its
line: whereas with a little consideration he may perceive, that no light is
seen by us but that which is reflected from an opacous body to our eye; so that
the light he means in his objection is never seen at all. Secondly, it is
manifest that the light which strikes our eye, strikes it in a straight line,
and seems to be at the end of that straight line, wherever that is; and so can
never appear to be in another place: but, the light, which we see in another
place, we conceive to be another light. Which makes it again evident, that the
light can never appear to shake, though we should suppose that light may be
seen from the middle of its line; for no part of wind or air can come into any
sensible place in that middle of the line with such speed, that new light from
the sourcce does not illuminate it sooner then it can be seen by us: wherefore
it will appear to us illuminated, as being in that place; and therefore the
light can never appear shaken. And lastly, it is easier for the air or wind to
destroy the light, then to remove it out of its place; wherefore, it can never
so remove it out of its place, as that we should see it in another place: But,
if it should remove it, it would wrap it up within it self and hide it.

In conclusion, after this long dispute concerning the nature of light: If we
consider well what has been said on both sides, The reasons for and against
lights being a body compared together.
(to which much more might be added, but that we have already trespassed in
length, and I conceive enough is said to decide the matter) an equal judge will
find the balance of the question to hang upon these terms; that, to prove the
nature of light to be material and corporeal, are brought a company of
accidents. well known to be the proprieties of quantity or bodies, and as well
known to be in light. Even so far as that it is manifest, light in its
beginning, before it be dispersed, is fire; and if again it be gathered
together, it shows it self again to be fire. And, the receptacles, of it are
the receptacles of a body: being a multitude of pores, as the hardness and
coldness of transparent things do give us to understand; of which we shall
hereafter have occasion to discourse.

On the contrary side, whatever arguments are brought, against lights being a
body, are only negative. As, that we see not any motion of light; that we do
not discern where the confines are between light and air; that we see not room
for both of them, or for more lights to be together; and the like: which is to
oppose negative proofs against affirmative ones; and to build a doctrine upon
the defect of our senses; or upon the likeness of bodies which are extremely
unlike, expecting the same effects from the most subtle as from the most gross
ones. All which, together with the authority of Aristotle and his followers,
have turned light into darkness, and made us almost deny the light of our own
eyes.

Now then, to take our leave of this important question; let us return to the
principles from whence we began, and consider A summary repetition of the
reasons which prove that light is fire.
that, Seeing Fire is the most rare of the Elements, and very dry; and that out
of the former it has, that it may be cut into very small pieces, and out of
the later, that it conserves its own figure, and so is apt to divide what ever
fluid body: and joining to these two principles, that it multiplies extremely
in its source: It must of necessity follow, that it sends out in great
multitudes little small parts, into the air and other bodies circumfused, with
great dilatation, in a spherical manner: And likewise, that these little parts
are easily broken; and, new ones still following the former, are still
multiplied in straight lines from the place where they break. Out of which it is
evident that, of necessity, it must, in a manner, fill all places, and that no
sensible place is so little, but that fire will be found in it, if the medium be
capacious. As also, that its extreme least parts will be very easily swallowed
up in the parts of the air, which are humid; and, by their enfolding, be as it
were quite lost, so as to lose the appearance of fire. Again, that, in its
reflections, it will follow the nature of grosser bodies, and have glidings
like them; which is that we call refractions. That little streamings from it
will cross one another in excessive great numbers, in an unsensible part of
space, without hindering one another. That its motion will be quicker then
sense can judge of; and therefore will seem to move in an instant, or to stand
still as in a stagnation. That, if there be any bodies so porous with little
and thick pores, as that the pores arrive near to equalling the substance of
the body; then, such a body will be so filled with these little particles of
fire, that it will appear as if there were no stop in its passage, but were all
filled with fire: and yet, many of these little parts will be reflected. And,
whatever qualities else we find in light, we shall be able to derive them out
of these principles; and show that fire must of necessity do what experience
teaches us that light does. That is, to say in one word, it will show us that
fire is light. But, if fire be light, then light must needs be fire. And so we
leave this matter.

CHAP. IX. Of Local motion in common.
THough, in the fifth Chapter, we made only earth the pretender 1. No local
motion can be performed without succession.
in the controversy aginst fire, for superiority in activity; (and, in very
truth, the greatest force of gravity appears in those bodies which are
eminently earthy): nevertheless, both water and air (as appears out of the 4.
Chapter of the Elements) do agree with earth in having gravity; and gravity, is
the chief virtue to make them efficients. So that, upon the matter, this plea
is common to all the three Elements.

Wherefore, to explicate this virtue, whereby these three weighty Elements work;
let us call to mind what we said in the beginning of the last Chapter,
concerning local motion: to wit, that, according as the body moved, or the
divider, did more and more enter into the divided body; so, it joined it self
to some new parts of the Medium or divided body, and did in like manner forsake
others. Whence it happens that in every part of motion, it possesses a greater
part of the Medium then it self can fill at once. And because, by the
limitation and confinedness of every magnitude to just what it is, and no more,
it is impossible that a lesser body should at once equalize a greater; it
follows, that this division or motion, whereby a body attains to fill a place
bigger then it self, must be done successively; that is, it must first fill one
part of the place it moves in, then another, and so proceed on, till it have
measured it self with every part of the place, from the first beginning of the
line of motion to the last period of it where the body rests.

By which discourse it is evident, that there cannot in nature be a strength so
great, as to make the least or quickest moveable that is to pass in an instant,
or all together; over the least place that can be imagined: for, that would
make the moved body (remaining what it is, in regard of its bigness) to
equallize and fit a thing bigger then it is. Therefore it is manifest, that
motion must consist of such parts as have this nature, that whiles one of them
is in being, the others are not yet: and, as by degrees every new one comes to
be, all the others that were before do vanish and cease to be. Which
circumstance accompanying motion, we call Succession.

And, whatever is so done is said to be done in time, which 2. Time is the
common measure of all sucessione.
is the common measure of all succession, For, the change of situation of the
Stars, but especally of the Sun and Moon, is observed, more or less, by all
mankind; and appears alike to every man: and (being the most known, constant,
and uniform succession that men are used to) is, as it were by nature it self,
set in their way and offered them, as fittest to estimate and judge all other
particular successions; by comparing them both to it, and among themselves by
it. And, accordingly, we see all men naturally measure all other successions,
and express their quantities, by comparing them to the revolutions of the
Heavens; for, days, hours, and years, are nothing else but they, or some
determinate parts of them; to some of which all other motions and successions
must of necessity be referred, if we will measure them. And thus we see, how all
the mystery of applying time to particular motions is nothing else, but the
considering how far the Agent that moves the Sun causes it to go on in its
journey, whiles the Agent that moves a particular body causes it to perform its
motion.

So that it is evident, that Velocity; is the effect of the superproportion 3
What velocity is, and that it cannot be infinite.
of the one Agent over a certain Medium; in respect of the proportion which
another Agent has to the same Medium. And, therefore, Velocity is a quality by
which One succession is intrinsically distinguishd from Another: though our
explication uses to include time in the notions of velocity and tardity.
Velocity, then, is the effect (as we said) of more strength in the Agent. And,
having before expressed, that velocity is a kind of density; we find that this
kind of density is an excellency in succession: as permanent density is an
excellency in the nature of Substance; though, an imperfection in the nature of
Quantity, (by which we see, that quantity is a kind of base alloy added to
substance.) And out of this it is evident that, by how much the quicker the
motion is in equal Mediums, by so much the agent is the perfecter which causes
it to so quick. Wherefore, if the velocity should ascend so much, as to admit no
proportion between the quickness of the one and the tardity of the other, all
other circumstances being even, excepting the difference of the Agents; then
there must be no proportion between the Agents. Nor indeed can there be any
proportion between them, though there were never so many differences in other
circumstances; as long as those differences be within any proportion. And
consequently, you see that, if one Agent be supposed to move in an instant, and
another in time; whatever other differences be in the bodies moved and in the
Mediums, nevertheless the agent which causes motion in an instant will be
infinite, in respect of the agent which moves in time. Which is impossible: it
being the nature of a body, that greater quantity of the same thing has
greater virtue, then a less quantity has; and therefore, for a body to have
infinite virtue, it must have infinite magnitude.

If any should say the contrary; affirming the infinite virtue may be in a
finite body: I ask, whether in half that body (were it divided) the virtue
would be infinite or no? If he acknowledge that it would not; I infer thence,
that neither in the two parts together there can be infinite virtue: for two
finites cannot compose and make up one infinite, But, if he will have the
virtue be infinite in each half; he therein allows that there is no more virtue
in the whole body then in one half of it: which is against the nature of
bodies. Now, that a body cannot be infinite in greatness is proved, in the
Second Knot of Mr. White's first Dialogue. De Mundo. And thus it is evident,
that, by the virtue of pure bodies, there can be no motion in an instant.

On the other side it follows, that there cannot be so little a force in
nature, but that, giving it time enough, it will move 4. No force so little
that is not able to move the greatest weight imaginable.
the greatest weight that can be imagined: For, the things we treat of, being
all of them quantities, may, by Division and Multiplication, be brought to
equality. As for example; Supposing the weight of a moveable to be a million of
pounds; and that the mover is able to move the millioneth part of one of those
pounds, in a million of years, the millioneth part of a pace, through a Medium
of a certain rarity: seeing years may be multiplied so, as to equalize the
force of this mover, to the weight of the moveable: it follows clearly, that
this force may move the whole weight of a million of pounds, through the
determined Medium, in a determinate number of millions of years, a million of
paces. For, such a force is equal to the required effect; and by consequence,
if the effect should not follow, there would be a complete cause put, and no
effect result from it.

But peradventure it is needful to illustrate this point yet further. Suppose
then a weight never so great to be A, and a force never so little to be B. Now,
if you conceive that some other force moves A, you must withal conceive it
moves A some space; since all motion implies necessarily that it be through
some space. Let that space be CD. And, because a body cannot be moved a space
in an instant, but requires some time, to have its motion performed in; it
follows, that there must be a determined time, in which the conceived force
must move the weight A through the space CD. Let that time be OF. Now, then,
this is evident, that it is all one to say, that B moves A; and to say, that B
moves A, through a space, in a time; so that, if any part of this be left out,
it cannot be understood that B moves A. Therefore to express particularly the
effect which B is to do upon A, we must say, B must move A a certain space in a
certain time. Which being so, we may in the next place consider, that this
effect of moving A may be diminished two ways, either because the space it is
to be moved in is lessened; or the time taken up in its motion is increased:
for, as it is a greater effect, to move A through the space CD in a less time
then OF, so it is a less effect to move the same A through the space CD in a
greater time then OF; or through a less space then CD in the time OF. Now then,
this being suposed, that it is a less effect to move A through CD in a greater
time then OF: it follows also, that a lesser virtue is able to move it through
CD in a greater time then OF, then the virtue which is required to move it
through the same space in the time OF. Which if it be once granted (as it
cannot be denied), then multiplying the time, as much as the virtue or force
required to move A through CD in the time OF is greater then the force B; in so
much time the force B will be able to move A through CD. Which discourse is
evident, if we take it in common terms: but, it be applied to action, wherein
physical accidents intervene; the artificer must have the judgment to provide
for them, according to the nature of his matter.

Upon this last discourse hangs the Principle which governs 5. The chief
principle of Mechanics deduced out of the former discourse.
Mechanics, to wit, that the force and the distance of weights counterpoysing
one another ought to reciprocal: That is, by how much the one weight is heavier
then the other, by so much must the distance of the lighter, from the fixed
point upon which they are moved, be greater then the distance of the greater
weight from the same point. For it is plain, that the weight which is more
distant must be moved a greater space, then the nearer weight; in the
proportion of the two distances: Wherefore, the force moving it must carry it in
a velocity of the said proportion to the velocity of the other; And
consequently the Agent, or mover, must be in that proportion more powerful
then the contrary mover. And, out of this practice of Geometricians in
Mechanics, (which is confirmd by experience) it is made evident that, if other
conditions be equal, the excess of so much Gravity will make so much Velocity:
and so much velocity, in proportion, will recompense so much gravity. 6. No
moveable can pass from rest to any determinate degree of velocity, or from a
lesser degree to a greater; without passing through all the intermediate
degrees, which are below the obtained degree.


Out of the precedent Conclusions another follows: which is, that nothing
receds from quiet or rest, and attains a great degree of Celerity, but it must
pass through all the degrees of Celerity that are below the obtained degree.
And the like is, in passing from any lesser degree of velocity to a greater;
because it must pass through all the intermediate degrees of velocity. For, by
the declaration of velocity, which we have even now made, we see, that there is
as much resistance in the Medium to be overcome with speed, as there is for it
to be overcome in regard of the quantity, or line of extent of it: because (as
we have said) the force of the Agent in counterpoises ought to be increased, as
much as the line of extent of the Medium, which is to be overcome by the Agent
in equal time, exceeds the line of extent of the other Medium, along which the
resistant body is to be moved. Wherefore, it being proved that no line of extent
can be overcome in an instant; it follows, that no defect of velocity, which
requires as great a superproportion in the cause, can be overcome likewise in
an instant.

And, by the same reason, by which we prove that a moveable cannot be drawn in
an instant from a lower degree of velocity to a higher, it is with no less
evidence concluded, that no degree of velocity can be attained in an instant:
For, divide that degree of velocity into two halfs, and if the Agent had
overcome the one half, he could not overcome the other half in an instant; much
less therefore is he able to overcome the whole (that is, to reduce the moveable
from quiet to the said degree of velocity) in an instant.

Another reason may be, because the movers themselves (such movers as we treat
of here) are Bodies likewise moved, and consist of parts: whereof not every one
part, but a competent number of them, makes the moving body a fit Agent, able
to move the proposed body in a proposed degree of celerity. Now, this Agent
meeting with resistance in the moveable, and not being in the utmost extremity
of density, but condensable yet further, (because it is a body); and every
resistance (be it never so small) works something upon the mover (though never
so hard) to condense it: the parts of the mover, that are to overcome this
resistance in the moveable, must (to work that effect) be condensed and brought
together as close as is needful, by this resistance of the moveable to the
mover; and so, the remote parts of the mover become nearer to the moveable,
which cannot be done but successively, because it enclud's local motion. And,
this application being likewise divisible, and not all the parts flocking
together in an instant to the place where they are to exercise their power: it
follows, that, whiles there are fewer moving parts knit together, they must
needs move less and more weakly, then when more or all of them are assembled
and appled to that work. So that, the motive virtue increasing thus, in
proportion to the multiplying of the parts applied to cause the motion; of
necessity, the effect (which is obedience to be moved, and quickness of motion,
in them oveable) must do so too: that is, it must from nothing, or from rest,
pass through all the degrees of celerityun, till it arrive to that which all
the parts together are able to cause.

As for example, when with my hand I strike a ball; till my hand touches it,
it is in quiet: but then it begins to move; yet with such resistance, that,
although it obey in some measure the stroke of my hand, nevetiheless it presses
the yielding flesh of my palm, backwards toward the upper and bony part of it.
That part then overtaking the other, by the continued motion of my hand; and
both of them joining together to force the ball away; the impulse becomes
stronger, then at the first touching of it. And, the longer it presses upon it,
the more the parts of my hand condense and unite themselves to exercise their
force; and the ball therefore must yield the more: and consequent, the motion of
it (...) quicker and quicker, till my hand parts from it. Which condensation of
the parts of my hand increasing successively, by the parts joining closer to
one another, the velocity of the balls motion (which is an effect of it) must
also increase proportionably thereto. And in like manner, the motion of my hand
and arm must grow quicker and quicker; and pass all the degrees of velocity
between rest and the utmost degree it attains unto: For seeing they are the
Spirits swelling the Nervs, that cause the arms motion, (as we shall hereafter
show); upon its resistance, they flock from other parts of the body to evercome
that resistance. And since their journey thither requires time to perform it
in; and the nearest come first: it must needs follow, that, as they grow more
and more in number, they must more powerfully overcome the resistance, and
consequently, increase the velocity of the motion, in the same proportion as
they flock thither; till it attain that degree of velocity, which is the utmost
period that the power which the Agent has to overcome the resistance of the
medium can bring it self to. Between which and rest, or any other inferior
degree of velocity, there may be designed infinite intermediate degrees;
proportionable to the infinite divisibility of time, and space, in which the
mover moves. Which degrees arise out of the reciprocal yiedling of the medium:
And that is likewise divisible in the same infinite proportion.

Since then, the power of all natural Agents is limited, the mover (be it never
so powerful) must be confined to observe these proportions, and cannot pass
over all these infinite designable degrees in an instant; but must allot some
time (which has a like infinity of designable parts) to balance this infinity
of degrees of velocity: and so consequently, it requires time, to attain to any
determinate degree. And therefore cannot recede immediately from rest to any
degree of celerity, but must necessarily pass through all the intermediate ones.

Thus it is evident that all motion which has a beginning must of necessity
increase for some time. And, since the works of nature are in proportion to
their causes, it follows that this increase is in a determinate proportion:
Which Galileus (to whom we owe the greatest part of what is known concerning
motion) teaches us how to find out; and to discover what degree of celerity any
movable, that is moved by nature, has, in any determinate part of the space it
moves in.

Having settled these conditions of motion; we shall do well in 7. The
conditions which help to motion, in the movable are three; in the medium one.
the next place to enquire after the causes of it: as well in the body moved,
as also in the mover that occasions the motion. And, because we have already
showed, that local motion is nothing in substance but division: we may
determine that those causes which co^tribute to division, or resist it, are the
causes which make or resist local motion. It has also been said, that Density
has in it a power of dividing; and that Rarity is the cause of being divided;
likewise we have said that fire, by reason of its small parts, intowch it may be
cut (which makes them sharp) has also an eminence in dividing: So that we have
two qualities, density and tenuity or sharpness, which concur actively to
division. We have told. Dialog. 1. of Motion.
you also how Galileus has demonstrated, that a greater quantity, of the same
figure and density, has a privilege of descending faster than a lesser. And
that privilege consists in this, that the proportion of the superficies to the
body it limits (which proportion the greater it is, the more it retards) is
less in a greater bulk than in a smaller.

We have therefore three conditions concurring to make the motion more
efficacious: namely, the density, the sharpness, and the bulk of the movable:
and more then these three we cannot expect to find in a moved body. For,
quantity has but three determinations: one, by density and rarity; of which
density is one of the three conditions: another, by its parts; as by a foot, a
span, etc. and in this way we have found that the greater excells the lesser:
the third and last is, by its figure, and in this we find that subtle or edged
quantities do prevail over blunt ones. Seeing, therefore, that these three
determinations be all that are in quantity; there can be no more conditions in
the body moved, (which of necessity is a finite quantity), but the three named.

And, as for the medium which is to be divided, there is only rarity and
density (the one, to help; the other to hinder) that require consideration, on
its side: For, neither figure, nor littleness and greatness, do make any
variation in it. And as for the Agent, it is not as yet time, before we have
looked further into the nature of motion, to determine his qualities.

Now then, let us reflect how these three conditions do all agree in this
circumstance, that they help nothing to division; unless the body in which they
are to be moved and pressed against 8. No body has any intrinsecal virtue to
move it self toward any determinate part of the Universe.
the body that is to be divided: so that we see no principle to persuade us,
that any body can move it self toward any determinate part or place of the
universe, of its own intrinsecal inclination. For, besides that the learned
Author of the Dialogues de Mundo (in his third Dialogue, and the second Knot)
has demonstrated, that a body cannot move unless it be moved by some
extrinsecal Agent; we may easily frame to our selves a conceit, how absurd it
is to think that a body, by a quality in it, can work upon it self: as if we
should say, that rarity (which is but more quantity) could work upon quantity;
or that figure (which is but that the body reaches no further) could work upon
the body: and in general, that the manner of any thing can work upon that thing
whose manner it is. For Aristotle and St. Thomas, and their Intelligent
Commentators, declaring the notion of Quality, tell us, that to be a Quality is
nothing else but to be the determination or modification of the thing whose
quality it is.

Besides, the natural manner of operation is, to work according to the capacity
of the subject: but, when a body is in the midst of an uniform medium or space,
the subject is equally prepared on all sides to receive the action of that
body. Wherefore (though we should allow it a force to move), if it be a natural
Agent and have no understanding, it must work indifferently on all sides, and
by consequence, cannot move on any side. For, if you say, that the Agent in
this case (where the medium is uniform) works rather upon one side than upon
another; it must be because this determination is within the Agent it self, and
not out of the circumstant dispositions: which is the manner of working of
those substances that work for an end of their own; that is, of understanding
creatures, and not of natural hodies.

Now, he that would exactly determine what motion a body has, or is apt to
have, determining by supposition the force of 9. The increase of motion is
always made in the proportion of the odd numbers.
the Agent, must calculate the proportions of all these three conditions of the
movable, and the quality of the medium; which is a proceeding too particular
for the intention of our discourse. But, to speak in common, it will not be
amiss to examine in what proportion motion does increase: since we have
concluded that all motion proceeds from quiet, by a continual increase,
Galileus (that miracle of our age, and whose wit was able to discover whatever
he had a mind to employ it about) has told us that natural motion increases,
in the proportion of the odd numbers. Which, to express by example, is thus:
suppose that in the going of the first yard it has one degree of velocity, then
in the going of the second yard it will have three degrees, and in going of the
third it will have five; and so onwards, still adding two to the degrees of the
velocity, for every one to the space. Or, to express it more plainly; if in the
first minute of time it goes one yard of space, then in the next minute it will
go three yards, in the third it will go five, in the fourth seven; and so
forth.

But, we must enlarge this proposition to all motions; as we have done the
former, of the increase it self in velocity: because the reason of it is common
to all motions. Which is, that all motion (as may appear out of what we have
formerly said) proceeds from two causes: namely, the Agent or the force that
moves; and the disposition of the body moved, as it is composed of the three
qualities we lately explicated. In which is to be noted, that the Agent does
not move simply by its own virtue, but applies also the virtue of the body
moved, which it has, to divide the medium when it is put on. As when we cut
with a knife, the effect proceeds from the knife pressed on by the hand; or,
from the hand as applying and putting in action the edge and cutting power of
the knife, Now this, in Physics and Nature, is clearly parallel to what, in
Geometry and Arithmatick the Mathematicians call drawing one number or one side
into another; for as, in Mathematics, to draw one number into another is to
apply the number drawn to every part of the number into which it is drawn (as,
if we draw three into seven, we make twenty one, by making every unity or part
of the number seven to be three; and the like is of lines, in Geometry); So, in
the present case, to every part of the hands motion, we add the whole virtue of
the cutting faculty which is in the knife, and, to every part of the motion of
the knife, we add the whole pressing virtue of the hand. Therefore the increase
of the effect, proceeding from two causes so working, must also be parallel to
the increase of the quantities arising out of the like drawing in Mathematics.
But in those, it is evident that the increase is according to the order of the
odd numbers; and therefore it must in our case be the like: that is, the
increase must be in the said proportion of odd numbers, Now, that in those the
increase proceeds so, will be evident, if you consider the increase of an
Equicrure Triangle; which, because it goes upon a certain proportion of length
and breadth, if you compare the increases of the whole Triangle (that gains on
each side) with the increases of the perpendicular (which gains only in
length), you will see that they will proceed in the foresaid proportion of odd
numbers.

Which will be better understood, if we set down the demonstration of it. Let
the Equicrure Triangle be ABC: and, from the point A, draw the line AD
perpendicular to the line BC, and let it be divided in to three equal parts by
the lines OF and GH, in the points I and K. And I say, that because the line
AK, is twice as long as the line AI, therefore the trapezium, EFHG, is thrice as
big as the triangle AEF. For, as AK is to AI, so is GH to OF: but the triangle
AGH is, to the triangle AEF; in a double proportion of the line GH to the line
OF; which being double the proportion of one triangle to the other must be
fourfold: so that subtracting the triangle AEF, the trapezium EFGH remains
thrice as big as it. And thus the whole triangle gets an encrense of three,
whiles the perpendicular is increased but one, to make his length two. Which
when it comes to three, the trapezium, GHCB, that contains the third division
of the perpendicular, becomes five times as big as the triangle AEF. For, since
the line AD is three times as long as the line AI; and the line BC is three
times as long as OF; it follows, that the triangle ABC is nine times as big as
the triangle AEF: but AGH is four times as big as AEF: therefore subtracting it
from the whole triangle ABC, it leaves the trapezium GHCB five times as big as
the first triangle AEF. Which proposition is very ingeniously set down by the
learned Monsieur Gassendi, in his first Epistle, Demotu impresso a m^tore
translato, to the same purpose for which we bring it. Though we do not here
wake use of this Scheme and way of demonstration; because we had fallen upon
this before his book came abroad: and therefore we only note his, to direct the
Reader to it, who peradventure may like his better, than ours. Howbeit we do
not conceive that he has, in his discourse there, arrived to the true reason
of the effect we search into: as may appear by what we 10. No motion can
increase for ever, without coming to a period.
have already delivered.

But, we must not imagine that the velocity of motion will always increase
thus, for as long as we can fancy any motion: but, when it is arrived to the
utmost period that such a moveable with such causes is capable of, then it
keeps constantly the same pace, and goes equally and uniformly at the same
rate. For since the density of the moveable, and the force of the Agent moving
it, (which two cause the motion) have a limited proportion to the resistance of
the medium, how yiedling soever it be: it must needs follow, that when the
motion is arrived to that height which arises out of this proportion, it cannot
exceed it, but must continue at that rate; unless some other cause give yet a
greater impulse to the movable, For, velocity consisting in this, that the
movable cuts through more of the medium in an equal time; it is evident, that in
the increase of velocity, the resistance of the medium which is overcome by it,
grows greater and greater, and by little and little gains upon the force of the
Agent; so that the superproportion of the Agent grows still lesser and lesser,
as the velocity increases; and therefore at the length they must come to be
balanced, and then the velocity can increase no more.

And the reason of the increase of it, for a while at the beginning, is
because, coming from rest, it must pass through all the intermediate degrees of
velocity, before it can attain to the height of it; which requires time to
perform, and therefore falls under the power of our sense to observe. But,
because we see it do so for some time, we must not therefore conclude, the
nature of such motion is still to increase, without any period or limit; like
those lines that perpetually grow nearer; and yet can never meet: for, we see
our reason, examining the causes of this velocity, assures us that, in
continuance of time and space, it may come to its height, which it cannot
exceed.

And there would be the pitch, at which distance weights being let fall would
give the greatest strokes and make greatest impressions. It Is true that
Galileus and Mersenius (two exact experimenters) do think they find this verity
by their experiences: But, surely that is impossible to be done. For, the
increase of velocity, being in a proportion ever diminishing, must of necessity
come to an insensible increase in proportion, before it ends: for, the space
which the movable goes through, is still increased, and the time, wherein it
passes through that space, remains still the same little one, as was taken up
in passing a less space immediately before; and such little differences, of
great spaces passed over in a little time, come soon to be undiscernible by
sense. But reason (which shows us that, if velocity never ceased from
increasing, it would in time arive to exceed any particular velocity, and, by
consequence, the proportion which the mover has to the medium; because of the
adding still a determinate part to its velocity) concludes plainly, that it is
impossible motion should increase for ever, without coming to a period.

Now the impression which falling weights make is of two kinds: for, the body
into which impression is made either can 11. Certain problems resolved
concerning the proportion of some moving agents compared to their effects.
yield backward, or it cannot. If it can yield backward, then the impression
made is a motion: as we see a stroke with a Racket upon a Ball, or with a
Pail-mail beetle upon a Bowl, makes it fly from it. But, if the stricken body
cannot yield backwards, then it makes it yield on the sides: And this, in
diverse matters; for, if the smitten body be dry and brittle, it is subject to
break it and make the pieces fly round about; but if it be a tough body, it
squeeses it into a larger form.

But, because, the effect, in any of these ways, is eminently greater than the
force of the Agent seems to be; it is worth our labor to look into the causes
of it. To which end, we may remember how we have already declared, that the
force of the velocity is equal to a reciprocal force of weight in the virtue
movent: wherefore the effect of a blow that a man gives with a hammer depends,
on the weight of the hammer, on the velocity of the motion, and on the hand, in
case the hand accompanies the blow. But, if the motion of the hand ceases
before (as when we throw a thing), then only the velocity and the weight of the
hammer remain to be considered. However, let us put the hand and weight in one
sum, which we may equalize by some other virtue or weight: Then, let us
consider the way or space which a weight, lying upon the thing, is to go
forwards; to do the same effect in the same time as the percussion does; and,
what excess the line of the blow has over the line of that way or space, such
an excess we must add of equal weight or force, to the weight we had already
taken: And, the weight composed of both will be a fit Agent to make the like
impression. This Problem was proposed to me by that worthy religious man,
Father Mersenius: who is not content with advancing learning by his own
industry and labors; but besides, is always (out of his generous affection to
verity) inciting others to contribute to the public stock of it.

He proposed to me likewise this following question, to wit, why there is
required a weight of water in double Geometrical proportion, to make a pipe run
twice as fast as it did, or have twice as much water run out in the same time?
To which I answer out of the same ground, as before: That because, in running
twice as fast, there goes out double the water in every part of time; and
again, every part of water goes a double space in the same part of time (that
is to say, because double the celerity is drawn into double the water, and
double the water into doule the celerity; therefore the present effect is, to
the former effect, as the effect or quadrate of a double line drawn into into
it self, is to the effect or quadrate of half the said line drawn into it self.
And consequently, the cause of the latter effect (which is the weight then)
must be to the cause of the former effect (that is, to the former weight) in
the same proportion; namely, as the quadrate of a double line is to the
quadrate of half that line. And so you see the reason of what he by experience
finds to be true. Though I doubt not but when he shall set out the treatise
which he has made on this subject, the Reader will have better satisfaction.

In the mean while, an experiment which Galileo delivers will confirm this
doctrine. He says, that, to make the same Pendant go twice as fast as it did,
or to make every undulation of it in half the time it did, you must make the
line, at which it hangs, double in Geometrical proportion, to the line at which
it hanged before. Whence it follows, that the circle by which it goes is
likewise in double Geometrical proportion. And this being certain, that
celerity to celerity has the proportion of force, which weight has to weight;
it is evident that, as in one case, there must be weight in Geometrical
proportion, so in theother case, where only celerity makes the variance, the
celerity must be in double Geometrical proportion; according as Galileo finds
it by experience.

But, to return to our main intent; there is to be further noted that, If the
subject stricken be of a proportionate cessibility, it seems to dull and deaden
the stroke; whereas, if the thing stricken be hard, the stroke seems to lose no
force, but to work a greater effect. Though indeed the truth be, that in both
cases the effects are equal; but diverse according to the natures of the things
that are stricken; for, no force that once is in nature can be lost, but must
have its adequate effect one way or other.

Let us then first suppose the body stricken to be a hard body, of no exceeding
bigness: in which case, if the stroke light perpendicularly upon it, it will
carry such a body before it. But, if the body be too great, and have its parts
so conjoined that they are weaker then the stroke; in this case the stroke
drives one part before it, and so breaks it from the rest. But lastly, if the
parts of the stricken body be so easily cessible, as without difficulty the
stroke can divide them; then it enters into such a body till it has spent its
force. So that now, making up our account, we see that an equal effect proceeds
from an equal force in all the three cases, though in themselves they be far
different. But, we are apt to account that effect greater, which is more
considerable to us by the profit or damage it brings us. And therefore we
usually say, that the blow, which shakes a wall, or beats it down and kills men
with the stones it scatters abroad, has a greater effect then that which
penetrates far into a mud wall, and does little harm: for that innocuousness of
the effect makes that, although in it self it be as great as the other, yet
it is little observed or considered.

This discourse draws on another: which is to declare how motion ceases. And to
sum that up in short, we say that, When 12. When a moveable comes to rest, the
motion decreases according to the rules of increase.
motion comes to rest, it decreases and passes through all the degrees of
celerity and tardity, that are between rest and the height of that motion which
so declines: and that in the proportion of the odd numbers, as, we declared
above, it increased. The reason is clear; because that which makes a motion
cease is the resistance it finds: which resistance is an action of a mover
that moves something against the body moved, or something equivalent to such an
action; wherefore it must follow the laws that are common to all motions; of
which kind those two are that we have expressed in this conclusion. Now, that
resistance is a countermotion, or equivalent to one is plain by this that any
body which is pressed must needs press again on the body that presses it;
wherefore, the cause that hinders such a body from yielding is a force moving
that body against the body which presses it. The particulars of all which we
shall more at large declare, where we speak of the action and reaction of
particular bodies.

CHAP. X. Of Gravity and Levity; and of Local Motion, commonly termed Natural.
IT is now time to consider that distinction of motions which 1. Those motions
are called natural which have constant causes; and those violent which are
contrary to them.
is so famous in Aristotle; to wit; that some motions are natural, others
violent: and to determine what may be signified by these terms. For seeing we
have said that no body has a natural intrinsecal inclination to any place, to
which it is able to move it self; we must needs conclude that the motion of
every body follows the percussion of extrinsecal Agents. It seems therefore
impossible that any body should have any motion natural to it self: and, if
there be none natural, there can be none violent; and so this distinction will
vanish to nothing. But on the otherside, Living creatures manifestly show
natural motions; having natural instruments to perform certain motions:
wherefore such motions must of necessity be natural to them: But, these are not
the motions we are to speak of; for, Aristotle's division is common to all
bodies, or at the least to all those we converse with: and particularly to
those which are called heavy and light; which two terms pass through all the
bodies we have notice of.

Therefore, proceeding on our grounds before laid, to wit, that no body can be
moved of it self; we may determine those motions to be natural to bodies, which
have constant causes or percutients to make them always in such bodies; and
those violent, which are contrary to such natural motions. Which being
supposed; we much search out the causes, that so constantly make some bodies
descend toward the center or the middle of the earth, and others to rise and
go from the center: by which the world is subject to those restless motions,
that keep all things in perpetual flux, in this changing sphere of action and
passion.

Let us then begin with considering what effects the Sun 2. The first and most
general operation of the Sun is, the making and raising of atoms.
(which is a constant and perpetual cause) works on inferior bodies, by his
being regularly sometimes present and sometimes absent. Observe in a pot of
water hanging over a fire, how the heat makes some parts of the water ascend,
and others to supply the room by descending; so that, as long as it boyls; it is
in a perpetual confused motion up and down. Now, having formerly concluded that
fire is light, and light is fire; it cannot be doubted but that the Sun serves
instead of fire to our Globe of Earth and water, (which may be fitly compared
to the boiling pot;) and all the day long draws vapors from those bodies that
his beams strike upon. For, he shooting his little darts of fire, in multitudes
and in continued streams from his own center, against the Python, the earth we
live on; they there overtake one another and cause some degrees of heat, as far
as they sink in. But, not being able (by reason of their great expansion in
their long journey) to convert it into their own nature and set it on fire,
(which requires a high degree of condensation of the beams); they but pierce
and divide it very subtly, and cut some of the outwardparts of it into
extreme little atoms. To which sticking very close, and being in a manner
incorporated with them (by reason of the moisture that is in them), they, in
their rebound back from the earth, carry them along with them; like a ball
that, struck against a moist wall, in its return from it, brings back some of
the mortar sticking upon it. For, the distance of the Earth from the Sun is not
the utmost period of these nimble body's flight; so that, when by this solid
body they are stopped in their course forwards on, they leap back from it, and
carry some little parts of it with them: some of them a farther, some of them a
shorter journey; according to their littleness and rarity make them fit to
ascend. As is manifest by the consent of all Authors that write of the Regions
of the Air: who determine the Lower Region to reach as far as the reflection of
the Sun; and conclude this Region to be very hot.

For, if we mark how the heat of fire is greatest, when it is incorporated in
some dense body, (as in Iron or in Sea-coal); we shall easily conceive that the
heat of this Region proceeds mainly, out of the incorporation of light with
those little bodies which stick to it in its reflection. And, experience
testifies the same, both in our soultry days, which we see are of a gross
temper, and ordinarily go before rain, as also in the hot Springs of extreme
cold countries, where the first heats are unsufferable, which proceed out of the
resolution of humidity congealed: and in hot winds (which the Spaniards call
Bochornos, from Boca de horno, by allusion to the breathing stream of an Oven
when it is opened), which manifestly show that the heat of the Sun is
incorporated in the little bodies, which compose the steam of that wind. And,
by the principles we have already laid, the same would be evident; though we
had no experience to instruct us; for, seeing that the body of fire is dry, the
wet parts (which are easiest resolved by fire) must needs stick to them, and
accompany them in their return from the earth.

Now, whiles these ascend, the air must needs cause others 3. The light,
rebounding from the earth with atoms, causes two streams in the air; the one
ascending, the other descending; and both of them in a perpendicular line.
that are of a grosser complexion to descend as fast, to make room for the
former, and to fill the places they left; that there may be no vacuity in
nature. And, to find what parts they are, and from whence they come, that
succeed in the room of light and atoms glew'd together that thus ascend; we
may take a hint from the Maxim of the Optics, that Light reflecting makes
equal angles: whence, supposing the Superficies of the earth to be circular, it
will follow that a Perpendicular to the center passes just in the middle
between the two rays, the incident and the reflected. Wherefore, the air
between these two rays, and such bodies as are in it, being equally pressed on
both sides; those bodies which are just in the middle are nearest, and
likeliest to succeed immediately, in the room of the light and atoms which
ascend from the Superficies of the earth: and their motion to that point is
upon the Perpendicular. Hence it is evident, that the Air and all such bodies as
descend to supply the place of light and atoms, which ascend from the Earth,
descend perpendicularly toward the center of the earth.

And again, such bodies as, by the force of light being cut from the earth or
water, do not ascend in form of light, but incorporate a hidden light and heat
within them, (and thereby are rarer then these descending bodies), must of
necessity be lifted up, by the descent of those denser bodies that go
downwards, because they (by reason of their density) are moved with a greater
force. And this lifting up must be in a perpendicular line; because the others,
descending on all sides perpendicularly, must needs raise those that are
between them equally from all sides: that is, perpendicularly from the center
of the earth. And thus we see a motion set on foot, of some bodies continually
descending, and others continually ascending: all in perpendicular lines;
excepting those which follow the course of lights reflection.

Again, as soon as the declining Sun grows weaker or leaves our Horizon, and
his beams, vanishing, leave the little hors-men which rode upon them, to their
own temper and nature (from whence they forced them: they, finding themselves,
surrounded by a smart descending stream, tumble down again in the night, as
fast as in the day they were carried up; and, crowding into their former
habitations, exclude those they find had usurped them in their absence. And
thus, all bodies within reach of the Suns power, but especially our air, are in
perpetual motion: the more rarefied ones ascending, and the dense ones
descending.

Now then, because no bodies, wherever they be (as we have 4. A dense body,
placed in the air between the ascending and descending streams must needs
descend.
already showed), have any inclination to move toward a particular place,
otherwise then as they are directed and impel'd by extrinsecal Agents: let us
suppose that a body were placed at liberty in the open air. And then, casting
whether it would be moved from the place we suppose it in; and which way it
would be moved; we shall find, it must of necessity happen that it shall
descend and fall down, till it meet with some other gross body to stay and
support it. For, though of it self it would move no way; yet, if we find that
any other body strikes efficaciously enough upon it, we cannot doubt but it
will move that way which the striking body impels it. Now, it is stricken upon
on both sides (above and below), by the ascending and the descending atoms; the
rare ones striking upon the bottom of it and driving it upwards, and the
denser ones pressing upon the top of it and bearing it downwards. But, if you
compare the the impressions the denser atoms make with those that proceed from
the rare ones; it is evident, the dense ones must be the more powerful; and
therefore will assuredly determine the motion of the body in the air that way
they go, which is downwards.

Nor need we fear, lest the littlenessof the agents, or the feebleness of their
strokes, should not be sufficient to work this effect; since there is no
resistance in the body it self, and the air is continually cut in pieces by the
Sunbeams, and by the motions of little bodies; so that the adhesion to air of
the body to be moved, will be no hind'rance to this motion: especially,
considering the perpetual new percussions, and the multitude of them; and how
no force is so little but that, with time and multiplication, it will overcome
any resistance.

But, if any man desires to look on, as it were at one view, the whole chain of
this doctrine of Gravity: let him turn the first 5. A more particular
explication of all the former doctrine touching Gravity
cast of his eyes on what we have said of fire, when we explicated the nature
of it; To wit, that it begins from a little source, and, by extreme
multiplication and rarefaction, extends it self into a great sphere. And then
he is perceive the reason, why light is darted from the body of the Sun with
that incredible celerity, wherewith its beams fly to visit the remotest parts
of the world: and how, of necessity, it gives motion to all circumstant bodies;
since it is violently thrust forward by so extreme rarefaction, and, the
further it goes, is still the more rarefied and dilated.

Next, let him reflect, how infinitely the quickness of lights motion prevents
the motion of a moist body; such an one as air is: and then he will plainly see,
that the first motion, which light is able to give the air must needs be a
swelling of that moist element, perpendicularly round about the earth. For, the
ray descendent, and the ray reflectent, flying with so great a speed, that the
air between them cannot take a formal pley any way before the beams of light be
on both sides of it: it follows, that, according to the nature of humide
things, it must first only swell; for, that is the beginning of motion in them,
when heat enters into and works on them. And thus he may confidently resolve
himself, that the first motion which light causes in the air will be a swelling
of it, between the two rays toward the middle of them; That is,
perpendicularly from the surface of the earth.

And, out of this, he will likewise plainly see, that, if there be any other
little dense bodies floating in the air, they must likewise mount a little,
through this swelling and rising of the air. But, that mounting will be no
more, then the immediate parts of the air themselves move: Because this motion
is not by way of impulse or stroke that the air gives those denser bodies; but
by way of containing them in it, and carrying them with it; so that it gives
them no more celerity, then to make them go with it self, and as parts of it
self.

Then, let him consider, that light or fire, by much beating upon the earth,
divides some little parts of it from others: whereof if any become so small and
tractable, as not to exceed the strength which the rays have to manage them,
the returning rays will, at their going back, carry away with or drive before
them such little atoms as they made or met with; and so fill the air with
little bodies cut out of the earth.

After this, let him consider, that, when light caries up an atome with it, the
light and the atome stick together and make one ascending body; in such sort
as, when an empty dish lies upon the water, the air in the dish makes one
descendent body together with the dish it self: so that the density of the
whole body of air and dish (which, in this case, are but as one body) is to be
esteemed according to the density of the two parts, one of them being allayed
by the other, as if the whole where thrughout of such a proportion of density,
as would arise out of the composition and kneading together the several
densities of those two parts. Now then, when these little compounded bodies of
light and earth, are carried up to a determinate height, the parts of fire or
light by little and little break away from them: and thereby the bulk of the
part which is left becoms of a different degree of density (quantity for
quantity) from the bulk of the entire atome, when light was part of it; and
consequently it is denser then it was.

Besides, let him consider, that, when these bodies ascend, they go from a
narrow room to a large one, that is, from the centrewards to the circumference;
but, when they come down again, they go from a larger, part to a narrower.
Whence it follows, that, as they descend, they draw closer and closer
together, and by consequence, are subject to meet and fall in one with another:
and thereby to increase their bulk, and become more powerful in density; not
only, by the loss of their fire, but also by the increase of their quantity.
And so it is evident, that they are denser coming down, then going up.

Lastly, let him consider, that, those atoms which went up first, and are
parted from their volative companions of fire or light, must begin to come down
apace, when other new atoms (which still have their light incorporated with
them) ascend to where they are, and go beyond them by reason of their greater
levity. And, as the latter atoms come up with a violence and great celerity, so
must the first go down with a smart impulse: and by consequence, being more
dense then the air in which they are carried, must of necessity cut their way
through that liquid and rare Medium; and go the next way to supply the defect
and room of the atoms which ascend, (that is, perpendicularly to the earth) and
give the like motion to any body they find in their way, if it be susceptible
of such a motion: Which it is evident that all bodies are, unless they be
stricken by some contrary impulse. For, since a bodies being in a place is
nothing else, but the continuity of its outside to the inside of the body that
contains it and is its place, it can have no other repugnance to local motion,
(which is nothing else but a successive changing of place), besides this
continuity. Now the nature of density being the power of dividing, and every
least power having some force and efficacy, (as we have showed above): it
follows, that the stroke of every atome (either descending, or ascending) will
work something upon any body (though never so big) it chances to encounter with
and strike upon in its way; unless there be as strong an impulse the contrary
way to oppose it. But, it being determined, that the descending atoms are
denser then those that ascend; it follows, that the descending ones will
prevail: And consequently, all dense bodies must necessarily tend downwards to
the center (which is to be heavy), if some other more dense body do not hinder
them.

Out of this discourse, we may conclude that there is no such 6. Gravity and
levity do not signify an intrinsecal inclination to such a motion, in the
bodies themselves which are termed heavy and light.
thing among bodies, as positive gravity or levity: but that their course
upwards or downwards happens to them by the order of nature, which by outward
causes gives them an impulse one of these ways; without which, they would rest
quietly wherever they are, as being of themselves indifferent to any motion.
But, because our words express our notions, and they are framed according to
what appears to us; when we observe any body to descend constantly toward our
earth, we call it heavy; and if it move contrariwise, we call it light. But,
we must take heed of considering such gravity and levity, as if they were
Entities that work such effects: since upon examination it appears, that these
words are but short expressions of the effects themselves, the causes whereof
the vulgar of mankind (who impose names to things) do not consider, but leave
that work to Philosophers to examine; whiles they only observe, what they see
done, and agree upon words to express that. Which words neither will, in all
circumstances, always, agree to the same thing: for, as cork descends in air
and ascends in water; so also will any other body descend if it lights among
others more rare then it self, and will ascend if it lights among others that
are more dense then it. And we term Bodies light and heavy, only according to
the course which we usually see them take.

Now, proceeding further on, and considering how there are 7. The more dense a
body is, the more swiftly it descends.
various degrees of density or gravity; it were irrational to conceive, that
all bodies should descend at the same rate, and keep equal pace with one
another, in their journey downwards. For, as two knives, whereof one has a
keener edge then the other, being pressed with equal strength into like
yielding matter, the sharper will cut deeper then the other: so, if, of two
bodies, one be more dense then the others that which is so will cut the air
more powerfully, and descend faster then the other: for, in this case density
may be compared to the kniefs edge; since in it consists the power of dividing,
as we have heretofore determined. And therefore, the pressing them downwards by
the descending atoms being equal in both (or peradventure greater in the more
dense body; as anon we shall have occasion to touch); and there being no other
cause to determine them that way; the effect of division must be the greater,
where the divider is the more powerful: Which, the more dense body is; and 8.
The velocity of bodies descending does not increase, in proportion to the
difference that may be between their several densities.
therefore cuts more strongly through the resistance of the air; and
consequently, passes more swiftly that way it is determined to move.

I do not mean, that the velocities of their descent shall be in the same
proportion to one another, as their densities are: for, besides their density,
those other considerations, which we have discoursed of above when we examined
the causes of velocity in motion, must likewise be balanced. And out of the
comparisons of all them, not out of the consideration of any one alone, results
the differences of their velocities: (nor that neither, but in as much as
concerns the consideration of the movables; for, to make the calculation
exact, the Medium must likewise be considered, as by and by we shall declare).
For, since the motion depends of all them together, though there should be
difference between the movables in regard of one only, and that the rest were
equal; yet the proportion of the difference of their motions must not follow
the proportion of their difference in that one regard: because, their
difference considered single in that regard will have one proportion; and with
the addition of the other considerations (though alike in both) to their
difference in this, they will have another.

As for example, reckon the density of one moveable to be double the density of
another moveable; so that in that regard it has two degrees of power to
descend, whereas the other has but one: suppose then the other causes of their
descent to be alike in both; and reckon them all three: and then join these
three to the one which is caused by the density in one of the movables; as
likewise to the two, which is caused by the density in the other moveable: and
you will find that, thus altogether, their difference of power to descend is no
longer in a double proportion (as it would be, if nothing but their density
were considered) but is in the proportion of five to four.

But, after we have considered all that concerns the movables, we are then to
cast an eye upon the Medium they are to move in; and we shall find the addition
of that decreases the proportion of their difference exceedingly more,
according to the cessibility of the Medium: Which, if it be Air, the great
disproportion of its weight, to the weight of those bodies which men use to
take in making experiences of their descent in that yielding Medium, will cause
their difference of velocity in descending to be hardly perceptible. Even as
the difference of a sharp or dull knife, which is easily perceived in cutting
of flesh or bread, is not to be distinguished in dividing of water or oil. And
likewise in Weights, a pound and a scruple will bear down a dram, in no
sensible proportion of velocity, more then a pound alone would do: and yet, put
a pound in that scale in stead of the dram, and then the difference of the
scruple will be very notable. So then, those bodies, whose difference of
descending in water is very sensible (because of the greater proportion of
weight in water, to the bodies that descend in it), will yield no sensible
difference of velocity when they descend in air; by reason of the great
disproportion of weight between air and the bodies that descend in it.

The reason of this will clearly show it self in abstracted proportions: Thus,
Suppose air to have one degree of density, and water to have 400 then let the
moveable A. have 410 degrees of density; and the moveable B. have 500. Now,
compare their motion to one another, in the several mediums of air and water:
The exuperance of the density of A. to water is 10 degrees, but the exuperance
of B. to the same water is 100 degrees; so that B. must have in water swifter
then A, in the proportion of 103 to ten, that is, of 10 to one. Then let us
compare the exuperance of the two movables over air. A is 409 times more dense
then air; but B is 499 times more dense then it: by which account the motion of
B. must be in that medium swifter then the motion of A, in the proportion of
499 to 409, that is, about 50, to 41: which (to avoid fractions) we may account
as 10 to 8. But in water they exceed one another as 10 to one: so that their
difference of velocity must be scarce perceptible in air, in respect of what it
is in water.

Out of all which discourse, I only infer in common, that a greater velocity in
motion will follow the greater density of the moveable; without determining
here their proportions, which I leave to them, who make that examination their
task: for thus much serves my present turn; wherein I take a survey of nature,
but in gross. And my chief drift in this particular is, only to open the way
for the discovering how bodies, that of themselves have no propension to any
determinate place, do nevertheless move constantly and perpetually one way; the
dense ones descending, and the rare ones ascending: not by any intrinsecal
quality that works upon them; but by the economy of nature, that has set on
foot due and plain causes to produce known effects. 9. More or less gravity
produces a swister or a slower descending a heavy body. Aristotle's argument, to
disprove motion in (...), is made good.


Here we must crave patience of the great soul of Galileus, (whose admirable
learning all posterity must reverence), whiles we reprehend in him that which
we cannot term less then absurd: and yet, he not only maintains it in several
places, but also professes Dial. Po. de motu, page 81. to make it more clear
then day. His position is, that more or less gravity contributes nothing at all
to the faster or slower descending of a natural body: but, that all the effect
it gives to a body is to make it descend or not descend, in such a Medium.
Which is against the first and most known principal that is in bodies; to wit,
that more does more, and less does less: for he allows, that gravity causes a
body to descend; and yet will not allow, that more gravity causes it to descend
more.

I wonder he never marked how, in a pair of scales, a superproportion of the
overweight in one balance, lifted up the other, faster then a less proportion
of overweight would do; Or that more weight hanged to a jack made the spit turn
faster; or, to the lines of a Clock, made it go faster; and the like.

But, his argument, whereby he endeavors to prove his position, is yet more
wonderful: for, finding in pendants unequal in gravity, that the lighter went
in the same time almost as fast as the heavier; he gathers from thence, that
the different weights have each of them the same celerity, and that it is the
opposition of the air, which makes the lighter body not reach so far at each
undulation, as the heavier. For reply whereto, first, we must ask him whether
experience or reason taught him, that the slower going of the lighter pendant
proceeded only from the Medium, and not from want of gravity? And when he shall
have answered (as he needs must) that experience does not show this; then we
must importune him for a good reason* but I do not find that he brings any at
all.

Again, if he admits, (which he does in express terms) that a lighter body
cannot resist the Medium so much as a heavier body can; we must ask him,
whether, it be not the weight that makes the heavier body resist more! which
when he has acknowledged, that it is; he has therein likewise acknowledged
that, whenever this happens in the descending of a body, the more weight must
make the heavier body descend faster.

But we cannot pass this matter without noting, how himself makes good those
arguments of Aristotle, which he seems by no means to esteem of. For, since the
gravity overcomes the resistance of the Medium in same some proportion, it
follows, that the proportions between the gravity and the medium may be
multiplied without end: so as, if he suppose that the gravity of a body makes
it go at a certain rate in Imaginary Space, (which is his manner of putting the
force of gravity,) then there may be given such a proportion of a heavy body to
the medium, as it shall go in such a medium at the same rate; and nevertheless
there will be an infinite difference, betwixt the resistance of the medium
compared to that body, and the resistance of the Imaginary Space compared to
that other body which he supposed to be moved in it at the same rate: which no
man will stick at confession to be very absurd.

Then turning the scales, because the resistance of the medium somewhat hinders
gravity, and that with less resistance the heavy body moves faster; it must
follow, that, since there is no proportion betwixt the medium and imaginary
space, there must neither be any proportion betwixt the time in which a heavy
body shall pass through a certain quantity of the medium, and the time in which
it shall pass through as much imaginary space: wherefore, it must pass over so
much imaginary space: in an instant. Which is the argument that Aristotle is so
much laughed at for pressing. And in a word, nothing is more evident, then
that, for this effect which Galileo attributes to gravity, it is unreasonable to
put a divisible quantity, since the effect is indivisible: And therefore as
evident it is that, in his doctrine, such a quality, as intrinsecal gravity is
conceived to be, ought not to be put; since every power should be fitted to the
effect or end for which it is put.

Another argument of Galileo is as bad as this; when he endeavors to prove,
that all bodies go of a like velocity, because it happens that a lighter body,
in some case, goes faster then a heavier body in another case: as for example,
in two pendants, whereof the lighter is in the beginning of its motion, and the
heavier toward the end of it; or if the lighter hangs at a longer string, and
the heavier at a shorter; we see that the lighter will go faster then the
heavier. But this concludes no more, then if a man should prove a lighter goes
faster then a heavier, because a greater force can make it go faster: for it is
manifest that, in a violent motion, the force, which moves a body in the end of
its course, is weaker then that which moves it in the beginning: and the like
is, of the two strings.

But here it is not amiss to solve a Problem he puts, which belongs to our
present subject. He finds by experience, that, 10. The reason why, at the
inferior quarter of a circle, a body descends faster by the arch of that
quarter, then by the chord of it.
if two bodies descend at the same time from the same point and go to the same
point, the one by the inferior quarter of the circle, the other by the chord
to that arch, or by any other lines which are chords to parts of that arch: he
finds (I say) that the moveable goes faster by the arch, then by any of the
chords. And the reason is evident, if we consider, that the nearer any motion
comes to a perpendicular one downwards, the greater velocity it must have: and
that in the arch of such a quadrant, every particular part of it inclines to
the perpendicular of the place where it is, more then the part of the chord
answerable to it does.

CHAP. XI. An Answer to Objections against the causes of natural motion, avowed
in the former Chapter; and a refutation of the contrary opinion.
BUt, to return to the third of our Doctrine; There may peradventure 1. The
first objection answered; why a hollow body descends flower then a solid one.
be objected against it, that, if the violence of a bodies descent toward the
center did proceed only from the density of it (which gives it an aptitude, the
better to cut the medium, and from the mltitude of little atoms descending
that strike upon it, and press it the way they go; which is downwards: then it
would not import whether the inner part of that body were as solid as the
outward parts; for it cuts with only the outward, and is smitten only upon the
outward. And yet experience shows us the contrary: for a great bullet of lead,
that is solid and lead throughout, descends faster then if three quarters of
the Diameiter were hollow within; and such a one, falling upon any resisting
substance, works a greater effect then a hollow one. And a ball of brass that
has but a thin outside of metal, will swim upon the water, when a massy one
sinks presently. Whereby it appears, that it is rather some other quality
belonging to the very bulk of the metal in it self; and not these outward
causes that occasion gravity.

But this difficulty is easily overcome, if you consider, how subtle those
atoms are which, descending downwards and striking upon a body in their way,
cause its motion likewise downwards: for, you may remember how we have showed
them to be the subtilest and the minutest divisions that Light, the subtilest
and sharpest divider in nature, can make. It is then easy to conceive, that
these extreme subtle bodies penetrate all others, as light does glass; and run
through them, as sand through a small sieve, or as water through a sponge: so
that they strike, not only upon the Superficies, but as well in every most
interior part of the whole body; running quite through it all, by the pores of
it. And then, it must needs follow, that the solider it is, and the more parts
it has within (as well as without) to be stricken upon; the faster it go, and
the greater effect it must work in what falls upon: whereas, if three quarters
of the Diameter of it within should be filled with nothing but air, the atoms
would fly without any considerable effect through all that space; by reason of
the rarity and cessibility of it.

And, that these atoms are thus subtle, is manifest by several effects which
we see in nature. Diverse Authors that write of Egypt assure us, that, though
their houses be built of strong stone, nevertheless a clod of earth, laid in
the inmost rooms and shut up from all appearing communication with air, will
increase its weight so notably; as thereby they can judge the change of weather,
which will shortly ensue. Which can proceed from no other cause, but a multitde
of little atoms of Saltpeter; which, floating in the air, penetrate through the
strongest walls and all the massy defenses in their way: and settle in the cold
of earth as soon as they meet with it; because it is of a temper fit to
entertain, and conserve, embody them. Delights have showed us the way, how to
make the spirits or atoms of Snow and Saltpeter pass through a glass vessel;
which Alchimists hold to be the most impenetrable of all they can find to work
with. In our own bodies, the aches which feeble parts feel before change of
weather, and the heaviness of our heads and shoulders, if we remain in the open
air presently after sunset, abundantly testify, that even the grosser of these
atoms (which are the first that fall) do vehemently penetrate our bodies: so
as, sense will make us believe what reason peradventure could not.

But, besides all this, there is yet a more convincing reason, why the
descending atoms should move the whole density of a body; even though it were
so dense that they could not penetrate it, and get into the bowels of it, but
must be content to strike barely upon the outside of it. For, nature has so
ordered the matter, that, when dense parts stick close together, and make the
length composed of them to be very stiff, one cannot be moved but that: all the
rest (which are in that line) must likewise be thereby moved: so that, if all
the world were composed of atoms closse sticking together, the least motion
imaginable must drive on all that were in a straight line, to the very end of
the world. This you see is evident in reason; and experience confirms it, when,
by a little knock given at the end of a long beam, the shaking (which makes
sound) reaches sensibly to the other end. The blind man, that governs his steps
by feeling in defect of eyes, receives advertisements of remote things through
a staff which he holds in his hands; peradventure more particularly then his
eyes could have directed him. And the like is of a deaf man, that hears the
sound of an Instrument; by holding one end of a stick in his mouth, whiles the
other end rests upon the Instrument. And some are of opinion (and they not of
the rank of vulgar Philosophers) that, if a staff were as long as to reach from
the Sun to us, it would have the same effect in a moment of time. Although, for
my part, I am hard to believe we could receive an advertisement so far; unless
the staff were of such a thickness as, being proportionable to the length,
might keep it from facile bending: for, if it should be very plyant, it would
do us no service; as we experience in a third, which, reaching from our hand to
the ground, if it knock against any thing, makes no sensible impression in our
hand.

So that, in fine, reason, sense, and authority, all of them show us, that, the
less the atoms should penetrate into a moving body, by reason of the extreme
density of it, the more efficaciously they would work, and the greater celerity
they would cause in its motion. And, hence we may give the fullest solution to
the objection above; Which was to this effect: that, seeing division is made
only by the superficies or exterior part of the dense body: and the virtue
whereby a dense body works is only its resistance to division; which makes it
apt to divide: it would follow, that a hollow bowl of brass or iron should be
as heavy as a solid one. For, we may answer, that, seeing the atoms must strike
through the body; and a cessible body does not receive their strokes so firmly
as a stiff one, nor can convey them so far: if to a stiff superficies there
succeed a yielding inside, the strokes must of necessity lose much of their
force; and consequently, cannot move a body full of air with so much celerity,
or with so much efficacy, as they may a solid one.

But then you may peradventure say, that, if these strokes of the descending
atoms upon a dense body were the cause of its 2: The second objection
answered; and the reasons shown why atoms continually overtake the descending
dense body.
motion downwards, we must allow the atoms to move faster then the dense body;
that so they may still overtake it and drive it along, and enter into it:
whereas, if they should move slower then it, none of them could come in their
turn to give it a stroke; but it would be past them, and out of their reach
before they could strike it. But it is evident (say you), out of these
pretended causes of this motion, that such atoms cannot move so swiftly
downwards, as a great dense body; since their littleness and their rarity are
both of them hindering to their motion. Therefore this cannot be cause of that
effect which we call gravity.

To this I reply, That to have the atoms give these blows to a descending dense
body, it is not required that their natural and ordinary motion should be
swifter then the descent of such a dense body; but the very descent of it
occasions their striking it; for, as it falls and makes it self a way through
them, they divide themselves before it, and swell on the sides and a little
above it; and presently close again behind it and over it, as soon as it is
past. Now, that closing, to hinder vacuity of space is a sudden one, and
thereby attains great velocity; which would carry the atoms in that degree of
velocity further than the descending body, if they did not encounter with it in
their way to retard them: which encounter and tarding implies such strokes upon
the dense body, as we suppose to cause this motion. And the like we see in
water, into which letting a stone fall, presently the water, that was divided
by the stone and swells on the sides higher then it was before, closes upon the
back of the descending stone; and follows it so violently, that, for a while
after, it leaves a purling hole in the place where the stone went down: till,
by the repose of the stone, the water returns likewise to its quiet; and so its
superficies becomes even.

In the third place, an enquiry occurs emergent out of this doctrine, of the
cause of bodies moving upwards and downwards: 3. A curious queston left
undecided.
Which is, Whether there would be any natural motion deep in the earth, beyond
the activity of the Sun beams? for, out of these principles, it follows that
there would not: and consequently there must be a vast Orb in which there would
be no motion of gravity or levity. For, suppose the Sun beams might pierce a
thousand miles deep into the body of the earth; yet there would still remain a
mass, whose Diameter would be near 5000 miles, in which there would be no
gravitation nor the contrary motion.

For my part, I shall make no difficulty to grant the inference; as far as
concerns motion caused by our Sun: for, what inconvenience would follow out of
it? But, I will not offer at determining, whether there may not be enclosed
within that great sphere of earth some other fire, (such as the Chemists talk
of), an Archeus, a Demogorgon seated in the center, like the heart in animals,
which may raise up vapors and boil an air out of them, and divide gross bodies
into atoms; and accordingly give them motions answerable to ours, but in
different lines from ours, according as that fire or Sun is situated: Since the
far-searching Author of the Dialogues de Mundo has left that speculation
undecided, after he had touched upon it in the Twelfth knot of his first
Dialogue.

Fourthly, it may be objected, that, if such descending atoms, 4. The fourth
objection answered; Why the descent of the same heavy bodies is equal in so
great inequality of the atoms which cause it.
as we have described, were the cause of a bodies gravity and descending
toward the center; the same body would, at diverse times, descend more and less
swiftly: for example, after midnight, when the atoms begin to descend more
slowly, the same body would descend more slowly in a like proportion, and not
weigh so much as it did in the heat of the day. The same may be said of Summer
and Winter; for, in Winter time, the atoms seem to be more gross, and
consequently, to strike more strongly upon the bodies they meet with in their
way as they descend: yet, on the other side, they seem in the Summer to be more
numerous, as also to descend from a greater height; both which circumstances
will be cause of a stronger stroke and more vigorous impulse on the body they
hit. And the like may be objected of diverse parts of the World; for, in the
Torrid Zone it will always happen as, in Summer, in places of the Temperate
Zone, and in the Polar times, as in deepest winter: so that no where there
should be any standard or certainty in the weight of bodies, if it depended
upon so mutable a cause. And it makes to the same effect, that a body, which
lies under a thick rock, or any other very dense body that cannot be penetrated
by any great store of atoms, should not be so heavy as it would be in the open
and free air, where the atoms in their complete numbers have their full strokes.

For answer to these and such like instances, we are to note, first, that it is
not so much the number or violence of the percussion of the striking atoms, as
the density of the thing stricken, which gives the measure to the descending of
a weighty body; and the chief thing, which the stroke of the atoms gives to a
dense body, is a determination of the way which a dense body is to cut to it
self: therefore multiplication or lessening of the atoms will not make any
sensible difference, betwixt the weight of one dense body where manya toms
strike, and an other body of the same density where but a few strike; so that
the stroke downwards of the descending atoms, be greater then the stroke
upwards of the ascending atoms, and thereby determines it to weigh to the
Centrewards, and not rise floating upwards; which is all the sensible effect we
can perceive.

Next, we may observe, that the first particulars of the objection do not reach
home to enfeeble our doctrine in this particular; although we admit them to be
in such sort as they are proposed: for they withal imply such a perpetual
variation of causes, ever favorable to our position, that nothing can be
inferred out of them to repugne against it. As thus: When there are many atoms
descending in the air, the same general cause which makes them be many makes
them also be light, in proportion to their multitude; And so, when they are few
they are heavy: likewise, when the atoms are light, the air is rarefied and
thin; and when they are heavy, the air is thick. And so, upon the whole matter,
it is evident, that we cannot make such a precise and exact judgment of the
variety of circumstances, as to be able to determine when there is absolutely
more cause of weight, and when less. And, as we find not weight enough in
either side of these opposite circumstances to turn the scales in our
discourse; so likewise we find the same indifference in experience it self:
for, the weights we use do weigh equally in mysty weather and in clear; and
yet, in rigor of discourse, we cannot doubt but that, in truth, they do not
gravitate or weigh so much (though the difference be imperceptible to sense)
when the air is thick and foggy, as when its pure and rarefied. Which thickness
of the Medium, when it arrives to a very notable degree, (as for example to
water) makes then a great difference of a heavy bodies gravitation in it: and
accordingly we see a great difference between heavy bodies descending in water
and in air; though between two kinds of air none is to be observed, their
difference is so small in respect of the density of the body that descends in
them. And therefore, since an assured, and certain difference in circumstances
makes no sensible inequality in the affect; we cannot expect any from such
circumstances, as we may reasonably doubt whether there be any inequality among
them or no.

Besides that, if in any of the proposed cases a heavy body should gravitate
more, and be heavier one time than another: yet by weighing it we could not
discern it; since the counterpoise (which is to determine its weight) must
likewise be in the same proportion heavier then it was. And, besides weighing,
no other means remains to discover its greater graviation, but to compare it to
Time in its descent: and I believe that, in all such distances as we can try it
in, its inequalities will be no whit less difficult to be observed that way,
then any other.

Lastly, to bend our discourse particularly to that instance of 5. The reason
why the shelter of a thickbody does not hinder the descent of that which is
under it.
the objection; where it is conceived that, if gravity or descending downwards
of bodies proceeded from atoms striking on them as they move downwards, it
would follow, that a stone or other dense body lying under shelter of a thick,
hard, and impenetrable adamantine rock, would have no impulse downwards; and
consequently would not weigh there. We may note, that no body whatever,
compacted by physical causes and agents, can be so dense and imporous, but that
such atoms as these we speak of must be in them, and in every part of them, and
every where pass through and through them; as water does through a sieve or
through a sponge: and this universal maxim must extend as far as the Sun, or
any other heat communicating with the Sun, reaches and is found.

The reason whereof is, because these atoms are no other thing, but such
extreme little bodies as are resolved by heat, out of the main stock of those
massy bodies upon which the Sun and heat do work. Now then, it being certain,
out of what we have heretofore said, that all mixed bodies have their temper and
consistence and generation, from the mingling of fire with the rest of the
Elements that compose them; and from the concoction or digestion which fire
makes in those bodies: it is evident, that no mixed body whatever, nor any
sensible part of a mixed body, can be void of pores capable of such atoms, or be
without such atoms passing through those pores; which atoms by mediation of the
air (that likewise has its share in such pores) must have communication with
the rest of the great sea of air and with the motions that pass in it. And
consequently, in all and every sensible part of any such extreme dense and
pretended inpenetrable body (to the notice whereof we can arrive), this
percussion of atoms must be found; and they will have no difficulty in running
through, nor, by means of it, in striking any other body lying under the
shelter of it: and thus, both in and from that hard body, there must be still an
uninterrupted continuation of gravity, or of descending toward the center.

To which we may add, that the stone or dense body cannot lie so close to the
rock that covers it, but that some air must be between, (for if nothing were
between, they would be united, and become one continued body;) and in that air
(which is a Creek of the great Ocean of air spread over the world, that is
every where bestrew'd with moving atoms, and which is continually fed, like a
running stream, with new air that drives on the air it overtakes) no doubt but
there are descending atoms, as well as in all the rest of its main body: and
these descending atoms, meeting with the stone, must needs give some stroke
upon it; and that stroke (be it never so little) cannot choose but work some
effect, in making the stone remove a little that way they go; and that motion,
whereby the space is enlarged between the stone and the sheltering rock, must
draw in a greater quantity of air and atoms to strike upon it. And thus, by
little and little, the stone passes through all the degrees of tardity, by
which a descending body parts from rest: which is by so much the more speedily
done, by how much the body is more eminent in density. But this difference of
time, in regard of the atoms strokes only, and abstracting from the bodies
density, will be insensible to us; seeing (as we have said) no more is required
of them, but to give a determination downwards.

And, out of this, we clearly see the reason why the same atoms, 6. The reason
why some bodies sink, others swims.
striking upon one body lying on the water, make it sink; and upon another they
do not. As for example, if you lay upon the superficies of some water a piece
of iron and a piece of cork, of equal bigness and of the same figure; the iron,
will be beaten down to the bottom, and the cork will float at the top. The
reason whereof is, the different proportions of the comparison of their
densities with the density of water: for (as we have said) the efficacy and
force of descending is to be measured by that. So then the strokes of the atoms
being more efficatious upon water then upon cork, because the density of water
is greater then the density of cork, considering the abundance of air that is
harbor'd in the large pores of it; it follows, that the atoms will make the
water go down more forcibly then they will cork: But, the density of iron
exceeding the density of water, the same strokes will make the iron descend
faster then the water; and consequently, the iron must sink in the water, and
the cork will swim upon it.

And this same is the cause, why, if a piece of cork be held by force at the
bottom of the water, it will rise up to the top, as soon as the violence is
taken away that kept it down: for, the atoms strokes having more force on the
water then on the cork, they make the water sink and slide under it; first, a
little thin plate of water, and then another, a little thicker, and so by
degrees more and more, till it has lifted the cork quite up to the top. 7. The
fifth objection answered, concerning the descending of heavy bodies in streams.


Fifthly, it may be objected, that these atoms do not descend always
perpendicularly, but sometimes slopingly; and in that case, if their strokes be
the cause of dense bodies moving, they should move sloping, and not downward.
Now, that these atoms descend sometimes slopingly, is evident: as when (for
example) they meet with a stream of water, or with a strong wind, or even with
any other little motion of the air, such as carries feathers up and down hither
and thither; which must needs waft the atoms in some measure along with them
their way. Seeing then that such a gentle motion of the air is able to put a
feather out of its way, notwithstanding the percussions of the atoms upon it;
why shall it not likewise put a piece of iron out of its way downwards, since
the iron has nothing from the atoms but a determination to its way? But much
more, why should not a strong wind, or a current of water, do it since the
atoms themselv's, that give the iron its determination, must needs be hurried
along with them?

To this we answer, that we must consider how any wind or water, which runs in
that sort, is it self originally full of such atoms, which continually, and
every where, press into and cut through it, in pursuing their constant
perpetual course of descending; in such sort as we showed, in their running
through any hard rock or other densest body. And these atoms make the wind or
water primarily tend downwards; though other accidental causes impel them
secundarily to a sloping motion, And still, their primary natural motion will
be in truth strongest; though their not having scope to obey that, but having
enough to obey the violent motion, makes this become the more observeable.
Which appears evidently out of this, that, if there be a hole in the bottom of
the pipe that conveys water slopingly, be the pipe never so long, and
consequently the sloping motion never so forcible; yet the water will run out
at that hole, to obey its more powerful impulse to the centrewards, rather then
continue the violent motion, in which it had arrived to a great degree of
celerity.

Which being so; it is easy to conceive that the atoms in the wind or water,
which move perpendicularly downwards, will still continue the irons motion
downwards, notwithstanding the Mediums sloping motion: since the prevailing
force determines both the iron and the Medium downward; and the iron has a
superproportion of density to cut its way, according as the prevalent motion
determines it.

But, if the descending atoms be in part carried along down the stream by the
current of wind or water, yet still the current brings with it new atoms into
the place of those that are carried away; and these atoms, in every point or
place wherever they are, of themselves tend perpendicularly downwards, though
they are forced from the complete effect of their tendance, by the violence of
the current: so that, in this case, they are moved by a declining motion,
compounded of their own natural motion and the force one with which the stream
carries them. Now then, if a dense body fall into such a current where these
different motions give their several impulses, it will be carried (in such sort
as we say of the atoms, but in another proportion) not in a perpendicular but
in a mixed declining line, compounded of the several impulses which the atoms
and current give it (in which also it is to be remembered, how the current gives
an impulse downwards, as well as sloping, and peradventure the strongest
downwards): and the declination will be more or less, according as the violent
impulse prevails more or less against the natural motion.

But this is not all that is to be considered, in estimating the declination of
a dense bodies motion, when it is sinking in a current of wind or water. You
must remember that the dense body it self has a particular virtue of its own
(namely its density) by which it receivs and prosecutes more fully its
determination downwards; and therefore the force of that body, in cutting its
way through the Medium, is also to be considered, in this case as well as
above, calculating its declining from the perpendicular: and out of all these
causes will result a middle declination; compounded of the motion of the water
or wind both ways, and of its own motion by the perpendicular line. And since,
of these three causes of a dense bodies motion, its own virtue, in prosecuting
by its density the determination it requires, is the most efficacious by much,
after it has once received a determination from without; its declination will
be but little, if it be very dense and heavy. But if it recede much from
density, as so have some near proportion to the density of the Medium, the
declination will be great. And in a word, according as the body is heavier or
lighter, the declination will be more or less, in the some current: though not
exactly according to the proportion of the diminishing of its density, as long
as there is a superproportion of its density to the Medium; since such a
superproportion (as we have declared heretofore) makes the Mediums operation
upon the dense body scarce considerable.

And hence you see why a stone or piece of iron, is not carried out of its way,
as well as a feather: because the stones motion downwards is greater and
stronger then the motion of a feather downwards; And by consequence, the force,
that can turn a feather from its course downwards, is not able to deturn a
stone. And if it be replied, that it may be so ordered that the stone shall
have no motion, before it be in the stream of a river; and notwithstanding it
will still move downwards: we may answer, that, considering the little
declivity of the bed of such a stream, the strongest motion of the parts of the
stream must necessiariy be downwards, and consequently, they will beat the
stone downwards. And, if they do not the like to a feather or other light body,
it is because other parts of the stream get under the light body, and beat it
upwards; which they have not power enough to do to the stone.

Sixthly, it may be objected, that if Elements do not weigh in their own
Spheres, then their gravity and descending must proceed 8. The sixth objection
answered: and that all heavy Elements do weigh in their own Spheres.
from some other cause, and not from this percussion of the atoms we attribute
to it: which percussion we have determined goes through all bodies whatever,
and beats upon every sensible part of them. But, that Elements weigh not in
their own Spheres appears out of the experience of a Siphon; for, though one
leg of a Siphon be sunk never so much deeper into the body of the water, then
the other leg reaches below the superficies of the water; nevertheless, if once
the outward leg become full of water, it will draw it out of the other longer
leg. Which it should not do, if the parts of water that are comprised within
their whole bulk did weigh: since the bulk of water is much greater in the sunk
leg then in the other; and therefore these should rather draw back the other
water into the Cistern, then be themselves drawn out of it into the air.

To this we answer, that it is evident, the Elements, do weigh in their own
Spheres; at least, as far as we can reach to their Spheres, for we see that a
ball once stuffed hard with air is heavier then an empty one. Again, more water
would not be heavier then less, if the inward parts of it did not weigh: and,
if a hole were dig'd in the bottom of the Sea, the water would not run into
and fill it, if it did not gravitate over it. Lastly, there are those who
undertake to distinguish, in a deep water, the diverse weights which several
parts of it have, as they grow still heavier and heavier toward the bottom:
and they are so cunning in this art, that they profess to make instruments,
which, by their equality of weight to a determinate part of the water, shall
stand just in that part, and neither rise or fall higher or lower; but if it be
put lower, it shall ascend to its exact equally weighing Orb of the water, and
if it be put higher, it shall descend till it comes to rest precisely in that
place. Whence it is evident, that parts of water do weigh within the bulk of
their main body; and of the like we have no reason to doubt, in the other two
weighty Elements.

As for the opposition of the Siphon, we refer that point to where we shall
have occasion to declare the nature of that engine, on set purpose. And there
we shall show, that it could not succeed in its operation, unless the parts of
water did gravitate in their main bulk, into which one leg of the Siphon is
sunk.

Lastly, it may be objected, that, if there were such a course of 9* The
seventh objection answered, and the reason why we do not feel the course of the
air and atoms that beat continually upon us.
atoms as we say, and their strokes were the cause of so notable an effect as
the gravity of heavy bodies; we should feel it palpably in our own bodies which
experience shows us we do not.

To this we answer, first, that there is no necessity we should feel this
course of atoms: since by their subtilty they penetrate all bodies; and
consequently, do not give such strokes as are sensible. Secondly, if we
consider that dusts, and straws, and feathers light upon us without causing any
sense in us; much more we may conceive that atoms (which are infinitely more
subtle and light) cannot cause in us any feeling of them. Thirdly, we see that
what is continual with us, and mingled in all things, does not make us take any
especial notice of it: and this is the cause of the smiting of atoms.
Nevertheless, peradventure we feel them in truth, as often as we feel hot and
cold weather, and in all Catars or other such changes; which as it were sink
into our body without our perceiving any sensible cause of them: for, no
question these atoms are the immediate causes of all good and bad qualities in
the air. Lastly, when we consider, that we cannot long together hold out our
arm at length, or our foot from the ground; and reflect upon such like
impotencies of our resisting the gravity of our own body: we cannot doubt but
that, in these cases, we feel the effect of these atoms, working upon those
parts; though we cannot, by our sense, discern immediately that these are the
causes of it.

But now it is time to draw our Reader out of a difficulty, 10. How, in the
some body, gravity may be greater than density, and density than gravity;
though they be the same thing.
which may peradventure have perplexed him in the greatest part of what he has
hitherto gone over. In our investigation of the Elements we took for a
principle thereto, that gravity is sometimes more, sometimes less, then the
density of the body in which it is: but in our explication of rarity and
density, and again, in our explication of gravity, we seem to put that gravity
and density is all one. This thorn, I apprehend, may, in all this distance,
have put some to pain: but it was impossible for me to remedy it; because I had
not yet delivered the manner of gravitation. Here then I will do my best to
assuage their grief; by reconciling these appearing repugnancies.

We are therefore to consider, that density (in it self) signifies a difficulty
to have the parts of its subject separated one from another; and that gravity
(likewise in it self) signifies a quality, by which a heavy body descends
toward the center; or (which is consequent thereto) a force to make another
body descend. Now, this power, we have showed, belong to density: so far forth
as a dense body, being stricken by another, does not yield by suffering its
parts to be divided; but, with its whole bulk strikes the next before it and
divides it, if it be more divisible then it self is. So that you see Density
has the name of Density, in consideration of a passive quality, or rather of an
impassibility which it has: and the same density is called Gravity, in respect
of an active quality it has, which follows this impassibility. And both of them
are estimated by the different respects which the same body or subject, in
which they are, has to different bodies that are the terms whereto it is
compared: for the active quality, or Gravity, of a dense body, is esteemed, by
its respect to the body it strikes upon; whereas its Density includes a respect
singly to the body that strikes it.

Now it is no wonder that this change of comparison works a disparity in the
denominations: and that thereby the same body may be conceived to be more or
less impartible, then it is active or heavy. A for example, let us of a dense
Element take any one least part, which must of necessity be, in its own nature
and kind, absolutely impartible; and yet it is evident that the gravity of this
part must be exceeding little, by reason of the littleness of its quantity: so
that thus you see an extremity of the effect of density, joined together in one
body (by the accident of its littleness) with a contrary extremity of the
effect of gravity (or rather with the want of it) each of them within the
limits of the same species. In like manner it happens that the same body in one
circumstance is more weighty, in another (or rather in the contrary) is more
partible: So water in a Pail, because it is thereby ^hinder'd from spreading
abroad, has the effect of gravity predominating in it, but if it be poured out,
it has the effect of partibility more. And thus it happens that, merely by the
gradation of rarity and density, one dense body may be apt, out of the general
course of natural causes, to be more divisible then to be a divider: though,
according to the nature of the degrees considered absolutely in themselves,
what is more powerful to divide, is also more resistent and harder to be
divided. And this arrives in that degree which makes water; for, the falling
and beating of the atoms upon water has the power both to divide and make it
descend; but so, that by making it descend it divides it. And therefore we say
it has more gravity then density; though it be the very density of it which is
the cause that makes it partible, by the working of one part upon another: for,
if the atoms did not find the body so dense as it is they could not, by their
beating upon one part make another be divided.

So that, a dense body to be more heavy then dense signifies nothing else, but
that it is in such a degree of density, that some of its own parts, by their
being assisted and set on work by a general cause (which is the fall of the
atoms), are powerful enough to divide other adjoining parts, of the same
density with them, one from another: as we see water poured out of an Ewer into
a Basin, where there is already other water, has the power to divide the water
in the Basin, by the assistance of the celerity which it gets in descending.
And now I hope the Reader is fully satisfied that there is no contradiction in
putting Density and Gravity to be the same thing materially: and that
nevertheless the same thing may be more heavy then dense, or more dense then
heavy, as we took it, to our several purposes, in the investigation of the
Elements.

Having thus laid an intelligible ground to discover how these 11. The opinion,
of gravities being an intrinsecal inclination of a body to the center, refuted
by reason.
motions that are general to all bodies and are natural in chief, are contrived
by nature; we will now endeavor to show, that the contrary position is not
only voluntary, but also impossible. Let us therefore suppose that a body has a
quality to move it downwards. And first we shall ask, what downwards signifies?
For, either it signifies toward a fixed point of Imaginary Space; or toward a
fixed point of the Universe; or, toward some Moveable point. As for the first,
who would maintain it must have more imagnation then judgment; to think that a
natural quality could have an essence determined by a nothing, because we can
frame a conceit of that nothing. As for the second, it is very uncertain whether
any such point be in nature: for, as for the center of the earthy it is clear
that, if the earth be carried about, the center of it cannot be a fixed point.
Again, if the center signifies a determinate point in the earth that is the
Medium of gravity or of quantity, it is changed as often as any dust lights
unequally upon any one side of the earth, which would make that side bigger
then it was, and, I doubt, a quality cannot have moral considerations, to think
that so little does no harm. As for the third position, likewise it is not
intelligible how a quality should change its inclination or essence; according
to the change that should light now to make one point, now another, be the
center to which it should tend.

Again, let us consider that a quality has a determinate essence. Then, seeing
its power is to move, and to move signifies to cut the Medium it is moved in; it
belongs to it of its nature, to cut so much of such a Medium, in such a time:
So that, if no other cause be added, but that you take, precisely and in
abstracto, that quality, that Medium, and that time; this effect will follow,
that so much motion is made. And, if this effect should not follow, it is clear,
that The being able to cut so much, of such a Medium, in such a time, is not
the essence of this quality, as it was, supposed to be. Dividing then the time
and the Medium, half the motion should be made in half the time, a quarter of
the motion in a quarter of the time; and so without end, as far as you can
divide. But this is demonstratively impossibly: since it is demonstrated, that a
moveable coming from rest must of necessity pass through all degrees of
tardity; and therefore, by the demonstration cited out of Galileus, we may take
a part in which this gravity cannot move its body, in a proportionate part of
time, through a proportionate part of the medium.

But because, in natural Theorems, experiences are naturally ^2. The same
opinion refuted by several experiences.
required; let us see whether nature gives us any testimony of this verity. To
that purpose we may consider a Plummet hanged in a small string from a beam;
which being lifted up gently on the one side at the extent of the string, and
permitted to fall merely by the power of gravity, will ascend very near as high
on the contrary side, as the place it was held in from whence it fell. In this
experiment we may note two things: First, that, if gravity be a quality, it
works against its own nature in lifting up the plummet; seeing its nature is
only to carry it down. For, though it may be answered, that it is not the
gravity, but another quality, called vis impressa, which carries it up:
nevertheless it cannot be denied, but that gravity is either the immediate, or
at least the mediate cause which makes this vis impressa: the effect whereof
being contrary to the nature of gravity, it is absurd to make gravity the cause
of it; that is, the cause of an essence, whose nature is contrary to its own.
And the same argument will proceed, though you put not vis impressa, but
suppose some other thing to be the cause of the plummets remounting; as long as
gravity is said to be a quality: for still gravity must be the cause of an
effect contrary to its own inclination, by setting on foot the immediate cause
to produce it.

The second thing we are to note in this experiment of the plummets ascent is,
that if gravity be a quality, there must be as much resistance to its going up,
as there was force to its coming down. Therefore there must be twice as much
force to make it ascend, as there was to make it descend; that is to say, there
must be twice as much force as the natural force of the gravity is: for there
must be once as much to equallize the resistance of the gravity; and then
another time as much, to carry it as far through the same. Medium in the same
time. But it is impossible that any cause should produce an effect greater then
it self.

Again, the gravity must needs be in a determinate degree, and the virtue that
makes the plummet remount (whatever it be) may be put as little as we please;
and, consequently, not able to oversway the gravity alone, if it be an
intrinsecal quality, and yet the plummet will remount: in which case you put an
effect withot a cause.

Another experience we may take from the force of sucking: For, take the barrel
of a long Gun perfectly bored, and set it upright with the breech upon the
ground; and take a bullet that is exactly fit for it, but so as it stick not
any where (both the barrel and it being perfectly polished): and then if you
suck at the mouth of the barrel, (though never so gently), the bullet will come
up so forcibly, that it will hazard the striking out your teeth. Now, let us
consider what force were necessary to suck the bullet up, and how very Slowly
it would ascend; if in the barrel it had as much resistance to ascend, as in
the free air it has inclination to go down. But, if it had a quality of gravity
natural to it, it must of necessity have such resistance: whereas, in our
experiment, we see it coms as easily as the very air. So that, in this example
as wll as in the other, nature teaches us that gravity is no quality.

And all or most of the arguments which we have urged against the quality of
gravity, in that explication we have considered it in, have force likewise
against it; although it be said to be an Inclination of its subject to move it
self to unity with the main stock of its own nature: as diverse witty men put
it. For, this supposition does but change the intention or end of gravity, and
is but to make it another kind of intellectual or knowing Entity, that
determines it self to an other end: which is as impossible for a natural
quality to do, as to determine it self to the former ends. And thus much the
arguments we have proposed do convince evidently, if they be applied against
this opinion.

CHAP. XII. Of Violent Motion.
ANd thus we have given a shortscantling, whereby to understand 1. The State of
the question touching the cause of violent motion.
in some measure the causes of that motion we call natural, by reason it has
its birth from the universal Economy of nature here among us; that is; from
the general working of the Sun, whereby all natural things have their course:
and by reason that the cause of it is at all times and in all places constantly
the same. Next which the order of discourse leads us to take a survey of those
forced motions; whose first causes the more apparent they are, the more
obscurity they leave us in, to determine by what means they are continued.

When a Tennis-ball is stricken by a Racket, or an Arrow shot from a Bow, we
plainly see the causes of their motion: namely the strings, which, first
yielding and then returning with a greater celerity, cause the missives to
speed so fast toward their appointed homes. Experience informs us what
qualities the missives must be endued with, to move fast and stedily. They must
be so heavy, that the air may not break their course; and yet so light, that
they may be within the command of the stroke which gives them motion: the
striker must be dense, and in its best velocity: the angle which the missive is
to mount by (if we will have it go to its furthest random) must be the half of
a right one: and lastly, the figure of the missive must be such, as may give
scope to the air to bear it up, and yet not hinder its course by taking too
much hold of it. All this we see: But when with all we see, that the mover
deserts the moveable as soon as he has given the blow; we are at a stand, and
know not where to seek for that which afterward makes it fly. For, motion
being a transient, not a permanent, thing, as soon as the cause ceases that
begot it, in that very point it must be at an end; and as long as the motion
continues, there must be some permanent cause to make it do so: so that, as
soon as the Racket or bow string go back and leave the ball or arrow, 2 That
the medium is the only cause, which continues violent motion.
why should not they presently fall straight down to the ground?

Aristotle and hs followers have attributed the cause hereof to the air: but
Galileo relishes not this conception. His arguments against it are (as I
remember) to this tenor: Frst, air, by reason of its rarity and divisibility,
seems not apt to conserve motion: next, we see that light things are best
carried by the air; and it has no power over weighty ones: lastly, it is
evident that air takes most hold of the broadest superficies; and therefore an
arrow would fly faster broad ways then long ways, if this were true.
Nevertheless, since every effect must have a proportionable cause from whence
it immediately flows, and a body must have another body to thrust it on as long
as it moves; let us examine what bodies touch a moveable whilst it is in motion,
as the only means to find an issue out of this difficulty; for, to have
recourse to a quality or impressed force, for deliverance out of this straight,
is a shift that will not serve the turn in this way of discourse we use. In
this Philosophy no knot admits such a solution.

If then we enquire, what body it is that immediately touches the ball or arrow
while it flies; we shall find none others does so but the air and the atoms in
it, after the strings have given their stroke and are parted from the missive.
And, though we have Galileo's authority and arguments, to discourage us from
believing the air can work this effect: yet, since there is no other body,
besides it, left for us to consider in this case; let us at the least examine
how the air behaves it self, after the stroke is given by the strings. First
then it is evident that, as soon as the rocket or bow-string shrinks back from
the missive, and leaves a space between the missive and it (as it is clear it
does, as soon as it has stricken the resisting body), the air must needs clap in
with as much velocity as they retire; and with somewhat more; because the
missive goes forward at the same time, and therefore the air must hasten to
overtake it, least any vacuity should be left between the string and the arrow.
It Is certain likewise, that the air on the sides also, upon the division of it,
slides back and helps to fill that space which the departed arrow leaves void.
Now, this forcible closing of the air at the nock of the arrow must needs give
an impulse or blow upon it: If it seem to be but a little one, you may consider
it is yet much greater, then what the air and the bodies swiming in it at the
first give to a stone falling from high; and how at the last those little
atoms, that drive a stone in its natural motion, with their little blows force
it peradventure more violently and swiftly, than any impelling agent we are
acquainted with can do. So that, the impulse which they make on the arrow,
pressing violently upon it after such a vehement concussion and with a great
velocity, must needs cause a powerful effect, in that which of it self is
indifferent to any motion any way.

But, unless this motion of the air continue to beat still upon 3. A further
explication of the former Doctrine.
the arrow, it will soon fall to the ground, for want of a cause to drive it
forward; and because the natural motion of the air (being then the only one)
will determine it downwards. Let us consider then, how this violent rending of
the air, by the blow the bow-string gives to the Arrow, must needs disorder the
little atones that swim to and fro in it, and that (being heavier then the air)
are continually descending downwards. This disorder makes some of the heavier
parts of them get above others, that are lighter then they; which they not
abiding press upon those that are next them, and they upon their fellows: so
that there is great commotion and undulation caused in the whole mass of air
round about the arrow: which must continue some time before it can be settled;
and it being determined by the motion of the arrow that way that it slides, it
follows, that all this commotion and undulation of the air serves to continue
the arrow in its flight. And thus, faster then any part behind can be settled,
new ones before are stirred; till the resistance of the medium grows stronger
then the impulse of the movers.

Besides this, the arrow pressing on the air before it, with a greater velocity
then the air (which is a liquid rare body) can admit, to move all of a piece
without breaking: it must of necessity happen, that the parts of the air
immediately before the arrow be driven upon others further off, before these
can be moved to give place unto them; so that in some places the air becomes
condensed, and consequently in others rarefied. Which also the wind we make in
walking (which will shake a paper, pined loosly at the wall of a chamber
toward which we walk), and the cooling air caused by faning when we are hot do
evidently confirm. So that it cannot be doubted, but condensation and
rarefaction of the air must necessarily follow the motion of any solid body:
which being admitted it is evident that a greater disorder, and for some
remarkable time, must necessarily be in the air; since it cannot brook to
continue in more rarity or density then is natural to it. Nor can weighty and
light parts agree to rest in an equal height or lowness; which the violence of
the arrows motion forces them to for the present. Therefore it cannot be
denied, but that, though the arrow slide away, there still remains behind it
(by this condensation and confusion of parts in the air) motion enough to give
impulse to the arrow; so as to make it continue its motion after the bowstring
has left it.

But here will arise a difficulty: which is, how this clapping in 4. That the
air has strength enough to continue violent motion in a moveable. Dial. 1. of
motion, page 98.
and undulation of the air should have strength and efficacy enough to cause
the continuance of so smart a motion, as is an arrow shot from a bow. To this,
I need no other argument for an answer, then to produce Galileo's testimony,
how great a body one single man's breath alone can, in due circumstances, give a
rapid motion to: and withal, let us consider, how the arrow and the air about
it are already in a certain degree of velocity; that is to say, the obstacle
that would hinder it from moving that way (namely, the resistance of the air)
is taken away, and the causes that are to produce it (namely the determining of
the airs and atoms motion that way) are heightened. And then we may safely
conclude that the arrow, which of it self is indifferent to be moved upwards or
downwards or forwards, must needs obey that motion, which is caused in it by
the atoms and the air's pressing upon it: either according to the impulse of
the string, or (when the string begins to flag) according to the beating that
follows the general constitution of nature, or in a mixed manner, according to
the proportions that these two hold to one another. Which proportions Galileus
(in his 4 Dialogue of Motion) has attempted to explicate very ingeniously: but,
having missed in one of his suppositions, to wit, that forced motion upon an
Horizontal line is throughout uniform, his great labors therein have taken
little effect, toward the advancing the knowledge of nature, as he pretended;
for, his conclusions succeed not in experience (as Mersenius assures us, after
very exact trials), nor can they in their reasons be fitted to nature.

So that, to conclude this point, I find no difficulty in allowing this motion
of the air strength enough to force the moveable onwards, for sometime after
the first mover is severed from it; (and long after we see no motions of this
nature endure:) so that we need seek no further cause for the continuance of
it; but may rest satisfied upon the whole matter, that, since the causes and
circumstances our reason suggests to us are, after mature and particular
examination, proportionable to the effects we see, the doctrine we deliver must
be sound and true.

For the establishing whereof, we need not (considering what we have already
said) spend much time in solving Galileo's arguments 5. An answer to the first
objection; that air is not apt to conserve motion. And how violent motion comes
to cease.
against it; seeing, out of what we have set down, the answers to them appear
plain enough. For, first, we have assigned causes how the air may continue its
motion, long enough to give as much impression as is needful to the arrow, to
make it go on as it does. Which motion is not requisite to be near so great in
the air behind the arrow (that drives it on) as what the arrow causes in the
air before it: for; by reason of its density, it must needs make a greater
impression in the air it cuts, then the air causes its motion, would do of it
self without the mediation of the arrow. As, when the force of a hand gives
motion to a knife to cut a loaf of bread, the knife, by reason of the density
and figure it has, makes a greater impression in the loaf then the hand alone
would do. And this is the same that we declared in the natural motion of a
heavy thing downwards; to which we assigned two causes; namely, the beating of
the atoms in the air, falling down in their natural course to determine it the
way it is to go; and the density of the body, that, cutting more powerfully
then those atoms can do, gives (together with their help) a greater velocity to
the moveable, then the atoms of themselves can give.

Nor imports it that our resolution it aginst the general nature of rare and
dense bodies, in regard of conserving motion; as Galileo objects. For, the
reason why dense bodies conserve motion longer then rare bodies is because, in
regard of their dividing virtue, they get, in equal time, a greater velocity:
Wherefore, seeing velocity is equal to gravity, it follows, that resistance
works not so much upon them as upon rare bodies; and therefore cannot make them
cease from motion so easily, as it does rare bodies. This is the general reason
for the conservation of motion in dense bodies. But because, in our case, there
is a continual cause which conserves motion in the air, the air may continue
its motion longer, than of it self it would do: not in the same part of air,
which Galileus (as it seems) aimed at; but in diverse parts, in which the
moveable successively is.

Which being concluded, let us see how the forced motion comes to decrease and
be ended. To which purpose we may observe, that the impression which the arrow
receives from the air that drives it forwards, being weaker than that which it
received at first from the string, (by reason that the air is not so dense, and
therefore cannot strike so great a blow); the arrow does not, in this second
measure of time, (wherein we consider the impulse given by the air only) cut so
strongly the air before it, nor press so violently upon it, as in the first
measure when the string parting from it did beat it forwards: for, till then,
the velocity increases in the arrow, as it does in the string that carries it
along, which proceeds from rest at the fingers loose from it, to its highest
degree of velocity; which is, when it arrives to the utmost extent of its jerk,
where it quits the arrow. And therefore the air now does not so swiftly, nor so
much of it, rebound back from before, and clap it self behind the arrow, to
fill the space that else would be left void by the arrows moving forward; and
consequently, the blow it gives in the third measure to drive the arrow on,
cannot be so great as the blow was immediately after the strings parting from
it, which was in the second measure of time: and therefore the arrow must needs
move slower in the third measure, than it did in the second; as formerly it
moved slower in the second (which was the airs first stroke) than it did in the
first, when the string drove it forwards. And thus successively in every moment
of time, as the causes grow weaker and weaker, by the increase of resistance in
the air before, and by the decrease of force in the subsequent air; so the
motion must be slower and slower, till it come to pure cessation. 6. An answer
to the second objection, that the air has no power over heavy bodies.


As for Galileu's second argument, that the air has little power over heavy
things; and therefore he will not allow it to be the cause of continuing forced
motions in dense bodies: I wish he could as well have made experience, what
velocity of motion a man's breath might produce in an heavy bullet lying upon an
even, hard, and slippery plain, (for a table would be too short) as he did, how
admirable great a one it produced in pendants hanging in the air; and, I doubt
not but he would have granted it as powerful in causing horizontal motions, as
he found it in the undulations of his pendants. Which nevertheless sufficiently
convince how great a power, air has over heay bodies. As likewise the
experience of wind-guns assures us, that air duly applied is able to give
greater motion to heavy bodies, than to light ones: For, how can a straw or
feather be imagined possibly to fly with half the violence, as a bullet of lead
does out of one of those Engines? And, when a man sucks a bullet upwards in a
perfectly bored barrel of a Gun, which the bullet fits exactly (as we have
mentioned before); with what a violence does it follow the breath, and ascend
to the mouth of the barrel? I remember to have seen a man, that was uncautious
and sucked strongly, that had his foreteeth beaten out by the blow of the
bullet ascending.

This experiment (if well looked into) may peradventure make good a great part
of this Doctrine, we now deliver. For, the air, pressing in behind the bullet
at the touchhole, gives it its impulse upwards; to which the density of the
bullet being added, you have the cause of its swiftness and violence, (for a
bullet of wood or cork would not ascend so fast and so strongly); and the
sucking away of the air before it, takes away that resistance, which otherwise
it would encounter with, by the air lying in its way: and its following the
breath with so great ease shows (as we touched before) that of it self, it is
indifferent to any motion, when nothing presses upon it, to determine it a
certain way.

Now to Galileo's last argument, that an arrow should fly faster 7. An answer
to the third objection, that an arrow should fly faster broadways than long ways
broad-ways than long-ways, if the air were cause of its motion; there needs no
more to be said, but that the resistance of the air before hinders it, as much
as the impulse of the air behind helps it on: So that nothing is gained in that
regard, but much is lost in respect of the figure, which makes the arrow unapt
to cut the air so well when it flies broad-ways, as when it is shot long-ways;
and therefore, the air being weakly cut, so much of it cannot clap in behind the
arrow and drive it on, against the resistance before, which is much greater.

Thus far with due respect, and with acknowledging remembrance of the many
admirable mysteries of nature which that great man has taught the world, we
have taken liberty to dipute against him: because this difficulty seems to have
driven him, against his Genius, to believe that in such motions there must be
allowed a quality imprinted into the moved body, to cause them; which our whole
scope, both in this and all other occasions where like qualities are urged, is
to prove superfluous and ill grounded in nature, and to be but mere terms to
confound and leave in the dark, whoever is forced to fly to them.

CHAP. XIII. Of three sorts of violent motion, Reflection, Undulation, and
Refraction.
THe motion we have last spoken of, because it is ordinarily 1. That reflection
is a kind of violent motion.
either in part or wholly, contrary to gravity, (which is accounted the natural
motion of most bodies), uses to be called violent or forced. And thus, you have
delivered you the natures and causes both of Natural and of Forced Motion; yet
it remains that we advertise you of some particular kinds of this forced
motion; which seem to be different from it, but indeed are not. As first, the
motion of Reflection: which, if we but consider how forced motion is made, we
shall find it is nothing else but a forced motion, whose line whereon it is made
is, as it were, snapp'd in two by the encounter of a hard body. For even, as we
see in a spout of water strongly shot against a wall, the water following
drives the precedent parts first to the wall; and afterward, coming themselves
to the wall, forces them again another way from the wall: so, the latter parts
of the torrent of air, which is caused by the force that occasioned the forced
motion, drives the former parts first upon the resistant body, and afterward
again from it. But, this is more eminent in light than in any other body;
because light does less rissent gravity; and so observes the pure course of the
stroke, better than any other body; from which others, for the most part,
decline some way by reason of their weight.

Now, the particular law of reflection is, that the line incident, and the line
of reflection must make equal angles, with that line of 2. Reflection is made
at equal angles.
the resistent superficies which is in the same superficies with themselves The
demonstration whereof that great wit, Renatus des Carts, has excellently set
down, in his book of Dioptricks, by the example of a ball stricken by a Racket
against the earth, or any resisting body: the substance whereof is, as follows.

In the Rectangle Parallelogramme AE, let CE be the supersicies of the earth;
A, the point from which the Racket HG strikes the Ball, by the line AB, to the
point B in the superficies of the Earth: and let us consider C to be on the
left hand, and E on the right. Now we are to show that the ball will rebound by
the line BF, to the point F, in the same time in which it went from A to B; and
so make the angle ABC equal to the angle FBE For the effecting whereof, we must
abstract, according to the manner of Mathematicians; from all Physical
inequalities; and suppose the superficies CE to be Mathematically plain, and
the force of the racket to continue equally strong in B as it is in A: for
though in truth neither of these be rigorously so; nevertheless, because there
is no sensible defect in any operation that depends on them, it is the same to
our purpose as if they were Mathematically so. We see then that the Racket HG,
in a certain time, drives the Ball from A to B: that is to say, from the left
hand to the right, as far as from C to B; and from above to downwards as far as
from A to C. We see again, that the superficies CE is not contrary to this
motion of the Ball as it goes from the left hand to the right; for the line CE
lies likewise that way: but is contrary to it, as it goes from above downward;
for in that course the superficies CE encounters and puts a period to the line
AC. And therefore the motion of the ball, when it meets with the superficies CE,
must be changed from the line AC, so much as the superficies CE is contrary to
it; that is, quite backwards as far as it depends on that opposition. Therefore,
when the Ball is come to B, it must go from thence in the same proportion of
left to right hand, and from below upwards; as it came before, from left to
right hand, and from above downwards, when it came from A to B. And
consequently, it must, in equal time, have passed another line from left to
right hand, as long as the line CB; and at the same time, another from below
upwards as long as AC: which will of necessity make it hit in the point F, at
the end of so much more time as it spent in going from A to B; and so make the
two Angles ABC and FBE equal, as every one knows that has but saluted Euclide.

The motion which we call Undulation needs no further explication: 3. The
causes and properties of Undulation
for it is manifest, that, since a Pendent, when it is removed from its
perpendicular, will restore it self thereto by the natural force of gravity, and
that in so doing it gains a velocity, (and therefore cannot cease on a
sudden); it must needs be carried, out of the force of that motion, directly
the contrary way: till, the force of gravity overcoming the velocity, it must
be brought back again to the perpendicular; which being done likewise with
velocity, it must send it again toward the place from which it fell at the
first. And in this course of motion it must continue for a while, every
Undulation being weaker then other; till at last it quite ceases, by the course
of nature settling the air in its due situation, according to the natural causes
that work upon it. And in this very manner also is performed that Undulation we
see in water, when it is stirred from the natural situation of its Spherical
superficies.

Galileo has noted, that the time in which the Undulations are made which
follow one another of their own accord, is the same in every one of them; and
that, as much time precisely is taken up in a pendants going a very short arch
toward the end of its vibration, as was in its going the greatest arch at the
beginning of its motion. The reason whereof seems strange to him, and he thinks
it an accident natural to the body out of its gravity; and that this effect
convinces, it is not the air which moves such bodies. Whereas, in truth, it is
clearly the air which causes this effect: Because the air, striving at each end
(where it is furthest from the force of the motion) to quiet it self, gets at
every bout somewhat upon the space; and so contracts that into a shorter arch.

But, it is a great wonder to me, that Galileo should make a wonder of this
effect, to the reason of which he has laid so fair a foundation upon another
occasion, had he but reflected on it. For (in his fourth Dialogue, of Motion)
he has demonstrated, that a natural movable descending in the quarter of a
circle, from what part soever it begins, spends equal time to come to the
lowest point, as if it came from any other part: so that a Pendant, being
brought up to any height by the force of a formermotion downwards, will be sure
to spend as much time in going down from thence to the Perpendicular, as it did
at the first when it was let fall from the greatest height. Now I subsume, that
the pendants ascending being the effect of the velocity of its motion gained in
descending immediatey before; the said velocity must be able to carry it, in
the same time, to a height proportionate to that, to which the velocity, gained
in the first fall, did cause the pendant to mount. As for example. If the
pendants first descent were from A to E, the second from C to E; because the
time of those two is the same, (as Galileus has demonstrated), it follows that
their velocities gained in deseending must of necessity be in the proportion of
the line AE to the line CE: therefore, their effects also must be
proportionable. Let us then put the line ED in that proportion to the line CE,
which CE has to AE; and then the velocity gained in CE will carry the pendent
up from E to D, in the same time in which the descent AE did carry it up the
other way from E to C: wherefore, seeing that the times of its descent from A to
E, and from C to E, are equal; likewise the two vibrations from A to C, and
from C to D will be done in equal times. But, that which made Galileo not see
the force of the consequence was, that he did not acknowledge violent motion to
be made in the same proportions, and for the same reasons, which are found in
natural motion, and for the same reasons, which are found in natural motion:
which we have above showed to be so, where we discoursed of the matter.

That motion also which we call Refraction, and is manifest 4. Refraction at
the entrance into the reflectent body is toward the perpendicular, at the
going out is from it; when the second superficies is parallel to the first.
to sense only in light, (though, peradventure hereafter, more diligent
searchers of nature may likewise find in such other bodies as are called
quality; as in cold or heat, etc.) is but a kind of Reflection. For, there
being certain bodies* in which the passages are so well ordered with their
resistences, that all the parts of them seem to permit light pass through
them, and yet all seem to reflect it; when light passes through such bodies, it
finds at the very entrance of them such resistences where it passes, as serve
it for a reflecting body; and yet such a reflectent body, as hinders not the
passage through, but only from being a staight line with the line incident.
Wherefore the light must needs take a ply, as beaten from those parts, toward a
line drawn from the illuminant falling perpendicularly upon the resisting
superficies; and therefore is termed by Mathematicians, to be refracted or
broken toward the perpendicular. Now, at the very going out again of the
light, the second superficies (if it be parallel to the former) must needs,
upon a contrary cause, strike it the contrary way: which is which is termed
from the perpendicular.

As for example, If the ray AB, lights upon the superficies EBF, and finds
entrance: it is not now the superficies OF that resists or reflects it: but it is
that part of the inside (as we may say of the Pore B toward F; being a
Physical body, not a Mathematical Point. The reflection therefore must be made,
as if the reflectent body were IBK: but it is evident that if AB did strike upon
IK, it would reflect toward AG. But, because we know not the inclination of
the superficies IK, whether it be truly a perpendicular or no; therefore we
cannot tell the quantity of the inclination which this reflection must make;
but only we know it must be toward AG. 5. A refutation of Monsir des Carts
his explication of ^efraction.


But, before we wade any deeper into this difficulty, we cannot omit a word of
the manner of explicating Refraction, which Monsieur des Carts uses; so witty
a one as I am sorry it wants success. He therefore, following the demonstration
above given of Reflection; supposes the superficies which a ball lights upon,
to be a thin linen cloth; or some other such matter as will break cleanly, by
the force of the ball striking smartly upon it. And because that superficies
resists only one way, therefore he infers that the velocity of the ball is
lessened only one way and not the other: so that the velocity of its motion,
that way in which it finds no resistance, must be (after the balls passage
through the linen) in a greater proportion to the velocity which it has the
other way were it finds resistance, then it was before. And therefore the ball
will in less time arrive to its period on the one side then on the other: and
consequently, lean toward that side to which the course wherein it finds no
opposition carries it.

But, how much he is mistaken upon the whole matter a little figure will show.
Let us therefore put a Rectangle Parallelogram (as before) AE, which I double
and make the whole Parallelogra^ AL, and draw out the line AB, till it comes to
L. Now, we must imagine, that CE is the cloth or passible superficies, which
Monsieur des Carts puts; and BL the line it would go in, if there were no
resistance. Next, we must seek the perpendicular; which, according to our
explication, is AC: for that falls from A the illuminant perpendicularly upon
CE; although, some who defend Monsieur des Carts seem to make another line the
perpendicular, against the conception of all those that write of Optics. But
not to trouble our selves with terms, the question is, whether the ball that
passes the cloth must (after its passage through) deflect from the line BL.
(which it would have kept, had there been no resistance) toward E; or else
deflect from that line toward C. And, both experience and reason assure us,
that it must turn toward C: but Monsieur des Caries says toward E.

Which to show how it is contrary to his own principle; Let us conceive the
cloth CE to be of some thickness, and so draw the line OP to determine that
thickness. And let us make from B upon AL another Parallelogram, like the
Parallelogram AL, whose Diameter shall be BQ. And it must necessarily follow,
that the motion from B to Q, if there were no resistance, were in the same
proportion as from A to B. But the proportion of the motion as from A to B is
the proportion of CB to CA that is, it goes in the same time, faster toward D,
then toward M, in proportion which CB has to CA. By which account, the
resistance it has in the way toward D must also be greater, then the
resistance it has in the toward M, in the proportion which CB has to CA; and
therefore the more tardicy must be in the way to D, and not in the way to M: and
consequently, the declination must be from E wards, and to M wards. For, where
there is most resistance, that way likewise must the tardity be greatest, and
the declination must be from that way: but, which way the thickness, to be
passed in the same time, is most, that way the resistance is greatest; and the
thickness is clearly greater toward E, then toward M; therefore, the
resistance must be greatest toward E, and consequently, the declination from
the line BL must be toward M, and not toward E.

But, the truth is, in his Doctrine, the ball would go in a straight line, as
if there were no resistance; unless peradventure toward the contrary side of
the cloth, at which it goes out into the free air. For, as the resistance of
the cloth is greater in the way toward D, then in the way toward M, (because
it passes a longer line in the same time, as also it did formerly in the air);
so likewise is the force that moves it that way greater, then the force which
moves it the other. And therefore, the same proportions that were in the motion,
before it came to the resisting passage, will remain also in it, at least till,
coming near the side at which it goes out, the resistance be weakened by the
thinness of the resistent there: which, because it must needs happen on the
side that has least thickness, the ball must consequently turn the other way,
where it finds greatest yielding; and so at its getting out into the free air,
it will bend from the greater resistance, in such manner as we have said above.

Neither do the examples, brought by Monsieur des Carts 6.
and others in the maintenance of this Doctrine, any thing avail them: for when
a Canon Bullet shot into a River hurts the people on the other side; it is not
caused by refraction, but by An answer to the arguments brought in favor of
Monsir des Carts his opinion.
reflection, as Monsir des Carts himself acknowledges; and therefore, has no
force to prove any thing in refraction, whose Laws are diverse from those of
pure reflection.

And the same answer servs against the instance of a Musket bullot shot at a
mark under water; which perpetually lights higher then the mark, though exactly
just aimed at. For, we knowing that it is the nature of water, by sinking in
one place to rise round about; it must of necessity follow that the bullet,
which in entering has pressed down the first parts of the water, has withal
thereby put others further off in a motion of rising: and therefore the bullet,
in its going on, must meet with some water swelling upwards; and from it
receive a ply that way, which cannot fail of carrying it above the mark it was
levelled at. And so we see this effect proceeds from reflection, or the bounding
of the water, and not from refraction. Besides that, it may justly be suspected
the shooter took his aim too high, by reason of the marks appearing in the
water higher than in truth it is: unless such false aiming were duly prevented.

Neither is Monsir des Carts his excuse to be admitted, when he says that
light goes otherwise than a ball would do; because in a glass or water, the
etherial substance, which he surposes to run through all bodies, is more
efficaciously moved than in air: and thersore light must go faster in the glass
than in the air, and so turn on that side of the straight line which is
contrary to the side that the ball takes, because the ball goes not so swiftly.
For, (not to dispute the verity of this proposition) the effect he pretends is
impossible: for, if the etherial suhstance in the air, before the glass, be
flowly moved, (the motion of which he calls light); it is impossible that the
etherial substance in the glass or in the water should be more smartly moved
than it. Well it may be less; but without all doubt the impulse of the etherial
substance in the Glass cannot be greater than its adequate cause; which is the
motion of the other parts that are in the air precedent to glass.

Again, after it is passed the glass, it should return to be a straight line
with the line that it made in the air precedent to the glass; in the subsequent
air must take off just as much (and no more) as the glass did add: the contrary
whereof experience shows us.

Thirdly, in this explication it would always go one way in the air, and
another way in the glass: whereas all experience testifies that, in a glass
unequal on both sides, it still goes in the air, after its going out, to the
same side as it did in the glass; but more. And the like happens in glasses on
both sides concave, Wherefore it is evident, that it is the snperficies of the
Glass that is the worker on both sides: and not the substance of the air on one
side, and of the glass on the other.

And lastly, his answer no way solvs our objection; which proves that the
resistance both ways is proportionate to the force that moves; and, by
consequence, that the thing moved must go straight. As we may imagine would
happen, if a bullet were shot stoping through a green mud wall, in which there
were many round sticks, so thin set that the bullet might pass with ease
through them; for, as long as the bullet touched none of them (which express
his case) it would go straight; but, if it touched any (which resembles ours,
as by and by will apperar), it would glance according to the quality of the
touch, and move from the stick in another line.

Some peradventure may answer for Monsieur des Carts, that 7. The true cause
of refraction of light, both at its entrance and at its going out, from the
reflecting body.
this subtle body, which he supposes to run through all things, is stiff and
no ways pliable. But, that is so repugnant to the nature of rarity, and so many
insuperable inconveniences follow out of it, as I cannot imagine he will own it;
and therefore I will not spend any time in replying thereto.

We must therefore seek some other cause of the refraction of light, which is
made at the entrance of it into a Diaphanous body. Which is plainly (as we said
before), because the ray, striking against the inside of a body it cannot
penetrate, turns by reflection toward that side on, which the illuminant
stands and if it finds clear passage through the whole resistent, it follows
the course it first takes; if not, then it is lost by many reflections to and
fro.

And that this Doctrine is true, the accidents or Phoenomenas evidently declare
to us: for experience teaches that, upon a plain superficies, the refraction is
made toward the perpendicular drawn from the illuminant to the superficies; as
we have said. Now, at the going out (if the surfaces be parallels) we see that
the ray turns from that perpendicular; which also is necessary; for, going
through a pore bigger than it self, or at the least as big, and finding it full
of air, it must needs be crowded there now, in a crowd, he presses you most
whom you press most upon: so then that side of the pore, which is next the
light as it passes, must press most upon it. But, the angle which is toward
the perpendicular, to wit, the Angle BCI, is the lesser, and by consequence,
the ray is nearer that side of the pore which is toward I, then the other side
of it which is toward H, wherefore it must take its ply from that side: But,
that side strikes it from the perpendicular: therefore it must there retract
from the perpendicular.

This very same doctrine, for the reason of refraction, is confirmed by what
happens in crooked superficies. As if OF be a Lens, or glass, on both sides
unequal; and CB the axis of it; AD the ray falling from the illuminant A; AB the
perpendicular falling from the same illuminant A: it will be plain, by the
former discourse, that the ray AD must, at the entry, be refracted toward AB,
as being repulsed from that part of the inside of the pore D, which is toward
F; because that side is most opposed to the ray. Now, the ray being once turned
that way, when, at the end of is journey through the glass, it is come to the
other superficies EGF, it makes the lesser angle toward F: and therefore must
it, by the rule given above, be refracted again, at its parting from the glass,
toward the same perpendicular; and it will meet somewhere with the axis CB;
all which experience shows us to be true.

And, taking a body of concave surfaces, we shall (according to this doctrine
of ours) find the causes of refraction just contrary; and accordingly,
experience likewise shows us the effects to be so too. Therefore since
experience agrees exactly with our rules, we cannot doubt but the principles
upon which we go, are well laid.

But, because crooked 8. A general rule to know the nature of reflections and
refractions in all sorts of surfaces.
surfaces may have many irregulalities; it will not be amiss to give a rule, by
which all of them may be brought to a certainty. And this it is, that
Reflections from crooked superficieses are equal to the reflections that are
made from such plain superficieses, as are tangents to the crooked ones in that
point from whence the reflections are made. Which Principle the Masters of
Optics take out of a Mathematecal supposition, of the Unity of the reflecting
point in both the surfaces, the crooked and the plain. But, we take it out of
the insensibility of the difference of so little a part in the two different
surfaces, as serves to reflect a ray of light: For, where the difference is
insensible in the causes, there likewise the difference is so little in the
effects, as sense cannot judge of them; which is as much as is requisite to our
purpose. Now since, in the Mathematical supposition, the point where the
reflection is made is indifferent to both the surfaces: it follows, that it
imports not whether superficies you take to know the quality of reflection by.
This principle then being settled, that the reflection must follow the nature of
the tangent surfaces; and it being proved, that, in plain surfaces, it will
happen as we have explicated; it follows, that, in any crooked supersicies, of
what Figure soever, the same also will happen.

Now, seeing we have formerly declared, that refractions are but a certain kind
of reflections; what we have said here of reflections may be applied to
refractions.

But, there remains yet untouched one affection more of refractions; which is,
that some Diaphanous bodies in their inward 9. A body of greater parts and
greater pores makes a greater refraction, than one of lesser parts and lesser
pores.
parts reflect more, than others (which is that we call refraction) as
experience shows us. Concerning which effect, we are to consider, that
Diaphanous bodies may, in their composition, have two differences: for, some
are composed of greater parts and greater pores; others, of lesser parts and
lesser pores. It Is true, there may be other combinations of pores and parts;
yet by these two the rest may be esteemed. As for the first combination, we see
that, because the pores are greater, a greater multitude of parts of light may
pass together through one pore; and, because the parts are greater, likewise a
greater multitude of rays may reflect from the same part, and find the same
passage quite throughout the Diaphanous body. On the contrary side, in the
second combination; where both the pores and the parts of the Diaphanous body
are little, the light must be but little that finds the same passage.

Now, that refraction is greater or lesser, happens two ways: for, it is either
when one Diaphanous body reflects light at more angles, than another, and by
consequence in a greater extent of the superficies; or else when one body
reflects light from the same point of incidence, in a shorter line and a
greater angle, than another does. In both these ways it is apparent that a
body, composed of greater parts and greater pores, exceeds bodies of the
opposite kind: for, by reason that, in the first kind, more light may beat
against one part, a body in which that happens will wake an appearance from a
further part of its superficies: whereas, in a body of the other sort, the light
that beats against one of the little parts of it will be so little, as 'twill
presently vanish. Again, because in the first, the part at the incidence is
greater, the surface from which the reflection is made inwards, has more of a
plain and straight superficies: and consequently reflects at a greater angle,
than that whose superficies has more of inclining.

But, we must not pass from this question, without looking a little into the
nature of those bodies in which refraction is 10. A confirmation of the former
doctrine, out of the nature of bodies that refract light.
made: for, if they, as well as the immediate causes of refraction, likewise
favor us; it will not a little advance the certainty of our determination. To
this purpose we may call to mind, how experience shows us that great
refractions are made in smoke and mists, and glasses, and thick-bodied waters;
and Monsir des Carts adds certain Oils and Spirits or strong Waters.

Now, most of these, we see, are composed of little consistent bodies, swimming
in another liquid body. As is plain in smoke and mists: for the little bubbles
which rise in the water before they get out of it, and that are smoke, when
they get into the air, assure us, that smoke is nothing else, but a company of
little round bodies swimming in the air; and the round consistence of water
upon herbs, leaves, and twigs, in a rind or dew, gives us also to understand,
that a Mist is likewise a company of little round bodies, that sometimes stand,
sometimes float in the air, as the wind drives them. Our very eyes bear witness
to us, that the thicker sort of waters are full of little bodies; which is the
cause of their not being clear.

As for Glass, the blowing of it convinces, that the little darts of fire,
which pierce it every way, do naturally, in the melting of it, convert it into
little round hollow bodies; which, in their cooling, must settle into parts of
the like figure. Then, for Crystal and other transparent stones which are
found in cold places; it cannot be otherwise, but that, the nature of cold
piercing into the main body, and contracting every little part in it self, this
contraction must needs leave vacant pores between part and part. And, that such
transparent stones as are made by heat have the like effect and property, may
be judged out of what we see in Bricks and Tiles; which are left full of holes
by the operation of the fire. And I have seen, in bones that have lain a long
time in the Sun, a multitude of sensible little pores close to one another; as
if they had been formerly stack all over with subtle sharp needles, as close
as they could be thrust in, by one another. The Chemical Oils and Spirits,
which Monsir des Carts speaks of, are likely to be of the same composition;
since such use to be extracted by violent fires: for a violent fire is made by
the conjunction of many rays together; and that must needs cause great pores
in the body it works on; and the sticking nature of these spirits is capable of
conserving them.

Out of all these observations it follows, that the bodies, in which greatest
refractions happen are compounded (as we have said) of great parts, and great
pores: and therefore, by only taking light to be such a body, as we have
described it, where we treated of its nature, it is evident, the effect we have
expressed must necessarily follow by way of reflection; and refraction is nothing
else but a certain kind of reflection.

Which last assertion is likewise convinced out of this, that the same effects
proceed from reflection, as from refraction; for, by reflection a thing may be
seen greater, than it is, in a different place from the true one where it is;
colors may be made by reflection, as also gloating light, and fire likewise;
and peradventure all other effects which are caused by refraction, may as well
as these, be performed by reflection. And therefore it is evident, they must be
of the same nature; since children are the resemblances of their parents.

CHAP. XIV. Of the composition, qualities, and generation of mixed bodies.
HAving now declared the virtues by which Fire and Earth work upon one another,
and upon the rest of the Elements; 1. The connection of this Chapter with the
rest, and the Authors intent in it.
which is, by Light, and the motions we have discoursed of: Our task shall be
in this Chapter, first, to observe what will result out of such action of
theirs; and next, to search into the ways and manner of compassing and
performing it. Which latter we shall the more easily attain to, when we first
know the end that their operation levels at. In this pursuit we shall find,
that the effect of the Elements combinations, by means of the motions that
happen among them, is a long pedigree of compounded qualities and bodies
wherein the first combinations (like marriages) are the breeders of the next
more-composed substances, and they again are the parents of others in greater
variety; and so are multiplied without end: for, the further this work
proceeds, the more subjects it makes for new business of the like kind.

To descend in particular to all these is impossible. And, to look further then
the general heads of them, were superfluous and troublesome in this discourse;
wherein I aim only at showing what sorts of things in common, may be done by
Bodies: that, if hereafter we meet with things of another nature and strain, we
may be sure they are not the offspring of bodies and quantity; which is the
main scope of what I have designed here. And, to do this with confidence and
certainty requires of necessity this leisurely and orderly proceeding we have
hitherto used, and shall continue to the end. For, walking thus softly, we have
always one foot upon the ground; so as the other may be sure of firm footing
before it settle: Whereas, they, that for more have will leap over rugged
passages and broken ground, when both their feet are in the air, cannot help
themselves, but must light as chance throws them.

To this purpose, then, we may consider, that the qualities of bodies in common
are of three sorts. For they are belonging, either to the Constitution of a
compounded body, or else to the Operation of it; and the Operation of a body is
of two kinds, one upon Other Bodies, the other upon Sense. The last of these
three sorts of qualities shall be handled in a peculiar Chapter by themselves.
Those of the second sort, whereby they work upon, Other bodies, have been partly
declared in the former chapters, and will be further discoursed of in the rest
of this first Treatise. So as that which remains for the present is, to fall
upon the discourse of such qualities as concur to the Constitution of bodies:
with an aim to discover, whether (or no) they may be effected by the several
mixtures of Rarity and Density, in such sort as is already declared. To which
end, we are to consider in what manner these two primary differences of bodies
may be joined together; and what effects such conjuncton will produce.

As for their conjunction; to deliver the nature of it entirely, 2. That there
is a least size of bodies, And that this least size is found in fire.
we must begin from the very root of it: and consider, how, the Universe, being
finite (which Mr. White has demonstrated, in the Second Knot of his First
Dialogue), there cannot be an Infinite Number of Bodies in it; for
Geometricians show us, how the least quantity that is may be repeated so often,
as would exceed any the greatest determinate quantity whatever. Out of which it
follows, that, although all the other bodies of the world were no bigger then
the least quantity that can be designed; yet they, being infinite in number,
would be greater then the whole Universe that contains them. Therefore, of
necessity there must be some least body, or rather, some least size of bodies.
Which in compounded bodies is not to be expected; for, their least parts, being
compounded, must needs include compounding parts less then themselves. We must
then look for this least size of bodies in the Elements; which of all bodies
are the simplest: And, among them, we must pitch upon that, wherein is greatest
divisibility, and which consequently is divided into least parts; that is,
Fire, So as, we may conclude that, among all the bodies in the world, that
which of its own nature has an aptitude to be least must be Fire.

Now, the least body of fire, be it never so little, is yet divisible 3. The
first conjunction of parts is in bodies of least size; and it is made by the
force of Quantity.
into less. What is it then that makes it be one? To determine this, we must
resort to the nature of Quantity; whose formal notion and essence is. To be
divisible: which signifies, that many may be made of it. But, that of which
many may be made is not yet many; out of this very reason, that many may be
made of it. But, what is not many is one. Therefore what has quantity, is, by
mere having quantity, actually and formally as well one, as it has the
possibility of being made many, and consequently, the least body of fire, by
having quantity, has those parts, which might be many, actually one. And this
is the first conjunction of parts that is to be considered in the composition
of bodies: which, though it be not an actual joining of actual parts, yet is a
formal conjunction of what may be many.

In the next place we may consider; how, seeing the least bodies 4. The second
sort of conjunction ^s compactedness in simple Elements, and it proceeds from
Density.
that are be of fire, it must needs follow, that the least parts of the other
Elements must be bigger then they: And consequently the possible parts of those
least parts of the other Elements must have something to conserve them
together, more then is found in fire. And this, because Elements are purely
distinguished by rarity and densiy, is straight concluded to be density. And
thus we have found, that, as quantity is the cause of the possible parts being
one, so density is the cause of the like parts sticking together: which appears
in the very definition of it; for, to be less divisible (which is the notion of
density) speaks a resistance to division, or sticking together.

Now, let us examine how two parts of different Elements are 5. The third
conjunction is of parts of different Elements; and it proceeds from quantity
and density together.
joined together, to make a compound. In this conjunction we find both the
affects we have already touched: for two such parts must make one; and
moreover, they must have some resistance to divisibility. The first of these
effects we have already assigned to the nature of quantity. And, it being the
formal effect of quantity, it cannot (wherever it is found) have any other
formal cause then quantity: wherefore, either the two little parts of different
Elements do not become one body; or if they do, we must agree it is by the
nature of quantity, which works as much in Heterogeneal parts as Homogeneal.
And it must needs do so: because Rarity and Density (which are the proper
differences of Quantity) cannot change the common nature of Quantity, their
Genus; which, by being so to them, must be univocally in them both. And this
effect comes precisely from the pure notion of the Genus; and consequently,
must be seen as well in two parts of different natures, as in two parts of the
same nature: but, in parts of the same nature which once were two and and
afterward become one, there can be no other reason why they are one, then the
very same for which those parts that were never separated (but that may be
separated) are likewise one: and this, most evidently, is the nature of
quantity.

Experience seems to confirm thus much; when, pouring water out of a basin,
some of it will remain sticking to the sides of the metal. For if the quantity
of the basin, and of the water, had not been one and the same by its own
nature, the water (considering the pliableness of its parts) would certainly
have come all away and glided from the unevenness of the basin, by the
attractive unity of its whole; and would have preserved the unity of its
quantity within it self, rather then, by sticking to the basin, have suffered
division in its own quantity; which we are sure was one, whiles the water was
altogether in the basin. But that, both the basin and the water making but one
quantity, and a division being unavoydable in that one quantity; it was
indifferent, in regard of the quantity considered singly by it self, where this
division should be made, whether in the parts of the basin, or in the parts of
the water: and then, the other circumstances determined it, in that part of the
water which was nearest to the joining of it with the basin.

The second effect (which was, resistance to divisibility) we assigned to
density. And of that same cause must also depend the like effect, in this case
of the sticking together of the two parts of different Elements, when they are
joined to one another, For, if the two parts, whereof one is dense the other
rare, do not exceed the quantity of some other part of one Homogeneal rare
Element; for the dividing whereof such a determinate force, and no less, can
suffice: then, seeing that the whole composed of these two parts is not so
divisible, as the whole consisting of that one part; the assigned force will
not be able to divide them. Wherefore it is plain, that if the rare part had
been joined to another rare part, instead of the dense one it is joined to; it
had been more easily dividable from that, then now it is from the dense part:
And by consequence, it sticks more closely to the dense part, then it would to
another of its own nature.

Out of what we have said, a step is made us to understand why soft and liquid
bodies easily join and incorporate into 6. The reason why liquid bodies, easily
join together, and dry ones difficultly.
one continued body; but hard and dry bodies so difficultly, as by experience
we find to be true. Water with water, or wine either with other wine, or with
water, so unites, that it is very hard to part them: but sand or stones cannot
be made to stick together, without very great force and industry. The reasons
whereof must necessarily depend of what we have said above. To wit, that two
bodies cannot touch one another, without becoming one: and that, if two bodies
of one degree of density do touch, they must stick together according to the
force of that degree of density. Out of which two is manifestly inferred, that,
if two hard things should come to touch, they must needs be more difficultly
separated then two liquid things. And consequently, they cannot come to touch,
without as much difficulty, as that whereby they are made one. 7. That no two
hard bodies can touch one another immediately.


But, to deduce this more particularly; let us consider, that all the little
surfaces, by which one hard body may be conceived to touch another (as for
example, when a stone lies upon a stone), must of necessity be either plain, or
concave, or unequal. Now, if a plain superficies should be supposed to touch
another plain one coming perpendicularly to it; it must of necessity be granted
to touch it as soon in the middle as on the sides. Wherefore, if there were any
air (as of necessity there must be) betwixt the two surfaces before they
touched; it will follow, that the air, which was in the middle, must have fled
quite out from between the two surfaces, as soon as any part of the surfaces
touch, that is, as soon as the air which was between the utmost edges of the
surfaces did fly out; and, by consequence, it must have moved in an instant.

But, if a plain surface be said to touch a unequal surface; it touches it only
by a line (as Mathematicians demonstrate) or a point. But, to touch by a line
or a point is, in truth, not to touch by the form or motion of Quantity, (which
requires divisibility in all that belongs to it;) and by consequence among
bodies it is not-to-touch: and so, one such surface does not touch the other.

Now, for a plain surface to touch a concave, every man sees is impossible.
Likewise, for two unequal surfaces to touch one another, they must be allowed to
touch either in a line or in a point which we have showed not to be a physical
touching. And if a unequal surface should be said to touch a concave, they must
touch all at once, as we said of plain surfaces; and therefore the same
impossibility will arise therein. So that it is evident, no two surfaces, moving
perpendicularly toward one another, can come to touch one another; if neither
of them yields, and changes its hew.

Now then, if it be supposed they come slidingly one over another in the same
line; whereby, first, the very tips of the edges come to touch one another; and
still as you shove the uppermost on forwards, and it slides over more of the
nether surface, it gains to touch more of it: I say that, neither in this case;
do they touch immediately one another. For, as soon as the two first parts
should meet, if they did touch and there were no air between them, they must
presently become one quantity or body, as we have declared; and must stick
firmly together, according to their degree of density; and consequenly, could
not be moved on, without still breaking asunder at every impulse as much of the
massy body, as were already made one by their touching.

And, if you should say they did not become one; and yet allow them to touch
immediately one another, without having any air or fluid body between them:
then, if you suppose them to move onwards upon these terms, they would be
changed locally, without any intrinsecal change; which, in the book De Mundo
(as we have formerly alleged) is demonstrated impossible.

There remains only a third way for two hard surfaces to come together, which
is, that first they should rest sloping one upon another, and make an angle
where they meet (as two lines that cut one another do, in the point of their
intersection); and so contain as it were a wedge of air between them: which
wedge they should lessen by little and little, through their moving toward one
another at their most distant edges (whiles the touching edges are like
immovable centers that the others turn upon); till at length they shut out all
the air, and close together, like the two legs of a compass.

But neither is it possible that this way they should touch. For, after their
first touch by one line, (which neither is, in effect, a touching, as we have
showed) no other parts of them can touch, though still they approach nearer and
nearer; till their whole surfaces entirely touch at once: and therefore, the
air must, in this case, leap out in an instant a greater space, then if the
surfaces came perpendicularly to one another; for, here it must fly from one
extremity to the other; whereas, in the former case, it was to go but from the
middle to each side.

And thus it is evident, that no two bodies can arrive to touch one another;
unless one of them at the least have a superficies pliable to the superficies
of the other: that is, unless one of them be soft, which is, to be liquid in
some degree. Seeing then, that by touching, bodies become one; and liquidity is
the cause and means whereby bodies arrive to touch: we may boldly conclude,
that two liquid bodies most easily and readily become one; and, next to two
such, a liquid and a hard body are soonest united; but, two hard ones most
difficultly.

To proceed then with our reflections upon the composition 8. How mixed bodies
are framed in general.
of Bodies, and upon what results out of the joining and mixture of their first
differences, Rarity and Density: we see, how, if a liquid substance happens to
touch a dry body, it sticks easily thereto. Then consider, there may be so
small a quantity of such a liquid body, as it may be almost impossible for any
natural agent to divide it further into less parts; and suppose that such a
liquid part is between two dry parts of a dense body, and, sticking to them
both, becomes like a glue to hold them together: will it not follow, out of
what we have said, that these two dense parts will be as hard to be severed
from one another, as the small liquid part, by which they stick together, is to
be divided? So that, when the viscuous ligaments, which, in a body hold
together the dense parts, are so small and subtle, as no force we can apply
can divide them; the adhesion of the parts must needs grow then inseparable.
And therefore, we use to moisten dry bodies, to make them more easily be
divided; whereas those that are over-moist are, of themselves, ready to fall in
pieces. And thus you see how, in general, bodies are framed.

Out of which discourse, we may balance the degrees of solidity 9. The cause
of the several degrees of solidity in mixed bodies.
in bodies. For, all bodies being composed of humide and dry parts, we may
conceive either kind of those parts to be bigger or lesser, or to be more rare
or more dense. Now, if the dry parts of any body be extreme little and dense,
and the moist parts that join the dry ones together be very great and rare;
then, that body will be very easy to be dissolved. But, if the moist parts,
which glue together such extreme little and dense dry parts, be either lesser
in bulk or not so rare; then the body composed of them will be in a stronger
degree of consistence. And, if the moist parts which serve for this effect, be
in an excess of littleness, and withal dense; then, the body they compose will
be in the highest degree of consistence that nature can frame.

On the other side, if you glue together great dry parts, which are moderately
dense and great, by the admixtion of humid parts that are of the least size in
bulk, and dense withal; then the consistence will decrease from its height, by
how much the parts are greater and the density less. But, if to dry parts of
the greatest size, and in the greatest remisness of density, you add humid
parts both very great and very rare; then the composed body will prove the most
easily dissolveable of all that nature affords. 10. The rule whereto are
reduced all the several combinations of Elements in compounding of mixed bodies.


After this, casting our eyes a little further toward the composition of
particular bodies; we shall find still greater mixtures the further we go: for,
as the first and simplest compounded bodies are made of the four Elements, so,
others are made of these, and again a third sort of them; and so on-wards,
according as by motion, the parts of every one are broken in sunder, and
mingled with others. Those of the first order must be of various tempers;
according to the proportions of the Elements whereof they are immediately made.
As for example, such a proportion of Fire to the other three Elements will make
one kind of simple body; and another proportion will make another kind: and so
throughout, by various combinations and proportions, among all the Elements.

In the effecting of which work, it will not be amiss to look a little upon
nature; and observe how she mingles and tempers different bodies one with
another, whereby she begets that great variety of creatures we see in the World,
But, because the degrees of composition are infinite, according to the increase
of number, we will contain our selves within the common notions of excess in
the four primary components: for, if we should descend once to specify any
determinate proportions, we should endanger losing our selves in a wood of
particular natures; which belong not to us at present to examine. Then, taking
the four Elements as materials to work upon, let us first consider how they may
be varied, that differing compositions may result out of their mixtures. I
conceive that all the ways of varying the Elements, in this regard, may be
reduced to the several sizes of Bigness of the Parts of each Element, that
enter into the composition of any body; and to the Number of those Parts: for
certainly, no other can be imagined, unless it were variety of Figure.

But, that cannot be admited to belong, in any constant manner, to those least
particulars whereof bodies are framed: as if determinate figures were, in every
degree of quantity, due to the natures of Elements, and therefore the Elements
would conserve themselves in those figures, as well in their least atoms as
massy bulk. For, seeing how these little parts are shuffled together without
any order; and that all liquids easily join, and take the figures which the
dense ones give them; and that they again, justling one another, crush
themselves into new shapes, to which their mixture with the liquid ones makes
them yield the more easily: it is impossible the elements should have any other
natural figure in these their least parts, then such as chance gives them. But,
that one part must be bigger then another, is evident: for, the nature of
rarity and density gives it; the first of them causing divisibility into little
parts, and the latter hindering it.

Having then settled in what manner the Elements may be varied, 11. Earth and
water are the Basis of all permanent mixed bodies.
in the composition of bodies, let us now begin our mixture. In which, our
ground to work upon must be Earth and Water. For, only these two are the Basis
of permanent bodies, that suffer our senses to take hold of them, and submit
themselves to trial. Whereas, if we should make the predominant Element to be Air
or Fire, and bring in the other two solid ones under their jurisdiction, only
to make up the mixture; the compound resulting out of them would be either in
continual consumption (as ordinary fire is), or else through too much subtlety,
imperceptible to our eyes or touch; and therefore not a fit subject for us to
discourse of; especially, since the other two Elements afford us enough to
speculate on. Peradventure our Smell might take some cognizance of a body so
composed, or the effect of it, taken in by respiration, might in time show it
self upon our health: but it concerns not us now to look so far; our design
requires more maniable substances.

Of these then let Water be the first; and with it we will mingle 12. What kind
of bodies those are, where water is the Basis and earth the pedominant element
over the other two.
the other three elements, in excess over one another, by turns, but still all
of them oversway'd by a predominant quantity of water: and then let us see what
kind of bodies will result out of such proportions. First, if earth prevail
above fire and air, and arrive next in proportion to the water: a body of such
a composition must needs prove hardly liquid, and not easy to let its parts
run a sunder; by reason of the great proportion of so dense a body as earth,
that holds it together. Yet, some inclination it will have to fluidness, by
reason the water is predominant over all; which also will make it be easily
divisible, and give every little resistance to any hard thing that shall be
applied to make way through it. In a word, this mixture makes the constitution
of Mud, Dirt, Honey, Butter, and such like things where the main parts are
great ones. And such are the parts of earth and water, in themselves,

Let the next proportion of excess, in a watery compound be of air; which, when
it prevails, incorporates it self chiefly with 13. Of these bodies where, water
bing the B sis, air is the predominant Element
earth; for the other Elements would not so well retain it. Now, because its
parts are subtle, (by reason of the rarity it has), and sticking, (because of
its humidity); it drives the earth and water likewise into lesser parts. The
result of such a mixture is, that the parts of a body compounded by it are
close, catching, flowing slowly, glibb; and generally it will burn, and be
easily converted into flame.

Of this kind are those we call Oily or unctuous bodies; whose great parts are
easily separated, that is, easily divisible in bulk,) but the small ones very
hardly. Next, the smalness and well-working of the parts, by means of the airs
penetrating every dense one and sticking close to every one of them and,
consequently, joining them without any unevenness, causes that there can be no
ruggedness in it; and therefore, it is glibb: in like manner as we see plaster
or starch become smooth, when they are well wrought. Then, the humidity of it
causes it to be catching; and the shortness of every part makes that, where it
sticks, it is not easily parted thence. Now, the rarity of air, next to fire,
admits it to be (of all the other Elements) most easily brought to the height
of fire, by the operation of fire upon it: And therefore, oils are the proper
food of that Element. And accordingly we see; if a drop of oil be spilled upon
a sheet of paper, and the paper set on fire at a corner; as the fire comes near
the oil, the oil will disperse and spread it self upon the paper to a broader
compass then it had, because the heat rarifies it: and so, in Oil it self, the
fire, rarifying the air, makes it penetrate the earthy parts adjoynd to it more
then it did; and so subtilizes them, till they be reduced to such a height as
they are within the power of fire to communicate its own nature to them: and
thus, it turns them into fire, and carries them up in its 14. What kind of
bodies result, where water is the Basis, and fire the predominant Element.
flame.

But, if fire be predominant over earth and air in a watery compound; it makes
the body, so proportioned, to be subtle, rare, penetrative, hot in operation,
light in weight, and subject to burn. Of this kind are all sorts of wines, and
distilled Spirits, commonly called strong waters or Aquavites; in Latin,
Aquaeardentes. These will lose their virtues, merely by remaining uncovered in
the air: for, fire does not incorporate strongly with water; but, if it find
means, raises it self into the air. As we see in the smoke of boiling water;
which is nothing else but little bodies of fire, that, entering into the water,
rarifie some parts of it; but have no inclination to stay there, and therefore,
as fast as they can get out, fly away: but, the humide parts of the water which
they have rarefied (being of a sticking nature) join themselves to them, and
ascend in the air, as high as the fiery atoms have strength to carry them;
which when it fails them, that smoke falls down in a dew, and so becomes water
again as it was. All which one may easily discern, in a glasse-vessel of water
set over the fire; in which one may observe the fire come in at the bottom,
and presently swim up to the top like a little bubble, and immediately rise
from thence in smoke; and that will at last convert it self into drops, and
settle upon some solid substance thereabouts.

Of these fiery spirits some are so subtle, as of themselves they will vanish,
and leave no residue of a body behind them: and Alchymists profess to make them
so etherial and volatile, that, being poured out of a glass from some
reasonable height, they shall never reach the ground; but before they come
thither, be so rarefied by that little motion, as they shall grow invisible
like the air, and dispersing themselves all about in it, fill the chamber 15.
Of those bodies, where water is in excess; it alone being both the Basis, and
the predominant Element:
with the smell of that body which can no longer be seen.

The last excess in watery bodies must be of water it self; which is, when so
little a proportion of any of the other is mingled with it, as is hardly
perceptible. Out of this composition arise all those several sorts of juices or
liquors, we commonly call Waters: which, by their mixture with the other three
Elements, 16. Of those bodies were Earth alone is the Basis, and also the
predominant in excess over the other three Elements.
have peculiar properties beyond simple Elemental water. The general quality
whereof we shall not need any further to express; because, by what we have
already said of water in common, they are sufficiently known,

In our next survey, we will take Earth for our ground to work upon, as
hitherto we have done water: which, if in any body it be in the utmost excess
beyond all the other three, then rocks and stones will grow out of it; whose
dryness and hardness may assure us, that Earth sways in their composition, with
the least allay that may be. Nor does their lightness (in respect of some other
earthy compositions) impeach this resolution: for, that proceeds from the
greatness and multiplicity of pores, wherewith their dryness causes them to
abound^; and hinders not, but that their real solid parts may be very heavy.

Now, if we mingle a considerable proportion of water with earth, so as to
exceed the fire and air, but still inferior to the 17. Of those bodies where
Earth is the basis, and Water the predominant Element over the other two.
earth; we shall poduce metals; whose great weight, with their ductility and
malleability, plainly tells us, that the smallest of waters gross parts, are
the glue that holds the earthy dense ones together; such weight belonging to
earth, and that easy changing of parts being most proper to water.
Quicksilver (that is, the general matter whereof all the metals are immediately
composed) gives us evidence hereof: for, fire works upon it, with the same
effect as upon water. And the calcination of most of the metals proves, that
fire can easily part and consume the glue by which they were closed and held
together: which therefore must be rather of a watery then of an aerie substance.
Likewise the glibness of Mercury, and of melted metals, without catching or
sticking to other substances, gives us to understand, that this great temper of
a moist Element with earth is water, and not air; and that the watery parts are
comprised, and as it were shut up within the earthy ones: for, air catches and
sticks notably to all things it touches, and will not be imprisoned; the
divisibility of it being excceeding great, though in never so short parts.

Now, if air mingles it self with earth, and be prodominant 18. Of those bodies
where, earth being the basis, air is the predominant.
over water and fire; it makes such an oily and fat soil, as Husbandmen account
their best mould; which, receiving a betterment from the Sun and temperate
heat, assures us of the concourse of the air: for wherever such heat is, air
cannot fail of accompanying, or being effected by it; and the richest of such
earth (as pot-earth and marl) will, with much fire, grow more compacted, and
stick closer together then it did; as we see in baking them into pots or fine
bricks. Whereas, if water were the glue between the dense parts, fire would
consume it and crumble them asunder; as it does in those bodies it calcines.
And, excess of fire will bring them to vitrification; which still confirms
that air abounds in them: for, it is the nature of air to stick so close, where
once it is kneaded in, as it cannot be separated without extreme difficulty.
And, to this purpose, the viscuous holding together of the parts of glass, when
it is melted, shows evidently that air abounds in vitrified bodies.

The last mixture we are to meddle with is, of fire with earth; 19. Of those
bodies where, earth being the basis, fire is the predominant.
in an overruling proportion over air and water. And this, I conceive,
produces those substa^ces, which we may term co-agulated juyces, and which the
Latins call succi concreti: whose first origin seems to have been liquours,
that have been afterward dried by the force either of heat or cold. Of this
nature are all kind of Salts, Niters, Sulfurs, and diverse sorts of Bitumens.
All which easily bewray the relics and effects of fire left in them; some
more, some less, according to their degrees.

And thus we have, in general, deduced from their causes the complexions of
those bodies, whereof the bulk of the world, 20. All the Second Qualities of
mixed bodies arise from several combinations of the First Qualities; and are at
last resolved into several degrees of rarity and density.
subjected to our use, consists; and which serve for the production and
nourishment of living creatures, both animal and vegetable. Not so exactly (I
confess) nor so particularly, as the matter in it self, or as a Treatise
confined to that subject, would require: yet, sufficiently for our intent. In
the performance whereof, if more accurate searchers of nature shall find that
we have peradventure, been mistaken in the minute delivering of some particular
bodies complexion, their very correction (I dare boldly say) will justify our
principal scope; which is, to show that all the great variety we see among
bodies arises out of the commixion of the First Qualities, and of the Elements:
for, they will not be able to correct us upon any other grounds then those we
have laid.

As may easily be perceived, if we cast a summary view upon the qualities of
compounded bodies. All which we shall find to spring out of rarity and density,
and to savor of their origin: for, the most manifest qualities of bodies may
be reduced to certain pairs, opposite to one another. As namely, some are
liquid and flowing, others are consistent; some are soft, others hard; some are
fatty, viscuous, and smooth, others lean, gritty, and rough; some gross, others
subtle; some tough, others brittle: and the like. Of which, the liquid, the
soft, the fat, and the viscuous, are so manifestly derived from rarity; that we
need not take any further pains to trace out their origin: and the like is of
their contraries, from the contrary cause, to wit, of those bodies that are
consistent, hard, lean, and gritty; all which evidently spring from density. As
for smoothness, we have already showed how that proceeds from an airy or oily
nature; and by consequence, from a certain degree of rarity: And therefore
roughness (the contrary of it) must proceed from a proportionable degree of
density. Toughness is also a kind of ductility, which we have reduced to
watriness; that is, to another degree of rarity; and consequently brittleness
must arise from the contrary degree of density. Lastly, grossness and
subtilness consist in a difficulty or facility to be divided into small parts;
which appears to be nothing else, but a certain determination of rarity and
density. And thus we see, how the several complexions of bodies are reduced to
the four Elements that compound them: and the qualities of those bodies, to the
two primary differences of quantitative things, by which the elements are
diversified.

And, out of this discourse, it will be evident, that these complexions 21.
That in the Planets and Stars there is a like variety of mixed bodies caused by
light, as here upon Earth.
and qualities, though in diverse degrees, must of necessity be found wherever
there is any variation in bodies. For, seeing there can be no variation in
bodies, but by rarity and density; and that the pure degrees of rarity and
density make heat, cold, moisture, and dryness, and (in a word) the four
Elements; it is evident, that, wherever there is variety of bodies, there must
be the four Elements; though peradventure far unlike these miked bodies which
we call Elements. And again, because these Elements cannot consist without
motion, and by motion they of necessity produce Mixed bodies, and forge out
those Qualities which we come from explicating; it must by like necessity
follow, that wherever there is any variety of active and passive bodies, there
mixed bodies likewise must reside of the same kinds, and be endued with
qualities of the like natures, as those we have treated of; though
peradventure, such as are in other places of the world, remote from us, may be
in a degree far different from ours.

Since then it cannot be denied, but that there must be notable variety of
active and passive bodies, wherever there is light: neither can it be denied
but that, in all those Great Bodies from which light is reflected to us, there
must be a like variety of complexions and qualities, and of bodies tempered by
them, as we find here in the Orb we live in. Which Systeme, how different it is
from that which Aristotle and the most of the School have delivered us; as well
in the evidencies of the proofs for its being so, as in the position and model
of it: I leave to the prudent Readers to consider and judge.

Out of what has been already said, it is not hard to discover 22. In what
manner the Elements work upon one another, in the position of mixed bodies: and
in particular, fire is the most active.
in what manner the composition of bodies is made. In effecting which, the main
hinge whereon that motion depends is fire or heat: as it likewise is in all
other motions whatever. Now, because the composition of a mixed body proceeds,
from the action of one simple body or element upon the others; it will not be
amiss to declare, by some example, how this work passes for that purpose, let
us examine how fire or heat works upon his fellows.

By what we have formerly delivered, it is clear, that fire streaming out from
its center, and diffusing it self abroad, so as to fill the circumference of a
larger circle; it must needs follow, that the beams of it are most condensed
and compacted together near the center, and, the further they stream from the
center, the more thin and rarefied they must grow: yet this is with such
moderation, as we cannot any where discern that one beam does not touch
another; and therefore the distances must be very small. Now, let us suppose that
fire happens to be in a viscuous and tenacious body; and then consider what
will happen in this case: of one side, the fire spreads it self abroad; on the
other side, the parts of the tenacious body being moist (as I have formerly
determined), their edges on all hands will stick fast to the dry beams of the
fire that pass between them. Then they, stretching wider and wider from one
another, must needs draw with them the parts of that tenacious body which stick
to them; and stretch them into a greater widness or largness then they enjoyed
before: from whence it follows that (seeing there is no other body near
therabouts, but they two), either there must be a vacuity left, or else the
tenacious body must hold and fill a greater space then it did before; and
consequently, be more rare. Contrariwise, of any of the other elements be
stronger then fire, the denser Elements break off from their continued stream
the little parts of fire, which were gotten into their greater parts; and,
sticking on all sides about them, so enclose them, that they have no more
semblance of fire: and, if afterward by any accident there comes a great
compression, they force them, to lose their natural rarity, and to become some
other Element. Thus it fares with fire, both in acting and suffering. And the
same course, we have in both these regards expressed of it passes likewise in
the rest of the Elements; to the proportion of their contrarieties.

Hence it follows that, when fire meets with humidity in any body, it divides
and subtilises it, and disperses it, gently and in a kind of equal manner
through the whole body it is in, (if the operation of it be a natural and a
gentle one): and so drives it into other parts; which at the same time it
prepares to receive it, by subtilising likewise those parts. And thus, moderate
fire makes humor, in very small parts, to incorporate it self, in an even or
uninform manner, with the dry parts it meets with: which being done, whether
the heat afterward continues, or the cold succeeds in lieu of it, the effect
must of necessity be, that the body thus composed be bound up and fastn'd; more
or less, according to the proportion of the Matter it is made of, of the Agents
that work upon it, and of the Time they employ about it. This is every day
seen, in the ripening of fruits, and in other frequent works as well of art as
of nature; and is so obvious and sensible to any reasonable observation, that
it is needless to enlarge my self much upon this subject.

Only, it will not be amiss, for examples sake, to consider the progress of it
in the composing or augmenting of metals, or 23. A particular declaration,
touching the generation of Metals.
earths of diverse sorts. First, heat (as we have said) draws humor out of all
the bodies it works on: then, if the extracted humor be in quantity, and the
steams of it happen to come together in some hollow place, fit to assemble them
into greater parts; they are condensed, and fall down in a liquid and running
body. These streams being corporified, the body resulting out of them makes it
self in the earth a channel to run in: and, if there be any loose parts in the
channel, they mingle themselves with the running liquor; and though there be
none such, yet in time liquor it self loosens the channel all about, and
imbibes into its own substance the parts it raises. And thus, all of them,
compacted together, roll along; till they tumble into some low place, out of
which they cannot so easily get, to wander further. When they are thus settled,
they the more easily receive into them and retain such heat, as is every where
to be met withal, because it is diffused more or less through the earth. This
heat, if it be sufficient, digests it into a solid body: the temper of cold
likewise concurring in its measure to this effect. And, according to the
variety of the substances whereof the first liquor was made, and which it
afterward drew along with it; the body that results out of them is
diversifyed. In confirmation of all which, they that deal in Mines tell us,
they use to find metalls oftentimes mingled with stones: as also coagulated
juyces with both, and earths of diverse natures with all three; and they with
it, and one with another among themselves. And that, sometimes, they find the
mines not yet consolidated and digested thoroughly into metal; when, by their
experience knowing after how many years they will be ripe, they shut them up
again till then.

Now, if the hollow place wherein the body stayed (which at first was liquid and
rolling) be not at once filled by it, but it takes up only part of it; and the
same liquor continues afterward to flow thither: then this body is augmented,
and grows bigger and bigger. And, though the liquors should come at several
times, yet they become not therefore two several bodies, but both grow into one
body: for, the wet parts of the adventititious liquor mollify the sides of the
body already baked; and, both of them being of a like temper and cognation,
they easily stick and grow together.

Out of this discourse it follows evidently, that, in all sorts of compounded
bodies whatever, there must of necessity be actually comprised sundry parts of
diverse natures: for otherwise, they would be but so many pure degrees of rarity
and density; that is, they would be but so many pure Elements, and each of them
have but one determinate virtue or operation.

CHAP. XV. Of the dissolution of mixed bodies.
THus much for composition of Bodies. Their dissolution is 1. Why some bodies
are brittle and others tough or apt to withstand outward violence, the first
instrument to dissolve mixed bodies.
made three ways; either by fire, or by water, or by some outward violence. We
will begin with examining how this last is done. To which end we may consider,
that, the unity of any body consisting in the connection of its parts; it is
evident, the force of motion, if it be exercised upon them, must of necessity
separate them; as we see, inbreaking, cutting, filing, drawing asunder, and the
like.

All these motions because they are done by gross bodies, require great parts
to work upon, and are easily discerned how they work: so that it is not
difficult to find the reason why some hard bodies break easily, and others with
much ado. The first of which are called brittle, the others tough. For, if you
mark it, all breaking requires that bending should precede: which on the one
side compresses the parts of the bended body, and condenses them into a lesser
room then they possessed before; and on the other side stretches them out, and
makes them take up more place. This requires some fluid or moveable substance
to be within the body; else it could not be done; for, without such help the
parts could not remove. Therefore, such hard bodies as have most fluid parts in
them, are most flexible, that is, are toughest: and those whcih have fewest,
though they become thereby hardest to have impression made upon them, yet, if
the force be able to do it, they rather yield to break then to bend; and thence
are called brittle.

Out of this we may infer, that some bodies may be so suddenly bent, as that
thereby they break afunder; whereas, if they were leisurely and gently dealt
withal, they would take what play one desires. And likewise that there is no
body (be it never so brittle and hard) but it will bend a little (and indeed
more then one would expect), if it be wrought upon with time and dexterity:
for, there is none but contains in it some liquid parts, more or less; even
glass and brick. Upon which occasion I remember, how once, in a great storm of
wind, I saw the high slender brick Chimneys of the Kings house at S. James's
(one winter, when the Court lay there) bend from the wind like boughs, and
shake exceedingly and totter. And, at other times I have seen some very high
and pointy Spire Steeples do the like. And I have been assured the like of the
whole pile of a high castle, standing in a gullet in the course of the wind,
(namely the castle of Wardour), who have often seen it shake notably in a
fierce wind.

The reason of all which may be deduced out of what we have said above. For,
since the bending of a body makes the spirits or humors within it to sally
forth; it is clear, if the violence which forces it be not so sudden, nor the
motion it receives so quick, but that the moisture may oose gently out, the
body will bend still more and more, as their absence gives it leave. But, if the
motion wrought in it be too quick, then the spirits, not having time allowed
them to go leisurely and gently out, force their prison, and break out with a
violence, and so the body is snap'd in two.

Here peradventure some (remembering what we have said in 2. How outward
violence work upon the most compacted bodies.
another place, namly, that it is the shortness and littleness of the humid
parts in a body which makes it stick together; and that this shortness may be
in so high a degree, as nothing can come between the parts they glue together
to divide them) may ask, how a very dense body of such a strain can be broken
or divided? But the difficulty is not great: for since the humid parts, in
whatever degree of shortness they be, must necessarily have still some latitude;
it cannot be doubted but there may be some force assigned greater then their
resistance can be. All the question is, how to apply it to work its effect upon
so close a compacted body, in which peradventure the continuity of the humid
parts that bind the others together may be so small, as no other body whatever
(no, not fire) can go between them, so as to separate part from part. At the
worst, it cannot be doubted, but that the force may be so applied at the
outside of that body, as to make the parts of it press and fight one against
another; and at length, by multiplication of the force, constrain it to yield
and suffer division. And this I conceive to be the condition of gold and some
precious stones: in which the elements are united by such little parts, as
nothing but a civil war within themselves (stirred up by some subtle outward
enemy, whereby they are made to tear their own bowels) could bring to pass
their destruction.

But this way of dissolving such bodies more properly belongs to the next way
of working upon them, by fire: yet the same is done, when some exterior
violence, pressing upon those parts it touches, makes them cut a way betwixt
their next neighbors; and so, continuing the force, divide the whole body. As,
when the chisel or even the hammer with beating breaks gold asunder: for, it is
neither the chisel nor the hammer, that does that effect immediately; but they
make those parts they touch cut the others that they are forced upon. As, I
remember, happened to a Gentleman, that stood by me (in a Sea Fight I was in)
with a coat of mail upon his body; when, a bullet coming against a bony part in
him, made a great wound, and shattered all the bones near where it struck, and
yet the coat of mail was whole: it seems the little links of the mail, yielding
to the bullets force, made their way into the flesh and to the bone.

But now it is time to come to the other two instuments of separation of bodies;
Fire and water: and to examine how they 3. The several effects of fi^e, the
second and chiefest instrument to dissolve compounded bodies.
dissolve compounds. Of these two, the way of working of fire is the easiest
and most apparent to be discerned. We may readily observe how it proceeds, if
we but set a piece of wood on fire; in which it makes little holes, as if with
bodkins it pierced it. So that the manner of its operation in common being
plain, we need but reflect a little upon the several particular degrees of it.
Some bodies it seems not to touch; as clothes made of Asbestus; which are only
purifyed by it. Others it melts, but consumes not; as gold. Others it turns
into powder, suddenly dissolving their body; as lead, and such metalls as are
calcined by pure fire. Others, again it separates into a greater number of
differing parts; as into Spirits, Waters, Oils, Salt, Earth and Glass: of which
rank are all vegetables. And lastly, others it converts into pure fire; as
strong Waters, or Aquavites (called Aquae ardentes), and some pure Oils: for
the smoke that is made by their setting on fire, and peradventure their salt,
is so little as is scarce discernable. These are, in sum, the divisions which
fire makes upon bodies, according to their nature, and its due application to
them: for, by the help and mediation of other things, it may peradventure work
other effects.

Now, to examine a little in particular, how the same fire, in differing
subjects, produces such different effects: Limus ut hic 4. The reason why some
bodies are not dissolved by fire.
durescit, and haec ut c^ra liquescit, Uno eodemque igni;

We will consider the nature of every one of the subjects, apart by it self.
First for the Asbestus it is clear, it is of a very dry substance; so that, to
look upon it when it is broken into very little pieces, they seem to be little
bundles of short hairs, the liquidity within being so little as it affords the
parts neither length nor breadth; and therefore fire meets with little there
that it can dilate. But, what it cannot dilate it cannot separate; nor carry
away any thing of it, but what is accidentally adherent to the outsides of it:
And so it seems only to pass through the pores, and cleanse the little thrids;
but brings no detriment at all to the substance of it. In this I speak only of
an ordinary fire: for, I doubt not but such a one it might be, as would
perfectly calcine it.

The next body we spoke of is Gold. This abounds so much in liquidity, that it
sticks to the fire, if duly applied; but 5. The reason why fire melts gold,
but cannot consume it.
its humidity is so well united to its earthy parts, and so perfectly
incorporated with them, as it cannot carry away one, without both: but both are
too heavy a weight, for the little agile parts of fire to remove. Thus it is
able to make Gold swell; as we see in melting it; in which, the Gold receives
the fire into its bowels and retains it a long time with it: but, at its
departure, it permits the fire to carry nothing away upon its wings; as is
apparent, by the Golds no whit decay of weight, after never so long fusion. And
therefore, to have fire make any separation in Gold, requires the assistance of
some other moist body; that, on the one side, may stick closely to the Gold,
when the fire drives it into it; and, on the oath rside, may be capable of
dilatation, by the action of the fire upon it. As, in some sort, we see in
Strong Waters made of Salts, (being a proper subject for the fire to dilate);
which, by the assistance of fire, mingling themselves closely with little parts
of the Gold, pull them away from their whole substance, and force them to bear
them company in their journey upwards, in which multitudes of little parts of
fire concur to press on and hasten them: and so, the weight of gold being at
length overcome by these two powerful Agents (whereof one supplies what the
other wants), the whole substance of the metal is, in little atoms, diffused
through the whole body of the water. But, this is not truly a dissolution or
separation of the substantial parts of Gold, one from another: it is only a
corrosion, which brings it into a subtle powder, (when the water and salts are
separated from it), much like what filing (though far smaller) or grinding of
leaf gold upon a porphyre stone may reduce it into: for neither the parts of
the water nor of the fire, that make themselves a way into the body of the gold,
are small and subtle enough to get between the parts that compose the essence
of it; and therefore all they can attain to is, to divide it only in its
quantity or bulk, not in the composition of its nature.

Yet, I intend not to deny, but this is possible to be arrived to; either by
pure fire duly applied, or by some other assistance; as, peradventure, by some
kind of Mercury; which, being of a nearer cognation to Metals then any other
Liquor is, may happily have a more powerful ingression into gold, then any
other body whatever; and being withal very subject to rarefaction, may (after
it is interred.) so perfectly penetrate the gold, as it may separate every least
part of it, and so reduce it into an absolute calx. But, in this place, I
explicate no more then what ordinarily passes; leaving the mysteries of this
Art to those who profess it.

To go on, then, with what we have in hand. Lead has abundance 6. Why Lead is
easily consumed and calcined by fire.
of water overmingled with its earth; as appears by its easy yielding to be
bent any way, and by its quiet standing bent in the same position that the
force which bowed it leaves it in, And therefore the liquid parts of Lead, are
easily separated from its dry and earthy ones: and, when it is melted, the very
shaking of it causes the gross parts to descend, and many liquid ones to fly
away with the fire; so that suddenly it is thus converted into powder. But,
this powder is gross in respect of other metals; unless this operation be often
reiterated, or the fire more powerfully applied, then what is just enough to
bring the body of the Lead into powder.

The next consideration of bodies that fire works upon is, of such as it
divides into Spirits, Salts, Oils, Waters, or Phlegms, 7. Why and how some
bodies are divided by fire into spirits, waters, oils, salts, and earth; and
what those parts are.
and Earth. Now, these are not pure and simple parts of the dissolved body; but
new compounded bodies made of the first, by the operation of heat. As Smoke is
not pure water, but water and fire together; and therefore becomes not water
but by cooling, that is, by the fire flying away from it. So likewise those
Spirits, Salts, Oils, and the rest, are but degrees of things which fire makes
of diverse parts of the dissolved body; by separating them one from another,
and incorporating it self with them. And so they are all of them compounded of
the four Element, and are further resolvable into them.

Yet, I intend not to say, that there are not originally in the body, before
its dissolution, some loose parts which have the properties of these bodies
that are made by the fire in the dissolving of it: For seeing that nature works
by the like instruments as art uses, she must need, in her excesses and
defects, produce like bodies to what art does in dissolution; which operation
of art is but a kind of excess in the progress of nature. But, my meaning is,
that, in such dissolution, there are more of these parts made by the working of
fire, then were in the body before.

Now, because this is the natural and most ordinary dissolution of things; let
us see in particular how it is done. Suppose then that fire were, in a
convenient manner, applied to a body that has all sorts of parts in it; and,
our own discourse will tell us, the first effect it works will be, that, as the
subtle parts of fire divide and pass through that body, they will adhere to
the most subtle parts in it: which being most agile and least bound and
incorporated to the bowels of the body, and lying, as 'twere, loosly scattered
in it, the fire will carry them away with it. These, will be the first that are
separated from the main body: which being retained in a fit receiver, will, by
the coldness of the circumdant air, grow outwardly cool themselves, and become
first a dew upon the sides of the glass, and then, still as they grow cooler,
condense more and more, till at length they fall down congealed into a palpable
liquor; which is composed (as you see) of the hotest parts of the body, mingled
with the fire that carried them out: and therefore this liquor is very
inflamable, and easily turned into actual fire; as you see all Spirits and
aquae ardentes of vegetables are.

The hot and loose parts being extracted, and the fire continuing and
increasing, those that will follow next are such as, though they be not of
themselves loose, yet are easiest to be made so; and are therefore most
separable. These must be humide, and those little dry parts which are
incorporated with the overflowing humide ones in them (for no parts that we can
arrive to are of one pure simple nature, but all mixed and composed of the four
Elements in some proportion) must be held together with such gross glue as the
fire may easily penetrate and separate them. And then the humide parts divided
into little atoms stick to the lesser ones of the fire: which, by their
multitude of number and velocity of motion, supplying what they want of them in
bulk, carry them away with them. And thus these Phlegmatic parts fly up with
the fire, and are afterward congealed into an insipide water: which, if it
have any savor it is because the first ardent spirits are not totally separated
from it; but some few of them remain in it, and give some little life to the
whole body of that otherwise flat liquor.

Now, those parts which the fire separates next from the remaining body, after
the fiery and watery ones are carried away, must be such as it can work upon:
and therefore must abound in humidity. But, since they stir not till the watery
ones are gone, it is evident, they are composed of many dry parts strongly
incorporated, and very subtly mixed with the moist ones; and that both of
them are exceeding small, and so closely and finely knit together, that the
fire has much ado to get between, and cut the thrids that tie them together:
and therefore they require a very great force of fire to carry them up. Now the
composition of these shows them to be Aerial: and (together with the fire that
is mingled with them) they congeal into that consistence which we call Oil.

Lastly, it cannot be otherwise but that the fire, in all this while of
continual application to the body it thus anatomises, has hardened and, as it
were, roasted some parts into such greatness and dryness as they will not fly,
nor can be carried up with any moderate heat. But, great quantity of fire,
being mingled with the subtiler parts of his baked earth, makes them very
pungent and acrimonious in taste: so that they are of the nature of ordinary
Salt, and so called; and, by the help of water, may easily be separated from
the more gross parts, which then remain a dead and useless earth.

By this discourse it is apparent, that fire has been the instrument, which has
wrought all these parts of an entire body, into the forms they are in: for,
whiles it carried away the fiery parts, it swelled the watery ones; and, whiles
it lifted up them, it digested the Aerial parts; and, whiles it drove up the
Oil, it baked the earth and salt. Again, all these retaining, for the most
part, the proper nature of the substance from whence they are extracted; it is
evident, that the substance is not dissolved, (for so the nature of the whole
would be dissolved and quite destroyed and extinguished in every part) but that
only some parts, containing the whole substance, or rather the nature of the
whole substance, in them, are separated fromo there parts that have likewise the
same nature in them.

The third instrument for the separation and dissolution of bodies (...) How
water, the third instrument to dissolve bodies, dissolves Calx into Salt. and
so into Terra damnata,
is Water, whose proper matter to work upon is Salt: and it serves to supply
what the fire could not perform; which is the separation of the salt from the
earth, in calcined bodies. All the other parts fire was able to sever; but, in
these he has so baked the little humidity he has left in them with their much
earth, as he cannot divide them any further: and so, though he incorporates
himself with them, yet he can carry nothing away with him. If then pure water
be put upon that chalk, the subtilest dry parts of it easily join to the
supervenient moisture; and sticking close to it, draw it down to them. But,
because they are the lighter, it happens to them as when a man in a boat pulls
the land to him; that comes not to him, but he removes himself and his boat to
it: so these ascend in the water, as they dissolve. And the water, more and
more penetrating them, and, by addition of its parts, making the humidity,
which glews their earthy parts together, greater and greater, makes a wider and
wider separation between those little earthy parts; and so imbues the whole
body of the water with them, into which they are dispersed in little atoms.
Those that are of biggest bulk remain lowest in the water, and, in the same
measure as their quantities dissolve into less and less, they ascend higher and
higher; till at length the water is fully replenished with them, and they are
diffused through the whole body of it: whiles the more gross and heavy earthy
parts (having nothing in them to make a present combination between them and
the water) fall down to the bottom, and settle under the water in dust.

In which, because earth alone predominates in a very great excess, we can
expect no other virtue to be in it, but that which is proper to mere earth; to
wit, dryness and weight. Which ordinary Alchimists look not after; and therefore
call it Terra damnata: but others find a fixing quality in it, by which they
perform very admirable operations, Now, if you prove the impregnated water from
the Terra damnata, and then evaporate it, you will find a pure white substance
remaining: Which by its bulk shows it self to be very earthy, and, by its
pricking and corrasive taste, will inform you much fire is in it; and, by its
easy dissolution in a moist place, that water had a great share in the
production of it. And thus the salts of bodies are made and extracted.

Now, as water dissolves salt, so, by the incorporation and virtue of that
corrosive substance, it does more then salt it self can 9. How water mingled
with salt, becomes almost powerful Agent to dissolve other bodies.
do: for, having gotten acrimony and more weight, by the mixture and
dissolution of salt in it, it makes it self away into solid bodies, even into
metalls, as we see in brass and iron, which are easily rusted by salt
dissolving upon them. And, according as the salts are stronger, so this
corrasive virtue increases in them; even so much, as neither silver nor gold
are free from their eating quality: But they, as well as the rest, are divided
into most small parts, and made to swim in water; in such sort as we have
explicated above, and whereof every ordinary Alchymist teaches the practice.

But this is not all: salts help as well to melt hard bodies and metalls, as to
corrode them. For, foam fusible salts flowing upon them by the heat of the
fire, and others dissolved by the steam, of the metal that incorporates with
them, as soon as they are in flux, mingle with the natural juice of the metals,
and penetrate deeper, then without them the fire could do, and swell them and
make them fit to run.

These are the principal ways of the two last instruments in dissolving of
bodies; taking each of them by it self. But there remains 20. How putrefaction
is caused
one more of very great importance, as well in the works of nature as of art;
in which, both the former are joined and concur: and that is putrefaction.
Whose way of working is, by gentle heat and moisture to wet and pierce the body
it works upon; whereby it is made to swel: and the hot parts of it being
loosened, they are at length drunk up and drowned in the moist ones (from
whence by fire they are easily separated, as we have already declared;) and
those moist parts afterward leaving it, the substance remains dry and falls
in pieces, for want of the glue that held it together.

CHAP. XVI. An explication of certain Maxims, touching the operations and
qualities of bodies: and whether the Elements be found pure in any part of the
World.
OUt of what we have determined, concerning the natural 1. What is the Sphere
of Activity in corporeal Agents.
actions of bodies, in their making and destroying one another; it is easy to
understand the right meaning of some terms, and the true reason of some maxims
much used in the Schools. As first; when Philosophers attribute to all sorts of
corporeal Agents a Sphere of Activity. The sense of that manner of expression,
in fire, appears plainly, by what we have already declared of the nature and
manner of operation of that Element.

And in like manner, if we consider, how the force of cold consists in a
compression of the body that is made cold; we may perceive that, if, in the
cooled body, there be any subtle parts which can break forth from the rest,
such compression will make them do so. Especially, if the compression be of
little parts of the compressed body within themselves, as well as of the outward
bulk of the whole body round about. For, at first, the compression of such
causes* in the body where they are, little holes or pores in the places they
are compressed and driven from: which pores they filled up, when they were
dilated at their own natural liberty; But, being thus forcibly shrunk up into
less room, afterward they squees again out of their crowd all such very loose
and subtle parts (residing till then with them) as can find their way out from
among them. And these subtle parts, that thus are delivered from the colds
compressions, get first into the pores that, we have showed, were made by this
compression. But, they cannot long stay there: for, the atoms of advenient cold
that obsess the compressed body, do likewise, with all their force, throng ito
those pores, and soon drive out the subtle guests they find there; because
they are more in number, bigger in bulk, and more violent in their course then
they. Who therefore must yield to them the little channels and capacities they
formerly took up. Out of which they are thrust with such an impetuositie, that
they spin from them with a vehemence, as Quick silver does through leather,
when, to purify it or bring an Amalgame to a due consistence, it is strained
through the sides of it.

Now these showrs or streams of atoms issuing from the compressed body are on
all sides round about it, at exceeding little distances; because the pores, out
of which they are driven, are so likewise. And consequently, there they remain
round about besieging it, as though they would return to their original homes,
as soon as the usurping strangers, that were too powerful for them, will give
them leave. And, according to the multitude of them, and to the force with
which they are driven out, the compass they take up round about the compressed
body is greater or lesser. Which besieging atoms are not so soon carried away
by any exterior and accidental causes, but they are supplied by new emanations
succeeding them out of the said compressed body.

Now, this which we have declared, by the example of cold compressing a
particular body, happens in all bodies wherever they be in the world. For, this
being the unavoidable effect of heat and of cold, wherever they reside, (which
are the active qualities, by whose means, not only fire and water and the other
two Elements, but all other mixed bodies composed of the Elements, have their
activity); and they being in all bodies whatever (as we have proved above); it
follows evidently, that there is not a body in the world but has about it self
an orb of emanations, of the same nature which that body is of* Within the
compass of which orb when any other body comes, that receives an immutation by
the little atoms whereof that orb is composed; the advenient body seems to be
affected, and as it were, replenished with the qualities of the body from
whence they issue: Which is then said to work upon the body, that imbibes the
emanations that flow from it. And, because this orb (regularly speaking) is in
the form of a Sphere; the passive body is said to be within the Sphere of the
others activity.

Secondly, when Philosophers pronounce, that No corporeal nature can operari in
distans; that is, that no body can work 2. The reason why no body can work in
distance.
upon another remote from it, without working first upon the body that lies
between them, which must continue and place up the operation from the agent to
the patient. The reason and truth of this maxim is, in our Philosophy,
evident. For, we having showed, that action among bodies is performed, for the
most part, by the emission of little parts out of one body into another; as
also, that such little parts cannot stream from the body that is their
fountain, and settle upon a remote body, without passing through the
interjacent bodies, which must furnish them, as it were, with channels and
pipes to convey them whither they are to go: it follows manifestly, that the
active emissaries of the working body can never reach their distant mark,
unless they be successively ferried over the medium that lies between them; in
which they must needs leave impressions of their having been there, and so work
upon it in their pass, and leave in it their qualities and complexions, as a
payment for* their wastage over.

But, peradventure some may contend, that these invisible Sergeants and workmen
are too feeble and impotent, to perform those visible great effects we daily
see: As, when fire, at the length, burns a board that has been a great while
opposed to it, though it touch not the body of the fire; or when a loadstone
draws to it a great weight of Iron that is distant from it.

To whom we shall reply, that, if he will not grant these 3. An objection
answered against the manner of explicating the former Axiom.
subtle emanations from the agent body to be the immediate workers of these
effects, he must allot that efficacy to the whole corpulency of all the Agent
working in bulk, (for, besides the whole and the parts, there is no third thing
to be considered in bodies, since they are constituted by quantity): But the
whole cannot work, otherwise then by local motion; which in this case it cannot
do, because, by the supposition, it is determined to keep its distance from the
passive body, and not to move toward it: Therefore, this is impossible; whereas
the other can appear but difficult at the worst, and therefore must be
admitted, when no better and more intelligible solution can be found.

But, withal we must note, that it is not our intention to say, but it may, in
some circumstances, happen that some particular action or effect may be wrought
in a remote part or body; which shall not be the same in the intermediate body
that lies between the agent and the patient, and conveyes the agents working
atoms to the others body. As for example, when tinder or Naphtha is, by fire,
made to burn at a yard distance from it, when the interjacent air is but warmed
by that fire: Or, when the Sun, by means of a burning-glass or some other
reflection, sets some bodies on fire; and yet only enlightens the glass and the
air that are in the way. The reason of which is manifest to be the diverse
dispositions of the different subjects, in regard of the Agent: and therefore
it is no wonder that diverse effects should be produced, according to those
diverse dispositions.

A third position among Philosophers is, that All bodies 4 Of reaction; and
first, in pure local motion, that each Agent must suffer in acting and act in
suffering.
which work upon others, at the same time, suffer from those they work upon:
and contrariwise, all bodies which suffer from others, at the same time, work
back again upon them. For the better understanding whereof, let us consider,
that all action among bodies is, either purely local motion, or else local
motion with certain particularities, which give it a particular name. As, when
we express the local motion of little atoms of fire, or of earth, or water,
upon and into other bodies, by the words of heating or cooling; and so of the
like. Now, if the action be pure local mo^on, and consequently, the effect
produced by that action be merely change of place; we must call to mind, how
two dense bodies, moving one against the other, each of them bear before them
some little quantity of a rarer body immediately joined to them: and
consequently, these more rare bodies must be the first to feel the power of the
dense bodies and receive impressions from their motions; each of them by the
opposite rare body, which, like an Huissier goes before, to make way for his
following Master that obliges him to this service.

Now, when these rare Ushers have strugled a while, like the first lightly
armed Ranks of two Armies, in the interjacent Field between their main
Battails, that follow them close at the heels; they must at the length yield,
when they are overborn by a greater weight then they can sustain; and then they
recoil back, as it were, to save themselves by getting in among the files of
the dense bodies that drove them on. Which not opening to admit them, and yet
they still flying violently from the mastering force that pursues them; they
press so hard upon what at the first pressed them on, as, notwithstanding
their density and strength, they force them to retire back: for, unless they do
so, they are not of the number of those that work upon one another. And, this
retiring is either on both sides, or but of one side. If both; then it is
evident how each of them is an Agent, and each of them a sufferer; each of them
overcoming his opposite in such sort, as himself likewise receives blows and
loss. But, if only one of the dense bodies be so shocked as to recoil back;
then that only suffers in its body, and the other suffers only in its virtue,
that is, in the air or other rare body it sends before it: which it drives with
such a violence, that it masters and quells the opposition of the other body,
before it can reach to shake the dense body, before which it runs. Yet that
rare body must be pressed and broken into, in some measure, by the encounter of
the other, (which though never so weak yet makes some resistance); but much
more when it comes to grapple with the dense body it self: and so, between
them, it is wounded and infeebled, like those soldiers that first enter a
Breach in a Town, from whence when they have driven the enemy, they pursue him
to the Citadel, and force him from thence too; and so, how maimed so ever they
prove, they make a free and easy way without resistance for the whole body of
their army to follow them, and take quiet possession of that which cost them so
much to win.

And thus we see how it may happen, that one of these moving bodies does not
suffer so much as to be stayed in its journey; much less, to be driven back:
And yet the other body, at the same time, work in some measure upon it, by
working upon what is next to it; which recoiling against it, must needs make
some impression upon it, since there can be no opposition but must have some
effect. Now this impression or effect, though it be not perceptible by causing
a contrary motion, yet it must needs infeeble the virtue of the conquering
Agent, and deaden the celerity of its motion. And thus it is evident, that, in
all pure local motions of corporeal Agents, every one of them must, in some 5.
The former doctrine applied to other local motions designed by particular
names. And that Suisseths argument is of no force against this way of doctrine.
proportion, suffer in acting: and in suffering must act.

And, what we have said of this kind of action may easily be applied to the
other, where the effect of local motion is designed by a particular name; as it
is in the examples we gave of heating and cooling. And, in that, the proceeding
will appear to be the very same as in this: For, if fire heats water, the water
reacts again, either upon the fire and cools it, if it be immediate to it; or
else upon the interjacent air, if it be at a distance from the fire. And so the
air is in some measure cooled, by the cold atoms that issue from the water;
whose compass or sphere of activity being lesser then the fire's, they cannot
cool so far off as others can heat; but, where they a rrive, they give their
proportion of cold, in the very midst of the others army of fiery atoms,
notwithstanding their multitude and violence.

According to which doctrine, our Countryman Suisseth's argument, that in the
Schools is held insoluble, has not so much as any semblance of the least
difficult. For it is evident, that such atoms of fire and water, as we
determine heat and cold to be, may pass and crowd by one another into the
subjects they are sent to, by diverse little streams, without hindering one
another (as we have declared of air and light); and each of them be received,
in their own nature and temper, by the same subject; though sense can judge
only according to which of them is predominant, and according to the proportion
of its superiority.

Upon which occasion we cannot choose but note, how the doctrine of qualities is
not only unable to give account of the ordinary and plain effects of nature;
but also uses to end in clear impossibilities and contradictions, if it be
driven far: as this argument of Suisseth shows, and many others of the like
nature.

A fourth position among Philosophers is, that Some Notions 6. Why some notions
admit of intension and remission; and others not.
admit the denominations of Intention and remission, but that others do not.
The reason of which we shall clearly see, if we but consider how, these terms
of intention and remission do but express more or less of the thing that is
said to be intended or remitted: for the nature of more and less implies a
latitude and divisibility; and therefore cannot agree with the nature of such
things as consist in an indivisible being. As for example, to be a whole or an
equal cannot be sometimes more, sometimes less; for, they consist in such a
rigorous indivisible being, that, if the least part imaginable be wanting, it
is no longer a whole, and if there be the least excess between two things, they
are no longer equal, but in some other proportion then of equality, in regard
of one another.

And hence it is that Aristotle teaches us that Substance and the species of
Quantity do not admit of intention and remission; but that Quality does. For
first, in Substance, we know that the signification of this word is, that which
makes a thing be what it is; as is evident by our giving it for an answer to
the question what a thing is. And therefore, if there were any divisibility in
Substance, it would be in what the thing is; and consequently, every division
following that divisibility, would make the thing another what, that is another
thing: and so the Substance that is pretended to be changed by intension or
remission, would not be divided, as is supposed; but would cease to be, and
another substance would succeed in the room of it. Whereby you see that every
mutation in Substance makes a new thing; and that more and less in quiddity
cannot be pronounced of the same thing.

Likewise in Quantity, it is clear, that its Specieses consist in an indivsible.
For, as in Numbers, ten Lions (for example) or ten Elephants are no more in
regard of multitude, then ten Fleas or ten Motes in the Sun; and, if you add or
take any thing from ten, it is no more ten, but some other number: so likewise
in Continued extension, a span, an ell, an ounce, or any other measure
whatever, cease to be a span, etc. if you add to it or diminish from it the
least quantity imaginable. And peradventure, the same is also of Figures; as of
a Sphere, a Cube, a Circle, a Square, etc. though they be in the rank of
Qualites.

But, if we consider such Qualities, as Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness,
Softness, Hardness, Weight, Lightness, and the like; we shall find that they
may be in any body, somtims more, sometimes less (according as the excess of any
Element or mixture is greater in it, at one time then at another): and yet the
body, in which these qualities are intended or remitted, remain still with the
same denomination. As, when Dirt continues still soft, though sometimes it be
less soft, other whiles softer; and wax remains figurable, whether it be melted
or congealed; and wood is still hot though it lose or gain some degrees of heat.

But such intention in any subject whatever has its determinate limits, that
it cannot pass; for when more of that quality which we say is intended (that
is, more of the atoms of the active body) is brought into the body that suffers
the intension, then its complexion can brook; it resigns its nature to their
violence, and becomes a new thing, such an one as they are pleased to make it.
As when wood, with extremity of heating (that is, with bringing into it so many
atoms of fire, that the fire is wronger in it then its own nature) is converted
into fire, smoke, water, and ashes; and nothing remains of the nature of wood.

But, before we end this Chapter, we may remember how, in the 7. That in every
part of our habitable world, all the four Elements are found pure in small
atoms; but not in any great bulk.
of the Fourth, we remitted a question concerning the Existence of the Elements
(that is, whether in any places of the world there were any pure elements,
either in bulk or in little parts): as being not ready to resolve it, till we
had declared the manner of working of bodies one upon another. Here then will
be a fit place to determine that; out of what we have discoursed concerning the
actions, whereby bodies are made and corrupted. For, considering the universal
action of fire, that runs through all the bodies we have commerce withal, by
reason of the Suns influence into them and operation upon them, with his light
and beams, which reach far and near; and looking upon the effects we have
showed follow thence: it is manifest, there cannot be any great quantity of any
body whatever, in which fire is not intrinsecally mixed. And, on the other
side, we see that, where fire is once mixed, it is very hard to separate it
totally from thence. Again, we see it is impossible that pure fire should be
conserved, without being adjoined to some other body: both because of its
violent nativity, still streaming forth with a great impetuosity; as also
because it is so easily overcome by any obsident body, when it is dilated. And
therefore, we may safely conclude, that no simple Element can consist in any
great quantity, in this course of nature we live in and take a survey of.
Neither does it appear, to what purpose nature should have placed any such
storehouses of Simples; seeing she can make all needful complexions, by the
dissolutions of mixed bodies into other mixed bodies favoring of the nature of
the Elements, without needing their purity to begin upon.

But, on the other side, it is as evident, that the Elements must remain pure
in every compounded body, in such extreme small parts as we use to call atoms.
For, if they did not, the variety of bodies would be nothing else, but so many
degrees of rarity and density, or somany pure Homogeneal Elements; and not
bodies composed of heterogeneal parts: and consequently would not be able to
show that variety of parts which we see in bodies, nor could produce the
complicated effects which proced from them. And accordingly, we are sure that
the least parts, which our senses can arrive to discover, have many varieties
in them: even so much that a whole living creature (whose organical parts must
needs be of exceeding different natures) may be so little, as, to our eyes, to
seem indivisible; we not distinguishing any difference of parts in it without
the help of a multiplying glass: as, in the least kind of mites, and in worms
picked out of childrens hands, we daily experience. So as it is evident that no
sensible part can be unmingled. But then again, when we call to mind how we
have showed that the qualities, which we find in bodies, result out of the
composition and mixtion of the Elements; we must needs conclude, that they must
of necessity remain in their own essences in the mixed body: and so, out of the
whole discourse, determine, that they are not there in any visible quantity,
but in those least atoms that are too subtle for our senses to discern. Which
position we do not understand so Metaphysically, as to say that their
Substantial form remain actually in the mixed body; but only that their
accidental qualities are found in the compound: remitting that other question
to Metaphysicians (those spiri^al Anatomists) to decide.

CHAP. XVII. Of Rarefaction and Condensation, the two first motions of
particular bodies.
OUr intention in this discourse, concerning the natures and 1. The Authors
intent in this and the following chapters:
motions of bodies, aiming no further then at the discovery of what is or may
be done by corporeal Agents; thereby to determine what is the work of Immaterial
and Spiritual Substances: it cannot be expected at our hands, that we should
deliver here an entire and complete body of Natural Philosophy; But only take
so much of it in our way, as is needful to carry us, with truth and evidence,
to our journeys end. It belongs not, then, to us to meddle with those sublime
contemplations, which search into the nature of the vast Universe, and
determine the unity and limitation of it; and show by what strings, and upon
what pins and wheels and hinges, the whole World moves: and from thence ascend
to an awful acknowledgment and humble admiration of the Primary Cause; from
whence, and of which, both the being of it, and the beginning of the first
motion, and the continuance of all others proceed and depend.

Nor indeed would it be to any purpose, for any man to sail in this Ocean, and
begin a new voyage of navigation upon it: unless he were assured, he had
ballast enough in his Ship, to make her sink deep into the water and carry her
steddily through those unruly waves; and that he were furnished with skill and
provision sufficient to go through, without either losing his course by
steering after a wrong compass, or being forced back again with short and
obscure relations of discoveries: since others, that went out before him, are
returned with a large account, to such as are able to understand and sum it up.
Which Mr. Thomas White.
surely our learned Countryman, and my best and most honored Friend, and to
whom of all men living I am most obliged (for to him I ow that little which I
know; and what I have and shall set down in all this discourse, is but a few
sparks kindled by me at his great fire), has both profoundly, and accutely, and
in every regard judiciously performed, in his Dialogues of the World.

Our task then (in a lower strain, and more proportionate to so weak shoulders)
is, to look no further then among those bodies we converse with. Of which
having declared by what course and Engines Nature governs their common motions,
that are found even in the Elements, and from thence are derived to all bodies
composed of them; we intend now to consider such motions as accompany diverse
particular bodies, and are much admired by whoever understands not the the
causes of them.

To begin from the easiest and most connexed with the actions 2. That bodies
may be rarefied, both by outward and inward heat; and how this is performed.
of the Elements; the handsel of our labor will light upon the motions of
Rarefaction and Condensation, as they are the passions of mixed bodies. And
first, for Rarefaction, we may remember how it proceeds originally from fire,
and depends of heat; as is declared in the former Chapter: and, wherever we
find Rarefaction, we may be confident the body which suffers it is not without
fire working upon it. From hence we may gather, that when the Air imprisoned in
a baloon or bladder swells against what contains it, and stretches its case,
and seeks to break out: this effect must proceed from fire or heat (though we
see not the fire) working either within the very bowels of the air, or without;
by pressing upon what contains it, and so making it self a way to it.

And, that this latter way is able to work this effect may be convinced, by the
contrary effect from a contrary cause: for' take a bladder stretched out to its
greatest extent by air shut up within it, and hang it in a cold place; you will
see it presently contract it self into a less room, and the bladder will grow
wrinckled and become too big for the air within it. But, for immediate proof of
this position, we see that the addition of a very small degree of heat rarifies
the air in a Weather-glass, (the air receiving the impression of heat sooner
then water); and so makes it extend it self into a greater place: and
consequently, it presses upon the water, and forces it down into a less room
then formerly it possessed. And likewise we see Quicksilver and other liquors,
if they be shut up in glasses close stopped and set in sufficient heat (and a
little is sufficient for this effect) will swell and fill their glasses; and at
the last break them, rather then not find a way to give themselves more room:
which is then grown too straight in the glass, by reason of the rarefaction of
the liquors by the fire working upon them.

Now, again, that this effect may be wrought by the inward heat, that is
enclosed in the bowels of the substance thus shut up, both reason and
experience assure us. For, they teach us, that, if a body which is not
extremely compacted, but that by its looseness is easily divisible into little
parts (such a one as Wine or other spiritual liquors) be enclosed in a vessel;
the little atoms that perpetually move up and down in every space of the whole
World, making their way through every body, will set on work the little parts
(in the Wine, for example) to play their game: so that the hot and light parts
(if they be many), not enduring to be compressed and kept in by the heavy and
cold ones, seek to break out with force; and, till they can free themselves from
the dense ones that would imprison them, they carry them along with them, and
make them swell out as well as themselves.

Now, if they be kept in by the vessel, so that they have not play enough; they
drive the dense ones (like so many little hammers or wedges) against the sides
of it, and at length break it, and so make themselves way to a larger room: But,
if they have vent, the more fiery hot spirits fly away, and leave the other
grosser parts quiet and at rest. On the other side, if the hot and light parts
in a liquor be not many nor very active, and the vessel be so full that the
parts have not free scope to remove and make way for one another; there will
not follow any great effect in this kind: as we see in Bottle Beer or Ale, that
works little, unless there be some space left empty in the bottle. And again;
if the vessel be very much too big for the liquor in it, the fiery parts find
room, first to swel up the heavy ones, and at length to get out from them,
though the vessel be close stopped; for they have scope enough to float up and
down between the surface of the liquor, and the roof of the vessel.

And this is the reason that, if a little beer or small wine be left long in a
great cask, be it never so close stopped, it will in time grow dead. And then,
if, at the opening of the bung (after the cask has been long unstir'd), you
hold a candle close to it, you shall, at the instant, see a flash of flame
environing the vent. Which is no other thing, but the subtle spirits that,
parting from the beer or wine, have left it dead; and, flying abroad as soon as
they are permited, are set on fire by the flame they meet with in their
journey: as being more combustible (because more subtle) then that spirit of
wine which is kept in form of liquor; and yet that likewise (though much
grosser) is set on fire by the touch of flame: And this happens not only to
Wine, and Beer, or Ale; but even to water. As daily experience shows in the
East Indian Ships, that, having been five or six years at Sea, when they open
some of their casks of Thames Water in their return homewards (for they keep
that water till the last, as being their best and most durable, and that grows
lighter and purer, by the often purifyings through violent motions in storms,
every one of which makes new gross and earthy parts fall down to the bottom,
and other volatile ones ascend to the top); a flame is seen about their bungs,
if a candle be near, as we said before of wine.

And to proceed, with confirming this doctrine by further experience, we daily
see that the little parts of heat, being agitated and brought into motion in
any body, enter and pierce into other parts, and incorporate themselves with
them, and set them on fire, if they be capable thereof; as we see in wet Hay or
Flax, laid together in great quantity. And, if they be not capable of taking
fire, then they carry them with them to the outside; and, when they can
transport them no further, part flies away, and other part stays with them: as
we see in new Bear or Ale; and in must of wine; in which a substance, usually
called the mother, is wrought up to the top.

Which in wine will at the last be converted into Tartar; when the spirits that
are very volatile are flown away, and leave those parts, from whence they have
evaporated, more gross and earthy then the others, where the grosser and
subtiler parts continue still mixed. but in Beer, or rather in ale, this mother
(which in them we call Barm) will continue longer in the same consistence, and
with the same qualities: for, the spirits of it are not so fiery that they must
presently leave the body they have incorporated themselves with; nor are hot
enough to bake it into a hard consistence. And therefore Bakers make use of it
to raise their bread; which neither will it do, unless it be kept from cold:
both which are evident signs that it works in force of heat; and consequently,
that it continues still a hot and light substance.

And again we see that, after wine or beer has wrought once, a violent motion
will make it work a new: As is daily seen in great lightnings, and in thunder,
and by much rocking of them. For, such motion rarifies, and consequently heats
them; partly by separating the little parts of the liquor, which were before as
glew'd together, and therefore lay quietly, but now, by their pulling a sunder
and the liquors growing thereby more loose then it was, they have freedom to
play up and down: and partly by beating one part against another, which breaks
and divides them into lesser atoms, and so brings some of them into the state
of fire; which, you may remember, is nothing else but a body brought into such
a degree of littleness and rarity of its parts.

And this is the reason why such hard and dry bodies as have an unctuous
substance in them are, by motion, either easily set on fire, or at least fire
is easily gotten out of them. As happens in flints and diverse other stones,
which yields fire when they are stricken; and if presently after you smell to
them, you shall perceive an odor of brimstone and burning: which is a certain
sign that the motion converted into fire the natural Brimstone that was
mingled withthe Flint, and whose denser parts were grown cold, and so stuck to
the stone. And, in like manner, the Ivywood, and diverse others, as also the
Indian Canes (which from thence are called Firecanes) being rubbed with some
other stick of the same nature, if they be first very dry, will of themselves
set on fire: and the like will happen to Coach-wheels in in the Summer, if they
be overheated with motion.

To conclude our discourse of Rarefaction, we may look a little 3. Of the great
effects of Rarefaction.
into the power and efficacity of it; which is no where to be seen so clearly
as in fire. And, as fire is the general cause of rarefaction, so is it of all
bodies the most rarefied: And therefore it is no marvel if its effects be the
greatest that are in nature; seeing it is the proper operation of the most
active Element. The wonderful force of it we daily see in Thunder, in Guns, in
Granado's, and in Mines; of which, continual experience as well as several
Histories, witness little less then miracles. Leaving them to the remarks of
curious persons, we will only look into the way, by which so main effects
proceed from causes that appear so slender.

It Is evident that fire (as we have said before) dilates it self spherically;
as nature shows us manifestly in bubbles of boiling 4. The first manner of
condensation, by heat
water, and Milk, and generally of such substances as are of a viscuous
composition: for, those bubbles, being round, assure us that the cause which
made them did equally dilate them from the Center to all parts. Now then,
remembering the infinite multiplication which is in fire, we may conceive that,
when a grain of Gunpowder is turned into it, there are so many little bubbles
of a viscuous substance, one backing another with great celerity, as there are
parts of fire more then there were of Gunpowder. And, if we make a computation
of the number and celerity of these bubbles, we shall find that although every
one of them single seem to be of an inconsiderable force, yet the whole number
of them together will exceed the resistance of the body move or broken by them:
especially, if we note that, when hard substances have not time allowed them to
yield, they break the sooner. And then we shall not so much admire the
extremities we see acted by these means.

Thus having looked into the nature of Rarefaction, and traced the progress of
it from the motion of the Sun and fire: in the next place we are to examine the
nature of Condensation. And we shall oftentimes find it likewise aneffect of
the same cause otherwise working. For, there being two different ways to dry
any wet thing, one, by taking away that juice which makes a body liquid, the
other, by putting more drought to the wet body, that it may imbibe the
moisture; this latter way does, as well as the former, condense a body: for, by
the close sticking of wet to dry, the most part of condensation is effected in
compounded bodies.

The first of these ways properly and immediately proceeds from heat. For
heat, entering into a body, incorporates it self with the moist and viscuous
parts it finds there; as purging medicines do with humor they work on: which
when the stomach can no longer entertain, (by reason of their unruly motions in
wrestling together), they are both ejected grappling with one another; and the
place of their contention is thus, by the supervenience of a guest of a
contrary nature (that will not stay long there), purged from the superabundance
of the former ones that annoyed it. Even so the fire, that is greedily drunk up
by the watery and viscuous parts of a compounded body, and whose activity and
restless nature will not endure to be long imprisoned there, quickly pierces
quite through the body it enters into: and, after a while, streams out at an
opposite side, as fast as it enters on the side next to it, and carries away
with it those glewy parts it is incorporated with; and, by their absence,
leaves the body they part from dryer then at the first it was.

Which course we may observe in Syrops that are boiled to a consistence, and in
broths that are consumed to a jelly: over which, whiles they are making by the
fire under them, you see a great steam; which is the watery parts that, being
incorporated with fire, fly away in smoke. Likewise, when the seawater is
condensed into salt, you see it is an effect of the Sun or fire, that exhales
or boyls away all the palpable moisture. And so, when wet clothes are hanged,
either in the Sun or at the fire, we see a smoke about the clothes, and heat
within them; which being all drawn out from them, they become dry.

And this deserves a particular note, that, although they should be not quite
dry, when you take them from the fire; yet, by that time they are cool, they
will be dry: for, the fire that is in them when removed from the main stock of
fire, flying away, carries with it the moisture that was incorporated with it.
And therefore whiles they were hot, that is, whiles the fire was in them, they
must also be moist; because the fire and the moisture were grown to be one
body; and could not become through dry with that measure of fire, (for more
would have dried them, even whiles they were hot) until they were also grown
through cold. And in like manner, Syrups Hydromels, Gellies, and the like, grow
much thicker after they are taken off from the fire, than they were upon the
fire; and much of their humidity flies away with the fire, in their cooling,
whereby they lessen much of their quantity, even after the outward fire has
ceased from working upon them.

Now, if the moist parts that remain after the drying be, by the heat, well
incorporated in the dry parts; and so occasion the 5. The second manner of
condensation, by cold.
dry parts to stick close together; then, that body is condensed, and will (to
the proportion of it) be heavier in a less bulk; as we see that Metals are
heavier than Stones.

Although this effect be, in those examples, wrought by heat; yet, generally
speaking, it is more proper to cold: which is the Second Way of drying a moist
body. As when, in Greenland, the extreme cold freeses the Whalefishes Beer into
Ice; so that the stewards divide it with Axes and Wedges, and deliver their
portions of drinks to their ships company, and their Shallops gings, in their
bare hands: but, in the innermost part of the Butt, they find some quantity of
very strong liquor; not inferior to moderate spirit of Wine. At first, before
custom had made it familiar to them, they wondered that, every time they drew
at the tap, when first it came from their ships to the shore, (for the heat of
the hold would not let it freese), no liquor would come, unless they new tap'd
it with a longer gimlet: but, they thought that pains well recompen'd, by
finding it in the taste to grow stronger and stronger; till, at last, their
longest gimlets would bring nothing out, and yet the vessel not a quarter drawn
off, which obliged them then to stave the Cask, that so they might make use of
the substance that remained.

The reason of this is evident, That cold seeking to condense the beer, by
mingling its dry and cold parts with it; those that would endure this mixture
were imbibed and shrunk up by them: But the other rare and hot parts, that were
squees'd out by the dense ones which entered to congeal the beer, and were
forced into the middle of the vessel (which was the furthest part for them to
retire to, from their invironing enemies) conserved themselves in their liquid
form, in defiance of the assaulting cold; whiles their fellows, remaining by
their departure more gross and earthy then they were before, yielded to the
conqueror, they could not shift away from, and so were dried and condensed in
ice: which, when the Mariners thawed, they found like fair water, without any
spirits in it or comforting heat to the stomach.

This manner of condensation, which we have described in the freezing of Beer,
is the way most practiced by nature; I mean, for immediate condensation (for
condensation is, secondarily, wherever there is rarefaction, which we have
determined to be an effect of heat.) And the course of it is, that a multitude
of earthy and dry bodies, being driven against any liquor, easily divide it, by
means of their density, their dryness, and their littleness (all which in this
case accompany one another, and are by us determined to be powerful dividers):
and when they are gotten into it, they partly suck into their own pores the wet
and diffused parts of the liquid body; and partly they make them (when
themselves are full) stick fast to their dry sides, and become as a glue to hold
themselves strongly together. And thus they dry up the liquor; and, by the
natural pressing of gravity, contract it into a lesser room: No otherwise then
when we force much wind or water into a bottle, and, by pressing it more and
more, make it lie closser then of its own nature it would do; Or rather, as
when ashes are mingled with water, both those substances stick so close to one
another, that they take up less room the^ they did each apart.

This is the method of Frosts, and Snow, and Ice, both natural and artificial:
For, in natural freezing, ordinarily the North or Northeast Wind, by its force,
brings and drives into our liquors such earthy bodies, as it has gathered from
rocks covered with snow; which, being mixed with the light vapors whereof the
wind is made, easily find way into the liquors, and then they dry them into
that consistence we call Ice. Which, in token of the wind it has in it, swims
upon the water, and, in the vessel where it is made, rises higher then the
water did whereof it is composed: and ordinarily it breaks from the sides of the
vessel, so giving way to more wind to come in and freeze deeper and thicker.

But because Galileus (In his Discourses, Intorno all cose che stanno in su l'
accqua, page 4.) was of opinion, that Ice was water 3. That Ice is not water
rarifi^d, but condensed.
rarefied, and not condensed; we must not pass over this verity, without
maintaining it against the opposition of so powerful an adversary. His
arguments are, first, that Ice takes up more place then the water did of which
it was made; which is against the nature of condensation. Secondly, that,
quantity for quantity, Ice is lighter then water; whereas things that are more
dense are proportionally more heavy. And lastly, that Ice swims in water;
whereas we have aften taught, that the more dense desends in the more rare.

Now, to reply to these arguments, we say first, that We would gladly know how
he did to measure the quantity of the Ice, with the quantity of the Water of
which it was made: and then, when he has showed it, and showed withal that
Ice holds more place then water, we must tell him, that his experiment
concludes nothing against our doctrine; because there is an addition of other
bodies mingled with the water to make Ice of it (as we touched above), and
therefore that compound may well take up a greater place then the water alone
did, and yet be denser then it, and the water also be denser then it was.

And, that other bodies do come into the water and are mingled with it is
evident, out of the exceeding coldness of the air, or some very old wind; one
of which two never misses to reign, whenever the water freezes: and both of
them argue great store of little earthy dry bodies abounding in them, which,
sweeping over all those that ly in their way and course, must of necessity be
mixed with such as give them admittance; which water does very easily. And
accordingly we see that when, in the freezing of water, the Ice grows any thing
deep, it either shrinks about the borders, or at least lies very loose; so as
we cannot doubt but there is a free passage more of such subtle bodies to get
still to the water, and freez it deeper.

To his second argument, we ask? How he knows that Ice, quantity for quantity,
is lighter then water? For though, of a Sponge that is full of water, it be
easy to know what the sponge weighs, and what the water that was soaked into
it, because we can part the one of them from the other, and keep each apart to
examine their weights; yet, to do the like between Ice and water, if Ice be
throughout full of air (as of necessity it must be) we believe impossible. And
therefore it may be lighter in the bulk then water, by reason of the great pores
caused in it, through the shrinking up of the parts of water together (which
pores must then necessarily be filled with air), and yet every part by it self
(in which no air is) be heavier then so much water.

And by this it appears that his last argument (grounded upon the the swiming
of Ice in water) has no more force, then if he would prove that an iron or
earthen dish were lighter, and consequently more rare, then water, because it
swims upon it; which is an effect of the airs being contained in the belly of
it (as it is in Ice), not a sign of the metals being more rare then water.

Whereas, on the contrary side, the proof is positive and clear for us: For, it
cannot be denied, but the mingling of the water with other bodies more dense
then it must of necessity make the compound, and also the water it self, become
more dense then it was alone. And accordingly we see, that Ice half thawed (for
then much of the air is driven out, and the water begins to fill the pores
wherein the air resided before) sinks to the bottom: as an Iron dish with holes
in it (whereby the water might get into it) would do. And besides, we see that
water is more Diaphanous then Ice, and Ice more consistent then water. Therefore
I hope we shall be excused, if, in this particular, we be of a contrary opinion
to this great personage.

But, to return to the third of our discourse. The same that passes here before
us, passes also in the Sky with Snow, Hail, 7. How wind, snow, and hail are
made; and wind by rain allayed.
Rain, and Wind. Which that we may the better understand, let us consider how
Winds are made: for they have a main influence into all the rest. When the Sun,
by some particular occurrent, raises great multitudes of Atoms from some one
place, and they, either by the attraction of the Sun or some other occasion,
take their course a certain way; this motion of those atoms we call a wind:
which, according to the continuance of the matter from whence these atoms rise,
endures a longer or a shorter time, and goes a farther or a shorter way; like a
river, or rather like those eruptions of waters, which, in the Northern parts
of England, they call Gypsies, which break out at uncertain times, and upon
uncertain causes, and flow likewise with an uncertain duration. So these winds,
being composed of bodies in a determinate proportion heavier then the air, run
their course, from their height to the ground; where they are supported (as
water is by the floor of its channel) whiles they perform their carreer: that
is, till they be wasted, either by the drawing of the Sun, or by their sticking
and incorporating into grosser bodies.

Some of these winds, according to the complexion of the body out of which they
are extracted, are dry; as those which come from barren mountains covered with
snow: others are moist; as those that come out of marrishy or watery places:
others have other qualities, as of heat, or cold, of wholsomness, or
unwholsomness, and the like; partly from the source, and partly from the bodies
they are mingled within their way.

Such then being the nature and origin of wind, if a cold one meet in the air
with that moist body whereof otherwise rain would have been made, it changes
that moist body into Snow or into Hail; if a dry wind meet with a wet body, it
makes it more dry, and so hinders the rain that was likely to be: but, if the
wet body overcome the dry wind, it brings the wind down along with it; as we
see when a shower of rain allays a great wind.

And that all this is so, experience will in some particulars instruct us, as
well as reason, from whence the rest may be evidently inferred, For we see that
those, who, in imitation of nature would convert water into Ice, take snow or
ice and mingle it with some active dry body, that may force the cold parts of
the snow from it: and then they set the water (in some fit vessel) in the way
that those little bodies are to take; which, by that means entering into it,
strait incorporate themselves therewith, and of a suden convert it into ice.
Which process you may easily try, by mingling Salt Armoniacke with snow; but,
much more powerfully, by setting the snow over the fire, whiles the glass of
water to be congealed stands in it, after the manner of an egg in salt. And
thus fire it self, though it be the enemy and destroyer of all cold, is made
the instrument of freezing. And the same reason holds in the cooling of wine
with snow or ice, when, after it has been a competent time in the snow, they,
whose charge it is, use to give the vessel that contains the wine three or four
turns in the snow; so to mingle through the whole body of the wine the cold
received first but in the outward parts of it, and, by pressing, too make that
without to have a more forcible ingression.

But, the whole doctrine of Meteors is so amply, so ingeniously, and so exactly
performed, by that never-enough-praised Gentleman, Mounsir Des Carts, in his
Meteorological discourses; as I should wrong my self and my Reader, if I dwell
any longer upon this subject. And whose Physical discourses; had they been
divulged before I had entered upon this work, I am persuaded would have excused
the greatest part of my pains in delivering the nature of bodies.

It were a fault to pass from treating of Condensation, without 8. How parts of
the same or diverse bodies are joined more strongly together by condensation.
noting so ordinary an effect of it, as is the joining together parts of the
same body, or of diverse bodies. In which we see, for the most part, that the
solid bodies which are to be joined together are, first either heated or
moistened, that is, they are rarefied: and then they are left to cold air or
other cold bodies, to thicken and condense (as above we mentioned of Syrups and
Jellies) and so they are brought to stick firmly together. In like manner we
see that, when two metals are heated till they be almost brought to running,
and then are pressed together by the hammer, they become one continued body.
The like we see in glass, the like in wax, and in diverse other things. Onthe
contrary side, when a broken stone is to be pieced together, the pieces of it
must be wetted, and the cement must be likewise moistened; and then joining them
aptly, and drying them, they stick fast together. Glue is moistened, that it
may, by drying afterward, hold pieces of wood together. And the
Spectale-makers have a composition, which must be both heated and moistened, to
join to handles of wood the glasses they are to grind. And broken glasses are
cemented with cheese and chalk, or with garlic.

All these effects, our sense evidently shows us, arise out of condensation;
but, to our reason it belongs to examine particularly by what steps thy are
performed. First, then, we know that heat subtilizes the little bodies which
are in the pores of the heated body; and partly also it opens the pores of the
body it self, if it be of a nature that permits it: as it seems those bodies
are, which by heat are mollified or are liquofactable. Again, we know that
moisture is more subtle to enter into small creeks, then dry bodies are;
especially when it is pressed: for then it will be divided into very little
parts, and will fill up every little chinck; and nevertheless, if it be of a
gross and viscuous nature, all the parts of it will stick together. Out of
these two properties we have, that, since every body has a kind of orb of its
own exhalations or vapors round about it self (as is before declared); the
vapors which are about one of the bodies will more strongly and solidly (that
is, in more abundant and greater parts) enter into the pores of the other body
against which it is pressed, when they are opened and dilated: and thus they
becoming common to both bodies, by flowing from the one, and streaming into the
other, and sticking to them both, will make them stick to one another. And
then, as they grow cold and dry, these little parts shrink on both sides, and,
by their shrinking, draw the bodies together; and withal leave greater pores,
by their being compressed together, then were there when by heat and moisture
they were dilated: into which pores the circumstant cold parts enter, and
thereby, as it were, wedge in the others; and consequently make them hold firmly
tostether the bodies which they join.

But, if art or nature should apply to this juncture any liquor or vapor,
which had the nature and power to insinuate it self more efficaciously to one
of these bodier, then the glue which was between them did; of necessity in this
case these bodies must fall in pieces. And so it happens in the separation of
metals by corrosive waters; as also in the precipitation of metals or salts,
when they are dissolved into such corrosive waters, by means of other metals or
salts of a different nature: in both which cases, the entrance of a latter
body, that penetrates more strongly, and unites it self to one of the joined
bodies but not to the other, 9. Vacuities cannot be the reason why water,
impregnated to the full with one kind of salt, will notwithstanding receive
more of another.
tears them asunder, and that which the piercing body rejects falls into little
pieces; and, if formerly it were joined with the liquor, it is then precipitated
down from it in a dust.

Out of which discourse we may resolve the question of that learned and
ingenious man, Petrus Gassendus; who, by experience found, that water,
impregnated to fullness with ordinary salt, would yet receive a quantity of
other salt, and, when it would imbibe no more of that would neverthless take
into it a proportion of a third, and so of several kinds of salts one after
another: which effect he attributed to Vacuities or porous spaces of diverse
figures, that he conceived to be in the water; whereof some were fit for the
figure of one salt, and some for the figure of another. Very ingeniously; yet,
if I miss not my mark, most assuredly he has missed his.

For, first, how could he attribute diverse sorts of Vacuities to water, without
giving it diverse figures? And this would be against his own discourse, by which
every body should have one determinate natural figure.

Secondly, I would ask him, if he measured his water after every salting? and,
if he did, whether he did not find the quantity greater, then before that salt
was dissolved in it? Which if he did, (as without doubt he must), then he might
safely conclude that his salts were not received in vacuities; but that the
very substance of the water, gave them place, and so increased by the receiving
them.

Thirdly, seeing that, in his doctrine, every substance has a particular
figure; we must allow a strange multitude of different shapes of vacuities to
be naturally in water, if we will have every different substance wherewith it
may be impregnated (by making decoctions, extractions, solutions, and the
like), to find a fit vacuity in the water to lodge it self in. What a difform
net, with a strange variety of mashes, would this be? And indeed, how extremely
incapable must it be of the quantity of every various kind of vacuity that, you
will find, must be in it; if in the dissolution of every particular substance,
you calculate the proportion between it and the water that dissolveth it, and
then multiply it according to the number of several kinds of substances that
may be dissolved in water? By this proceeding, you will find the vacuities to
exceed infinitely the whole body of the water; even so much that it could not
afford subtle thrids enough to hold it self together.

Fourthly, if this doctrine were true, it would never happen that one body, or
salt, should precipitate down to the bottom of the water, by the solution of
another in it; which, every Alchymist knows, never fails in due circumstances:
for, seeing that the body which precipitates, and the other which remains
dissolved in the water, are of different figures, and therefore require
d^fferent vacuities; they might both of them have kept their places in the
water, without thrusting one another out of it.

Lastly, this doctrine gives no account, why one part of salt is separated from
another, by being put in the water; and why the parts are there kept so
separated: which is the whole effect of that motion we call dissolution.

The true reason therefore of this effect is (as I conceive), that 10. The true
reason of the former effect.
one salt makes the water apt to receive another: for, the lighter salt, being
incorporated with the water, makes the water more proper to stick to an
heavier, and, by dividing the small parts of it, to bear them up, that
otherwise would have sunk in it. The truth and reason of which will appear more
plain; if at every joint we observe the particular steps of every salts
solution. As soon as you put the first salt into the water, it falls down
presently to the bottom of it; and as the water by its humidity pierces by
degrees the little joints of this salt, so the small parts of it are by little
and little separated from one another, and united to parts of water. And so,
infusing more and more salt, this progress will continue; till every part of
water is incorporated with some part of salt: and then, the water can no longer
work of it self, but in conjunction to the salt with which it is united. After
which, if more salt of the same kind be put into the water, that water so
impregnated will not be able to divide it; because it has not any so subtle
parts left, as are able to enter between the joints of a salt so closely
compacted: but may be compared to that salt, as a thing of equal dryness with
it; and therefore is unapt to moisten and pierce it.

But, if you put into this compound of salt and water another kind of salt,
that is of a stronger and drier nature then the former and whose parts are more
grossly united; then, the first salt dissolved in the water will be able to get
in betwixt the joints of the grosser salt, and divide it into little parts: and
will incorporate his already-composed parts of salt and water into a decompound
of two salts and water; till all his parts be anew impregnated with second
grosser salt, as before, the pure water was with the first subtiler salt. And
so it will proceed on, if proportionate bodies be joined; till the dissolving
composition grow into a thick body.

To which discourse we may add, that, when the water is so fully impregnated
with the first salt, as it will receive no more, remaining in the temper it is
in; yet, if it be heated, it will then afresh dissolve more of the same kind.
Which shows, that the reason of its giving over to dissolve is, for want of
having the water divided into parts little enough to stick to more salt, which
as, in this case, the fire does, so peradventure in the other, the
acrimoniousness of the salt does it.

And this is sufficient to give curious wits occasion, by making 11. The reason
why bodies of the same nature j^yn more easily together then others,
further experiments, to Search out the truth of this matter. Only, we may note
what happens in most of the experiencies we have mentioned; to wit, that things
of the same nature join better and more easily, then others that are more
estranged from one another. Which is very agreeable to reason; seeing that, if
nature intends to have things consist long together, she must fit them for such
consistence.

Which seems to proceed out of their agreement in four qualities. First, in
weight; for bodies of diverse degrees in weight, if they be at liberty, seek
diverse places: and consequently, substances of like weight must of necessity
find one another out, and crowd together, as we have showed, it is the nature
of heat to make them do. Now, it is apparent, that things of one nature must,
in equal parts, have the same or a near proportion ofweight; seeing that, in
their composition, they must have the same proportion of Elements.

The second reason, of the consistence of bodies together, that are of the same
nature, is the agreement of their liquid parts, in the same degree of rarity
and density. For, as it is the nature of quantity in common to make all parts
be one quantity; so it is the nature of the degrees of quantity, when two parts
meet that are of the same degree, to make them one in that degree of quantity:
which is, to make them stick together, in that degree of sticking which the
degree of density that is common to them both makes of its own nature. Whereas,
parts of different densities cannot have this reason of sticking: though,
peradventure they may, upon some other ground, have some more efficatious one.
And in this manner, the like humide parts of two bodies, becoming one, the
holes or receptacles, in which those humide parts are contained, must also
needs be united.

The third reason is the agreeable proportion, which their several figures have
in respect of one another. For, if any humidity be extracted out of a mixed
body, especially, by the virtue of fire, it must have left pores of such
figures, as the humidity that is drawn out of them is apt to be cut into: for
every humide body (not being absolutely humide, but having certain dry parts
mixed with it) is more apt for one kind of figure and greatness, then for
another; and by consequence, whenever that humidity shall meet again with the
body it was severed from, it will easily run through and into it all, and fill
exactly the cavities pores it passed before.

The last quality in which bodies that are to consist long together agree is,
the bigness of the humide and dry parts of the same body. For, if the humide
parts be too big for the dry ones, it is clear that the dry ones must needs hang
loosly together by them, because their glue is in too great a quantity: But, if
the humide parts be too little for the dry ons, then of necessity some portion
of every little dry part must be unfurnish of glue, by means whereof to stick to
his fellow; and so the sticking parts not being conveniently proportioned to
one another, their adhesion cannot be so solid, as if each of them were exactly
fitted to his fellow.

CHAP. XVIII. Of another motion belonging to particular bodies, called
Atraction; and of certain operations, termed Magical.
HAving thus ended the two motions of rarefaction and condensation; the next
that offer themselves are the local motions, 1. What attraction is, and from
whence it proceeds.
which some bodies have to others. These are sometimes performed by a plain
force in the body toward which the motion is: and other whiles by a hidden
cause, which is not so easily discerned. The first is chiefly that which is
ordinarily said to be done by the force of nature to hinder vacuum, and is much
practiced by nature: as, in drawing our breath, in sucking, and many other
natural operations, which are imitated by art in making of Pumps, Siphons, and
such other instuments: and in that admirable experiment of taking up a heavy
Marble stone, merely by another lying flat and smoothly upon it, without any
there connection of the two stones together, as also by that sport of boys, when
they spread a thin moistened leather upon a smooth broad stone, press it all
over close to it, and then by pulling of a string fastened at the middle of the
leather, they draw up likewise the heavy stone. In all which, the first cause
of the motion proceeds from that body toward which the motion is made: and
therefore is properly called Attraction.

For the better understanding and delaring of which, let us suppose two marble
stones, very broad and exceeding smoothly polished, to be laid one flat upon
the other: and let there be a ring fastened at the back part of the uppermost
stone, and exactly in the middle of it. Then, by that ring, pull it up
perpendicularly and steadily; and the undermost will follow, sticking fast to
the overmost: and though they were not very perfectly polished, yet the
nethermost would follow for a while, if the ring be suddenly plucked up; but
then it will soon fall down again. Now this plainly shows, that the cause of
their sticking so strongly together, when both the stones are very well
polished, is for that nothing can well enter between them to part them; and so,
it is reduced to the shortness of the air betwixt them: which not being capable
of so great an expansion, nor admitting to be divided thick-ways, so much as is
necessary to fill the first growing distance between the two stones till new
air finds a course thither (that so the swelling of the one may hinder vacuity,
till the other come into the rescue); the two stones must needs stick together
to certain limits, which limits will depend of the proportion that is between
the weight, and the continuity of the nethermost stone.

And, when we have examined this, we shall understand in what sense it is meant
that Nature abhors from Vacuity; and what 1. The true sense of the Maxim, that
Nature abhors from vacuity.
means she uses to avoid it. For, to put it as an enemy that nature fights
against, or to discourse of effects that would follow from it, in case it were
admitted, is a great mistake, and a lost labor; seeing it is nothing and,
therefore, can do nothing: but is merely a form of expression, to declare, in
short, nothing else but that it is a contradiction, or implication in terms,
and an impossibility in nature, for Vacuity to have or be supposed to have a
Being.

Thus then, since in our case, after we have cast all about, we can pitch upon
nothing to be considered but that the two stones touch one another, and that
they are weighty; we must apply our selves only to reflect upon the affects
proceeding from these two causes, their contiguity and their heaviness: and we
shall find that as the one of them, namely the weight, hinders the undermost
from following the uppermost, so, contiguity obliges it to that course; and
according as the one overcoms the other, so will this action be continued or
interrupted.

Now, that contiguity of substances makes one follow another, is evident, by
what our Masters in Metaphysics teach us; when they show that, without this
affect, no motion at all could be made in the world, nor any reason given for
those motions we daily see. For, since the nature of quantity is such, that,
whenever there is nothing between two parts of it, they must needs touch and
adhere and join to one another; (for how should they be kept asunder, when
there is nothing between them to to part them?) if you pull one part away,
either some new substance must come to be close to that which removes; (or else
the other, which was formerly close to it, must still be close to it, and so
follow it: for, if nothing come between, it is still close to it. Thus then, it
being necessary that something must be joined close to every thing; Vacuity,
(which is nothing) is excluded from having any being in nature.

And, when we say that one body must follow another, to avoid vacuity; the
meaning is, that, under the necessity of a contradiction, they must follow one
another, and that they cannot do otherwise. For it would be a contradiction, to
say that nothing were between two things; and yet that they are not joined
close to one another: and therefore, if you should say it, you would in other
words say, they are close together, and they are not close together. In like
manner, to say that Vacuity is any where, is a pure contradiction; for Vacuity,
being nothing has no Being at all: and yet, by those words, it is said to be in
such a place; so that they affirm it to be and not to be, at the same time.

But now, let us examine if there be no means to avoid this contradiction and
vacuity; other then by the adhesion, and following 3. The true rea son of
attraction.
of one body upon the motion of another, that is closely joined to it and every
where contiguous. For, sense is not easily quieted with such Metaphysical
contemplations, that seem to repugn against her dictamens; and therefore, for
her satisfaction, we can do no less then give her leave to range about and cast
all ways, in hope of finding some one that may better content her: which when
she finds that she cannot, she will the less repine to yield her assent to the
rigorous sequels and proofs of reason.

In this difficulty then, after turning on every side, I for my part can
discern no pretense of probability, in any other means but pulling down the
lower stone by one corner; that so there may be a gaping between the two
stones, to let in air by little and little. And, in this case, you may say
that, by the intervention of air, Vacuity is hindered; and yet the lower stone
is left at liberty to follow its own natural inclination, and be governed by
its weight. But indeed, if you consider the matter well, you will find that the
doing this requires a much greater force, then to have the lower stone follow
the upper: for, it cannot gape in a straight line, to let in air, since, in
that position, it must open at the bottom where the angle is made, at the same
time that it opens at the mouth: and then, air requiring time to pass from the
edges to the bottom, it must in the mean while fall into the contradiction of
Vacuity. So that, if it should open to let in air, the stone, to compass that
effect, must bend; in such sort as wood does, when a wedg is put into it to
cleave it.

Judge then what force it must be, that should make hard marble, of a great
thickness, bend like a wand; and whether it would not rather break and slide
off, then do so: you will allow that a much less will raise up the lower stone,
together with the uppermost. It must then of necessity fall out, that it will
follow it, if it be moved perpendicularly upwards. And the like effect will be,
though it should be raised at oblique angles; so that the lower-most edge do
rest all the way upon something that may hinder the inferior stone from sliding
aside from the uppermost.

And this is the very case of all those other experiments of art and nature,
which we have mentioned above: for, the reason holds as well in water and
liquide things, as in solid bodies, till the weight of the liquid body
overcome's the continuity of it; for then, the third breaks, and it will ascend
no higher. 4. Water may be brought by the force of attraction to what height
soever.


Which height Galileo tells us (from the workmen in the Arsenal of Venice) is
40 foot; if the water be drawn up in a close pipe; in which the advantage of
the sides helps the ascent. But others say that the invention is enlarged; and
that water may be drawn to what height one pleases. However, the force which
nature applies to maintain the continuity of quantity, can have no limit;
seeing it is grounded upon contradiction. And therefore Galileo was much
mistaken, when he thought to make an instrument, whereby to discover the limits
of this force.

We may then conclude, that the breaking of the water must depend from the
strength of other causes. As for example, when the gravity is so great, by
increasing the bulk of the water, that it will either overcome the strength of
the pipe, or else make the sucker of the pump rather yield way to air, then
draw up so great a weight: for which defects, if remedies be found, the art may
surely be enlarged without end.

This is particular in a Siphon, that, when that arm of it, which hangs out of
the water, is lower then the superficies of the water; 5. The doctrine touching
the attraction of water in Siphons.
then, it will run of it self, after it is once set on running by sucking. The
reason whereof is, because the weight, which is in the water pendant, is
greater then the weight of the ascending water; and thereby supplies the want of
a continual sucke^. But, if the nose of that arm that hangs out of the water be
put even with the water; then the water will stand still in both pipes or arms
of the Siphon, after thy are filled with sucking. But, if, by the running out
of the water, the outward pipe grow shorter then to reach as low as the
superficies of the water in the fountain from whence it runs; in this case, the
water in each arm of the Siphon will run back into the fountain.

Withal it is to be noted, that, though the arm which is out of the water be
never so long, yet, if it reach not lower then the superficies of the fountain,
the over quantity and weight of the water there, more then in the other arm,
helps it nothing to make it run out. Which is, because the declivity of the
other arm over-recompences this overweight. Not that the weight in the shorter
pipe has so much force, as the weight in the longer pipe; but because it has
more force then the greater weight exercises therein its running: for, the
greatest part of its force, tends another way, then to the end of the pipe, to
wit, perpendicularly toward the Center; and so is hindered from effect, by the
great sloping, or little declivity, of the pipe upon which it leans. 6. That
the Siphon does not prove water to weigh in its own orb.


But, some, considering how the water in that longer arm of the Siphon is more
in quantity, than the water in the other arm of it, whereat it runs out, admire
why the greater quantity of water does no^d raw back the less into the cistern;
but suffers it self to be lifted up, and drained away, as if it run steeply
downwards. And they imagine, that hence may be deduced, that the parts of water
in the cistern do not weigh, as long as they are within the orb of their own
body.

To whom we answer, that they should consider how, that to have the greater
quantity of water in the longer arm of the Siphon (which arm is immersed in
the water of the cistern) draw back into the cistern the water in the other arm
of the Siphon, that hangs out in the air; it must both raise as much of the
water of the cistern as its own bulk is, above the level which at present the
whole bulk of water has, and withal, at the same time, pull up the water in the
other arm. Now it is manifest, that these two quantities of water together are
heavier then the water in the sunk arm of the Siphon; since one of them single
is equal unto it: And by consequence, the more water in the sunk arm cannot
weigh back the less water in the hanging arm; since, to do that, it must at the
same time weigh up, over and above, as much more in the cistern as it self
weighs.

But, turning the argument, I say, that, if once the arm of the Siphon that is
in the air be supposed to draw any water, be it never so little, out of the
cistern (whether occasioned by sucking or by whatever other means): it follows
that as much water as is drawn up, above the level of the whole bulk in the
cistern, must needs press into the sunken arm from the next adjacent parts,
(that is, from the bottom) to supply its emptying; and as much must of it self
press down from above (according to its natural course, when nothing violents
it) to rest in the place, that the ascending water, (which is lower then it)
leaves at liberty for it to take possession of. And then it cannot be doubted,
but that this descending water, having all its weight in pressing down applied
to drive up the rising water in the sunk arm of the Siphon, and the water in
the other arm of the Siphon without having all its weight in running out
applied at the same time to draw up the same water in the sunk arm; this single
resistant must yield to their double and mastering force. And consequently, the
water in the arm of the Siphon that is in the air must needs draw the water
that is the other immersed arm, as long as the end of its pipe reaches lower
then the level of the water in the cistern; for so long, it appears by what we
have said, it must needs be more weighty, since part of the rising water in the
sunk arm of the siphon is cou^ erpois'd by as much descending water in the
cistern.

And thus it is evident, that, out of this experiment, it cannot be inferred,
that parts of water do not weigh within the orb of their own whole: but only,
that two equal parts of water in their own orb (namely that which rises in the
sunken arm, and that which presses down from the whole bulk in the cistern)
are of equal weight and balance one another, So that never so little odds,
between the two counterpoysing parcels of water which are in the air, must
needs make the water run out at that end of the siphon, where the overweight of
water is.

The Attraction, whose cause next to this is most manifest, is that which is
made by the force of heat or fire: for, we see that 7. Concerning attraction
caused by fire.
fire ever draws air to it; so notably, that, if in a close room there be a
good fire, a man that stands at the door or window (especially without) shall
hear such a noise, that he will think there is a great wind within the chamber.
The reason of this attraction is, that fire, rarifying the air next it, and
withal spending it self perpetually, causes the air, and his own body mingled
together to fly up through the chimney, or by some other passage: Whence it
follows of necessity, that the next body must succeed into the place of the
body that is flown away. The next body generally is air, whose mobility and
fluidity, beyond all other bodies, makes it of all others the fittest to be
drawn, and the more of it is drawn, the more must needs follow. Now, if there
be floating in this air any other atoms, subject to the current which the air
takes; they must also come with it to the fire, and by it be rarefied and
exported out of that little orb.

Hence it is, that men (with very good reason) hold that fire airs a chamber,
as we term it; that is, purifies it: both because it purifies it, as wind does,
by drawing a current of air into it that sweeps through it; or by making it
purify it self by motion, as a stream of water does by running; as also,
because those vapors which approach the fire are burned and dissolved. So that
the air, being noisome and unwholesome, by reason of its grossness, (proceeding
from its standing unmoved, like a stagnation of dead water, in a marish place)
the fire takes away that cause of annoyance.

By this very rule we learn, that other hot things, which participate the
nature of fire, must likewise (in other respects) have a 8. Concerning
attraction made by virtue of hot bodies, amulets, etc.
resemblance in this quality. And accordingly we see, that hot loaves in a
Bakers shop, newly drawn out of the Oven, are accounted to draw to them any
infection which is in the air. The like we say of onyons, and other strong
breathing substances; which by their smell show much heat in them. In like
manner it is conceived, that Pigeons and Rabbets and Cats easily take infection;
by reason of their extraordinary warmth which they have in themselves.

And this is confirmed by the practice of Physicians, who use to lay warm
Pigeons newly killed to the feet, wrists, or heads of sick persons, and young
Puppies to their stomachs, and sometimes certain hot gums to their navels; to
draw out such vapors or humors as infest the body: for the same reason, they
hang amulets of arsenick, sublimate, dried Toads, or Spiders, about their
patients necks; to draw to them venomous qualities from their body. Hence also
it is that, if a man be stricken by a Viper or a Scorpion, they use to break
the body of the beast it self that stung him (if they can get it) upon the
wound: but, if the beast be crawled out of their finding, they do the like by
some other venomous creature; as I have seen a bruised Toad laid to the biting
of a Viper. And they manifestly perceive the applied body to swel with the
Poison sucked out from the wound, and the patient to be relieved and have less
poison; in the same manner as, by cupping-glasses, the poison is likewise drawn
out from the wound: so that you may see, the reason of both is the very same;
or at least very like one another. Only, we are to note, that the proper body
of the beast, out of which the venom was driven into the wound, is more
efficacious than any other to suck it out.

And the like is to be observed in all other kinds, that such vapors, as are
to be drawn, come better and incorporate faster in bodies of like nature, then
in those which have only the common conditions of heat and dryness, the one of
which serves to attract, the other to fasten and incorporate into itself the
moisture which the first draws to it. So we see that water soaks into a dry
body, whence it was extracted, almost inseparably, and is hidden in it; as,
when it rains first after hot weather, the ground is presently dried after the
shower. Likewise we see that, in most cements, you must mingle a dust of the
nature of the things which are to be cemented, if you will have them bind
strongly.

Out of this discourse, we may yield a reason for those Magical 9. The natural
reason given for diverse operations, esteemed by some to be magical.
operations, which some attribute to the Devils assistance; peradventure
because man's wickedness has bin more ingenious then his good will, and so has
found more means to hurt then to help; nay, when he has arrived some way to
help, those very helps have undergone the same calumny, because of the likeness
which their operations have to the others. Without doubt very unjustly; if
there be truth in the effects: For, where have we any such good suggestions of
the enemy of mankind proposed to us, that we may with reason believe he would
duly, settledly, and constantly concur to the help and service of all those he
so much hates; as he must needs do if he be the Author of such effects? Or, is
it not a wrong to Almighty God, and to his careful instruments; rather to
impute to the Devil the aids, which to some may seem supernatural, then to them
of whom we may justly believe and expect such good Offices and assistances? I
mean, those operations, both good and bad, which ordinarily are called
Magnetical; though peradventure wrongfully, as not having that property whcih
denominates the loadstone.

One thing I may assure, that, if the reports be true, they have the perfect
imitation of nature in them. As for example; that the Weapons-Salve, or the
Sympathetick-Powder, requires, in the using it, to be conserved in an equal
moderate temper; and that the weapon which made the wound, or the cloth upon
which the blood remains that issued from it, be orderly and frequently dressed:
or else the wounded person will not be cured. Likewise, the steam or spirits,
which at the giving of the wound entered into the pores of the weapon, must not
be driven out of it, (which will be done by fire: and so, when it is heated by
holding over coals, you may see a moisture sweat out of the blade at the
opposite side to the fire, as far as it entered into the wounded persons body;
which being once all sweated out, you shall see no more the like steam upon the
sword), neither must the blood be washed out of the bloody cloth: for, in these
cases, the powder, or salve, will work nothing. Likewise, if there be any
excess either of heat or cold in keeping the medicated weapon or cloth; the
patient feels that, as he would do, if the like excess where in any remedy that
were applied to the wound it self. Likewise, if the medicated weapon or bloody
cloth, be kept too close, no effect follows. Likewise, the natures of the
things used in these cures are, of themselves, sovereign for healing the like
griefs; though peradventure too violent, if they were applied in body, without
much attenuation.

And truly, if we will deny all effects of this kind, we must in a manner
renounce all humane faith: men of all sorts and qualities (and many of them
such, in my own knowledge, as I cannot question their prudence in observing, or
their sincerity in relating) having very frequently made experience of such
medicines; and all affirming after one fashion to have found the same effects.
Add to these the multitude of other like effects, appearing, or conceited to
appear, in other things. In some Countries it is a familiar disease with Kine,
to have a swelling in the soles of their feet: and the ordinary cure is, to cut
a turf upon which they have trodden with their sore foot, and to hang it upon a
hedge; and as that dries away, so will their sore amend. In other parts they
observe, that if milk, newly come from the cow, in the boiling run over into
the fire, and that this happen often and near together to the same cows milk;
that cow will have her udder sore inflamed: and the prevention is, to cast salt
immediately into the fire upon the milk. The herb Persicaria, if it be well
rubbed upon Warts, and then be laid in some fit place to putrify, causes the
Warts to wear away, as it rots: some say the like of fresh Beef. Many examples
also there are of hurting living creatures, by the like means; which I set not
down, for fear of doing more harm, by the evil inclination of some persons into
whose hands they may fall, then profit, by their knowing them to whom I intend
this work.

But, to make these operations of nature not incredible: let us remember how we
have determined; that every body whatever yields some steam, or vents a kind of
vapor from it self; and consider, how they must needs do so most of all, that
are hot and moist, as blood and milk, and all wounds and sores generally are.
We see that the foot of a Hare or Bear leaves such an impression where the
beast has passed, as a dog can discern it a long time after: and a Fox breaths
out so strong a vapor, that the hunters themselves can wind it a great way off,
and a good while after he is parted from the place. Now, joining this to the
experiences we have already allowed of, concerning the attraction of heat; we
may conclude that, if any of these vapors light upon a solid warm body, which
has the nature of a source to them, they will naturally congregate and
incorporate there: and, if those vapors be joined with any medicative quality
or body, they will apply that medicament better then any Surgeon can. Then,
if the steam of blood blood and spirits carry with it, from the weapon or
cloth, the balsamike qualities of the salve or powder; and with them settle
upon the wound: what can follow but a bettering in it? Likewise, if the steam
of the corruption that is upon the clod, carry the drying quality of the wind,
which sweeps over it when it hangs high in the air, to the sore part of the
cows foot; why is it not possible that it should dry the corruption there, as
well as it dryes it upon the hedge; And, if the steam of burned milk can hurt,
by carrying fire to the dug: why should not salt cast upon it be a preservative
against it? Or rather, why should not salt hinder the fire from being carried
thither? Since the nature of salt always hinders and suppresses the activity of
fire: as we see by experience, when we throw salt into the fire below, to
hinder the flaming of soot in the top of a chimney; which presently ceases,
when new fire from beneath does not continue it. And thus we might proceed, in
sundry other effects, to declare the reason and possibility, were we certain of
the truth of them: therefore we remit this whole question to the authority of
the testimonies.

CHAP. XIX. Of three other motions belonging to particular bodies, Filtration,
Restitution, and Electrical attraction.
AFter these, let us cast our eye upon another motion, very familiar 1. What is
Filtration; and how it is effected.
among Alchymists; which they call Filtration. It is effected by putting one
end of a tongue or label of Flannen, or Cotton, or Flax, into a vessel of
water; and letting the other end hang over the brim of it: And it will, by
little and little, draw all the water out of that vessel (so that the end which
hangs q^t be lower then the superficies of the water); and make it all come
over into any lower vessel you will reserve it in.

The end of this operation is, when any water is mingled with gross and muddy
parts (not dissolved in the water); to separate the pure and light ones from
the impure. By which we are taught, that the lighter parts of the water are
those which most easily catch. And, if we will examine in particular, how it is
likely this business passes; we may conceive that the body or linguet, by which
the water ascends, being a dry one, some lighter parts of the water, whose
chance it is to be near the climbing body of Flax, begin to stick fast to it:
and then, they require nothing near so great force nor so much pressing, to
make them climb up along the flax, as they would do to make them mount in the
pure air, As you may see, if you hold a stick in running water, shelving
against the stream: the water will run up along the stick, much higher then it
could be forced up in the open air without any support; though the agent were
much stronger then the current of the stream. And a ball will, on a rebound,
run much higher upon a shelving board, then it would if nothing touched it. And
I have been told that, if an egsshell filled with dew be set at the foot of a
hollow stick; the Sun will draw it to the top of the shelving stick; whereas
without a prop, it will not stir it.

With much more reason then, we may conceive that water, finding as it were
little steps in the Cotton, to facilitate its journey upwards, must ascend more
easily then those other things do; so as it once receive any impulse to drive
it upwards. For, the gravity, both of that water which is upon the Cotton, as
also, of so many of the confining parts of water as can reach the Cotton, is
exceedingly allayed; either by sticking to the Cotton, and so weighing in one
bulk with that dry body, or else, by not tending down straight to the Center,
but resting as it were upon a steep plain (according to what we said of the arm
of a Siphon that hangs very sloping out of the water, and therefore draws not
after it a less proportion of water in the other arm that is more in a direct
line to the Center): by which means the water, as soon as it begins to climb,
comes to stand in a kind of cone; neither breaking from the water below, (its
bulk being big 2. What causes the water in filtration to ascend.
enough to reach to it) nor yet falling down to it.

But our chief labor must be, to find a cause that may make the water begin
to ascend. To which purpose, consider how water of its own nature, compresses
it self together, to exclude any other body lighter then it is. Now, in respect
of the whole mass of the water, those parts which stick to the cotton are to be
acounted muchlighter then water: not, because in their own nature they are so;
but for the circumstances which accompany and give them a greater disposition
to receive a motion upwards, then much lighter bodies, whiles they are
destitute of such helps. Wherefore as, the bulk of water weighing and striving
downwards, it follows that, if there were any air mingled with it, it would, to
possess a lesser place, drive out the air: so here in this case, the water at
the foot of the ladder of cotton, ready to climb with a very small impulse may
be, after some sort, compared (in respect of the water) to air, by reason of
the lightness of it; and, consequently, is forced up by the compressing of the
rest of water round about it. Which no faster gets up, but other parts at the
foot of the ladder follow the first, and drive them still upwards along the
tow; and new ones drive the second, and others the third, and so forth: so that
with ease they climb up to the top of the filter, still driving one another
forwards: as you may do a fine towel through a musket barrel, which, though it
be too limber to be thrust straight through, yet, craming still new parts into
it, at length you will drive the first quite through.

And thus, when these parts of water are got up to the top of the vessel on
which the filter hangs, and over it on the other side; by sticking still to the
tow, and by their natural gravity, against which nothing presses on this side
the label: they fall down again by little and little, and by drops break again
into water in the vessel set to receive them.

But now if you ask, why it will not drop, unless the end of the label that
hangs be lower then the water? I conceive it 3. Why the filter will not drop,
unless the label hang lower then the water.
is, because the water, which is all along upon the flannen, is one continued
body hanging together, as it were a third of wire; and is subject to like
accidents as such a continued body is. Now, suppose you lay wire upon the edge
of the basin, which the filter rests on; and so make that edge the Center to
balance it upon: if the end that is outermost be heaviest, it will weigh down
the other; otherwise, not. So fares it with this third of water: if the end of
it that hangs out of the pot be longer, and consequently heavier, then that
which rises; it must needs raise the other upwards, and fall it self downwards.
Now, the raising of the other implies lifting more water from the Cistern; and
the sliding of it self further downwards is the cause of its converting into
drops. So that the water in the cistern serves like the flax upon a distaff;
and is spun into a third of water, still as it comes to the flannen, by the
drawing it up, occasioned by the overweight of the third on the other side of
the center.

Which to express better by a similitude in a solid body: I remember I have
oftentimes seen, in a Mercers shop, a great heap of massy gold lace lie upon
their stall; and a little way above it, a round smooth pin of wood, over which
they use to have their lace when they wind it into bottoms. Now, over this pin,
I have put one end of the lace; and, as long as it hung no lower then the board
upon which the rest of the lace did lie, it stird'd not: for as the weight of
the loose end carried it one way, so the weight of the otherside, where the
whole was, drew it the otherway; and in this manner kept it in equalibrity.
But, as soon as I drew on the hanging end to the heavier then the climbing
side, (for, no more weights then is in the air, that which lies upon the board
having another center); then it began to roll to the ground: and still drew up
new parts of that which lay upon the board, till all was tumbled down upon the
floor. In the same manner it hap'nes to the water; in which, the third of it
upon the filter is to be compared fitly to that part of the lace which hung
upon the pin, and the whole quantity in the cistern is like the bulk of lace
upon the Shopboard: for, as fast as the filter draws it up, it is converted into
a third like that which is already upon the filter; in like manner as the wheel
converts the flax into yarn, as fast as it draws it out from the distaff.

Our next consideration will very aptly fall upon the motion 4. Of the motion
of R^stitution: and why some bodies stand bent, others not.
of those things which, being bent, leap with violence to their former figure:
whereas others return but a little; and others stand in that ply, wherein the
bending has set them. For finding the reason of which effects, our first
reflection may be, to note that a Superficies, which is more long then broad,
contains a less floor, then that whose sides are equal, or nearer being equal:
and that, of those surfaces whose lines and angles are all equal, that which
has most sides and angles contains still the greater floor. Whence it is that
Mathematicians conclude a circle to be the most capacious of all figures: and
what they say of lines in respect of a superficies, the same, with proportion,
they say of surfaces, in respect of the body contained. And accordingly, we see
by consequence, that, in the making a bag of a long napkin; if the napkin be
sewed together longwise, it holds a great deal less, then if it be sewd
together broadwise.

By this we see plainly, that if any body, in a thick and short figure, be
forced into a thinner (which, by becoming thinner, must likewise become either
longer or broader; for what it loses one way, it must get another); then that
superficies must needs be stretched: which, in our case, is a Physical outside,
or material part of a solid body; not a Mathematical consideration of an
indivisible Entity. We see also that this change of figures happens in the
bending of all those bodies, whereof we are now enquiring the reason, why some
of them restore themselves to their original figures, and others stand as they
are bent.

Then, to begin with the latter sort: we find that they are of a moist nature;
as, among metalls, lead and tin, and, among other bodies, those ^which we
account soft. And we may determine that this effect proceeds, partly from the
humidity of the body that stands bent; and partly from a dryness peculiar to
it, that comprehends and fixes the humidity of it. For, by the first, they are
rendered capable of being driven into any figure, which nature or art desires:
and, by the second, they are preserved from having their gravity put them out
of what figure they have once received.

But, because these two conditions are common to all solid bodies; we may
conclude that, if no other circumstance concurred, the effect arising out of
them would likewise be common to all such: and therefore, where we find it
otherwise, we must seek further for a cause of that transgression. As for
example, if you bend the bodies of young trees, or the branches of others; they
will return to their due figure. It Is true, they will sometimes lean toward
that way they have been bent: as may be seen even in great trees after violent
tempests, and generally the heads of trees, and the ears of corn, and the grown
hedge rows will all bend one way in some countries, where some one wind has a
main predominance and reigns most continually; as near the Seashore upon the
western coast of England (where the South-West wind blows constantly the
greatest part of the year) may be observed: but this effect, proceeding from a
particular and extraordinary cause, concerns not our matter in hand.

We are to examine the reason of the motion of Restitution, which we generally
see in young trees, and branches of others; as we said before. In such we see
that the earthy part which makes them stiff (or rather stark) abounds more,
then in the others that stand as they were bent; at least in proportion to
their natures: but I conceive this is not the cause of the effect we enquire
about; but that it is a subtle spirit which has a great proportion of fire in
it. For as, in rarefaction, we found that fire, which was either within or
without the body to be rarefied, did cause the rarefaction; either by entering
into it, or by working within it: so, seeing here the question is, for a body
to go out of a lesser superficies, into a greater (which is the progress of
rarefaction, and hapen's in the motion of restitution); the work must needs be
done by the force of heat. And because this effect proceeds, evidently, out of
the nature of the thing in which it is wrought; and not from any outward cause:
we may conclude, it has its origin from a heat within the thing it self; or
else that was in it, and may be pressed to the outward parts of it, and would
sink into it again.

As for example, when a young tree is bended, both every man's conceit is, and
the nature of the thing makes us believe, that the force, which brings the tree
back again to its figure, comes from the inner side that is bent; which is
compressed together, as being shrunk into a circular figure from a straight
one: for, when solid bodies that were plain on both sides are bent, so as on
each side to make a portion of a Circle; the unequal superficies will be longer
then it was before when it was plain, but the concave will be shorter. And
therefore we may conceive that the spirits, which are in the contracted part,
(being there squeezed into less room, then their nature well brooks) work
themselves into a greater space; or else, that the spirits, which are crushed
out of the unequal side by the extension of it, remain besieging it and strive
to get in again, (in such manner as we have declared when we spoke of
attraction, wherein we showed how the emited spirits of any body will move to
their own source, and settle again in it, if they be within a convenient
compass;) and accordingly bring back the extended parts to their former
situation: or rather, that both these causes, in their kinds, concur to drive
the tree into its natural figure.

But, as we see, when a stick is broken, it is very hard to replace all the
splinters, every one in its proper situation; so it must 5. Why some bo dies
return only in part to their natural figure; others entirely.
of necessity fall out in this bending, that certain insensible parts, both
inward and outward, are thereby displaced, and can hardly be perfectly
rejoynted. Whence it follows that, as you see the splinters of a half broken
stick, meeting with one another, hold the stick somewhat crooked; so these
invisible parts do the like, in such bodies as, after bending, stand a little
that way: but, because they are very little ones, the tree or branch, that has
been never so much bended, may (so nothing be broken in it) be set strait again
by pains, without any notable detriment of its strength. And thus you see the
reason of some bodies returning in part to their natural figures after the
force leaves them that bent them.

Out of which you may proceed to those bodies that restore themselves entirely:
whereof steel is the most eminent. And, of it, we know, that there is a fiery
spirit in it, which may be extracted out of it; not only by the long operations
of calcining, digesting, and distilling it; but even by gross heating, and then
extinguishing it in wine and other convenient Liquors, as Physicians use to do.
Which is also confirmed, by the burning of steeldust in the flame of a candle,
before it has been thus wrought upon; which after-wards it will not do: whereby
we are taught that, originally, there are store of spirits in steel, till they
are sucked out. Being then assured that in steel there is such abundance of
spirits, and knowing that it is the nature of spirits to give a quick motion,
and seeing that duller spirits in trees make this motion of Restitution; we
need seek no further, what it is that does it in steel, or in any other things
that have the like nature: which, through the multitude of spirits that abound
in them, (especially steel) returns back with so strong a jerk, that their
whole body will tremble a great while after, by the force of its own motion.

By what is said, the nature of those bodies which shrink and 6. Concerning the
nature of those bodies which shrink and stretch.
stretch may easily be understood: for, they are generally composed of stringy
parts, to which if humidity happen to arrive, they grow thereby thicker and
shorter. As we see that drops of water, getting into a new rope of a well, or
into a new cable, will swell it much thicker; and by consequence, make it
shorter. Galileus notes such wetting to be of so great efficacy, that it will
shrink a new cable, and shorten it notably; notwithstanding the violence of a
tempest, and the weight and jerks of a laden ship, strain it what is possible
for them to stretch it. Of this nature leather seems to be, and parchment, and
diverse other things: which, if they be proportionably moistened (and no
exterior force applied to extend them), will shrink up; but if they be
overweted, they will become flaccide. Again, if they be suddenly dried, they will
shrivel up; but, if they be fairly dried after moderate weting, they will
extend themselves again to their first length.

The way having been opened (by what we have discoursed, before we came to the
motion of Restitution) toward the discovery 7. How great and wonderful effects
proceed from small, plain, and simple principles.
of the manner how heavy bodies may be forced upward, contrary to their natural
motion; by very small means in outward appearance: let us now examine (upon the
same grounds), if like motions to this of water, may not be done in some other
bodies, in a subtiler manner. In which more or less needs not trouble us; since
we know, that neither quantit^ ^or the operations of it consist in an
indivisible, or are limited or determined by periods they may not pass. It Is
enough for us to find a ground for the possibility of the operation: and then
the perfecting and reducing of it to such a height, as at first might seem
impossible and incredible, we may leave to the Economy of wise nature. He that
learns to read, write, or play on the Lute, is, in the beginning, ready to lose
heart at every step; when he considers with what labor, difficulty, and
slowness he joins the letters, spells syllables, forms characters, fits and
breaks his fingers (as though they were upon the rack), to stop the right
frets, and touch the right strings: and yet you see how strange a dexterity is
gained in all these by industry and practice; and readiness beyond what we
could imagine possible, if we saw not daily the effects.

If then we can but arrive to decipher the first characters of the hidden
Alphabet we are now taking in hand, and can but spellingly read the first
syllables of it, we need not doubt, but that the wise Author of nature, in the
masterpiece of the creature (which was to express the excellency of the
workman), would with excellent cunning and art dispose all circumstances so
aptly, as to speak readily a complete language rising from those Elements; and
that should have as large an extent in practice and expression, beyond those
first principles, which we like children only lisp out, as the vast discourses
of wisest and most learned men are beyond the spellings of infants: and yet
those discourses spring from the same root, as the other spellings do, and are
but a raising of them to a greater height; as the admired music of the best
player on a Lute or Harp that ever was is derived from the harsh twangs of
course Bowstrings, which are composed together and refined, till at length they
arrive to that wonderful perfection. And so, without scruple, we may, in the
business we are next falling upon, conclude, that the admirable and almost
miraculous effects we see are but the elevating-to-a-wonderful-height those
very actions and motions, which we shall produce as causes and principles of
them.

Let us then suppose a solid hard body, of an unctuous nature; whose parts are
so subtle and fiery, that, with a little agitation, 8. Concerning Electrical
at action, and the causes of it.
they are much rarefied and breath out in steams, (though they be too subtle
for our eyes to discern), like the steam that issues from sweating men or
horses, or that which flies from a candle when it is put out: but that these
steams, as soon as they come into the cold air, are by that cold suddenly
condensed again, and, by being condensed, shorten themselves, and by little and
little retire, till they settle themselves upon the body from whence they
sprung; in such manner as you may observe the little tender horns of Snails use
to shrink back, if any thing touch them, till they settle in little lumps upon
their heads If, I say, these strings of bituminous vapors should, in their way
outward, meet with any light and spungy body, they would pierce into it, and
settle in it: and, if it were of a competent bigness for them to wield, they
would carry it with them which way soever they go; so that, if they shrink back
again to the fountain from whence they came, they must needs carry back with
them the light spungy body they have fixed their darts in.

Consider, then, that, how much heat rarifies, so much cold condenses; and
therefore such parts as by agitation were spun out into a subtle third of an
inch long (for example) as they cool, grow bigger and bigger, and consequently
shorter and shorter: till at length, they gather themselves back into their main
body, and there they settle again in cold bitumen as they were at first; and
the light body they stick to is drawn back with them, and consequently sticks
to the superficies of the bitumen. As if something were tied at one end of a
lu^estring extended to its utmost capacity, and the other end were fastened to
some pin; as the string shrinks up, so that which is tied at it must needs move
nearer and nearer the pin: which artifice of nature jugglers imitate, when, by
means of an unseen, hair, they draw light bodies to them. Now, if all this
operation be done, without your seeing the little thrids which cause it; the
matter appears wonderful and strange: But, when you consider this progress that
we have set down, you will judge it possible.

And this seems to be the case of those bodies which we call Electrical; as
yellow Amber, Jet, and the like: all which are of a bituminous unctuous nature;
as appears by their easy combustibility and smell, when they are burned. And if
some do not so apparently show this unctuous nature, it is because either they
are too hard, or else they have a high degree of aqueous humidity joined with
their unctuosity: and in them the operation will be duller in that proportion.
For, as we see that unctuous substances are more odoriferous then others, and
send their streams further off and more efficaciously; so we cannot doubt but
such bodies as consist in a moist nature accordingly send forth their
emanations in a feebler proportion. Yet, that proportion will not be so feeble,
but they may have an Electrical effect, as well as the more efficacious
Electrical bodies: which may be perceptible, if exact experience be made by an
instrument like the Mariners needle; as our learned Countryman Dr. Gilbert
teaches.

But, that, in those eminent agents, the spirits, whereby they attract, are
unctuous, is plain, because the fire consumes them and so, if the agents be
over heated, they cannot work: but moderate heat, even of fire, increases their
operation. Again, they are clogged by mysty air, or wettine: and likewise, are
pierced through and cut asunder by spirit of wine, or aquae ardentes; but oil
does not hurt them. Likewise, they yield more spirits in the Sun then in the
shade; and they continue longer, when the air is cleard by North or Eastern
winds. They require to be polished; either because the rubbing, which polished
them, takes off from their surfaces the former emanations, which returning back
stick upon them, and so hinder the passage of those that are within: or else,
because their outsides may be foul; or lastly, because the ports may be dilated
by that smoothing. Now, that hardness and solidity is required, argues that
these spirits must be quick ones; that they may return smartly, and not be lost
through their languishing in the air. Likewise, that all bodies, which are not
either exceeding rare, or else set on fire, may be drawn by these unctuous
thrids, concludes that the quality by which they do it is a common one, that
has no particular contrarieties: such an one as we see in grease or in pitch,
to stick to any thing; from which in like manner nothing is exempted, but fire
and air. And lastly, that they work most efficaciously when they are heated by
rubbing, rather then by fire, shows that their spirits are excitated by motion,
and thereby made to fly abroad; in such manner as we see in Pomanders and other
perfumes, which must be heated if you will have them communicate their scent.
And a like effect as in them, agitation does in Jet, yellow Amber, and such
other Electrical bodies; for, if, upon rubbing them, you put them presently to
your nose, you will discern a strong bituminous smell in them. All which
circumstances show, that this electrical virtue consists in a certain degree of
rarity or density of the bodies unctuous emanations:

Now, if these refined and viscuous thrids of Jet or Amber, in their streaming
abroad, meet with a piece of straw, or hay, or dried leaf, or some such light
and spungy body; it is no marvel if they glue themselves to it like birdlime: and
that in their shrinking back (by being condensed again and repulsed, through
the coldness of the air) they carry it along with them to their entire body.
Which they that only see the effect, and cannot penetrate into a possibility of
a natural cause thereof, are much troubled withal. 6. Cabeus his opinion
re^uted, concerning the cause of Electrical motions.


And this seems to me to bear a fairer semblance of truth, then what Cabeus
delivers for the cause of Electrical attractions: whose speculation herein,
though I cannot allow for solid, yet I must for ingenious. (And certainly even
errors are to be commended, when they are witty ones; and proceed from a
casting-further-about then the beaten Tract of verbal learning, or rather
terms, which explicate not the nature of the thing in question). He says that
the coming of straws and such other light bodies to Amber, Jet, and the like,
proceeds from a wind, raised by the forcible breaking out of subtle emanations
from the Electrical bodies into the air which brings those light bodies along
with it to the Electrical ones.

But this discourse cannot hold. For, First, it is not the nature of unctuous
emanation (generally speaking) to cause smart motions singly of themselves.
Secondly, although they should raise a wind, I do not comprehend how this wind
should drive bodies directly back to the source that raised it; but rather any
other way; and so, consequently, should drive the light bodies, it meets with
in its way, rather from, then toward the Electrical body. Thirdly, if there
should be such a wind raised, and it should bring light bodies to the
Electrical ones; yet it could not make them stick thereto; which we see they do,
turn them which way you will; as though they were glew'd together.

Neither do his experiences convince any thing. For, what he says, that the
light bodies are sometimes brought to the Electrical body with such a violence,
that they rebound back from it, and then return again to it, makes rather
against him: for, if wind were the cause of their motion, they would not return
again, after they had leaped back from the Electrical body; no more then we can
imagine that the wind it self does.

The like is of his other experience; when he observed that, some little grains
of Saw-dust hanging at an Electrical body, the furthermost of them not only
fell off, but seemed to be driven away forcibly: for, they did not fall
directly down, but sidewayes; and besides, flew away with a violence and
smartness, that argued some strong impulse. The reason whereof might be, that,
new emanations might smite them; which, not sticking and fast'ning upon them,
whereby to draw them nearer, must needs push them further: or it might be that
the emanations, to which they were glew'd, shrinking back to their main body,
the later grains were shouldered off by others that already besieged the
Superficies; and then, the emanations retiring swiftly, the grains must break
off with a force: or else we may conceive it was the force of the air that bore
them up a little, which made an appearance of their being driven away; as we
see feathers and other light things descend not straight down.

CHAP. XX. Of the Loadstones generation; and its particular motions.
THere is yet remaining the great Mystery of the Loadstone 1. The extreme heat
of the Sun under the Zodiac, draws a stream of air from each pole into the
Torrid Zone.
to discourse of: Which all Authors, both ancient and modern, have agreed upon
as an undeniable example and evidence of the shortness of man's reach in
comprehending, and of the impossibility of his reason in penetrating into and
explicating such secrets, as nature has a mind to hide from us. Wherefore our
Reader (I am sure) will not, in this subject, expect clear satisfaction or
plain demonstrations, at our hands: but will judge we have fairly acquitted our
selves, if what we say be any whit plausible.

Therefore, to use our best endeavors to content him; let us reflect upon the
disposition of parts of this habitable Globe, whereof we are Tenants for life:
And we shall find that the Sun, by his constant course under the Zodiac, heats
a great part of it unmeasurably more then he does the rest. And consequently,
that this Zodiac, being in the midst between two (as it were) ends, which we
call the Poles; these Poles must necessarily be extremely cold, in respect of
the Torrid Zone: for, so we call that part of the earth which lies under the
Zodiac.

Now, looking into the consequence of this, we find that the Sun, or the Suns
heat which reflects from the earth in the Torrid Zone, must rarifie the air
extremely; and, according to the nature of all heat and fire, must needs carry
away from thence many parts of the air and earth sticking to that heat, in such
sort as we have formerly declared.

Whence it follows, that other air must necessarily come from the Regions
toward both the Poles, to supply what is carried away from the middle; as is
the course in other fires, and as we have explicated above Chap. 18. Sect. 7.
. Especially considering that the air, which comes from the Polewards, is
heavier then the air of the Torrid Zone, and therefore, must naturally press to
be still nearer the earth; and so, as it were shoulders on the air of the
Torrid Zone toward the circumference, by rolling into its place: and this, in
great quantities; and consequently, the polar air must draw a great train after
it.

Which, if we consider the great extent of the Torrid Zone, we shall easily
persuade our selves, must reach on each side, to the very Pole. For, taking from
Archimedes, that the Spherical Superficies of a portion of a Sphere is, to the
Superficies of the whole Sphere, according as the parts of the axis of that
Sphere, comprised within the said portion, is to the whole axis: and
considering that (in our case) the part of the axis comprised within the Torrid
Zone is, to the whole axis of the earth, in about the proportion of 4. to 10:
it must of necessity follow, that a fire or great heat, reigning in so vast an
extent, will draw air very powerfully from the rest of the world.

Neither let any man apprehend, that this course, of the Sun's elevating so
great quantities of Atoms in the Torrid Zone, should hinder the course of
gravity there. (For, first, the medium is much rarer in the Torrid Zone, then
in other parts of the earth; and therefore the force of the descending Atoms
needs not be so great there as in other places, to make bodies descend there as
fast as they do elsewhere. Secondly, there being a perpetual supply of fresh
air from the Polar parts, streaming continually into the Torrid Zone; it must
of necessity happen that, in the air, there come Atoms to the Torrid Zone, of
that grossness that they cannot suddenly be so much rarefied as the subtiler
parts of air that are there: and therefore, the more those subtiler parts are
rarefied, and thereby happen to be carried up; the stronger and the thicker the
heavier Atoms must descend. And thus this concourse of air from the Polar parts
maintains gravity under the Zodiac; where otherwise all would be turned into
fire, and so have no gravity.

Now, who considers the two Hemispheres, which, by the 2. The Atoms of these
two streams coming together are apt to incorporate with one another.
Equator are divided, will find that they are not altogether of equal
complexions; but that our Hemisphere, in which the Northpole is comprised, is
much dryer then the other, by reason of the greater continent of land in this,
and the vast tract of Sea in the other; and therefore, the supply which comes
from the diverse Hemispheres must needs be of different natures; that which
comes from toward the Southpole, being compared to that which comes from
toward the North, as the more wet to the more dry. Yet, of how different
complexions soever they be, you see they are the emanations of one and the same
body. Not unlike to what nature has instituted in the rank of Animals: among
whom the Male and Female are so distinguished by heat and cold, moisture and
drought, that nevertheless all belongs but to one nature; and that, in degrees,
though manifestly different, yet so near together, that the body of one is, in
a manner, the same thing, as the body of the other. Even so, the complexions of
the two Hemispheres are in such sort different in the same qualities, that
nevertheless they are of the same nature; and are unequal parts of the same
body which we call the Earth. Now, Alchimists assure us, that, if two
extractions of one body meet together, they will incorporate one with the
other; especially, if there be some little difference in the complexion of the
extractions.

Whence it follows, that these, two streams of air, making up one continuate
flood of various currents, ^om one end of the 3. By the meeting and mingling
together of these streams at the Equator, diverse rivolets of Atoms of each Pole
are continuated from one Pole to the other.
world to the other; each stream that come to the Equator from its own Pole by
the extraction of the Sun, and that is still supplied with new matter flowing
from its own Pole to the Equator, before the Sun can sufficiently rarifie and
lift up the Atoms that came first Perpendicularly under its beams, (as it uses
to happen in the effects of Physical causes, which cannot be rigorously
ajusted, but must have some latitude; in which nature inclines ever rather to
abundance then to defect), will pass even to the other pole, by the conduct of
his fellow, in case he be by some occasion driven back homewards.

For, as we see in a Bowl or Pail full of water, or rather in a Pipe, through
which the water runs along; if there be a little hole at the bottom or side of
it, the water will wriggle and change its course to creep out at that Pipe:
especially if there be a little spiggot, or quill at the outside of the hole,
that by the narrow length of it helps in some sort (as it were) to suck it. So,
if any of the files of the army or flood of Atoms, sucked from one of the Poles
to the Equator, do there find any gaps, or chinks, or lanes of retiring files
in the front of the other poles battalia of atoms; they will press in there,
(in such mannner as we have above declared that water does by the help of a
label of cotton; and as is exemplyfied in all the attractions of venime by
venomous bodies, whereof we have given many examples above): and they will go
along with them the course they go. For as, when a thick short gilded ingot of
silver is drawn out into a long subtle wyre; the wyre, continuing still
perfectly gilded all over, manifestly shows that the outside and the inside of
the ingot strangely meet together, and intermix in the drawing out: so this
little stream, which (like an Eddy current) runs back from the Equator toward
its own Pole, will continue to the end still tincted with the mixture of the
other Poles atoms, it was incorporated with at his coming to the Equator.

Now, that some little rivolets of air and atoms should run back to their own
Pole, contrary to the course of their main stream, will be easy enough to
conceive; if we but consider that, at certain times of the year, winds blow
more violently and strongly from some determinate part or Rombe of the world,
then they do at other times, and from other parts. As for example; our East
India Mariners tell us of the famous Monsones they find in those parts: whch
are strong winds that reign constantly six months of the year from one
polewards, and the other six months from the other pole; and beginning
precisely about the Suns entering into such a sign or degree of the Zodiac, and
continue til about its entrance into the opposite degree. And, in our parts of
the world, certain smart Easterly or Northeasterly winds reign about the end of
March and beginning of April; when it seems that some snows are melted by the
spring heats of the Sun. And other winds have their courses in other seasons,
upon other causes. All which evidently convince, that the course of the air and
vapors, from the poles to the Equator, cannot be so regular and uniform, but
that many impediments and crosses light in the way, to make breaches in it; and
thereby to force it in some places to an opposite course. In such sort as we see
happens in eddy waters, and in the course of a tide; wherein the stream, running
swiftly in the middle, beats the edges of the water to the shore, and thereby
makes it run back at the shore. And hence we may conclude that, although the
main course of air and atoms (for example, from North to South, in our
Hemisphere) can never fail of going on toward the Equator, constantly at the
same rate, in gross; nevertheless, in several particular little parts of it,
(and especially at the edges of those streams that are driven on faster then
the rest, by an extraordinary and accidental violent cause) it is variously
interrupted, and sometimes entirely stopped, and other times even driven back to
the Northwards.

And, if peradventure any man should think that this will not fall out; because
each stream seems to be always coming from his one Pole to the Equator, and
therefore will oppose and drive back any bodies that with less force should
strive to swim against it; or, if they stick to them, will carry them back to
the Equator. We answer, that we must not conceive the whole air in body does
every where equally incroach from the Polewards upon the Torrid Zone; but, as
it were, in certain brooks or rivulets, according as the contingency of all
causes put together makes it fall out.

Now then, out of what we have said, it will follow, that; since all the air in
this our Hemisphere is, as it were, strewn over and sowed with abundance of
Northern atoms; and that some brooks of them are in station, others in a motion
of retrogradation back to their own North Poles: the Southern atoms (which,
coming upon them at the Equator, do not only press in among them, wherever they
can find admittance, but also go on forwards to the North Poles in several
files by themselves; being driven that way by the same accidental causes, which
make the others retire back), seizing in their way upon the northern ones, in
such manner as we described in filtration, and thereby creeping along by them
wherever they find them standing still, and going along with them wherever they
find them going back, must of necessity find passage in great quantites toward
and even to the North Pole; though some parts of them will ever and anon be
checked in this their journey by the main current prevailing over some
accidental one, and so be carried back again to the Equator, whose line they
had crossed.

And this affect cannot choose but be more or less, according to the seasons of
the year. For, when the Sun is in the Tropic of Capricorn, the southern atoms
will flow in much more abundance, and with far greater speed, into the Torrid
Zone, then the northern atoms can; by reason of the Suns approximation to the
South, and his distance from the North Pole: since he works faintest, where he
is furthest off; and therefore from the North no more emanations or Atoms will
be drawn, but such as are most subtilised and duly prepared for that course.
And, since only these selected bands do now march toward the Equator; their
files must needs be thinner, then when the Suns being in the Equator or Tropic
of Cancer wakens and musters up all their forces. And consequently, the quiet
parts of air between their files (in which like Atoms are also scattered) are
the greater; whereby the advenient Southern Atoms have the larger filter to
climb up by. And the like happens in the other Hemisphere, when the Sun is in
the Tropic of Cancer; as who will bestow the pains to compare them, will
presently see. 4. Of these Atoms, incorporated with some fit matter in the
bowels of the earth, is made a stone.


Now then, let us consider what these two streams thus incorporated, must of
necessity do in the surface or upper parts of the Earth. First, it is evident
they must needs penetrate a pretty depth into the Earth: for so freezing
persuades us; and much more, the subtle penetration of diverse more spiritual
bodies, of which we have sufficiently discoursed above. Now, let us conceive
that these steams find a body, of a convenient density to incorporate themselves
in, in the way of density; as we see fire does in iron, and in other dense
bodies: and this not for an hour or two, as happens in fire; but for years: as
I have been told that, in the extreme cold hills in the Peak in Darbyshire,
happens to the dry Atoms of cold; which are permanently incorporated in water
by long continual freezing, and so make a kind of Crystal.

In this case, certainly it must come to pass, that this body will become in a
manner, wholly of the nature of these steams; which being drawn from the Poles
that abound in cold and dryness, (for others, that have not these qualities, do
not contribute to 5. This stone works by emanations joined with agreeing
streams that meet them in the air; and in fine it is a Loadstone.
the intended effect), the body is aptest to become a stone: for so we see that
cold and drought turns the superficial parts of the earth into stones and
rocks; and accordingly, wherever cold and dry winds reign powerfully, all such
Countries are mainly rocky.

Now then, let us suppose this stone to be taken out of the earth and hanged in
the air, or set conveniently on some little pin; or otherwise put in liberty,
so as a small impulse may easily turn it any way: it will in this case
certainly follow, that the end of the stone, which in the earth lay toward the
North pole, will now in the air convert it self, in the same manner, toward
the same point; and the other end, which lay toward the South, turn by
consequence to the South. I speak of these Countries which lie between the
Equator and the North; in which of necessity the stream going from the North to
the Equator must be stronger then the opposite one.

Now, to explicate how this is done. Suppose the stone hanged East and West
freely in the air; the steam, which is drawn from the North Pole of the earth,
ranges along by it in its course to the Equator; and, finding in the stone the
South steam (which is grown innate to it) very strong, it must needs
incorporate it self with it, and most by those parts of the steam in the stone
which are strongest; which are they that come directly from the North of the
stone, (by which I mean that part of the stone that lay Northward in the Earth,
and that still looks to the North pole of the Earth now it is in the air). And
therefore, the great flood of atoms coming from the North pole of the earth will
incorporate it self most strongly, by the North end of the stone, with the
little flood of Southern atoms it finds in the stone: for that end serves for
the coming out of the Southern atoms, and sends them abroad; as the South end
does the Northern steam, (since the steams come in at one end, and go out at
the other.)

From hence we may gather, that this stone will join and cleave to its
attractive; whenever it happens to be within the Sphere of its activity.
Besides, if, by some accident it should happen, that the atoms or steams,
which are drawn by the Sun from the Polewards to the Equator, should come
stronger from some part of the earth, which is on the side hand of the Pole,
then from the very Pole it self; in this case the stone will turn from the Pole
toward that side. Lastly, whatever this stone will do toward the Pole of the
earth; the very same a lesser stone of the same kind will do toward a greater.
And, if there be any kind of other substance that has participation of the
nature of this stone, such a substance will behave it self toward this stone,
in the same manner as such a stone behaves it self toward the earth: all the
Phenomens whereof may be the more plainly observed, if the stone be cut into
the form of the earth.

And thus, we have found a perfect delineation of the Loadstone, from its
causes. For, there is no man so ignorant of the nature of a Loadstone, but he
knows that the properties of it are to tend toward the North; to vary
sometimes; to join with another Loadstone; to draw iron to it: and such like,
whose causes you see delivered.

But, to come to experimental proofs and observations on the Loadstone, by
which it will appear that these causes are well 6 A method for making
experiences on any subject.
esteemed and applied; we must be beholding to that admirable searcher of the
nature of the Loadstones Dr. Gilbert: by means of whom and Dr. Harvey, our
Nation may claim, even in this latter age, as deserved a crown for solid
Philosophical learning; as, for many ages together, it has done formerly for
acute and subtle speculations in Divinity. But, before I fall to particulars,
I think it worth warning my Reader, how this Great Man arrived to discover so
much of Magnetical Philosophy; that he likewise, if he be desirous to search
into nature, may, by imitation, advance his thoughts and knowledge that way.

In short, then; all the knowledge he got of this subject was by forming a
little Loadstone into the shape of the earth. By which means he compassed a
wonderful design, which was, to make the whole globe of the earth maniable:
for, he found the properties of the whole earth in that little body; which he
therefore called a Terrella, or little earth, and which he could manage and try
experiences on, at his will. And in like manner, any man, that has an aim to
advance much in natural Sciences, must endeavor to draw the matter he enquires
of into some small model, or into some kind of manageable method; which he may
turn and wind as he pleases: and then let him be sure, if he has a competent
understanding, that he will not miss of his mark.

But, to our intent; the first thing we are to prove is, that the 7. The
Loadstones generation, by atoms flowing from both Poles, is confirmd by
experiments observed in the stone it self.
Loadstone is generated in such sort as we have described. For proof whereof,
the first ground we will lay shall be to consider how, in diverse other effects,
it is manifest, that the differences of being exposed to the North or to the
South, cause very great variety in the same thing: as hereafter, we shall have
occasion to touch, in the barks and grains of trees, and the like. Next, we
find by experience, that this virtue of the Loadstone is receivd into other
bodies that resemble its nature, by heatings and coolings: for, so it passes in
iron bars, which, being thoroughly heated, and then laid to cool North and
South, are thereby imbued with a Magnetic virtue; heat opening their bodies,
and disposing them to suck in such atoms as are convenient to their nature,
that flow to them whiles they are cooling. So that we cannot doubt, but
convenient matter, fermenting in its warm bed under the earth, becomes a
Loadstone; by the like sucking in of affluent streams, of a like complexion to
the former.

And it fares in like manner with those fiery instruments (as fireforks,
tongues, shovels; and the like) which stand constantly upwards and downwards;
for they, by being often heated and cooled again, gain a very strong verticity,
or turning to the Pole: and indeed, they cannot stand upwards and downwards so
little a while, but they will in that short space gain a manifest verticity;
and change it at every turning. Now, since the force and vigor of this
verticity is in the end that stands downwards; it is evident that this effect
proceeds out of an influence received from the earth.

And because in a Lodestone (made into a globe, or considered so, to the end
you may reckon Hemispheres in it, as in the great earth) either Hemisphere
gives to a needle touched upon it, not only the virtue of that Hemisphere where
it is touched, but likewise the virtue of the contrary Hemisphere: we may
boldly conclude, that the virtue which a Loadstone is impregnated with, in the
womb or bed of the earth where it is formed and grows, proceeds as well from
the contrary Hemisphere of the earth, as from that wherein it lies; in such
sort, as we have above described. And, as we feel oftentimes in our own bodies,
that some cold we catch remains in us a long while after the taking it; and
sometimes seems even to change the nature of some part of our body, into which
it is chiefly entered and has taken particular possession of: so that,
whenever new atoms of the like nature again range about in the circumstant air,
that part, so deeply affected with the former ones of-kin to these, in a
particular manner seems to rissent and attract them to it; and to have its
guests within it (as it were) wakened and roused up, by the strokes of the
advenient ones that knock at their doors. Even so (but much more strongly, by
reason of the longer time and less hindrances) we may conceive, that the two
virtues or atoms, proceeding from the two different Hemisphere, constitute a
certain permanent and constant nature in the stone that imbibes them: which,
then, we call a Loadstone; and is exceeding sensible (as we shall hereafter
declare) of the advenience to it of new atoms, a like in nature and complexion
to those it is impregnated with.

And this virtue, consisting in a kind of softer and tenderer substance then
the rest of the stone, becomes thereby subject to be consumed by fire. From
whence we may gather the reason, why a Loadstone never recovers its magnetic
virtue, after it has once lost it; though iron does: for the humidity of iron
is inseparable from its substance; but the humidity of a Loadstone; which makes
it capable of this effect, may be quite consumed by fire, and so the stone may
be left too dry, for ever being capable of imbibing any new influence from the
earth, unless it be by a kind of new making it.

In the next place, we are to prove, that the Loadstone works in that manner we
have showed. For which end, let us consider 8. Experiments to prove that the
Loadstone works by emanations meeting with agreeing streams.
how the atoms, that are drawn from each Pole and Hemisphere of the earth to
the Equator, making up their course by a manuduction of one another, the
hindermost cannot chose but still follow on after the foremost. And, as it
happens in filtration by a cotton cloth, if some one part of the cotton have
its disposition to the ascent of the water more perfect and ready, then the
other parts have; the water will assuredly ascend faster in that part, then in
any of the rest: so, if the atoms find a greater disposition for their passage,
in any one part of the Medium they range through, then in another; they will
certainly not fail of taking that way, in greater abundance and with more
vigor and strength, then any other.

But it is evident that, when they meet with such a stone as we have described,
the helps, by which they advance in their journey, are notably increased by the
flood of atoms they meet coming out of that stone; which being of the nature of
their opposite pole, they seize greedily upon them, and thereby pluck themselves
faster on: like a Ferry man, that draws on his boat the swiftlier, the more
vigourously he t^gs and pulls at the rope that lies thwart the river for him to
hale himself over by. And therefore, we cannot doubt but this flood of atoms,
streaming from the pole of the earth, must needs pass through that stone, with
more speed and vigor then they can do any other way.

And, as we see in the running of water, if it meets with any lower cranies
then the wide channel it streams in; it will turn out of its straight way, to
glide along there where it finds an easier and more declive bed to tumble in:
so these atoms will infallibly deturn themselves from their direct course, to
pass through such a stone, as far as their greater convenience leads them.

And, what we have said of these atoms, which from the Poles range through the
vast sea of air to the Equator, is likewise to be applied to those atoms which
issue out of the stone: so that we may conclude, that, if they meet with any
help which may convey them on with more speed and vigor, then whiles they
stream directly forwards; they will likewise deturn themselves from directly
forwards, to take that course. And, if the stone it self be hanged so nicely,
that a less force is able to turn it about, then is requisite to turn awry, out
of its course, the continued stream of atoms which issues from the stone: in
this case, the stone it self must needs turn toward that stream, which
climbing and filtring it self along the stones stream, draws it out of its
course; in such sort as the nose of a Weathercock buts it self into the wind.
Now, then, it being known, that the strongest stream comes directly from the
North, in the great earth; and that the Southern stream of the Terrella, or
Loadstone, (proportioned duly by nature to incorporate with the North stream of
the earth) issues out of the north end of the stone; it follows plainly that,
when a Loadstone is situated at liberty, its North and must necessarily turn
toward the North pole of the World.

And it will likewise follow, that, whenever such a stone meets with another of
the same nature and kind, they must comport themselves to one another in like
sort: that is, if both of them be free and equal, they must turn themselves to
or from one another; according as they are situated in respect of one another.
So that, if their axis be parallel, and the South pole of the one and the North
of the other look the same way, they will send proprtionate and greeing streams
to one another from their whole bodies, that will readily mingle and
incorporate with one another, without turning out of their way, or seeking any
shorter course, or cha^ging their respects to one another.

But, if the poles of the same denomination look the same way, and the
loadstones do not lie so as to have their axis parallel, but that they incline
to one another: then they will work themselves about, till they grow, by their
opposite poles, into a straight line; for the same reason, as we have showed of
a loadstones turning to the pole of the earth.

But, if only one of the loadstones be free, and the other fixed, and that they
lie inclined, as in the former case; then, the free stone will work himself,
till his pole be opposite to that part of the fixed stone, from whence the
stream which agrees with him issues stro^gest; for that strea^ is to the free
loadstone, as the Northern strea^ of the earth is to a loadstone compared to
the earth. But withal, we must take notice that, in this our discourse, we
abstract from other accidents; and particularly, from the influence of the
earths streams into the loadstones: which will cause great variety in these
cases, if they lie not due North and South, when they begin to work. And, as
loadstones and other magnetic bodies thus of necessity turn to one another,
when they are both free; and, if one of them be fast'ned, the other turns to
it: so likewise, if they be free to progressive motion, they must, by a like
necessity and for the same reason, come together and join themselves to one
another. And, if only one of them be free, that must remove it self to the
other; for, the same virtue that makes them turn (which is the strength of the
steam) will likewise (in due circumstances) make them come together; by reason
that the steams, which climb up one another by the way of filtration, and
thereby turn the bodies of the stones upon their centers, when they are only
free to turn, must likewise draw the whole bodies of the stones entirely out of
their places, and make them join; when such a total motion of the body is an
effect that requires no more force, than the force of conveying vigorously the
streams of both the Magnetic bodies into one another, that is, when there is
no such impediment standing in the way of the Magnetic bodies motion, but that
the celerity of the atoms motion, mingling with one another, is able to
overcome it. For, then, it must needs do so; and the magnetic body, by natural
coherence to the steam of atoms in which it is involved, follows the course of
the steam: in such sort as in the example we have heretofore, upon another
occasion, given of an eggs-shell filled with dew; the Sunbeams converting the
dew into smoke, and raising up that smoke or steam, the eggs-shell is likewise
raised up for company with the steam that issues from it.

And, for the same reason it is, that the Lodestone draws iron; For, iron
being of a nature apt to receive and harbor the steams of a Loadstone, it
becomes a weak loadstone, and works toward a loadstone, as a weaker Loadstone
would do: and so moves toward a Loadstone, by the means we have now described.
And, that this conformity between iron and the Loadstone is the true reason of
the Loadstones drawing iron is clear, out of this, that a Loadstone will take
up a greater weight of pure iron, then it will of impure or drossie Iron, or of
Iron and some other metal joined together; and that it will draw further
through a slender long Iron, then in the free open air: all which are manifest
signs, that iron co-operates with the force which the Loadstone grafts in it.
And the reason why iron comes to a loadstone more efficaciously then another
loadstone does, is, because loadstones generally are more impure then iron is
(as being a kind of Oar or Mine of Iron) and have other extraneous and
Heterogeneal natures mixed with them: whereas iron receives the loadstones
operation in its whole substance.

CHAP. XXI. Positions drawn out of the former Doctrine, and confirmed by
experimental proofs.
THe first Position is, that, The working of the loadstone, (being 1. The
operations of the loadstone are wrought by bodies and not by qualities.
throughout according to the tenor of the operation of bodies) may be done by
bodies; and consequently, is not done by occult or secret qualities. Which is
evident out of this, that a greater loadstone has more effect then a lesser:
and that, if you cut away part of a loadstone, part of his virtue is likewise
taken from him; and if the parts be joined again, the whole becomes as strong
as it was before.

Again, if a loadstone touch a longer iron, it gives it less force then if it
touch a shorter: nay, the virtue in any part is sensibly lesser, according as
it is further from the touched part.

Again, the longer an iron is in touching, the greater virtue it gets, and the
more constant. And, both an iron and a loadstone may lose their virtue, by long
lying out of their due order and situation, either to the earth or to another
loadstone.

Besides, if a loadstone touch a long iron in the middle of it, he diffuses his
virtue equally toward both ends; and, if it be a round plate, he diffuses his
virtue equally to all sides.

And lastly, the virtue of a loadstone, as also of an iron touched, is lost by
burning it in the fire. All which symptoms, agreeing exactly with the rules of
bodies, make it undeniable, that the virtue of the loadstone is a real and
solid body.

Against this position Cabeus objects, that little atoms would not be able to
penetrate all sorts of bodies; as we see the virtue 2. Objections against the
former position answered.
of the loadstone does: And argues, that, although they should be allowed to do
so, yet they could not be imagined to penetrate thick and solid bodies so
suddenly, as they would do thin ones; and would certainly show then some sign
of facility or difficulty of passing, in the interposition and taking away of
bodies put between the loadstone and the body it works upon. Secondly, he
objects that atoms, being little bodies, cannot move in an instant; as the
working of the loadstone seems to do. And lastly, that the loadstone, by such
abundance of continual evaporations, would quickly be consumed.

To the first we answer, That atoms, whose nature it is to pierce iron, cannot
reasonbly be suspected of inability to penetrate any other body: and, that
atoms can penetrate iron, is evident, in the melting of it by fire. And indeed
this objection comes now too late; after we have so largely declared the
divisibility of quantity, and the subtility of nature in reducing all things
into extreme small parts: for, this difficulty has no other avow, then the
tardity of our imaginations, in subtilizing sufficiently the quantitative parts
that issue out of the loadstone.

As for any tardity that may be expected by the interposition of a thick or
dense body, there is no appearance of such; since we see light pass through
thick glasses, without giving any sign of meeting with the least opposition in
its passage, (as we have above declared at large): and magnetical emanations
have the advantage of light in this, that they are not obliged to straight
lines, as light is.

Lastly, as for Loadstones spending themselves by still venting their
emanations; odoriferous bodies furnish us with a full answer to that objection:
for, they continue many years palpably spending themselves, and yet keep their
odor in vigor; whereas a loadstone, if it be laid in a wrong position, will
not continue half so long. The reason of the duration of both which makes the
matter manifest, and takes away all difficulty: which is, that, as in the root
of a vege^able there is a power to change the advenient juice into its nature;
so is there, in such like things as these, a power to change the ambient air
into their own substance: as evident experience shows in the Hermetike Salt,
(as some modern writers call it), which is found to be repaired, and increased
in its weight, by lying in the air; and the like happens to Saltpeter. And, in
our present subject, experience informs us, that a Loadstone will grow stronger
by lying in due position either to the earth, or to astronger Loadstone,
whereby it may be better impregnated; and, as it were, feed it self with the
emanations issuing out of them into it.

Our next position is, that, This virtue comes to a magnetic body, from
another body; as the nature of bodies is, to require a 3. The Loadstone is
imbued with his virtue, from another body.
being moved, that they may move. And this is evident in iron, which, by the
touch, orby standing in due position near the loadstone, gains the power of the
Loadstone. Again, if a Smith, in beating his iron into a rod, observe to lay it
North and South; it gets a direction to the North, by the very beating of it.
Likewise, if an iron rod be made red hot in the fire, and kept there a good
while together, and, when it is taken out, be laid to cool just North and
South; it will acquire the same direction toward the North. And this is true
not only of iron, but also of all other sorts of bodies whatever that endure
such ignition: particularly of pot-earths, which, if they be molded in a long
form, and, when they are taken out of the Kiln, be laid (as we said of the
iron) to cool North and South, will have the same effect wrought in them. And
iron, though it has not been heated, but only continued long unmoved in the
some situation of North and South in a building; yet it will have the same
effect. So as it cannot be denied, but this virtue comes to iron from other
bodies: whereof one must be a secret influence from the North. And this is
confirmd, by a Loadstones losing its virtue (as we said before) by lying a long
time unduly disposed, either toward the earth, or toward a stronger
Loadstone; whereby, in stead of the former, it gains a new virtue according to
that situation.

And this happens, not only in the virtue which is resident and permanent in a
Loadstone, or a touched iron; but likewise in the actual motion or operation of
them. As may be experienced, First, in this, that the same loadstone or touched
iron, in the South hemisphere of the world, has its operation strongest at
that end of it which tends to the North; and in the North Hemisphere, at the
end which tends to the South: each pole communicating a vigor proportionable
to its own strength, in the climate where it is received. Secondly, in this,
that an iron joined to a Loadstone, or within the Sphere of the Loadstones
working, will take up another piece of iron greater then the Loadstone of it
self can hold; and, as soon as the holding iron is removed out of the sphere of
the Loadstones activity, it presently lets fall the iron it formerly held up.
And this is so true, that a lesser loadstone may be placed so within the sphere
of a greater loadstones operation, as to take away a piece of iron from the
greater Loadstone: and this in virtue of the same greater Loadstone from which
it plucks it; for, but remove the lesser out of the sphere of the greater, and
then it can no longer do it. So that it is evident, in these cases, the very
actual operation of the lesser Loadstone, or of the iron; proceeds from the
actual influence of the greater Loadstone upon and into them. And hence we may
understand, that, whenever a magnetic body works, it has an excitation from
without; which makes it issue out and send its streams abroad: so as it is the
nature of all bodies to do; and as we have given examples of the like done by
heat, when we discoursed of Rarefaction.

But, to explicate this point more clearly, by entering more particularly into
it. If a magnetic body lies North and South, it is easy and obvious to
conceive, that the streams, coming from North and South of the world, and
passing through the stone, must needs excitate the virtue which is in it, and
carry a stream of it along with them that way they go: But, if it lies East and
West, then the streams of North and South of the earth, streaming along by the
two poles of the stone, are sucked in by them much more weakly; yet
nevertheless, sufficiently to give an excitation to the innate streams which
are in the body of the stone, to make them move on in their ordinary course.

The third position is, that, The virtue of the Loadstone is a double, and not
one simple virtue. Which is manifest in an iron 4: The virtue of the Loadstone
is a double, and not one simple virtue.
touched by a Loadstone: for, if you touch it only with one pole of the stone,
it will not be so strong and full of the magnetike virtue; as if you touch one
end of it with one pole, and the other end of it with the other pole of the
stone. Again, if you touch both ends of an iron with the same pole of the
stone, the iron gains its virtue at that end which was last touched; and
changes its virtue from end to end, as often as it is rubbed at contrary ends.
Again, one end of the Loadstone, or of iron, touched will have more force on
the one side of the Equator, and the other end on the other side of it. Again,
the variation on the one side of the Equator, and the variation on the other
side of it, have different laws; according to the different ends of the
loadstone, or of the needle, which looks to those Poles.

Wherefore it is evident, that there is a double virtue in the loadstone; the one
more powerful at one end of it, the other at the other. Yet these two virtues
are found in every sensible part of the stone: for, cutting it at either end,
the virtue at the contrary end is also diminished; and the whole loadstone that
is left has both the same virtues, in proportion to its bigness. Besides, cut
the Loadstone how you will, still the two poles remain in that line, which lay
under the Meridian when it was in the earth. And the like is of the touched
iron: whose virtue still ^es along the line which goes straight (according to
the line of the Axis) from the point where it was touched; and, at the opposite
end, constitutes the contrary pole.

The fourth position is, that, Though the virtue of the Loadstone be in the
whole body; Yet its virtue is more seen in the poles 5. The virtue of the
Loadstone works more strongly in the poles of it, then in any other part.
then in any other parts. For, by experience it is found, that a Loadstone, of
equal bulk, works better and more efficaciously, if it be in a long form, then
if it be in any other. And, from the middle line betwixt the two poles there
comes no virtue, if an iron be touched there: but any part toward the pole,
the nearer it is to the pole, the greater party it imparts. Lastly, the
declination teaches us the same; which is so much the stronger, by how much it
is nearer the pole.

The fifth position is, that, In the the loadstone there are emanations 6. The
loadstone sends forth its emanations spherically. Which are of two kind^: and
each kind is strongest in that Hemisphere, through whose polary parts they
issue out.
which issue, not only at the poles and about them, but also spherically, round
about the whole body, and in an orb from all parts of the superficies of it; in
such sort as happens in all other bodies whatever: And these spherical
emanations are of two kinds; proportionable to the two polar emanations: And
the greatest force of each sort of them is in that Hemisphere, where the Pole
is, at which they make their chief issue.

The reason of the first part of this position is, because no particular body
can be exempt from the Laws of all bodies: and we have above declared, that
every physical body must of necessity have an orb of fluours, or a sphere of
activity, about it. The reason of the second part is, that, seeing these
fluours proceed out of the very substance and nature of the loadstone; they
cannot choose but be found of both sorts, in every part how little soever it
be, where the nature of the loadstone resides. The reason of the third part is,
that, because the polar emanations tend wholly toward the poles (each of them
to their proper pole); it follows that, in every Hemisphere, both those which
come from the contrary Hemisphere, and those which are bred in that they go out
at, are all assembled in that Hemisphere: and therefore of necessity it must be
stronger in that kind of fluours, then the opposite end is. All which appears
true in experience: for, if a long iron touches any part of that Hemisphere of
a loadstone which tends to the North, it gains at that end a virtue of tending
likewise to the North: and the same will be if an iron but hang loose over it.
And this may be confirmed, by a like experience of an iron bar, in respect of
the earth; which, hanging downwards in any part of our Hemisphere, is imbued
with the like inclination of drawing toward the North.

The sixth position is, that although every part of one loadstone 7. Putting
two loadstones within the sphere of one another, every part of one loadstone
does not agree with every part of the other loadstone.
do in it self agree with every part of another loadstone, (that is, if each of
these parts were divided from their wholes, and each of them made a whole by it
self, they might be so joined together as they would agree); nevertheless, when
the parts are in their two wholes, they do not all of them agree together: but,
of two loadstones, only the poles of the one agree with the whole body of the
other; that is, each pole with any part of the contrary Hemisphere of the other
loadstone.

The reason of this is, because the fluours which issue out of the stones are
in certain different degrees, in several parts of the entire loadstones: whereby
it happens, that one loadstone can work, by a determinate part of it self, most
powerfully upon the other, if some determinate part of that other lie next it;
and not so well, if any other part lies toward it. And accordingly experience
shows that, if you put the pole of a loadstone toward the middle of a needle
that is touched at the point, the middle part of the needle will turn away, and
the end of it will convert it self to the pole of the loadstone.

The seventh position is, that, If a touched needle and a loadstone come
together, and touch one another in their agreeing 8. Concetning the declination
and other respects of a needle, toward the loadstone it touches.
parts (whatever parts of them those be); the line of the needles length will
be^d toward the pole of the stone (excepting, if they touch by the Equator of
the stone, and the middle of the needle): yet not so that, if you draw out the
line of the needles length, it will go through the pole of the stone; unless
they touch by the end of the one, and the pole of the other. But if they touch
by the Equator of the one and the middle of the other, then the needle will lie
parallel to the axis of the stone.

And the reason of this is manifest; for, in that case, the two poles being
equidistant to the needle, they draw it equally; and by consequence, the needle
must remain parallel to the axis of the stone. Nor does it import that the
inequality of the two poles of the stone is, materially or quantitatively
greater then the inequality of the two polles of the needle; out of which it
may at the first sight seem to follow, that the stronger pole of the stone
should draw the weaker pole of the needle nearer to it self, then the weaker
pole of the stone can be able to draw the stronger pole of the needle, and by
consequence that the needle should not lie parallel to the axis of the stone,
but incline somewhat to the stronger pole of it. For, after you have well
considered the matter, you will find that the strength of the pole of the stone
cannot work according to its material greatness; but is confined to work only
according to the susceptibility of the needle: which, being a slender and thin
body, cannot receive so much as a thicker body may. Wherefore, seeing the
strongest pole of the stone gives most strength to that pole of the needle,
which lies furthest from it; it may well happen, that the superiority of
strength in the pole of the needle, that is applied to the weaker pole of the
stone, may counterpoise the excess of the stronger pole of the stone, over its
opposite weaker pole: though not in greatness and quantity, yet in respect of
the virtue which is communicable to the poles of the needle; whereby its
comportment to the poles of the stone is determined. And indeed, the needles
lying parallel to the axis of the stone, when the middle of it sticks to the
equator of the stone, convinces that, upon the whole matter, there is no excess
in the efficacious working of either of the stone's poles: but that their
excess over one another, in regard of themselves, is balanced by the needles
receiving it.

But, if the needle hapen's to touch the loadstone in some part nearer one pole
then the other; in this case it is manifest that the force of the stone is
greater on the one side of the needles touch, then on the other side, because
there is a greater quantity of the stone on the one side of the needle then on
the other: and by consequence, the needle will incline that way which the
greater force draws it; so far forth as the other part does not hinder it. Now
we know that, if the greater part were divided from the rest, and so were an
entire Loadstone by it self, (that is, if the Loadstone were cut off where the
needle touches it); then the needle would join it self to the pole, that is, to
the end of that part; and by consequence, would be tending to it, as a thing
that is sucked tends toward the sucker, against the motion or force which
comes from the lesser part: and on the other side, the lesser part of the
stone, which is on the other side of the point which the needle touches, must
hinder this inclination of the needle, according to the proportion of its
strength; and so it follows, that the needle will hang by its end, not
directly set to the end of the greater part, but as much inclining toward it
as the lesser part does not hinder, by striving to pull it the other way. Out
of which we gather the true cause of the needles declination; to wit, the
proportion of working of the two unequal parts of the stone, between which it
touches and is joined to the stone. 8. The virtue of the Loadstone goes from
end to end, in lines almost parallel to the Axis.


And we likewise discover their error, who judge that the part which draws iron
is the next pole to the iron. For it is rather the contrary pole which attracts;
or, to speak more properly it is the whole body of the stone, as streaming in
lines almost parallel to the axis, from the furthermost end, to the other next
the iron: and (in our case) it is that part of the stone, which begins from the
contrary pole and reaches to the needle. For, besides the light which this
discourse gave us, experience assures us, that a Loadstone, whose poles lie
broadways, not longways, is more imperfect and draws more weakly then if the
poles lay longways; which would not be, if the fl^ours streamed from all parts
of the stone directly to the pole: for then, however the stone were cast, the
whole virtue of it would be in the poles. Moreover, if a needle were drawn
freely upon the same Meridian, from one pole to the other; as soon as it were
passed the Equator, it would leap suddenly, at the very first remove of the
Equator where it is parallel with the axis of the Loadstone, from being so
parallele, to make an angle with the axis, greater then a half right one; ^o
the end that it might look upon the pole, which is supposed to be the only
attractive that draws the needle: which great change, wrought all at once,
nature never causes nor admits, but, in all actions or motions, uses to pass
through all the Mediums, whenever it goes from one extreme to another. Besides,
there would be no variation of the needles aspect toward the North end of the
stone: for, if every part sent its virtue immediately to the poles, it were
impossible that any other part whatever should be stronger then the polar part,
seeing that the polar part has the virtue even of that particular part, and of
all the other parts of the stone beside, joined in it self.

This therefore is evident, that the virtue of the loadstone goes from end to
end in parallel lines; unless it be in such stones, as have their polar parts
narrower then the rest of the body of the stone: for, in them, the stream will
tend with some little declination toward the pole, as it were by way of
refraction Because, without the stone, the fluours from the pole of the earth
coarct themselves, and so thicken their stream, to crowd into the stone, as soon
as they are sensible of any emanations from it; that being (as we have said
before) their readiest way to pass along: and with in the stone, the stream
does the like, to meet the advenient stream where it is strongest and thickest;
which is at that narrow part of the stones end, which is most prominent out.

And, by this discourse, we discover likewise another error, 10. The virtue of
the Loadstone is not perfectly spherical, though the stone be such.
of them that imagine the Loadstone has a sphere of activity round about it,
equal on all sides; that is, perfectly spherical, if the stone be spherical.
Which clearly is a mistaken speculation: for, nature having so ordered all her
agents, that where the strength is greatest, there the action must (generally
speaking) extend it self furthest off; and it being acknowledged that the
Loadstone has greatest strength in its Poles, and least in the Equator; it
must of necessity follow, that it works further by its Poles, then by its
Equator. And consequently, it is impossible that its sphere of activity should
be perfectly spherical.

Nor does Cabeus his experience move us, to conceive the loadstone has a
greater strength to retain an iron laid upon it by its Equator, then by its
Poles: for, to justify his assertion, he should have tried it in an iron wire,
that were so short as the poles could not have any notable operation upon the
ends of it; since otherwise, the force of retaining it will be attributed to the
Poles (according to what we have above delivered) and not to the Equator.

The eighth position is, that The intention of nature, in all the 11. The
intention of nature, in all the operations of the loadstone, is to make an
union betwixt the attractive and attracted bodies.
operations of the Loadstone, is to make an union betwixt the attractive and
the atracted ^bodies. Which is evident out of the sticking of them together: as
also out of the violence wherewith iron comes to a Loadstone; which, when it is
drawn by a powerful one, is so great, that, through the force of the blow
hitting the stone, it will rebound back, and then fall again to (the stone.
And, in like manner, a needle upon a pin, if a Loadstone be set near it, turns
with so great a force toward the pole of the stone, that it goes beyond it
and, coming back again, the celerity wherewith it moves makes it retire it self
too far on the other side; and so, by many undulations, at last it comes to
rest directly opposite to the pole. Likewise, by the declination; by means of
which, the iron to the stone, or the stone to the earth, approaches in such a
disposition, as is most convenient to join the due ends together. And lastly,
out of the flying away of the contrary ends from one another: which clearly is
to no other purpose, but that the due ends may come together. And in general,
there is no doubt, but ones going to another is instituted by the order of
nature for their coming together; and for their being together, which is but a
perseverance of their coming together.

The ninth position is, that, The nature of a Loadstone does not sink deeply
into the main body of the earth, as to have the substance 12. The main globe of
the earth is not a Loadstone.
of its whole body be magnetical; but only remans near the surface of it. And
this is evident, by the inequality in virtue of the two ends: for, if this
magnetic virtue were the nature of the whole body, both ends would be equally
strong; For would the disposition of one of the ends be different from the
disposition of the other. Again, there could be no variation of the tending
toward the North: for, the bulk of the whole body would have a strength so
eminently greater then the prominences and disparities of hills or seas, as the
varieties of these would be absolutely insensible. Again, if the motion of the
Loadstone came from the body of the earth, it would be perpetually from the
center, and not from the Poles; and so, there could be no declination more in
one part of the earth, then in another. Nor would the Loadstone tend from North
to South, but from the center to the circumference; or rather from, the
circumference to the center. And so we may learn the difference between the
loadstone and the earth, in their attractive operations; to wit, that the earth
does not receive its influence from another body, nor does its magnetic virtue
depend of another magnetic agent, that impresses it into it: which,
nevertheless, is the most remarkable condition of a Loadstone. Again, the
stongest virtue of the Loadstone is from pole to pole; but the strongest virtue
of the earth is from the center upwards: as appears by fireforks, gaining a
much greater magnetic strength in a short time, then a Loadstone in a longer.
Neither can it be thence objected, that the loadstone should therefore receive
the earths influences more strongly from the centerwards, then from the poles
of the earth, (which by its operation, and what we have discoursed of it, is
certain it does not): since the beds, where Loadstones lie and are formed, be
toward the bottom of that part or back of the earth which is imbued with
magnetic virtue. Again, this virtue which we see in a Loadstone is substantial
to it; whereas the like virtue is but accidental to the earth, by means of the
Suns drawing the northern and southern exhalations to the Equator. 13. The
loadstone is generated in all parts or Clim^t's of the earth.


The last position is, that The loadstone must be found over all the earth, and
in every country. And so we see it is: both because iron mines are found (in
some measure) almost in all countries; and cause, at least other sorts of the
earth (as we have declared of potearths) cannot be wanting in any large extent
of country, which, when they are baked and cooled in due positions, have this
effect of the Loadstone, and are of the nature of it. And Dr. Gilbert shows,
that the loadstone is nothing else but the Ore of Steel or perfectest iron; and
that it is to be found of all colors, and fashions, and almost of all
consistences.

So that we may easily conceive, that the emanations of the Loadstone being
every where, as well as the causes of gravity; the 14. The conformity betwixt
the two motions of magnetic things, and of heavy things.
two motions, of magnetic and weighty things, both of them derive their
origin from the same source: I mean, from the very same emanations coming from
the earth; which by a diverse ordination of nature, make this affect in the
loadstone, and that other in weighty things. And, who knows but that a like
sucking, to this which we have showed in magnetic things, passes also in the
motion of gravity? in a word, gravity bears a fair testimony in behalf of the
magnetic force; and the Loadstones working returns no mean verdict for the
causes of gravity: according to what we have delivered of them.

CHAP. XXII. A Solution of certain Problemes concerning the Loadstone, and a
short sum of the whole doctrine touching it.
OUt of what is said upon this subject, we may proceed to the Solution of
certain questions or problemes, which are or 1. Which is the North, and which
the South Pole of a Loadstone.
may be made in this matter. And first, of that which Dr. Gilbert disputes,
against all former writers of the Loadstone; to wit, which is the North, and
which the South pole of a stone? Which seems to me only a question of the name:
for if, by the name of North and South, we understand that end of the stone
which has that virtue that the North or South pole of the earth have then it is
certain, that the end of the stone which looks to the South pole of the earth
is to be called the North pole of the loadstone, and contrariwise, that which
looks to the North is to be called the South pole of it. But if, by the names
of North and South pole of the stone, yo^ mean those ends of it, that lie and
point to the North and South poles of the earth; then you must reckon their
poles contrariwise to the former account. So that, the terms being once
defined, there will remain no further controversy about the point.

Dr. Gilbert seems also to have another controversy with all 2. Whether any
bodies, besides magnetic ones, be attractive.
Writers; to wit, whether any bodies besides Magnetical ones be attractive;
Which he seems to deny; all others to affirm. But this also, being fairly put,
will peradventure prove no controversy: for the question is either in common,
of attraction, or else in particular, of such an attraction as is made by the
loadone. Of the first part, there can be no doubt; as we have declared above;
and is manifest betwixt gold and quicksilver, when a man holding Gold in his
mouth, it draws to it the quicksilver that is in his body. But, for the
attractive to draw a body to it self, not wholly, but one determinate part of
the body drawn, to one determinate part of the drawer; is an attraction which,
for my part, I cannot exemplify in any other bodies but Magnetical ones.

A third question is, Whether an iron that stands long unmoved 3. Whether an
iron, placed perpendicularly toward the earth, gets a magnetical virtue of
pointing toward the north, or toward the south, in that end that lies
downwards.
in a window, or any other part of a building, perpendicularly to the earth,
contracts a Magnetical virtue, of drawing or pointing toward the North, in
that end which looks downwards? For Cabeus (who wrote since Gilbert) affirms it
out of experience: but, either his experiment or his expression was defective.
For, assuredly, if the iron stands so in the Northern Hemisphere, it will turn
to the North; and, if in the Southern Hemisphere, it will turn to the South:
for, seeing the virtue of the loadstone proceeds from the earth, and the earth
has different tempers toward the North, and toward the South pole (as has
been already declared); the virtue, which comes out of the earth in the
Northern Hemisphere, will give to the end of the iron next it an inclination to
the North pole, and the earth of the Southern Hemisphere will yield the
contrary disposition to the end which is nearest it.

The next Question is, why a loadstone seems to love iron 4. Why loadstones
affect iron better than one another.
better then another loadstone? The answer is, because iron is indifferent in
all its parts to receive the impression of a loadstone; whereas another
loadstone receives it only in a determinate part: and therefore a loadstone
draws iron more easily then it can another loadstone; because it finds
repugnance in the parts of another Loadstone, unless it be exactly situated in
a right position. Besides, iron seems to be compared to a Loadstone, like a
more humid body to a dryer of the same nature: and the difference of male and
female sexes in Animals manifestly show the great appetence of conjunction
between moisture and dryness, when they belong to bodies of the same species.

Another question is that great one, Why a Loadstone cap'd 5. Gilberts reason
refuted touching a cap'd Loadstone, that takes up more iron then one not cap'd;
and an iron impregnated that, in some case, draws more strongly then the stone
it self.
with steel takes up more iron, then it would do if it were without that
caping? Another conclusion like this is, that, if by a Loadstone you take up an
iron, and by that iron a second iron, and then pull away the second iron; the
first iron (in some position) will leave the Loadstone to stick to the second
iron, as long as the second iron is within the sphere of the Loadstones
activity: but, if you remove the second out of that sphere, then the first iron
remaining within it, though the other be out of it, will leave the second, and
leap back to the Loadstone. To the same purpose is this other conclusion; that,
The greater the iron is, which is entirely within the compass of the Loadstones
virtue, the more strongly the Loadstone will be moved to it, and the more
forcibly stick to it.

The reasons of all these three we must give at once: for, they hang all upon
on string. And, in my conceit, neither Gilbert nor Galileo have hit upon the
right. As for Gilbert; he thinks that, in iron, there is originally the virtue
of the loadstone; but that it is as it were asleep, till by the touch of the
Loadstone it be awaked and set on work: and therefore the virtue of bath joined
together is greater, then the virtue of the Loadstone alone.

But, if this were the reason, the virtue of the iron would be greater in every
regard; and not only in sticking or in taking up: whereas himself confesses,
that a cap'd stone draws no further then a naked stone, nor hardly so far.
Besides, it would continue its virtue out of the sphere of activity of the
loadstone; which it does not. Again, seeing that, if you compare them
severally, the virtue of the Loadstone is greater, then the virtue of the iron;
why should not the middle iron stick closer to the stone, then to the further
iron, which must of necessity have less virtue?

Galileo yields the cause of this effect, that, when an iron touches an iron,
there are more parts which touch one another, then when a Loadstone touches the
iron: First, because the Galileus his opinion touching the former effects
refuted.
Loadstone has generally much impurity in it, and therefore diverse parts of it
have no virtue; whereas iron by being melted has all its parts pure: and
secondly, because iron can be smoothed and polished more then a Loadstone can
be, and therefore its superficies touches, in a manner, with all its parts:
whereas diverse parts of the stones superficies cannot touch, by reason of its
ruggedness.

And he confirms his opinion by experience: for, if you put the head of a
needle to a bare stone, and the point of it to an iron; and then pluck away the
iron; the needle will leave the iron and stick to the stone; but, if you turn
the needle the other way, it will leave the stone and stick to the iron. Out of
which he infers that it is the multitude of parts, which causes the closs and
strong sticking. And it seems he found the same in the caping of his
Loadstones; for he used flat irons for that purpose, which by their whole plane
did take up other irons: whereas Gilbert cap'd his with unequal irons; which, not
applying themselves to other irons, so strongly or with so many ports as
Galileo's did, would not by much take up so great weights as his.

Nevertheless, it seems not to me that his answer is sufficient, or that his
reasons convince. For, we are to consider that the virtue, which he puts in the
iron, must (according to his own supposition) proceed from the Loadstone: and
then, what imports it, whether the superficies of the iron, which touches
another iron, be so exactly plain or no, or that the parts of it be more solid
then the parts of the stone? For, all this conduces nothing to make the virtue
greater then it was: since no more virtue can go from one iron to the other,
then goes from the Loadstone to the first iron; and, if this virtue cannot tie
the first iron to the Loadstone, it cannot proceed out of this virtue that the
second iron be tied to the first. Again, if a paper be put betwixt the cap and
another iron, it does not hinder the magnetical virtue from passing through it
to the iron; but the virtue of taking up more weight, then the naked stone was
able to do, is thereby rendered quite useless. Therefore, it is evident, that this
virtue must be put in something else, and not in the application of the
magnetical virtue.

And, to examine his reasons particularly: it may very well fall out, that,
whatever the cause be, the point of a needle may be too little to make an exact
experience in; and therefore a new doctrine ought not lightly be grounded upon
what appears in the application of that, And likewise, the greatness of the
surfaces of the two irons may be a condition helpful to the cause, whatever it
be: for, greater and lesser are the common conditions of all bodies, and
therefore avail all kinds of corporeal causes; so that no one cause can be
affirmed more then another, merely out of this, that great does more, and
little does less.

To come then to our own solution. I have considered how fire 7. The Authors
solution to the former questions.
has, in a manner, the same effect in iron, as the virtue of the Loadstone
has by means of the cap: for, I find that fire, coming through iron
red-glowing hot, will burn more strongly, then if it should come immediately
through the air; also we see that, in Pitcole, the fire is stronger then in
Charcole. And nevertheless, the fire will heat further if it come immediately
from the source of it, then if it come through a red iron that burns more
violently where it touches; and likewise charcoal will heat further then
pitcoal, that near hand burns more fiercely. In the same manner, the Loadstone
will draw further without a cap then with one; but with a cap it sticks faster
then without one. Whence I see that it is not purely the virtue of the
Loadstone; but the virtue of it being in iron, which causes this effect.

Now, this modification may proceed, either from the multitude of parts which
come out of the Loadstone, and are as it were stopped in the iron; and so the
sphere of their activity becomes shorter, but stronger; or else, from some
quality of the iron, joined to the influence of the loadstone. The first seems
not to give a good account of the effect: for, why should a little paper take
it away, seeing we are sure that it stops not the passage of the loadstones
influence? Again, the influence of the Loadstone seems in its motion to be of
the nature of light, which goes in an insensible time as far as it can reach:
and therefore, were it multiplied in the iron, it would reach further then
without it; and from it the virtue of the Loadstone would begin a new sphere of
activity. Therefore we more willingly cleave to the latter part of our
determination.

And thereupon enquiring what quality there is in iron, whence this effect may
follow; we find, that it is distinguished from a loadstone, as a metal is from
a stone. Now, we know that metals have generally more humidity than stones: and
we have discoursed above, that humidity is the cause of sticking; especially
when it is little and dense. These qualities must needs be in iron, which of
all metals is the most terrestrial: and such humidity as is able to stick to
the influence of the loadstone, as it passes through the body of the iron, must
be exceeding subtle and small. And it seems necessary that such humidity
should st^k to the influence of the loadstone, when it meets with it
considering that the influence is of it self dry, and that the nature of iron
is a kin to the loadstone: wherefore the humidity of the one, and the drought of
the other, will not fail of incorporating together. Now then, if two irons,
well polished and plain, be united by such a glue as results ou^ of this
composition; there is a manifest appearance of much reason for them to stick
strongly together. This is confirmed by the nature of iron in very cold
Countries and very cold weather: for the very humidity of the air, in times of
frost, will make upon iron, sooner then upon other things, such a sticking glue
as will pull off the skin of a man's hand that touches it hard.

And, by this discourse, you will perceive that Galileo's arguments confirm our
opinion, as well as his own; and that, according to our doctrine, all
circumstances must fall out just as they do in his experiences. And the reason
is clear, why the interposition of another body hinders the strong sticking of
iron to the cap of the loadstone; for, it makes the mediation between them
greater, which we have showed to be the general reason why things are easily
parted.

Let us then proceed to the resolution of the other cases proposed. The second
is already resolved: for, if this glue be made of the influence of the
loadstone, it cannot have force further then the loadstone it self has; and so
far it must have more force then the bare influence of the loadstone. Or rather
the humidity of two irons makes the glue of a fitter temper to hold, then that
which is between a dry loadstone and iron: and the glue enters better when both
sides are moist, then when only one is so.

But this resolution, though it be in part good, yet does not evacuate the
whole difficulty; since the same case happens between 8. The reason why, in the
former case, a lesser Loadstones draws the interjacent iron from the greater.
a stronger and a weaker Loadstone, as between a Loadstone and iron: for, the
weaker Loadstone, while it is within the sphere of activity of the greater
Loadstone, draws away an iron set betwixt them, as well as a second iron does.
For the reason, therefore, of the little Loadstones drawing away the iron, we
may consider, that the greater Loadstone has two effects upon the iron betwixt
it and a lesser Loadstone; and a third effect upon the little loadstone it
self. The first is, that it impregnates the iron, and gives it a permanent
virtue, by which it works like a weak Loadstone. The second is, that, as it
makes the iron work toward the lesser Loadstone by its permanent virtue; so
also it accompanies the steam that goes from the iron toward the little
Loadstone, with its own steam which goes the same way: so that both these
steams in company climb up the steam of the little Loadstone which meets them;
and that steam climbs up the enlarged one of both theirs together. The third
effect which the greater Loadstone works is, that it makes the steam of the
little loadstone become stronger, by augmenting its innate virtue in some
degree.

Now then, the going of the iron to either of the Loadstones must follow the
greater and quicker conjunction of the two meeting steams, and not the
greatness of one alone. So that, if the conjunction of the two steams, between
the iron and the little Loadstone, be greater and quicker, then the conjunction
of the two steams, which meet betwixt the greater Loadstone and the iron; the
iron must stick to the lesser Loadstone. And this must happen more often then
otherwise: for, the steam which goes from the iron to the greater Loadstone
will, for the most part, be less then the steam which goes from the lesser
Loadstone to the iron; and, though the other steam be never so great, yet it
cannot draw more then according to the proportion of its Antagonists coming
from the iron: Wherefore, seeing the two steams betwixt the iron and the little
Loadstone are more proportionable to one another; and the steam coming out of
the little loadstone is notably greater then the steam going from the iron to
the greater Loadstone: the conjunction must be made, for the most part, to the
little loadstone. And, if this discourse does not hold in the former part of
the Problem, betwixt a second iron and Loadstone; it is supplied by the former
reason which we gave for that particular purpose.

The third case depends also of this solution: for, the bigger an iron is, so
many more parts it has to suck up the influence of the Loadstone, and
consequently, does it thereby the more greedily; and therefore the Loadstone must
be carried to it more violently and, when they a^e joined, stick more strongly.

The sixth question is, Why the variations of the Needle from the true North,
in the Northern Hemisphere, are greater the 9. Why the variation of a touched
needle from the North is greater, the nearer you go to the Pole.
nearer you go to the Pole, and lesser the nearer you approach to the Equator.
The reason whereof is plain in our doctrine. For, considering that the magnetic
virtue of the earth streams from the North toward the Equator; it follows of
necessity, that, if there be two streams of magnetic flowrs issuing from the
North, one of them precisely from the pole, and the other from a part of the
earth near the pole, and that the stream coming from the point by side the Pole
be but a little the stronger of the two; there will appear very little
differences in their several operations, after they have had a long space to
mingle their emanations together, which thereby join and grow as it were into
one stream: whereas, the nearer you come to the Pole, the more you will find
them severed, and each of them working by its own virtue. And, very near the
point which causes the variation, each stream works singly by it self; and
therefore here the point of variation must be master, and will carry the needle
strongly to his course from the due North, if his stream be never so little
more efficacious then the other.

Again, a line drawn from a point of the Earth wide of the Pole, to a point of
the Meridian near the Equator, makes a less angle; then a line drawn from the
same point of the Earth, to a point of the same Meridian nearer the Pole:
wherefore, the variation being esteemed by the quantities of the said angles, it
must needs be greater near the Pole, then near the Equator; though the cause be
the same.

Which a little figure will presently explicate. Let the point A be the Pole,
and the line AB the Meridian, and the point B the intersection of it, with a
parallel near the Equator, and the point C the intersection of the Meridian
with the Tropic; and D a point in the Earth near the Pole, to which, in the
said intersection, the needle tends, instead of looking directly to the pole,
whereby it make, variation from due North. I say then, that the variation of a
needle near the Equator in the point B, looking upon the point D, cannot be so
great and sensible, as the variation of a needle in the Tropic C, lookign upon
the same point: since the angle DBA, which is made by the variation of the
first, is less then the angle DCA, which it made by the variation of the latter
needle, nearer the Pole,

But, because it may happen, that, in the parts near the Equator, the variation
may proceed from some piece of land, not much more northerly then where the
needle is, but that it bears rather Easterly or Westerly from it; and yet
Gilbert's assertion goes universally, when he says the variations in Southern
regions are less then in Northern ones: we must examine what may be the reason
thereof. And presently, the generation of the Loadstone shows it plainly. For,
seeing the nature of the Loadstone proceeds out of this, that the Sun works
more upon the Torrid Zone, then upon the poles; and that his too strong
operation is contrary to the Loadstone, as being of the nature of fire: it
follows evidently, that the lands of the Torrid Zone cannot be so magnetical
(generally speaking) as the polar lands are; and by consequence, that a lesser
land near the Pole will have a greater effect, then a larger continent near the
Equator; and likewise, a land further off toward the Pole will work more
strongly, then a nearer land which lies toward the Equator.

The seventh question is, Whether, in the same part of the 10. Whether, in the
same part of the world, a touched needle may it one time vary more from the
North, and at another time less.
world, a touched needle may at one time vary more from the true North point,
and at another time less? In which Gilbert was resolute for the negative part:
but our latter Mathematicians are of another mind. Three experiences were made
near London in three diverse years; The two first 42 years distant from one
another, and the third 12 years distant from the second: And by them it is
found that, in the space of 54 years, the Loadstone has, at London, diminsh'd
his variation from the North, the quantity of 7 degrees and more; But so that,
in the latter years, the diminution has sensibly gone faster then in the
former.

These observations, peradventure, are but little credited by Strangers; but
we, who know the worth of the men that made them, cannot mistrust any notable
error in them: for they were very able Mathematicians, and made their
observations with very great exactness; and there were several judicious
witnesses at the making of them; as may be seen in Mr. Gillebrand's print
concerning this subject. And diverse other particular persons confirm the same;
whose credit, though each single might peradventure be slighted, yet all in
body make a great accession.

We must therefore cast about to find what may be the cause of an effect so
paradox to the rest of the doctrine of the Loadstone: for seeing that no one
place can stand otherwise to the North of the earth at one time then at
another; how it is possible the needle should receive any new variation, since
all variation proceeds out of the inequality of the earth? But, when we
consider that this effect proceeds not out of the main body of the earth, but
only out of the bark of it; and that its bark may have diverse tempers, not as
yet discovered to us; out of whose variety the influence of the earthy parts
may be diverse in respect of one certain place: it is not impossible but that
such variation may be, especially in England; which Island lying open to the
North, by a great and vast Ocean, may receive, more particularly then other
places, the special influences and variation of the weather, that happen in
those Northeastern countries from whence this influence comes to us. If
therefore there should be any course of weather, whose period were a hundred
years (for example), or more or less, and so might easily pass unmarked: this
variation might grow out of such a course.

But, in so obscure a thing, we have already hazarded to guess too much. And,
upon the whole matter of the Loadstone, it serves our turn, if we have proved
(as we conceive we have done fully) that its motions, which appear so
admirable, do not proceed from an occult quality: but that the causes of them
may be reduced to local motion; and all performed by such corporeal instruments
and means (though peradventure more intricately disposed) as all other effects
are among bodies. Whose ordering and disposing and particular progress there is
no reason to despair of finding ou^; would men but carefully apply themselves to
that work, upon solid principles and with diligent experiences.

But because this matter has been very long, and scatteringly 11. The wh^le
doctrine of the lo^dstone sum'd up in short.
diffused in many several branches; peradventure it will not be displeasing to
the Reader, to see the whole nature of the loadstone sum'd up in short. Let him
then cast his eyes upon one effect of it, very easy to be tried, and
acknowledged by all writers; though we have not as yet mentioned it: It Is, that
a knife, drawn from the pole of a loadstone toward the Equator, if you hold
the point toward the pole, gains a respect to one of the poles; but
contrariwise, if the point of the knife be held toward the Equator, and be
thrust the same way it was drawn before (that is, toward the Equator), it
gains a respect toward the contrary pole.

It Is evident out of this experience, that the virtue of the loadstone is
communicated by way of streams; and that in it there are two contrary streams:
for otherwise the motion of the knife, this way or that why, could not change
the efficacity of the same parts of the loadstone. It Is likewise evident, that
these contrary streams come from the contrary ends of the loadstone. As also,
that the virtues of them both are in every part of the stone. Likewise, that
one loadstone must of necessity turn certain parts of it self, to certain parts
of another loadstone; nay, that it must go and join to it, according to the
laws of attraction which we have above delivered: and consequently, that they
must turn their disagreeing parts away from one another; and so one loadstone
seem to fly from another; if they be so applied that their disagreeing parts be
kept still next to one another; for, in this case, the disagreeing and the
agreeing parts of the same loadstone being in the same straight line; one
loadstone, seeking to draw his agreeing part near to that part of the other
loadstone which agrees with him, must of necessity turn away his disagreeing
parts, to give way to his agreeing parts to approach nearer,

And thus you see, that the flying from one another of two ends of two
loadstones, which are both of the same denomination, (as for example, the two
South ends, or the two North ends), does not proceed from a pretended antipathy
between those two ends, but from the attraction of the agreeing ends.

Furthermore, the earth having to a Loadstone the nature of a Loadstone; it
follows that a Loadstone must necessarily turn it self to the poles of the
earth, by the same laws: and consequently, must tend to the North, must vary
from the North, must incline toward the center; and must be affected with all
such accidents as we have deduced of the Loadstone.

And lastly, seeing that iron is to a Loadstone a fit matter for it to impress
its nature in, and easily retains that magnetike virtue; the same effects, that
follow between two Loadstones, must necessarily follow between a Loadstone and
a piece of iron, fitly proportionated in their degrees: excepting some little
particularities, which proceed out of the naturalness of the magneticke virtue
to a Loadstone, more then to iron.

And thus you see the nature of the Lodestone sum'd up in gross; the
particular joints and causes whereof, you may find treated at large in the main
discourse. Wherein we have governed our selves chiefly by the experiences that
are recorded by Gilbert and Cabeus; to whom, we remit our Reader for a more
ample declaration of particulars.

CHAP. XXIII. A description of the two sorts of Living Creatures, Plants and
Animals: and how they are framed in common, to perform vital motion.
HItherto we have endeavored to follow, by a continual 1. The connection of the
following Chapters with the precedent ones.
third, all such effects as we have met with among Bodies; and to trace them in
all their windings, and drive them up to their very root and original source:
for, the nature of our subject, having been yet very common, has not exceeded
the compass and power of our search and inquiry, to descend to the chief
circumstances and particulars belonging to it. And indeed, many of the
conveyance, whereby the operations we have discoursed of are performed, be so
secret and abstruse; as they that Look into them, with less heedfulness and
judgment then such a matter requires, are too apt to impute them to mysterious
causes, above the reach of humane nature to comprehend, and to calumniate them
of being wrought by occult and specific qualities, whereof no more reason could
be given, then if the effects were infused by Angelical hands, without
assistance of inferior bodies; which uses to be the last refuge of ignorant
men; who, not knowing what to say, and yet presuming to say something, fall
often upon such expressions, as neither themselves nor their hearers understand,
but if they be well scanned, imply contradictions. Therefore, we deemed it a kind
of necessity, to strain our selves to prosecute most of such effects; even to
their notional connexions with Rarity and Density. And the rather, because it
has not been our luck yet to meet with any that has had the like design, or
done any considerable matter to ease our pains. Which cannot but make the
Readers journey somewhat tedious to him, to follow all our steps; by reason of
the ruggedness and untrodenness of the paths we have walked in.

But now, the effects we shall henceforward meddle with grow so particular, and
swarm into such a vast multitude of several little joints and wreathy
labyrinths of nature; as were impossible, in so summary a treatise as we
intend, to deliver the causes of every one of them exactly: which would require
both large discourses, and abundance of experiences, to acquit our selves as we
ought of such a task. Nor is there a like need of doing it as formerly, for as
much as concerns our design; since the causes of them are palpably material,
and the admirable artifice of them consists only in the Dedalean and
wonderful-ingenious ordering and ranging them one with another.

We shall therefore entreat our Reader, from this time forwards, to expect only
the common sequel of those particular effects, out of the principles already
laid. And when some shall occur, that may peradventure seem at first sight
enacted immediately by a virtue spiritual, and that proceeds indivisibly; in a
different strain from the ordinary process which we see in bodies and bodily
things (that is, by the virtues of rarity and density, working by local
motion): we hope he will be satisfied at our hands, if we lay down a method,
and trace out a course, whereby such events and operations may follow out of the
principles we have laid. Though peradventure we shall not absolutely convince,
that every effect is done just as we set it down in every particular; and that
it may not as well be done by some other disposing of parts under the same
general scope: for it is enough for our turn, if we show that such effects may
be performed by corporeal agents, working as other bodies do, without confining
our selves to an exactness, in every link of the long chain that must be wound
up in the performance of them.

To come then to the matter. Now that we have explicated 2. Concerning several
compositions of mixed bodies.
the natures of those motions, by means whereof bodies are made and destroyed;
and in which they are to be considered chiefly as passive, whiles some exterior
agent, working upon them, causes such alterations in them, and brings them to
such pass, as we see in the changes that are daily wrought among substances:
The next thing we are to employ our selves about is, to take a survey of those
motions which some bodies have, wherein they seem to be not so much patients as
agents, and contain within themselves the principle of their own motion, having
no relation to any outward object, more then to stir up that principle of
motion and set it on work; which, when it is once in act, has, as it were
within the limits of its own kingdom and severed from commerce with all other
bodies whatever, many other subaltern motions over which it presides.

To which purpose we may consider, that, among the compounded bodies, whose
natures we have explicated, there are some, in whom the parts of different
complexions are so small and so well mingled together, that they make a compound
which, to our sense, seems all quite through of one Homogeneous nature; and,
however it be divided, each part retains the entire and complete nature of the
whole. Others again there are, in which it is easy to discern that the whole is
made up of several great parts, of very differing natures and tempers.

And of these there are two kinds: one, of such as their differing parts seem
to have no relation to one another, or correspondence together to perform any
particular work, in which all of them are necessary, but rather they seem to be
made what they are by chance and accident; and, if one part be severed from
another, each is an entire thing by it self, of the same nature as it was in
the whole, and no harmony is destroyed by such division. As may be observed in
some bodies dig'd out of Mines, in which one may see lumps of Metal, or stone,
and glass, and such different substances, in their several distinct situations,
perfectly compacted into one continuate body; which if you divide, the glass
remains what it was before, the Emerald is still an Emerald, the silver is good
silver, and the like of the other substances: the causes of which may be easily
deduced, out of what we have formerly said. But, there are other bodies, in
which this manifest and notable difference of parts carries with it such a
subordination of one of them to another, as we cannot doubt but that nature
made such engines (if so I may call them) by design, and intended that this
variety should be in One thing; whose unity and being what it is, should depend
of the harmony of the several differing parts, and should be destroyed by their
separation. As we see in living Creatures, whose particular parts and members
being once severed, there is no longer a living creature to be found among them.

Now, of this kind of bodies there are two sorts. The first is 3. Two sorts of
Living Creatures.
of those that seem to be one continuate substance, wherein we may observe one
and the same constant progress throughout, from the lowest to the highest part
of it; so that the operation of one part is not at all different from that of
another: but the whole body seems to be the course and throughfare of one
constant action, varying it self in diverse occasions and occurrences, according
to the disposition of the subject.

The bodies of the second sort have their parts so notably separated one from
the other, and each have such a peculiar motion proper to them, that one might
conceive they were every one a complete distinct total thing by it self, and
that all of them were artificially tied together: were it not that the
subordination of these parts to one another is so great, and the correspondence
between them so strict, (the one not being able to subsist without the other,
from whom he derives what is needful for him; and again, being so useful to
that other, and having its action and motion so fitting and necessary for it,
as without it that other cannot be), as plainly convinces that the compound of
all these several parts must needs be one individuol thing. 4. An engine to
express the first sort of living creatures.


I remember that, when I traveled in Spain, I saw there two Engines that, in
some sort, express the natures of these two kinds of bodies; One at Toledo, the
other a Segovia: both of them set on work by the current of the river in which
the foundation of their machine was laid. That at Toledo was to force up water
at a great height, from the river Tagus to the Alcazar (the Kings palace), that
stands upon a high steep hill or rock, almost perpendicular over the river. In
the bottom there was an indented wheel, which, turning round with the stream,
gave motion at the same time to the whole engine; which consisted of a
multitude of little troughs or square ladles, set one over another in two
parallel rows over against one another, from the bottom to the top, and upon
two several divided frames of timber. These troughs were closed at one end with
a traverse board, to retain the water from running out there; which end, being
bigger then the rest of the trough, made it somewhat like a ladle; and the rest
of it seemed to be the handle with a channel in it; the little end of which
channel or trough was open, to let the water pass freely away. And these
troughs were fastened by an axletree in the middle of them, to the frame of
timber that went from the bottom up to the top: so that they could upon that
center move at liberty, either the shut end downwards, or the open end; like
the beam of a balance.

Now, at a certain position of the root-wheel (if so I may call it), all one
side of the machine sunk down a little lower toward the water; and the other
was raised a little higher: Which motion was changed, as soon as the
ground-wheel had ended the remnant of his revolution; for then the side that
was lowest before sprung up, and the other sunk down: And thus the two sides of
the machine were like two legs, that by turns trod the water; as in the Vintage
men press Grapes in a watte. Now, the troughs, that were fast'ned to the timber
which descended, turned that part of them downwards which was like a Box shut
to hold the water; and consequently, the open end was up in the air, like the
arm of the balance to which the lightest scale is fastened: and in the mean
time, the troughs upon the ascending timber were moved by a contrary motion,
keeping their boxends aloft, and letting the open ends incline downwards; so
that, if any water were in them, they would let it run out, wher'as the others
retained any that came into them.

When you have made an image of this Machine in your fantasy, consider what
will follow out of its motion. You will perceive that, when one leg sinks down
toward the water, that trough which is next to the Superficies of it, putting
down his box end and dipping it a little in the water, must needs bring up as
much as it can retain, when that leg ascends: which when it is at its height,
the trough moves upon his own center, and the box end, which was lowest,
becomes now highest; and so the water runs out of it. Now, the other leg
descending at the same time, it falls out that the trough on its side, which
would be a step above that which has the water in it if they stood in
equilibrity, becomes now a step lower then it; and is so placed, that the
water, which runs out of that which is aloft, falls into the head or box of it:
which no sooner has received it, but that leg on which it is fastened springs
up, and the other descends; so that the water of the second leg runs now into
the box of the first leg, that is next above that which first laded the water
out of the river. And thus, the troughs of the two legs deliver their water by
turns from one side to the other; and at every remove, it gets a step upwards,
till it comes to the top: whiles at every ascent and descent of the whole side,
the lowest ladle or trough takes new water from the River; which ladleful
follows immediately in its ascent that which was taken up the time before. And
thus, in a little while, all the troughs from the bottom to the top are full;
unless there happen to be some failing in some ladle: and in that case the
water breaks out there, and all the ladles above that are dry.

The other Engine, or rather multitude of several engines, to 5. Another Engine
by which may be expressed the second sort of living creatures.
perform sundry different operations, all conducing to one work (whereas, that
of Toledo is but one tenor of motion, from the first to the last,) is in the
Mint at Segovia. Which is so artificially made, that one part of it distends an
Ingot of Silver or Gold, into that breadth and thickness as is requisite to
make Coin of. Which being done, it delivers the plate it has wrought to
another, that Prints the Figure of the Coin upon it. And from thence it is
turned over to another, that cuts it according to the Print, into due shape and
weight. And lastly, the several pieces fall into a reserve, in another room:
where the Officer, whose charge it is, finds Treasure ready Coined; without
any thing there, to inform him of the several different motions that the silver
or the gold passed, before they came to that state. But, if he go on the other
side of the wall, into the room where the other machines stand and are at work;
he will then discern that every one of them, which considered by it self might
seem a distinct complete engine, is but a serving part of the whole, whose
office is to make money: and that, for this work any one of them, separated
from the rest, ceases to be the part of a mint, and the whole is malm'd and
destroyed.

Now, let us apply the consideration of these different kinds of Engines to the
natures of the bodies we treat of. Which, I doubt 4. The two former engines and
some other comparisons applied, to express the two several sorts of living
creatures.
not, would fit much better, were they lively and exactly described: But it is
so long since I saw them, and I was then so very young, that I retain but a
confused and cloudy remembrance of them, Especially, of the mint at Segovia, in
the which there are many more particulars then I have touched; as, convenience
for refining the ore or metal, and then casting it into ingots, and driving
them into rods, and such like: to all which there is little help of hands
requisite, more then to apply the matter duly at the first. But, what have I
said of them is enough, to illustrate what I aim at; and though I should err
in the particulars, it is no great matter; for, I intend not to deliver the
history of them; but only, out of the remembrance of such noteful and
artificial masterpieces, to frame a model, in their phancies that shall read
this, of something like them, whereby they may, with more ease, make a right
conception of what we are handling.

Thus then, all sorts of plants, both great and small, may be compared to our
first engine of the waterwork at Toledo. For in them all the motion, we can
discern, is of one part transmitting to the next to it the juice received from
that immediately before it: so that it has one constant course, from the root
(which sucks it from the earth) to the top of the highest spring; in which if
it should be intercepted and stopped by any maiming of the bark (the channel it
ascends by), it would there break out and turn into drops, or gum, or some such
other substance as the nature of the plant requires; and all that part of it to
which none of this juice can ascend would dry and wither and grow dead.

But Sensible living creatures we may fitly compare to the second machine of
the Mint at Segovia. For in them, though every part and member be as it were a
complete thing of it self; yet every one requires to be directed and put on in
its motion by another: and they must all of them (though of very different
natures and kinds of motion) conspire together, to effect any thing that may be
for the use and service of the whole. And thus we find in them perfectly the
nature of a mover and a moveable: each of them moving differently from one
another, and framing to themselves their own motions in such sort as is most
agreeable to their nature; when that part which sets them on work has stirred
them up.

And now, because these parts (the movers and the moved) are parts of one
whole; we call the enter thing Automatum or se^movens, or a Living Creature.
Which also may be fitly compared to a Joyner, or a Painter, or other craftsman;
that had his tools so exactly fitted about him, as, when he had occasion to do
any thing in his trade, his tool for that action were already in the fittest
position for it to be made use of: so as, without removing himsef from the
place where he might sit environed with his tools, he might, by only pulling of
some little cords, either apply the matter to any remote tool, or any of his
tools to the matter he would work upon; according as he finds the one or the
other more convenient for performance of the actions he intends.

Whereas in the other, there is no variety of motions; but one and the same goes
quite through the body, from one end of it to the other. and the passage of the
moisture through it, from one part to another next (which is all the motion it
has), is, in a manner, but like the rising of water in a Still; which by heat
is made to creep up by the sides of the glass, and from thence runs through the
nose of the Limbeck, and falls into the receiver. So that, if we will say that
a Plant lives, or that the whole moves it self, and every part moves another;
it is to be understood in afar more imperfect manner, then when we seak of an
Animal: and the same words are attributed to both, in a kind of equivocal:
sense. But, by the way I must note, that under the title of Plants, I include
not Zoophytes or Plant Animals; that is, such creatures as, though they go not
from place to place, and so cause a local motion of their whole substance, yet
in their parts they have a distinct and articulate motion.

But, to leave comparisons, and come to the proper nature of the things. Let us
frame a conception, that, not far under the superficies of the earth, there
were gathered together diverse parts of 7. How plants are framed.
little mixed bodies, which in the whole sum were yet but little: and that this
little mass had some excess of fire in it; such as we see in wet Hay, or in
must of wine, or in woort of beer, and that withal, the drought of it were in
so high a degree, as this heat should not find means (being too much
compressed) to play his game: and that, lying there in the bosom of the earth,
it should, after some little time, receive its expected and desired drink,
through the benevolence of the heaven; by which it being moistened, and thereby
made more pliable and tender and easy to be wrought upon, the little parts of
fire should break loose, and, finding this moisture a fit subject to work upon,
should drive it into all the parts of the little mass, and digesting there
should make the mass swel. Which action, taking up long time for its
performance, in respect of the small increase of bulk made in the mass by the
swelling of it, could not be hindered by the pressing of the earth, though lying
never so weightily upon it: according to the maxim we have above delivered,
that any little force, be it never so little, it is able to overcome any great
resistance, be it never so powerful; if the force multiply the time it works
in, sufficiently to equalize the proportions of the agent and the resistant.

This increase of bulk and swelling of the lettle mass will, of its own nature,
be toward all sides, by reason of the fire and heat that occasions it (whose
motion is on every side, from the center to the circu^ference): but it will be
most efficacious upwards, toward the air, because the resistance is least that
way; both by reason of the little thickness of the earth over it, as also by
reason that the uper part of the earth lies very loose and is exceeding porous,
through the continual operation of ^e Sun, and falling of rain upon it. It
cannot choose therefore but mount to the air; and the same cause that makes it
do so presses, at the same time, the lower parts of the mass downwards. But,
what ascends to the air must be of the hotter and more moist parts of the
fermenting mass; and what goes downwards must be of his harder and drier parts,
proportionate to the contrary motions of fire and earth, which predominate in
these two kinds of parts, Now, this that is pushed upwards comcoming above
ground, and being there exposed to Sun and wind, contracts thereby a hard and
rough skin on its outside; but within is more tender: in this sort it defends
it self from outward injuries of weather, whiles it mounts; and by thrusting
other parts down into the earth, it holds it self steadfast, that, although the
wind may shake it, yet it cannot overthrow it. The greater this Plant grows,
the more juice daily accrews to it, and the heat is increased; and
consequently, the greater abundance of humors is continually sent up. Which
when it begins to clog at the top, new humors pressing upwards forces a breach
in the skin: and so a new piece, like the main stem, is thrust out and begins
on the sides; which we call a Branch. Thus is our Plant amplified; till nature,
not being able still to breed such strong issues, falls to works of less
labor, and pushes forth the most elaborate part of the plants juice into more
tender substances, but especially, at the ends of the branches, where abundant
humor, but at the first not well concocted, grows into the shape of a Button;
and more and better concocted humor succeeding, it grows softer and softer
(the Sun drawing the subtilest parts outward), excepting what the coldness of
the air and the roughness of the wind harden into an outward skin. So then, the
next parts to the skin are tender; but the very middle of this button must be
hard and dry, by reason that the Sun from without, and the natural heat within,
drawing and driving out the moisture and extending it from the center, must
needs leave the more earthy parts much shrunk up and hardened by their
evaporating out from them: which hardening being an effect of fire within and
without, that bakes this hard substance, incorporates much of it self with it;
as we have formerly declared in the making of salt by force of fire. This
button, thus dilated and brought to this pass, we call the Fruit of the Plant:
whose harder part encloses oftentimes another, not so hard as dry. The reason
whereof is, because the outward hardness permits no moisture to soake, in any
abundance, through it; and then, that which is enclosed in it must needs be
much dried; though not so much, but that it still retains the common nature of
the plant. This drought makes these inner parts to be like a kind of dust; or
at least, such as may be easily dried into dust, when they are bruised out of
the husk that incloses them: And, in every parcel of this dust, the nature of
the whole resides, as it were, contracted into a small quantity. For, the juice
which was first in the button, and had passed from the root through the
manifold varieties of the diverse parts of the plant, and suffered much
concoction, partly from the Sun, and partly from the inward heat imprisoned in
that harder part of the fruit, is, by these passages strainings and
concoctions, become at length to be like a tincture extracted out of the whole
plant; and and is at last dried up into a kind of magistery. This we call the
Seed: which is of a fit nature, by being buried in the earth and dissolved with
humor, to renew and reciprocate the operation we have thus described. And
thus, you have the formation of a Plant.

But a Sensitive Creature being compared to a Plant, as a plant is to mixed
body; you cannot but conceive that he must be 8. How Sensitive Creatures are
formed.
compounded, as it were, of many plants; in like sort as a plant is of many
mixed bodies. But so, that all the Plants, which concur to make one Animal, are
of one kind of nature and cognation: and besides, the matter of which such
diversity is to be made, must of necessity be more humid and figurable, then
that of an ordinary plant; and the Artificer which works and moulds it, must be
more active. Wherefore, we must suppose that the mass, of which an Animal is to
be made, must be actually liquid: and the fire that works upon it, must be so
powerful, that, of its own nature, it may be able to convert this liquid matter
into such breaths and steams, as we see use to rise from water, when the Sun or
fire works upon it. Yet, if the mass were altogether as liquid as water, it
would vanish away by heat boiling it, and be dried up; therefore, it must be of
such a convenient temper, that, although in some of its parts it be fluid and
apt to run, yet by others it must be held together; as we see that unctuous
things for the most part are; which will swell by heat, but not fly away.

So then, if we imagine a great heat to be imprisoned in such a liquor; and
that it seeks by boiling to break out, but that the solidness and viscousness
of the substance will not permit it to evaporate: it cannot choose but comport
it self in some such sort as we see butter or oil in a drying pan over the
fire, when it rises in bubbles; but much more efficaciously. For, their body is
not strong enough to keep in the heat, and therefore those bubbles fall again;
whereas, if it were, those bubbles would rise higher and higher, and stretch
themselves longer and longer (as when the Soap-boylers boil a strong unctuous
lie into Soap), and every one of them would be as it were a little brook whereof
the channel would be the enclosing substance, and the inward smoke that extends
it might be compared to the water of it: as when a glass is blown out by fire
and air into a long figure.

Now we may remember, how we have said, where we treated of the Production and
Resolution of Mixed bodies, that there are two sorts of liquid substantial
parts, which by the operation of fire are sent out of the body it works upon;
the watery, and the oily parts. For, thouh there appear sometimes some very
subtle and Ethereal parts of a third kind (which are the Aquae Ardentes, or
borning spirits;) yet in such a close distilling of circulation as this is,
they are not severed by themselves, but accompany the rest: and especially the
watery parts, which are of a nature, that the rising Ethereal spirits easily
mingle with, and extend themselves in it; whereby the water becomes more
efficacious, and the spirit less fugitive.

Of these liquid parts which the fire sends away, the watery ones are the first,
as being the easiest to be raised: the oily parts rise more difficultly, and
therefore come last. And in the same manner it happens in this emission of
brooks; the watery and oily steams will each of them fly into different reservs:
and if there arrive to them abundance of their own quality, each of them must
make a substance of its own nature; by by settling in a convenient place, and by
due concoction. Which substance after it is made and confirmed, if more
humidity and heat press it, will again break forth into other little channels.
But, when the watery and oily parts are boiled away, there remain yet behind
other more solid and fixed parts, and more strongly incorporated with fire then
either of these: which yet cannot dry up into a fiery salt, because a
continual accession of humor keeps them always flowing; and so they become
like a cauldron of boiling fire. Which must propagate it self as wide as either
of the other; since the activity of it must needs be greater then theirs (as
being the source of motion to them) and that there wants not humidity for it to
extend it self by.

And thus you see three roots of three diverse plants, all in the same plant,
proceeding by natural resolution from one primitive source. Whereof that which
is most watery is fittest to fabricate the body and common outside of the
triformed plant: since, water is the most figurable principle in nature, and
most susceptible of multiplication and by its cold is easiest to be hardened,
and therefore fittest to resist the injuries of enemy-bodies that may infest it.
The oily parts are fittest for the continuance and solidity of the plant: for,
we see that viscuosity and oyliness hold together the parts where they abound;
and they are slowly wasted by fire, but conserve and are an aliment to the fire
that consumes them. The parts of the third kind are fittest for the
conservation of heat: which, though in them it be too violent, yet is necessary
for working upon other parts, and maintaining a due temper in them.

And thus we have armed our plant with three sorts of rivers or brooks to run
through him, with as many different streams: the one of a gentle balsamike
oil; another, of streaming fire; and the third, of a con-natural and cooler
water to irrigate and temper him. The streams of water (as we have said) must
run through the whole fabric of this triformed plant: and because it is not a
simple water, but warm in a good degree, and as it were a middle substance
betwixt water and air (by reason of the ardent volatile spirit that is with
it), it is of a fit nature to swell, as air does; and yet withal to resist
violence in a convenient degree, as water does. Therefore, if from its source
nature sends abundance into any one part, that part must swell and grow thicker
and shorter; and so must be contracted that way which nature has ordered it.
Whence we perceive a means, by which nature may draw any part of the outward
fabric which way soever she is pleased, by set instruments for such an effect.
But, when there is no motion, or but little, in these pipes, the standing
stream, that is in a very little, though long, channel, must needs be troubled
in its whole body; if any one part of it be pressed upon, so as to receive
thereby any impression: and therefore whatever is done upon it, though at the
very furthest end of it, makes a commotion and sends an impression up to its
very source. Which appearing, by our former d scourse, to be the origin of
particular and accasional motion; it is obvious to conceive how it is apt to be
moved and wrought by such an impression, to set on foot the beginning of any
motion; which by natures providence is convenient for the plant, when such an
impression is made upon it.

And thus you see this plant has the virtue both of sense or feeling; that is,
of being moved and effected by extern objects, lightly striking upon it; as
also of moving it self, to or from such an object; according as nature shall
have ordained. Which in sum is, that This Plant is a Sensitive Creature,
composed of three sources, the Heart, the Brain, and the Liver; whose
offsprings are the Arteries, the Nervs, and the Veins: which are filled with
Vital Spirits, with Animal Spirits, and with Blood; and by these the Animal is
heated, nourished, and made partaker of Sense and Motion.

Now, refering the Particular motions of Living Creatures to another time: we
may observe, that both kinds of them, as well Vegetables as Animals, agree in
the nature of sustaining themselves in the three common actions of generation,
nutrition, and augmentation; which are the beginning, the progress, and the
conserving of life. To which three we may add the (not so much action as)
passion of Death; and of Sickness or decay, which is the way to death.

CHAP. XXIV. A more particular survey of the generation of Animals, in which is
discovered what part of the Animal is first generated.
TO begin then with examining how Living Creatures are in* gender'd: our main
question shall be, Whether they be 1. The opinion that the seed contains
formally every part of the parent.
framed entirely at once; or successively, one part after another? And, if this
latter way; which part first? Upon the discussion of which, all that concerns
generation will be explicated; as much as concerns our purpose in hand. To
deduce this from its origin, we may remember how our Masters tell us, that,
when any living creature is past the heat of its augmentation or growing; the
superfluous nourishment settles it self in some appointed place of the body, to
serve for the production of some other. Now it is evident, that this
superfluity comes from all parts of the body, and may be said to contain in it,
after some sort, the perfection of the whole living creature. Be it how it
will, it is manifest that the living creature is made of this superfluous
moisture of the parent: which, according to the opinion of some, being
compounded of several parts derived from the several limbs of the parent, those
parts, when they come to be fermented in convenient heat and moisture, take
their posture and situation, according to the posture and disposition of parts
that the living creature had from whence they issued; and then they growing
daily greater and solider (the effects of moisture and heat,) at length become
such a creature as that was, from whence they had their origin.

Which an accident, that I remember, seems much to confirm. It was of a Cat,
that had it is, tail cut off when it was very young: which Cat happening
afterward to have young ones, half the kitlings proved without tails, and the
other half had them in an ordinary manner; as if nature could supply but on one
partners side, not on both. And another particular, that I saw when I was at
Argiers, makes to this purpose: which was a woman that having two thumbs upon
the left hand; four daughters that she had all resembled her in the same
accident, and so did a little child, a girl of her eldest daughters; but none
of her sons. Whiles I was there, I had a particular curiosity to see them all:
and though it be not easily permited to Christans, to speak familiarly with
Mohammedan women; yet the condition I was in there, and the civillity of the
Basha, gave me the opportunity of full view and discourse with them. And the
old woman told me, that her mother and grandmother had been in the same manner.
But, for them it rests upon her credit: the others I saw my self.

But the opinion which these accidents seem to support, though at the first
view it seems smoothly to satisfy our inquiry, and 2. The former opinion
rejected.
fairly to compass the making of a living creature; yet, looking further into
it, we shall find it fall exceeding short of its promising, and meet with such
difficulties, as it cannot overcome. For first, let us cast about how this
compound of several parts, that servs for the generation of a new living
creature, can be gathered from every part and member of the parent: so to carry
with it in little the complete nature of it. The meaning hereof must be, that
this superfluous aliment either passes through all and every little part and
particle of the parents body; and in its passage receives something from them:
or else, that it receives only from all similiar and great parts.

The former seems impossible; for, how can one imagine that such juice should
circulate the whole body of an Animal, and visit every atome of it, and retire
to the reserve where it is kept for generation; and no part of it remain
absolutely behind, sticking to the flesh or bones that it bedews, but that
still some part returns back from every part of the Animal? Besides, consider
those parts that are most remote from the channels which convey this juice how,
when they are fuller of nourishment then they need, the juice which overflows
from them comes to the next part and, settling there and serving it for its due
nourishment, drives back into the channel that which was betwixt the channel
and it self: so that here there is no return at all from some of the remote
parts; and much of that juice which is rejected never went far from the channel
it self. We may therefore safely conclude, that it is impossible every little
part of the whole body should remit something impregnated and imbued with the
nature of it.

But then you may peradventure say, that every similiar part does. If so, I
would ask, how it is possible that, by fermentation only, every part should
regularly go to a determinate place, to make that kind of Animal, in which
every similiar part is diffused to so great an extent? How should the nature of
flesh here become broad there round, and take just the figure of the part it is
to cover? How should a bone here be hollow, there be blady, and in another part
take the form of a rib; and those many figures which we see of bones? And the
like we might ask of every other similiar part; as, of the veins, and the rest.
Again, seeing it must of necessity happen, that at one time more is remitted
from one part then from another; how comes it to pass that, in the collection,
the due proportion of nature is so punctually observed? Shall we say that this
is done by some cunning artificer, whose work it is to set all these parts in
their due posture; which Aristotle attributes to the seed of the male? But this
is impossible: for, all this diversity of work is to be done at one time, and
in the same occasions; which can no more be effected by one agent, then
multiplicity can immediately proceed from unity.

But, besides that there can be no agent to dispose of the parts when they are
gathered; it is evident that a sensitive creature may be made, without any such
gathering of parts beforehand from another of the same kind: for else, how
could vermin breed out of living bodies or out of corruption? How could Rats
come to fill ships; into which never any were brought? How could Frogs be
engendered in the air? Eels, of dewy turfs, or of mud? Toads, of Ducks? Fishs of
Herns? and the like. To the same purpose, when one species or kind of Animal is
changed into another; as when a Caterpillar or a Silkworm becomes a Fly, it is
manifest, there can be no such precedent collection of parts.

And therefore, there is no remedy but we must seek out some other means and
course of generation, then this. To which we 3. The Authors opinion of this
question.
may be lead, by considering how a Living Creature is nourished and augmented:
for why should not the parts be made in Generation, of a matter lik that which
makes them in Nutrition? If they be augmented by one kind of juice that, after
several changes, turns at length into flesh and bone, and every sort of mixed
body or similiar part, whereof the sensitive creature is compounded; and that
joins it self to what it finds already made: why should not the same juice,
with the same progress of heat and moisture and other due temperaments, be
converted at first into flesh and bone; though none be formerly there to join
it self to?

Let us then conclude that the juice, which serves for nourishment of the
Animal, being more then is requisite for that service; the superfluous part of
it is drained from the rest, and reserved in a place fit for it: where by
little and little, through digestion, it gains strength and vigor and spirits
to it self, and becomes an homogeneal body (such as other simple compounds
are); which, by other degrees of heat and moisture, is changed into another
kind of substance, and that again by other temperaments, into an other. And
thus, by the course of nature, and by passing successively many degrees of
temper, and by receiving a total change in every one of them; at length an
Animal is made, of such juice as afterward serves to nourish him.

But, to bring this to pass a shorter way, and with greater facility, 4. Their
opinion refuted, who hold that every thing contains formally all things.
some have been of opinion, that all similar things, of whatever substance, are
undiscernably mixed in every thing that is: and that, to the making of any
body, out of any thing, there is no more required, but to gather together those
parts which are of that kind; and to separate, and cast away from them, all
those which are of a nature differing from them.

But, this speculation will appear a very aerie and needless one, we consider
into how many several substances the same species of a thing may be immediately
changed; or rather, how many several substances may be increased immediately
from several equal individuals of the same thing: and then take an account, how
much of each individual is gone into each substance which it has so increased,
For, if we sum up the quantities that, in the several substances, are thereby
increased; we shall find they very much exceed the whole quantity of any one of
the individuals: which should not be, if the supposition were true; for, every
individual should be but one one total, made up of the several different
similar parts, which increase the several substances, that extract out of them
what is of their own nature.

This will be better understood by an example. Suppose that a Man, a Horse, a
Cow, a Sheep, and 500 more several species of living creatures should make a
meal of Letuces. To avoid all perplexity in conceiving the argument, let us
allow that every one did eat a pound: and let us conceive another pound of this
herb to be burned; as much to be putrified under a Cabage root, and the like
under 500 plants more of diverse species. Then cast how much of every pound of
letuce is turned into the substances that are made of them, or increased by
them; as, how much ashes one pound has made, how much water has been distilled
out of another pound; how much a man has been increased by a third; how much a
horse by a fourth, how much earth by the putrefaction of a fifth pound, how
much a Cabage has been increased by a sixth: and so go over all the pounds
that have been turned into substances of different species (which may be
multiplied as much as you please.) And when you have sum'd up all these several
quantities, you find them far to exceed the quantity of one pound: which it
would not do, if every pound of Letuce were made up of several different
similiar parts actually in it, that are extracted by different substances of
the natures of those parts; and that no substance could be increased by it,
unless pats of its nature were originally in the letuce.

On the other side, if we but cast our eye back upon the principles we have
laid, where we discourse of the composition of 5. The Authors opinion
concerning the generation of Animals declared and confirmed.
bodies; we shall discern how this work of changing one thing into another,
either in nutrition, in augmention, or in generation, will appear not only
possible, but easy to be effected. For, out of them it is made evident, how the
several varieties of solid and liquid bodies, all differences of natural
qualities, all consistences, and whatever else belongs to similar bodies,
results out of the pure and single mixture of rarity and density: so that, to
make all such varieties as are necessary, there is no need of mingling or
separating any other kinds of parts; but only an art or power to mingle, in due
manner, plain rare and dense bodies one with another. Which very action, and
none other, (but with excellent method and order, such as becomes the great
Architect that has designed it) is performed in the generation of a living
creature; which is made of a substance at first far unlike what it afterward
grows to be.

If we look upon this change in gross, and consider but the two extremes; to
wit, the first substance of which a living creature made, and it self in its
full perfection: I confess, it may well seem incredible, how so excellent a
creature can derive its origin from so mean a principle, and so far remote and
differing from what it grows to be. But, if we examine it in retail, and go
along anatomizing it in every step and degree that it changes by: we shall find
that every immediate change is so near, and so palpably to be made by the
concurrent causes of the matter prepared; as we must conlude, it cannot
possibly become any other thing then just what it does become.

Take a Bean, or any other seed; and put it into the earth* and let water fall
upon it: can it be but the bean must swell? The bean swelling, can it choose but
break the skin? The skin broken, can it choose (by reason of the heat that is in
it) but push out more matter, and do that action which we may call germinating?
Can these germs choose but pierce the earth in small strings, as they are able
to make their way? Can these strings choose but be hardened, by the compression
of the earth, and by their own nature; they being the heaviest parts of the
fermented bean? And can all this be any thing else but a root? Afterward, the
heat that is in the root mingling it self with more moisture, and according to
its nature, springing upwards; will it not follow necessarily, that a tender
green substance (which we call a bud, or leaf must appear a little above the
earth: since tenderness, greenness, and ascent, are the effects of those two
principles, heat and moisture? And, must not this green substance change from
what it was at first, by the Sun and Air working upon it, as it grows higher;
till at length it hardens into a stalk? All this while, the heat in the root
sublimes up more moisture; which makes the stalk at first grow rank, and
increase in length. But, when the more volatile part of that warm juice is
sufficiently depured and sublimed; will it not attempt to thrust it self out
beyond the stalk, with much vigor and smartness? And, as soon as it meets with
the cold air in its eruption, will it not be stopped and thick'ned? And, new
parts flocking still from the root; must they not clog that issue, and grow
into a button, which will be a bud? This bud being hardened at the sides, by
the same causes which hardened the stalk, and all the while the inward heat
still streaming up, and not enduring to be long enclosed, especially when, by
its being stopped, it multiplyes it self), will it not follow necessarily, that
the tender bud must cleave and give way to that spiritual juice; which, being
purer then the rest (through its great sublimation), shows it self in a purer
and nobler substance than any that is yet made, and so becomes a flower? From
hence, if we proceed as we have begun and weigh all circumstances, we shall see
evidently, that another substance must needs succeed the flower; which must be
hollow and contain a fruit in it: and that this fruit must grow bigger and
harder. And so, to the last period of the generation of new beans.

Thus, by drawing the third carefully along through your fingers, and staying
at every knot to examine how it is tied; you see, that this difficult progress
of the generation of living creatures is obvious enough to be comprehended: and
that the steps of it are possible to be set down; if one would but take the
pains and afford the time that is necessary (less then that Philosopher, who
for so many years gave himself wholly up to the single observing of the nature
of Bees) to note diligently all the circumstances in every change of it. In
every one of which the thing that was becoms absolutely a new thing; and is
endew'd with new properties and qualities, different from those it had before;
as Physicians, from their certain experience, assure us. And yet every change
is such, as, in the ordinary and general course of nature, (wherein nothing is
to be considered, but the necessary effects following out such Agents working
upon such patients, in such circumstances) it is impossible that any other thing
should be made of the precedent, but that which is immediately subsequent to it.

Now, if all this orderly succession of mutations be necessarily made in a
Bean, by force of sundry circumstances and external accidents: why may it not
be conceived, that the like is also done in sensible creatures; but, in a more
perfect manner, they being perfecter substances? Surely the progress we have
set down is much more reasonable, then to conceive that, in the meal of the
Bean, are contained, in little, several similar substances; as, of a root, of a
leaf, a stalk, a flower, a cod, fruit, and the rest: and that every one of
these, being from the first still the same that they shall be afterward, do
but suck in more moisture from the earth, to swel and enlarge themselves in
quantity. Or that, in the seed of the male, there is already in act the
substance of flesh, of bone, of sinews, of veins, and the rest of those several
similar parts, which are found in the body of an Animal; and that they are but
extended to their due magnitude, by the humidity drawn from the mother; without
receiving any substantial mutation, from what they were originally in the seed.

Let us then confidently conclude, that all generation is made of a fitting,
but remote, homogenial compounded substance; upon which outward Agents working,
in the due course of nature change it into another substance, quite different
from the first, and make it less homogenal then the first was. And other
circumstances and agents change this second into a third; that third into a
fourth; and so onwards, by successive mutations, that still make every new
thing become less homogeneal then the former was, according to the nature of
heat mingling more and more different bodies together) till that substance be
produced, which we consider in the period of all these mutations.

And this is evident out of many experiences. As for example, in Trees, the
bark, which is opposed to the North wind, is harder and thicker then the
contrary side which is opposed to the south; and a great difference will appear
in the grain of the wood; even so much, that skilful people will, by feeling
and seeing a round piece of the wood after the Tree is felled, tell you in what
situation it grew, and which way each side of that piece looked. And Josephus
Acosta writes of a Tree in America, that, on the one side being situated
toward great hills, and on the other exposed to the hot Sun; the one half of
it flourishes at one time of the year, and the other half at the opposite
season. and some such like may be the cause of the strange effects we sometimes
see of trees, flourishing or bearing leaves at an unseasonable time of the
year; as in particular, in the famous Oak in the New Forest, and in some
others in our Island: in which peradventure the Soil they grow in may do the
same effect, as the winds and Sun did in the Tree that Acosta mentions. For, we
daily see, how some soiles are so powerful over some kind of corn, that they
will change the very nature of it; so that, you shall reap Oats or Rye after
you have sown Wheat there.

Which shows evidently that, since the outward circumstances can make the parts
or the whole of any substance become different from what they were at first;
generation is not made by aggregation of like parts to presupposed like ones,
nor by a specifical worker within; but, by the compounding of a seminary matter
with the juice which accrues to it from without, and with the streams of
circumstant bodies; which, by an ordinary course of nature, are regularly
imbibed in it by degrees, and at every degree change it into a different thing,
such as is capable to result out of the present compound, (as we have said
before) till it arrive to its full perfection.

Which yet is not the utmost period of natures changes; for, from that, (for
example, from corn or an Animal) it carries it on, still changing it, to be
meal or a Cadaver, from thence, to be That one substance is changed into
another.
bread or dirt, after that, to be blood or grass. And so, still turning about
her wheel (which suffers nothing to remain long in the state it is in), she
changes all substances from one into another: And, by reiterated revolutions,
makes in time every thing of every thing. As when of mud she makes Tadpoles,
and Frogs of them, and afterward mud again of the Frog: or when she runs a
like progress, from Earth to Worms, and from them to Flies, and the like; so
changing one Animal into such another, as, in the next precedent step, the
matter in those circumstances is capable of being changed into; or rather (to
say better) must necessarily be changed into.

To confirm this by experience. I have been assured, by one who was very exact
in noting such things, that he once observed in Spain, in the Spring season,
how a stick, lying in a moist place, grew, in tract of time, to be most of it a
rotten durty matter; and that, at the dirty end of the stick, there began a
rude head to be formed of it by little and little; and, after a while, some
little legs began to discover themselves near this unpolished head, which daily
grew more and more distinctly shaped. And then, for a pretty while (for it was
in a place where he had the convenience to observe daily the progress of it,
and no body came near to stir it in the whole course of it) he could discern
where it ceased to be a body of a living creature, and where it began to be
dead stick or dirt; all in one continuate quantity or body. But, every day the
body grew longer and longer, and more legs appeared; till at length, when he
saw the Animal almost finished, and near separating it self from the rest of
the stick; he stayed then by it, and saw it creep away in a Caterpillar,
leaving the stick and dirst, as much wanting of its first length, as the worms
body took up. Peradventure, the greatest part of such creatures makes their way
by such steps into the world. But, to be able to observe their progress thus
distinctly, as this Gentleman did, happens not frequently.

Therefore, to satisfy our selves herein, it were well we made our remarks in
some creatures, that might be continually in our 7. Concerning the hatching of
Chickens, and the generation of the other Animals.
power to observe in them the course of nature, every day and hour. Sir John
Heydon, the Lieutenant of his Majesty's Ordnance (that generous and knowing
Gentleman, and consummate Soldier both in Theory and Practice) was the first
that instructed me how to do this; by means of a furnace, so made as to imitate
the warmth of a sitting Hen. In which you may lay several eggs to hatch; and by
breaking them at several ages, you may distinctly observe every hourly mutation
in them, if you please. The first will be, that on one side you shall find a
great resplendent clearness in the white. After a while, a little spot of red
matter, like blood, will appear in the midst of that clearness, fast'ned to the
yolk: which will have a motion of opening and shutting; so as sometimes you will
see it, and straight again it will vanish from your sight, and indeed, at first
it is so little, that you cannot see it, but by the motion of it: for, at every
pulse, as it opens you may see it, and immediately again it shuts in such sort,
as it is not to be discerned. From this red speck, after a while, there will
stream out a number of little (almost imperceptible) red veins. At the end of
some of which, in time, there will be gathered together a knot of matter, which
by little and little will take the form of a head; and you will ere long begin
to discern eyes and a beak in it. All this while the first read spot of blood
grows bigger and solider: till at length it becomes a fleshy substance, and, by
its figure may easily be discerned to be the heart; which as yet has no other
enclosure but the substance of the egg. But, by little and little, the rest of
the body of an Animal is framed, out of those red veins which stream out all
about from the heart. And in process of time, that body encloses the heart
within it by the chest; which grows over on both sides, and in the end meets,
and closes it self fast together. After which this little creature soon fills
the shell, by converting into several parts of it self all the substance of the
egg. And then growing weary of so straight a habitation, it breaks prison, and
comes out a perfectly formed Chicken.

In like manner, in other creatures (which in latin are called Vivipera,
because their young ones are quick in their mothers Womb) we have, by the
relation of that learned and exact searcher into nature, Dr. Harvy; that the
seed of the male, after his accoupling with the female, does not remain in her
womb, in any sensible bulk: but (as it seems) evaporates and incorporates it
self, either into the body of the Womb, or rather into some more interior part;
as, into the seminary vessels. Which, being a solid substance, much resembling
the nature of the Females seed, is likely to suck up, by the mediation of the
Females seed, the Male seed incorporated with it and, by incorporation, turned
as it were into a vapor: in such sort as we have formerly explicated, how the
body of a Scorpion or Viper draws the poison out of the wound. And after a
certain time (Dr. Harvy noted the space of six weeks or two months in Does or
Hindes) these seeds distill again into the Womb; and by little and little
clarify in the midst, and a little red speck appears in the cencer of the
bright clearness; as we said before of the egg.

But we should be too blame to leave our Reader without 8. From whence it
happens, that the deficiences or excresences of the parents body are often seen
in their children.
clearing that difficulty, which cannot choose but have sprung up in his
thoughts; by occasion of the relations we made, at the entrance into this
point, concerning the Cat whose kitlings were half with tails and half without:
and the woman's daughters at Argiers, that had, as well as their mother,
excresences upon their left thumbs, imitating another lesser thumb; and the
like effects whenever they happen, which they do frequently enough.

Let him therefore remember, how we have determined that generation is made of
the blood: which, being dispersed into all the parts of the body, to irrigate
every one of them, and convey fitting spirits into them from their source or
shop where they are forged; so much of it as is superabundant to the nourishing
of those parts is sent back again to the heart, to recover the warmth and
spirits it has lost by so long a journey. By which perpetual course of a
continued circulation, it is evident that the blood, in running thus through all
the parts of the body, must needs receive some particular concoction or
impression from every one of them. And by consequence, if there be any
specifical virtue in one part, which is not in another; then the blood,
returning from thence, must be endued with the virtue of that part. And the
purest part of this blood, being extracted like a quintessence out of the whole
mass, is reser'd in convenient receptacles or vessels, till there be use of it,
and is the matter or seed, of which a new Animal is to be made: in whom will
appear the effect of all the specifical virtues drawn by the blood in its
iterated courses, by its circular motion through all the several parts of the
parents body.

Whence it follows, that, if any part be wanting in the body whereof this seed
is made, or be superabundant in it; whose virtue is not in the rest of the
body: the virtue of that part cannot be in the blood, or will be too strong in
the blood, and by consequence, it cannot be at all, or it will be too much, in
the seed. And, the effect proceeding from the seed, that is, the young Animal,
will come into the world savouring of that origin; unless the Mother's seed
supply or temper what the Father's was defective or superabundant in, or
contrariwise the Father's correct the errors of the Mother's.

But peradventure, the Reader will tell us, that such a specifical 9. The
difference between the Authors opinion, an^ ^he former (...).
virtue cannot be gotten by concoction of the blood, or by any petended
impression in it; unless some little particles of the nourished part remain in
the blood, and return back with it; according to that maxim of Geber, Quod non
ingreditur non immutat, no body can change another unless it enter into it,
and, mixing it self with it, become one with it. And that so in effect, by this
explication, we fall back into the opinion which we rejected.

To this I answer, that the difference is very great between that opinion and
ours; as will appear evidently, if you observe the two following assertions of
theirs. First they affirm, that a living creature is made m^erly by the
assembling together of similar parts, which were hidden in those bodies from
whence they are extracted in generation: whereas we say that blood, coming to a
part to irrigate it, is, by its passage through it and some little stay in it,
and by its frequent returns thither, at length transmuted into the nature of
that part; and thereby the specifical virtues of every part grow greater, and
are more diffused and extended.

Secondly, they say, that the Embryon is actually formed in the seed; though in
such little parts as it cannot be discerned, till each part have enlarged and
increased it self, by drawing to it from the circumstant bodies more substance
of their own nature. But we say, that there is one Homogenal substance made of
the blood, which has been in all parts of the body; and this is the seed:
which contains not in it any figure of the Animal from which it is refined, or
of the Animal into which it has a capacity to be turned (by the addition of
other substances); though it have in it the virtues of all the parts it has
often run through.

By which term of specifike virtues, I hope, we have said enough in sundry
places of this discourse, to keep men from conceiving that we mean any such
inconceivable quality, as modern Philosophers too frequently talk of; when they
know not what they say or think, nor can give any account of. But that it is
such degrees and numbers of rare and dense parts mingled together, as
constitute a mixed body of such a temper and nature: which degrees and
proportions of rare and dense parts, and their mixture together, and
incorporating into one Homogeneal substance, is the effect resulting from the
operations of the exterior agent, that cuts, imbibes, kneads, and boyls it to
such a temper. Which exterior agent, in this case, is each several part of the
Animals body, that this juice or blood runs through; and that has a particular
temper belonging to it, resulting out of such a proportion of rare and dense
parts, as we have even now spoken of; and can no more be withheld from
communicating its temper to the blood, that first soaks into it and soon after
drains away again from it (according as other succeeding parts of blood drive
it on): then a mineral channel can choose but communicate its virtue to a stream
of water that runs through it, and is continually grating off some of the
substance of the Mineral earth, and dissolving it into it self.

But, to go on with our intended discourse. The seed, thus imbued 10 That the
heart is imbued with the general specifike virtues of the whole body: whereby is
confirmed the doctrine of the two former Paragraphes.
with the specifical virtues of all the several parts of the parents body,
meeting in a fit receptacle the other parents seed, and being there duly
concocted, becomes first a heart. Which heart, in this tender beginning of a
new Animal, contains the several virtues of all the parts, that afterward will
grow out of it and be in the future Animal: in the same manner as the heart of
a complete Animal: contains in it the specificke virtues of all the several
parts of its own body, by reason of the bloods continual resorting to it in a
circle from all parts of its body, and its being nourished by that juice, to
supply the continual consumption which the extreme heat of it must needs
continually occasion in its own substance; whereby the heart becoms in a manner
the Compendium or abridgment of the whole Animal.

Now, this heart, in the growing Embryon, being of the nature of fire; as, on
the one side, it streams out its hot parts; so, on the other, it sucks oil or
fuel to nourish it self out of the adjacent moist parts: which matter
aggregated to it being sent abroad, together with the other hot parts that
steam from it; both of them together stay and settle, as soon as they are out
of the reach of that violent heat, that would not permit them to thicken or
rest. And there they grow into such a substance, as is capable to be made of
such a mixture; and are linked to the heart by some of those strings that steam
out from it (for those steams likewise harden, as we showed more particularly,
when we discoursed of the tender stalks of plants): and in a word, this becoms
some other part of the Animal. Which thus increases by order, one part being
made after another; till the whole living creature be completely framed.

So that now you see, how mainly their opinion differs from ours: since, they
say that there is actually in the seed a complete living creature; for, what
else is a living creature, but bones in such parts, nerves in such others,
blood and humors contained in such and such places, all as in a living
creature? All which they say. But, we make the seed to be nothing else but one
mixed body, of one homogeneal nature throughout; consisting of such a
multiplicity of rare and dense parts, so balanced and proportioned in number
and magnitude of those parts, which are evenly shuffled and alike mingled in
every little parcel of the whole substance: in such sort, that the operation of
nature upon this seed, may, in a long time and with a due process, bring out
such figures, situation, and qualities (as fluidity, consisence, dryness, and
the like), which, by much mixstion and consequent alteration, may in the end
become such as constitute a living creature of such a kind. And thus it appears
that, although other substances and liquors and steams are, from time to time,
mingled with the seed, and then with the heart, and afterward with the other
parts, as they grow on and increase; yet the main virtue of the ensuing Animal
is first in the seed, and afterward in the heart.

Whence the reason is evident, why both defects and excrescences pass sometimes
from the parents to the children; to wit, when nothing supplies the defect or
corrects the exorbitancy. Rather, after this which we have said, the difficulty
will appear greater, in that such accidents are not always hereditary from the
parents; but happen only now and then, some rare times. But, the same grounds
we have laid will likewise solve this objection. For, seeing that the heart of
the Animal, from whence the seed receives its proper nature (as we have
declared) is impregnated with the specific virtue of each several part of the
body; it cannot be doubted but that the heart will supply for any defect happened
in another part, after it has been imbued with that virtue, and is grown to a
firmness and vigorous consistence, with that virtue molded and deeply imbibed
into the very substance of it. And although the heart should be tincted, from
its first origin, with an undue virtue from some part (as it seems to have
been in the mother of those daughters that had two thumbs upon one hand); yet
it is not necessary that all the offspring of that parent should be formed
after that model; for, the other partners seed may be more efficacious and
predominant in the geniture, over the faulty seed of the other parent; and then
it will supply for and correct the others deviation from the general rule of
nature. Which seems to be the cause of that woman's male children; for, in them
the fathers seed being strongest, all their fingers imitated the regularity of
their Fathers: whereas the daughters (whose sex implies that the fathers seed
was less active) carried upon some of theirs the resemblance of their mothers
irregularity.

And, in confirmation of this doctrine, we daily see, that the Children of
Parents who have any of their noble parts much and long distempred, whereby
there must be a great distemper in the blood (which is made and concocted by
their assistance), seldom fail of having strong inclinations to the distempers
and diseases that either of their parents were violently subject to. Scarce any
Father or Mother dies of the Consumption of the Lungs, but their children
inherit that disease in some measure: the like is of the Stone; the like of the
Gout, the like of diseases of the brain, and of sundry others; when they
infested the parents with any notable eminency. For the blood, coming
continually to the heart from such ill-affected parts, by its circulation
through the whole body, must needs in process of time alter and change the
temper of the heart; and then both the heart gives a tainted impression to the
blood that must be boiled into seed, and the parts themselves communicate their
debilites and distempers to it: so that it is no wonder, if the seed partake of
such depraved qualities; since it is a maxim among Physicians, that subsequent
concoctions can never amend or repair the faults of the precedent ones.

Having waded thus far into this matter, and all experience agreeing that the
whole Animal is not formed at once; I conceive 11 That the heart is the first
part generated in a living creatures.
there can be no great difficulty in determining what part of it is first
generated: which we have already said to be the heart but peradventure the
Reader may expect some more particular and immediate proof of it. It Is evident,
that all the motions and changes we have observed in the Egg and in the Do
proceed from heat: and it is as certain, that heat is greatest in the center of
it; from whence it disperses it self to less and less. It must then necessarily
follow, that the part in which heat most abounds, and which is the interior
fountain of it from whence (as from a stock of their own) all the other parts
derive theirs, must be formed first; and the others successively after it:
according as they partake more or less of this heat; which is the Architect
that moulds and frames them all. Undoubtedly this can be none other but the
heart: whose motion and manner of working evidently appears in the twinkling
of the first red spot (which is the first change) in the Egg, and in the first
matter of other living creatures: Yet I do not intend to say, that the heart is
perfectly framed, and completely made up, with all its parts and instruments;
before any other part be begun to be made: but only the most virtuous part;
and, as it were, the marrow of it, which servs as a shop or hot forge to mold
spirits in; from whence they are dispersed abroad to form and nourish other
parts that stand in need of them to that effect.

The shootings or little red strings that stream out from it must surely be
arteries: through which the blood issuing from the heart, and there made and
imbued with the nature of the seed, runs; till encountering with fit matter, it
engrosses it self into brain, liver, lights, etc. From the brain chiefly grows
the marrow and, by consequent, the bones containing it, (which seem to be
originally but the outward part of the marrow, baked and hardened into a strong
crust by the great heat that is kept in): as also the sinews, which are the
next principal bodies of strength, after the bones. The marrow being very hot
dries the bones; and yet with its actual moisture it humects and nourishes them
too, in some sort. The spirits that are sent from the brain do the like to the
sinews. And lastly, the arteries and veins, by their blood, cherish and bedew
the flesh. And thus the whole living creature is begun, framed and made up.

CHAP. XXV. How a Plant or Animal c^mes to that figure it has.
BUt, before we go any further, and search into the operations 1. That the
figure of an Animal is produced by ordinary second causes, as well as any other
corporeal effect.
of this Animal, a wonderful effect calls our consideration to it: which is,
how a Plant or Animal comes by the figure it has, both in the whole and in
every part of it? Aristotle, after he had beaten his thoughts as far as he
could upon this question, pronounced that this effect could not possibly be
wrought by the virtue of the first qualities; but that it sprung from a more
divine origin: And most of the contemplatours of Nature, since him, seem to
agree, that no cause can be rendered of it; but that it is to be referred merely
to the specifical nature of the thing. Neither do we intend to derogate from
either of these causes: since, both Divine Providence is eminently shown, in
contriving all circumstances necessary for this work; and likewise, the first
temperament that is in the seed must needs be the principal immediate cause of
this admirable effect.

This latter then being supposed; our labor and endeavor will be to unfold
(as far as so weak and dim eyes can reach) the excellency and exactness of Gods
Providence; which cannot be enough adored, when it is reflected on and marked
in the apt laying of adequate causes to produce such a figure, out of such a
mixture first laid. From them, so artificially ranged, we shall see this
miracle of nature to proceed; and not from an immediate working of God or
nature, without convenient and ordinary instruments to mediate and effect this
configuration, through the force and virtue of their own particular natures.
Such a necessity to interest the chief workman at every turn, in particular
effects, would argue him of want of skill and providence, in the first laying
of the foundations of his designed Machine. He were an improvident Clockmaker,
that should have cast his work so, as, when it were wound up and going, it
would require the Masters hand at every hour, to make the Hammer strike upon
the Bell. Let us not then, too familiarly and irreverently, engage the Almighty
Architect's immediate handiwork in every particular effect of nature; Tali non
est dignus vindice nodu^.

But, let us take principles within our own kenning; and consider, how a body
has, of its own nature, three dimensions, (as 2. That the several figures of
bodies proceed from a defect in one of three dimensions; caused by the
circumference of accidental causes.
Mathematicians use to demonstrate): and that the variety we see of figures in
bodies proceeds out of the defect of some of these dimensions, in proportion to
the rest. As for example, that a thing be in the form of a Square Tablet; is,
for that the cause, which gave it length and breadth, could not also give it
thickness in the same proportion: for, had it been able to give profundity as
well as the other two, it had made a Cube instead of a Tablet. In like manner,
the former of a lamine, or very long square, is occasioned by some accident
which hinders the cause from giving breadth and thickness proportionable to the
length. And so, other figures are made, by reason that their causes are some
ways bound to give more of some dimension to one part then another.

As for example, when water falls out of the sky, it has all the little
corners or extancies of its body grated off by the air, as it rolls and tumbles
down in it; so that it becomes round: and continues in that form, till, settling
on some flat body (as Grass or a Leaf), it receives a little plainness, to the
proportion of his weight mastering the continuity of it. And therefore, if the
drop be great upon that plain body, it seems to be half a Sphere, or some less
portion of one: but, if it be a little drop, then the flat part of it (which is
that next the grass) is very little and undiscernable, because it has not
weight enough to press it much and spread it broad upon the grass, and so the
whole seems in a manner to be a Sphere. But, if the extern causes had pressed
upon this drop only broadways and thick ways (as when a Turner makes a round
Pillar, of a square one) then it would have proved a Cylinder; nothing working
upon it to grate off any of its length, but only the corners of the breadth and
thickness of it.

And thus you see, how the fundamental figures (upon which all the rest are
grounded) are contrived by nature: not by the work of any particular Agent that
immediately Imprints a determinate figure into a particular body, as though it
wrought it there at once, according to a foreconceiv'd design or intelligent
aim of producing such a figure in such a body; but by the concurrence of
several accidental causes, that all join in bringing the body, they file and
work upon into such a shape.

Only, we had like to have forgotten the reason and cause of the concave figure
in some parts of Plants: which, in the ordinary course of nature, we shall find
to grow from hence, That a round outside being filled with some liquor, which
makes it grow higher and higher, it happens that the succeeding causes contract
this liquor and harden the outside; and then of necessity there must be a
hollow Cylinder remaining, in lieu of the juice which before filled it. As we
see every day in corn, and in Reeds, and in Canes, and in the stalks of many
herbs: which, whilst they are tender and in their first growth, are full of
juice; and become afterward hallow and dry.

But, because this discourse may peradventure seem too much in common: it will
not be amiss to apply it to some particulars 3. The former doctrine is confirmd
by several instances.
that seem very strange. And first, let us examine how the rocking of concrete
juices (which seems to be such an admirable mystery of Nature) is performed.
Allom falls down in lumps, Saltpeter in long icicles, and common Salt in
squares: and this, not once or sometimes, now or then, but always constantly in
the same order.

The reason of these effects will easily be deduced out of what we have said.
For, if all three be dissolved in the same water, Allom, being the grossest,
falls first, and fastest, and, being of an unctious nature, the first part
which falls does not harden till the second comes to it; whereby this second
sticks to the first and crushes it down, and this is served in the same manner
by the third: and so it goes on, one part squeezing another* till what is
undermost grow hard enough to resist the weight of new falling parts; or
rather, till no more fall; but the liquor they were dissolved in is delivered
of them all, and then they harden in that figure they were compressed into.

As for Salt, which descends in the second place; that swims first upon the
water, and there gets its figure, which must be equally long and broad, because
the water is indifferent to those two positions: but its thickness is not equal
to its other two dimensions, by reason that, before it can attain to that
thickness, it grows too heavy to swim any longer, and, after it is increased to
a certain bulk, the weight of it carries it down to the bottom of the water,
and consequently it can increase no more; for, it increases by the joining of
little parts to it, as it swims on the top of the water.

The Saltpeter falls last; which being more difficult to be figured then the
other two, because it is more dry then either of them, (as consisting chiefly
of earthy and of fiery parts), is not equally increased, neither in all three,
nor in two dimensions, but has its length exceeding both its breadth and
thickness: and its lightness makes it fall last, because it requires least
water to sustain it.

To give the causes of the figures of diverse mixts, and particularly of some
precious stones (which seems to be cast by Nature in exactest moulds), would
oblige us to enter into the particular manner of their generation: which were
exceeding hard, if not impossible, for us to do, by reason that Authors have
not left us the circumstances, upon which we might ground our judgment
concerning them, so particularly described as were necessary; nor our selves
have met with the commodity of making such experiences, and of searching so
into their beds as were requisite, to determine solidly the reasons of them.
And indeed, I conceive, that oftentimes the relations which others have
recorded of their generation would rather mislead then assist us: since it is
very familiar in many men, to magnify the exactness of Nature, in framing
effects by fancy to themselves; when, to make their Wonder appear more just,
they will not fail to set off their story with all advantageous circumstances,
and help out what wants a little or comes but near the mark.

But, to come closer to our purpose; that is, to the figures of living things.
We see that the roots in the earth are all of them 4. The same doctrine applied
to plants.
figured almost in the same fashion: for the heat residing in the amidst of
them pushes every way, and thereupon, some of them become round, but others more
long then round; according to the temper of the ground, or the season of the
year, or the weather that happens: and this, not only in diverse kinds of
Roots, but even in several of the same kind. That part of the plant which
mounts upwards, for the most part, round and long; the cause whereof is evident.
For, the juice which is in the middle of it working upwards (because the
hardness of the bark will not let it out at the sides), and coming in more and
more abundance (for the reasons we have above delivered), increases that part
equally every way but upwards; and therefore it must be equally thick and broad,
and consequently round: but the length will exceed either of the other
dimensions; because the juice is driven up with a greater force, and in more
quantity then it is to the sides. Yet the broadness and thickness are not so
exactly uniform, but that they exceed a little more at the bottom then at the
top, which is occasioned, partly by the contracting of juice into a narrower
circuit, the further it is from the source; and partly by reason of the
Branches, which, shooting forth, convey away a great part of the Juice from the
main stock.

Now, if we consider the matter well, we shall find, that 4. The same doctrine
declared in leaves of trees.
what is done in the whole tree, the very same is likewise done in every little
leaf of it. For, a leaf consists of little branches shooting out from one
greater branch, which is in the middle; and again, other less branches are
derived from those second branches: and so still lesser and lesser, till they
weave themselves into a close work, as thick as that which we see women use to
fill up with Silk or Crewel, when in Tentwork they embroyder leafs or flowers
upon Canvas. And this again is covered and, as it were, glew'd over, by the
humor which, sticking to these little thrids, stops up every little vacuity,
and by the air is hardened into such a skin as we see a leaf consists of.

And thus it appears, how an account may be given of the figure of the leafs,
as well as of the figure of the main body of the whole tree: the little
branches of the leaf being proportionate in figure to the branches of the tree
itself (so that each leaf seems to be the Tree in little), and the figure of
the leaf depending of the course of these little branches; so that, if the
greatest branch of the Tree be much longer then the others, the leaf will be a
long one, but if the lesser branches spread broadways, the leaf will likewise
be a broad one; so far, as even to be notch'd at the outsides, round about it,
in great or little notches; according to the proportion of the Trees Branches.
These Leafs, when they first break out, are foulded inwards; in such sort as
the smalness and roundness of the passage in the wood, through which they
issue, constrains them to be: where nevertheless the dryness of their parts
keep them asunder; as that one leaf does not incorporate it self with another.
But, so soon as they feel the heat of the Sun (after they are broken out into
liberty), their tender branches by little and little grow more straight: the
concave parts of them drawing more toward the Sun, because he extracts and
sucks their moisture from their hinder parts into their former, that are more
exposed to his beams; and thereby the hinder parts are contracted and grow
shorter, and those before grow longer. Which, if it be in excess, makes the
leaf become crooked the contrary way; as we see in diverse flowers, and in
sundry leaves during the Summers heat: witness, the Ivy, Roses full blown.
Tulips, and all flowers in form of Bells; and indeed all kinds of flowers
whatever, when the Sun has wrought upon them to that degree we speak of, and
that their joining to their stalk, and the next parts thereto allow them scope,
to obey the impulse of those outward causes. And, when any do vary from this
rule we shall as plainly see other manifest causes producing those different
effects, as now we do those working in this manner.

As for Fruits, though we see that, when they grow at liberty upon the Tree,
they seem to have a particular figure allotted them by nature; yet in truth, it
is the ordered series of natural causes, and not an intrinsecal formative
virtue which breeds this effect: as is evident, by the great power which art
has to change their figures at pleasure, whereof you may see examples enough in
Campanella; and every curious Gardener can furnish you with store.

Out of these and such like principles, a man that would make 16. The same
applied to the bodies of Animals.
it his study (with less trouble of tediousness then that patient contemplator
of one of natures little works, the Bees; whom we mentioned a while agone)
might without all doubt, trace the causes in the growing of an Embryon; till he
discovered the reason of every bones figure, of every notable hole or passage
in them, of the Ligaments by which they are tied together, of the membranes
that cover them; and of all the other parts of the body. How, out of a first
Mass, that was soft and had no such parts distinguishable in it, every one of
them came to be formed; by contracting that Mass in one place, by dilating it
in another, by moistning it in a third, by drying it here, hard'ning it there;

-- Ut his exordia primis,
Omnia, and ipse tener hominis concreverit orbis.
till in the end this admirable machine and frame of man's body was composed and
fashioned up, by such little and almost insensible steps and degres. Which,
when it is looked upon in bulk and entirely-formed, seems impossible to have
been made, and sprung merely out of these principles; without an Intelligence
immediately working and moulding it at every turn, from the beginning to the
end.

But withal, we cannot choose but break out into an ecstasy of admiration and
hymns of praise (as great Galen did upon the like occasion), when we reverently
consider the infinite Wisdom and deep far-looking Providence of the
all-seeing Creator and Orderer of the World; in so punctually adopting such a
multitude and swarm of causes to produce, by so long a progress, so wonderful
an effect: in the whole course of which, if any one, the very least of them
all, went never so little awry, the whole fabric would be discomposed and
changed from the nature it is designed to.

Out of our short survey of which (answerable to our weak talents and slender
experience) I persuade mv self it appears 7. In what sense the Author admits
of, vis formatrix.
evident enough, that, to effect this work of generation, there needs not be
supposed a forming virtue, or Vis formatrix, of an anknown power and operation;
as those that consider things suddenly and but in gross use to put. Yet, in
discourse, for convenience and shortness of expression, we shall not quite
banish that term from all commerce with us; so that what we mean by it be
rightly understood: which is, the complex, assemblement, or chain of all the
causes, that concur to produce this effect; as they are set on foot to this end
by the great Architect and Moderatour of them, God Almighty, whose instrument
Nature is: that is, the same thing, or rather the same things, so ordered as we
have declared; but expressed and comprised under another name,

CHAP. XXVI. How motion begins in Living Creatures: And of the motion of the
Heart; circulation of the Blood; Nutrition, Augmentation, and Corruption or
Death.
BUt we must not take our leave of this subject, til we have examined, 1. From
whence proceeds the primary motion and growth in Plants.
how motion begins in living things; as well Plants as Sensative creatures. We
can readily pitch upon the part we are to make our observations in, for
retriving the origin of this primary motion: for, having concluded, that the
roots of Plants, and the hearts of Animals, are the parts of them which are
first made, and from which the forming virtue is derived to all the rest; it
were unreasonable to seek for their first motion any where else.

But, in what manner, and by what means does it begin there? For roots, the
difficulty is not great, for, the moisture of the earth pressing upon the seed,
and soaking into it, the hot parts of it, which were imprisoned in cold and dry
ones, are thereby stirred up and set on work; then they, mingling themselves with
that moisture, ferment and distend the whole seed, til, making it open and
break the skin, more juice comes in: which imcorporating it self with the heat,
those hot and now moist parts will not be contained in so narrow a room as at
the first; but, struggling to get out on all sides, and striving to enlarge
themselves, they thrust forth little parts. Which, if they stay in the earth,
grow white, and make the root; but those which ascend and make their way into
the air, being less compressed and more full of heat and moisture, turn green:
and, as fast as they grow up, new moisture coming to the root is sent up
through the pores of it; and this fails not, till the heat of the root it self
fails. For, it being the nature of heat to rarifie and elevate, there must of
necessity be caused in the earth a kind of sucking in of moisture into the root
from the next parts to it, to fill those capacities which the dilating heat
has made, that else would be empty; and to supply the rooms of those which the
heat continually sends upwards: for, the moisture of the root has a continuity
with that in the earth, and therefore they adhere together (as in a Pump, or
rather as in filtration) and follow one another, when any of them are in
motion; and still the next must needs come in and fill the room, where it finds
an empty space immediate to it. The like of which happens to the Air when we
breath: for, our lungs being like a Bladder, when we open them the air must
needs come in, to fill that capacity which else would be empty; and when we
shut them again, as in a pair of Bellows, we put it out.

This may suffice, concerning the primary motion of roots: 2. Mr. des Carts
his opinion touching the motion of the heart.
but in that of the heart, we shall find the matter not altogether so plain,
Monsieur des Carts, following herein the steps of the learned and ingenuous
Dr. Harvey, who has invented and teaches that curious and excellent Doctrine
of the Cerculation of the Blood, (as indeed, what secret of nature can be
hidden from so sharp a wit, when he applies himself to penetrate into the
bottom of it), explicates the matter much after this sort. That the heart,
within the substance of it, is like a hollow Cavern in whose bottom were an
hot stone, on which should drop as much liquor as the fiery stone could blow
into smoke; and this smoke or steam should be more then the Cave could contain,
wherefore it must break out: which to do, it presses on all sides, to get an
issue or door to let it out. It finds of two sorts, but only one kind of them
will serve it for this purpose; for the one sort of these doors opens inwards,
the other outward: which is the cause that, the more it strives to get out,
the faster it shuts the doors of the first kind; but, by the same means, it
beats back the other doors, and so gets out.

Now, when it is gone quite out of this Cavern, and consequently leaves it to
its natural disposition; whereas before it violently stretched it out, and, by
doing so, kept close the doors that open inwards: then, all the parts of it
begin to slacken, and those Doors give way to new liquor to drop in anew; which
the heat in the bottom of the heart rarifies again ininto smoke, as before.
And thus he conceives the motion of the heart to be made; taking the substance
of it to be (as I may say) like to limber Leather, which, upon the feeling of
it with blood and steam, opens and dilates it self; and at the going of it out,
it shrinks together like a bladder.

But, I doubt this Explication will not go through the difficulty. 3. The
former opinion rejected.
For first, both Galen and Dr. Harvey show, that, as soon as the blood is come
into the heart, it contracts it self; which agrees not with Monsir des Carts
his supposition: for, in his doctrine, there appears no cause why it should
contract it self, when it is full; but contrariwise, it should go on dilating
it self; till enough of the blood which drops into the heart were converted
into steam, to force the doors open, that so it may gain an issue thence, and a
passage into the body.

Next, Monsir des Carts supposes that the substance of the heart is like a
bladder, which has no motion of it self; but opens and shuts, according as
what is within it stretches it out, or permits it to shrink and fall together
again. Whereas Dr. Harvey proves that, when it is full, it compresses itself by
a quick and strong motion, to expel that which is in it; and that, when it is
empty, it returns to its natural dilatation, figure, and situation; by the
ceasing of that agents working, which caused its motion. Whereby it appears to
be of such a fibrous substance, as has a proper motion of its own.

Thirdly, I see not how this motion can be proportional. For, the heart must
needs open and be dilated, much faster then it can be shut and shrunk together;
there being no cause put to shut and bring it to its utmost period of
shrinking, other then the going out of the vapor, whereby it becomes empty:
which vapor, not being forced by any thing but its own inclination, may
peradventure, at first when there is abundance of it, swell and stretch the
heart forcibly out; but, after the first impulse and breach of some part of it
out of the Cavern that enclosed it, there is nothing to drive out the rest,
which must therefore steam very leasurely out.

Fourthly, what should hinder the blood from coming in before the heart be
quite-empty and shrunk to its lowest pitch? For as soon as the vapor yields
within, new blood may fall in from without; and so keep the heart continually
dilated, without ever suffering it to be perfectly and completely shut.

Fifthly, the heart of a Viper, laid upon a plate in a warm place, will beat
four and twenty hours, and much longer, if it be carefully taken out of its
body, and the weather warm and moist: and it is clear, that this is without
succession of blood to cause the pulses of it. Likewise, the several members of
living creatures will stir for sometime, after they are parted from their
bodies: and in them we can suspect no such cause of motion.

Sixthly, Mounsir des Carts his opinion, the heart should be hardest when it
is fullest; and the eruption of the steam out of it should be strongest at the
beginning; whereas experience shows, that it is softest when it is at the point
of being full, and hardest when it is at the point of being empty; and the
motion strongest toward the end.

Seventhly, in Mounsir des Carts his way, there is no agent or force strong
enough to make blood gush out of the heart. For, if it be the steam only that
opens the doors, nothing but it will go out, and the blood will still remain
behind; since it lies lower then the steam, and further from the issue that
lets it out: but Dr. Harvey finds by experience (and teaches how to make this
experience) that, when a wound is made in the heart, blood will gush out by
spurts at every shooting of the heart.

And lastly, if Mounsir des Carts, his supposition were true, the arteries
would receive nothing but steams; whereas it is evident, that the chief filler
of them is blood.

Therefore we must enquire after another cause of this primary 4. The Authors
opinion concerning the motion of the heart.
motion of a sensitive creature, in the beatings of its heart. Wherein we shall
not be obliged to look far: for seeing we find this motion and these pulsations
in the heart, when it is separated from the body; we may boldly and safely
conclude, that it must of necessity be caused by something that is within the
heart it self. And what can that be else, but heat or spirits imprisoned in a
tough viscous blood: which it cannot so presently break through to get out; and
yet can stir within it, and lift it up?

The like of which motion may be observed, in the heaving up and sinking down
again of lose mould thrown into a pit, intoe which much ordure has been
emptied. The same cause, of h at in the earth, makes mountains and sands to be
cast up in the very sea. So, in frying, when the pan is full of meat, the
bubbles rise and fall at the edges. Treacle, and such strong compounded
substances, whiles they ferment, lift themselves up and sink down again; after
the same manner as the Vipers heart does: as also do the bubbles of Barm, and
most of Wine. And short ends of Lute strings, baked in a juicy pie, will, at
the opening of it, move in such sort, as they who are ignorant of the feat will
think there are Magots in it: and a hot loaf, in which quicksilver is enclosed,
will not only move thus, but will also leap about, and skip from one place to
another; like the head or limb of an Animal (very full of spirits) newly cut
off from its whole body.

And that this is the true cause of the hearts motion, appears evidently.
First, because this virtue of moving is in every part of the heart; as you will
plainly see, if you cut out into several pieces a heart, that conservs its
motion long after it is out of the Animals belly: for every piece will move; as
Dr. Harvey assures us by experience, and I my self have often seen, upon
occasion of making the great antidote, in which Vipers hearts is a principal
ingredient. Secondly, the same is seen in the auricles and the rest of the
heart; whose motions are several; though so near together, that they can hardly
be distinguished. Thirdly, Dr. Harvey seems to affirm, that the blood which is
in the ears of the heart, has such a motion of it self, precedent to the
motion of the ears it is in: and that this virtue remains in it, for a little
space after the ears are dead. Fourthly, in touching a heart, which had newly
left moving, with his finger weted with warm spittle, it began to move again;
as testifying that heat and moisture made this motion. Fifthly, if you touch
the Vipers heart over with vinegar, with spirit of wine, with sharp white wind,
or with any piercing liquor; it presently dies: for the acuteness of such
substances pierces through the viscous blood, and makes way for the heat to get
out.

But, this first mover of an Animal must have something from without to stir it
up; else, the heat would lie in it, as if it were dead, and in time would
become absolutely so. In Eggs you see this exterior mover, in the warmth of
the Hens hatching them: And in Embryons, it is the warmth of the mothers womb.
But when in either of them, the heart is completely formed and enclosed in the
breast, much heat is likewise enclosed there, in all the parts near about the
heart; partly made by the heart it self, and partly caused by the outward heat,
which helped also to make that in the heart: and then, although the warmth of
the hen or of the mothers womb forsake the heart; yet this stirs up the native
heat within the heart and keeps it in motion, and makes it feed still upon new
fuel, as fast as that which it works upon decays.

But, to express more particularly how this motion is effected, 5. The motion
of the heart depends originally of its fibers irrigated by blood.
We are to note, that the heart has in its ventrickles three sorts of fibers.
The first go long ways (or are straight ones) on the sides of the ventricles,
from the thick basis of the heart, toward the little tip or cone of it: the
second go cross, or roundways, about the ventricles within the heart; and the
third, are transversal or thwart ones. Next, we are to remember, that the heart
is fixed to the body by its base; and hangs loose at the cone. Now then, the
fibers being of the nature of such things as will swell and grow thicker by
being moistened; and consequently shrink up in length and grow shorter, in
proportion to their swelling thicker (as you may observe in a loose-wrought
hempen rope): it must of necessity follow, that, when the blood falls into the
heart (which is of a kind of spungy substance); the fibers, being therewith
moist'ned, will presently swell in roundness and shrink in length.

Next, we are to note, that there is a double motion in the heart: the one of
opening, which is called Diastole; the other of shutting, which is termed
Systole. And although Dr. Harvey seems to allow the opening of the heart to be
no motion; but rather a relenting from motion; nevertheless (me thinks) it is
manifest, that it is not only a complete motion, but, in a manner, the greater
motion of the two, though indeed the less sensible, because it is performed by
little and little: for in it the heart is drawn by violence from its natural
position, which must be (as it is of all heavy things) that by which it
approaches most to the center of gravity; and such a position we see it gains
by the shutting of it.

Now, to declare how both these motions are effected, we are to consider how,
at the end of the Systole, the heart is voided and cleansed of all the blood
that was in it; whence it follows, that the weight of the blood which is in the
auricles, pressing upon the valvulas or doors that open inwards, makes its way
by little and little into the ventricles of the heart: where it must
necessarily swell the fibers, and they being swelled must needs draw the heart
into a roundish and capacious figure; which the more it is done, the more blood
comes in, and with greater violence. The following effect of which must be,
that the weight of the blood, joined to the weight of the heart it self and
particularly of the conus or tip (which is more solid and heavy in proportion
to its quantitity, then the rest of the heart,) must necessarily set the heart
into the natural motion of descending according to its gravity; which,
consequently, is performed by a lively jerk, whereby it comes to pass, that the
tip of our heart as it were springs up toward our breast; and the blood is
spurted out by other valvulae (that open outward) which are aptly disposed to
be opened upon such a motion, and convey it to the arteries.

In the course of which motion, we may note, how the figure of our heart
contributes to its springing up toward our breast; for, the line of distance
between the basis and the tip being longer on that side toward the back, then
on the other toward the breast; it must happen that, when the heart shuts and
straightens it self, and thereby extends it self to its length, the tip will
but out forwards toward the breast.

Against this doctrine, of the motion, and of the Systole and 6. An objection
answered against the former doctrine.
Diastole of the heart, it may be objected, that beasts hearts do not hang like
a man's heart, straight downwards, but rather horizantally; and therefore this
motion of gravity cannot have place in them: nevertheless, we are sure they
beat, and open and shut regularly. Besides, if there were no other cause, but
this of gravity, for the motion of a man's heart; it would follow that one, who
were set upon his head or hung by his heels, could not have the motion of his
heart: which posture nevertheless, we see men remain in for a pretty while,
without any extreme prejudice.

But these difficulties are easily answered. For, first, whether beasts hearts
lie directly horizontally, or whether the basis be fast'ned somewhat higher then
the tip reaches, and so makes their heart hang inclining downwards; still the
motion of gravity has its effect in them. As we may perceive in the heart of a
viper lying upon a plate, and in any other thing that of it self swells up, and
straight again shrinks down: in which we cannot doubt, but that the gravity,
fighting against the heat, makes the elevated parts fall, as the heat makes
them rise.

And as for the latter, it is evident that men cannot stay long in that posture,
without violent accidents; and, in any little while, we see, the blood comes
into their face and other parts, which naturally are situated higher, but by
this position become lower then the heart: and much time is not required, to
have them quite disordered and suffocated; the blood passing through the heart
with too much quickness, and not receiving due concoction there, and falling
thence in too great abundance into places that cannot with convenience
entertain it.

But you will insist, and ask, Whether in that posture the heart moves or no;
and how? And, to speak by guess in a thing I have not yet made experiences
enough to be thoroughly informed in; I conceive, without any great scruple, that
it does move: And that it happens thus, That the heart, hanging somewhat loose,
must needs tumble over, and the tip of it lean downwards some way or other; and
so lie in part like the heart of a beast, though not so conveniently
accommodated: and then the heat, which makes the viscous blood that is in the
substance of the heart to ferment, will not fail of raising it up; whereupon, the
weight of that side of the heart that is lifted up will presently press it
down. And thus, by the alternative operations of these causes, the heart will
be made to open and shut it self; as much as is necessary for admitting and
thrusting out that little and disorderly coming blood, which makes its course
through it, for that little space wherein the man continues in that position.

Now, from these effects wrought in the heart by the moistning of the fibers,
two other effects proceed. One is, that 7. The Circulation of the Blood, and
other effects that follow the motions of the heart.
the blood is pushed out of every corner of the heart with an impetuousness or
velocity: The other is, that by this notion the spirits, which are in the
ventricles of the heart and in the blood that is even then heated there, are
more and deeper pressed into the substance of the heart; so that you see the
heart imbibes fresh vigor, and is strengthened with new spirits, whiles it
seems to reject that which should strengthen it.

Again, two other effects follow this violent ejection of the blood out of the
heart. One is, that, for the present, the heart is entirely cleans'd of all
remainders of blood; none being permitted to fall back, to annoy it. The other
is, that the heart finding it self dry, the fibers relent presently into their
natural position and extension, and the valvulae that open inwards fall flat to
the sides of the ventricles; and consequently new blood drops in. So that, in
conclusion, we see, the motion of the heart depends originally of its fibers
irrigated by the blood; and not from the force of the vapor, as Monsieur des
Carts supposes.

This motion of the heart drives the blood (which is warmed and spiritualized,
by being boiled in this furnace) through due passages into the arteries, whence
it runs into the veins: and is a main cause of making and nourishing other
parts; as the Liver, the Lungs, the Brains, and whatsoever else depends of
those veins and arteries through which the blood goes. Which being ever freshly
heated, and receiving the tincture of the hearts nature, by passing through the
heart; wherever it stays and curdles, it grows into a substance, of a nature
conformable to the heart; though every one of such substances be of exceeding
different conditions in themselves; the very grossest excrements not being
excluded from some participation of that nature.

But, if you desire to follow the blood all along, every step in its progress
from the heart round about the body, till it return back again to its center;
Dr. Harvey, who most acutely teaches this doctrine, must be your guide. He will
show you how it issues from the heart by the Arteries; from whence it goes on
warming the flesh til it arrive to some of the extremities of the body: and
against it is grown so cool (by long absence from the fountain of its heart,
and by evaporating its own stock of spirits without any new supply) that it
has need of being warmed anew, it finds it self returned back again to the
Heart, and is there heated again; which return is made by the Veins, as its
going forwards is performed only by the Arteries.

And, were it not for this continual circulation of the blood, and this new
heating it in its proper caldron, the Heart; it could not be avoided but that
the extreme parts of the body would soon grow cold and die. For, flesh being of
it self of a cold nature (as is apparent in dead flesh), and being kept warm
merely by the blood that bedews it; and the blood likewise being of a nature
that soon grows cold and congeals, unless it be preserved in due temper by
actual heat working upon it: how can we imagine that they two singly, without
any other assistance, should keep one another warm (especially in those parts
that are far distant from the heart) by only being together? Surely, we must
allow the blood (which is a substance fit for motion) to have recourse back to
the heart (where only it can be supplied with new heat and spirits); and from
thence be driven out again by its pulses or strokes, which are its shuttings.
And, as fast as it flies out, (like a reeking thick steam, which rises from
perfumed water falling upon a heated pan), that which is next before it must
fly yet further on, to make way for it; and, newt arterial blood still issuing
forth at every pulse, it must still drive on what issued thence the last
precedent pulse, and that part must press on what is next before it. And thus
it fares with the whole mass of blood; which, having no other course but in the
body, must at length run round, and by new vessels (which are the veins) return
back to the place from whence it issued first: and, by that time it comes
thither, it is grown cool and thick, and needs a vigorous restoration of
spirits and a new rarifying, that then it may warm the flesh it passes again
through; without which it would suddenly grow stone cold. As is manifest, if,
by tying or cutting the arteries, you intercept the blood which is to nourish
any part: for then that part grows presently cold and benumbed.

But, referring the particulars of this doctrine to Dr. Harvey, who has both
invented and perfected it: our task in hand 8. Of Nutrition.
calls upon us, to declare in common the residue of motions that all Living
Creatures agree in. How Generation is performed, we have determined in the past
discourse: Our next consideration then ought to be of Nutrition and
Augmentation. Between which there is very little difference, in the nature of
their actions: and the difference of their names is grounded, more upon the
different result in the period of them, then upon the thing it self; as will by
and by appear. Thus then is the progress of this matter. As soon as a living
creature is formed, it endeavors straight to augment it self, and employs it
self only about that; the parts of it being yet too young and tender, to
perform the other functions which nature has produced them for. That is to
say, the Living Creature at its first production is in such a state and
condition, that it is able to do nothing else but, by means of the great heat
in it, to turn into its own substance the abundance of moisture that overflows
it.

They who are curious in this matter tell us, that the performance of this work
consists in five actions; which they call Attraction, Adhesion, Concoction,
Assimulation, and Unition. The nature of Atraction we have already declared;
when we explicated how the heart and the root sends juice into the other parts
of the Animal or Plant: for they, abounding in themselves with inward heat, and
besides that, much other circumstant heat working likewise upon them; it cannot
be otherwise, but that they must needs suck and draw into them the moisture
that is about them.

As for Adhesion, the nature of that is likewise explicated; when we showed how
such parts as are moist, but especially aerial or oily ones, (such as are made
by the operation of a soft and continual heat), are catching and easily stick
to any body they happen to touch: and how a little part of* moisture between
two dry parts joins them together. Upon which occasion, it is to be noted that
parts of the same kind join best together: and therefore the powder of glass is
used to ciment broken glass withal (as we have touched somwhere above), and the
powder of marble to ciment marble with; and so of other bodies. In like manner,
Alchimists find no better expedient to extract a small proportion of silver
mixed with a great one of gold, then to put more silver to it: nor any more
effectual way to get out the heart, or tincture, or spirits, of any thing they
distill or make an extract of; then to infuse its own phlegm upon it, and to
water it with that. Now, whether the reason of this be, that continuity,
because it is an unity, must be firmest between parts that are most conformable
to one another, and consequently nearest one among themselves; or whether it be
for some other hidden cause, belongs not to this place to discourse: but in
fine so it is. And the adhesion is strongest of such parts as are most
conformable to that which needs increase and nourishment; and that is made up
by the other three actions.

Of which, Concoction is nothing else but a thickning of that juice which
already sticks to any part of the Animals body, by the good digestion that heat
makes in it. And Assimilation is the effect of Concoction: for, this juice
being used in the same manner, as the first juice was that made the part whereto
this is to be joined, it cannot choose but become like it in substance; And
then, there being no other substance between, it is of it self united to it,
without any further help.

Hitherto this action belongs to Nutrition. But if, on the one 9. Of
Argumentation,
side, the heat and spirituality of the blood, and, on the other side, the due
temper and disposition of the part be such, as the blood is greedily sucked
into the part, (which thereby swells to make room for it, and will not let it go
away, but turns it into a like substance as it self is, and is greater in
quantity, then what is consumed and decays continually by transpiration: then
this action is called likewise Augmentation. Which Galen explicates, by a sport
the boys of Ionia used; who were accustomed to fill a bladder with wind, and,
when they could force no more into it, they could rub the bladder; and, after
rubbing of it, they found it capable of receiving new breath; and so they would
proceed on, till their bladder were as full, as by use they knew it could be
made. Now (says he) nature does the like, by filling our flesh and other parts
with blood; that is to say, it stretches the fibers: but she has, over and
above, a power which the boys had not, namely, to make the fibers as strong
after they are stretched to their utmost extension, as they were before they
were extended; whence it happens, that she can extend them again as well as at
the first, and this without end, as far as concerns that part.

The reason whereof is, because she extends them by means of a liquor, which is
of the same nature as that whereof they were made at first: and from thence it
follows, that, by concoction, that liquour settles in the parts of the fibers
which have most need; and so makes those parts as great in the length they are
extended to, as they were in their shortness before they were drawn out.
Whereby the whole part of the Animal, wherein this happens, grows greater: and,
the like being done in every part, as well as in any one single one, the whole
Animal becomes bigger; and is in such sort augmented.

Out of all which discourse, we may collect that, in the essential 10. Of Death
and Sickness.
composition of Living Creatures, there may peradventure be a phisical
possibility for them to continue always without decay; and so become immortals
even in their bodies, if all hurtful accidents coming from without might be
prevented. For, seeing that a man, besides the increase which he makes of
himself, can also impart to his children a virtue, by which they are able to do
the like; and to give again to theirs, as much as they received from their
Fathers: it is clear, that what makes him die is no more the want of any radical
power in him, to increase or nourish himself; then, in fire, it is the want of
power to burn, which makes it go out. But, it must be some accidental want;
which Gallen attributes chiefly to the dryness of our bones, and sinews, etc.
as you may in him see more at large. For, dryness with density alows not easy
admittance to moisture, and therefore it causes the heat, which is in the dry
body, either to evaporate, or to be extinguished: and want of heat is that from
whence the failing of life proceeds which he thinks cannot be prevented by any
art or industry.

And herein God has expressed his great mercy and goodness toward us. For,
seeing that, by the corruption of our own nature, we are so immersed in flesh
and blood, as we should for ever delight to wallow in their mire; without
raising our thoughts at any time above that low and brutal condition: he has
engaged us, by a happy necessity, to think of and provide for a nobler and far
more excellent state of living, that will never change or end.

In pursuance of which inevitable ordinance, Man (as if he were grown weary and
out of love with this life; and scorned any Term in his farm here, since he
cannot purchase the Fee-simple of it) hastens on his death by his unwary and
rash use of meats, which poison his blood: and then his infected blood, passing
through his whole body, must needs in like manner taint it all at once. For the
redress of which mischief, the assistance of physic is made use of: and that,
passing likewise the same way, purifies the blood, and recovers the corruption
occasioned by the peccant humor; or other whiles, gathering it together, it
thrusts and carries out that evil guest, by the passages contrived by nature to
disburden the body of unprofitable or hurtful supersluites.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the motions of Sense; and of the Sensible Qualities in
general: and, in particular, of those which belong to Touch, Taste, and Smelling.
HAving thus brought on the course of Nature as high as Living Creatures, whose
chief species or division is those that 1. The connxeion of the subsequent
chapters with the precedent.
have sense; and having declared the operations which are common to the whole
tribe of them, which includes both Plants and Animals: it is now time we take a
particular view of those, whose action and passion is the reason why that chief
portion of life is termed sensitive; I mean the Senses, and the qualities by
which the outward world comes into the living creature through his senses.
Which when we shall have gone through, we shall scarcely have left any
qualities among bodies, to plead for a spiritual manner of being or working,
that is, for a selfentity an instantaneous operation; which kind of things and
properties vulgar Philosophy is very earnest to attribute to our senses: with
what reason, and upon what ground, let us now consider.

These qualities are reduced to five several heads; answerable to so many
different ways, whereby we receive notice of the bodies 2. Of the Senses and
sensible qualities in general: And, of the end for which they serve.
that are without us And accordingly, they constitute a like number of
different Senses: of every one of which we will discourse particularly, when we
have examined the natures of the qualities that affect them. But now, all the
consideration we shall need to have of them is only this; That it is manifest,
the organs in us, by which sensible qualites work upon us, are corporeal, and
made of the like ingredients as the rest of our body is: and therefore must of
necessity be liable to suffer evil, and receive good (as all other bodies do)
from those active qualities which make and mar all things within the limits of
Nature. By which terms of Evil and Good, I mean those effects that are averse
or conformable to the particular nature of any thing; and thereby tend to the
preservation or destruction of that individual.

Now we, receiving from our senses the knowledge we have of things without us,
give names to them, according to the passions and affections which those things
cause in our senses: which being the same in all mankind (as long as they are
considered in common, and their effects are looked upon in gross), all the
world agrees in one Notion and Name of the same thing; for every man living is
affected by it just as his neighbor is, and as all men else in the world are.
As for example; Heat or Cold works the same feeling in every man composed of
flesh and blood: and therefore whoever should be asked of them would return the
same answer, that they cause such and such affects in his sense; pleasing or
displeasing to him, according to their degrees, and as they tend to the good or
evil of his whole body.

But, if we descend to particulars, we shall find that several men of differin^
constitutions frame different notions of the same things; according as they are
conformable or disagreeing to their natures: and accordingly, they give them
different names. As when the same liquor is sweet to some men's taste, which to
another appears bitter: one man takes that for a perfume, which to another is
an offensive smell. In the Turkish Baths, (where there are many degrees of heat
in diverse rooms, through all which the same person uses to pass, and to stay a
while in every one of them, both at his entrance and going out; to season his
body by degrees for the contrary excess he is going to) that seems chilly-cold
at his first return, which appeared melting hot at his going to it: as I my
self have often made experience in those Countries. Beauty and loveliness will
shine to one man in the same face, that will give aversion to another. All
which proclaims, that the Sensible Qualities of Bodies are not any positive
real thing, consisting in an indivisible and distinct from the body it self;
but are merely the very body, as it affects our senses: to discover how they
do, which must be our labor here.

Let us therefore begin with considering the difference between sensible and
insensible creatures. These later lie exposed to the mercy of all outward
agents, that from time to time (by the continual motion which all things are
in) come within distance of working upon them: and they have no power to remove
themselves from what is averse to their nature; nor to approach nearer what
comforts it. But the others, having within themselves a principle of motion, (as
we have already declared), are able, whenever such effects are wrought on them,
as on the others, upon their own account and by their own action, to remove
themselves from what begins to annoy them, and to come nearer to what they find
a beginning of good by.

These impressions are made on those parts of us, which we call the Organs of
our Senses: and by them give us seasonable advertisements and knowledges,
whereby we may govern and order, to the best advantage, our little charge of a
body; according to the tune or warnings of change in the great circumstant body
of the world, as far as it may concern ours. Which how it is done, and by what
steps it proceeds, shall be in the following discourse laid open.

Of this great machine that environs us, we, who are but a small parcel, are
not immediately concerned in every part. It imports not us, for the
conservation of our body, to have knowledge of other parts then such are within
the distance of working upon us: those only, within whose sphere of activity we
are planted, can offend or advantage us; and of them some are near us, others
further from us. Those that are next us we discern (according as they are
qualified), either by our Touch, or our Taste, or our Smelling: which three
Senses manifestly appear to consist in a mere gradation of more or less gross;
and their operations are levelled to the three Elements that press upon us,
Earth, Water, and Air. By our other two Senses (our Hearing and our Seeing) we
have notice of things further off; and the agents which work on them are of a
more refined nature.

But we must treat of them all in particular: and that which we will begin with
shall be the Touch; as being the grossest of 3. Of the sense of Touching; and
that both it and its qualities are bodies.
them, and that which converses with none but the most material and massy
objects. We see, it deals with heavy consistent bodies; and judges of them by
conjunction to them, and by immediate reception of something from them. And,
according to the diverse impressions they make in it, it distinguishes them by
diverse names; which (as we said of the qualities of mixed bodies) are generally
reduced to certain pairs: as, hot and cold, wet and dry, soft and hard, smooth
and rough, thick and thin, and some others of the like nature; which were
needless to enumerate, since we pretend not to deliver the science of them, but
only to show that they and their actions are all corporeal.

And, this is sufficiently evident, by mere repenting but their very names: for
it is plain by what we have already said, that there are nothing else but
certain effections of quantity, arising out of different degrees of rarity and
density compounded together. And it is manifest, by experience, that our sense
receivs the very same impressions from them which another body does. For, our
body or our sense will be heated by fire; burned by it too, if the heat be too
great, as well as wood: it will be constipated by cold water, moistened by
humide things, and dried by dry bodies; in the same manner as any other body
whatever, Likewise, it may, in such sort as they, be wounded and have its
continuity broken by hard things, be pleased and polished by soft and smooth,
be pressed by thick and heavy, and rubbed by those that are rugged, etc.

So that those Masters, who will teach us that the impressions upon sense are
made by spiritual or spirit-like things or qualities, (which they call
intentional specieses), must labor at two works: the one, to make it appear
that there are in nature such things as they would persuade us; the other, to
prove that these material actions we speak of are not able to perform those
eff^cts, for which the senses are given to living creatures. And, till they
have done that, I conceive, we should be much too blame to admit such things,
as we neither have ground for in reason, nor can understand what they are. And
therefore, we must resolve to rest in this belief, which experience breeds in
us, that these bodies work on our senses, no other ways then by a corporeal
operation; and that such a one is sufficient for all the effects we see proceed
from them: as, in the process of this discourse, we shall more amply declare.

The Element immediately next to Earth in grosness is Water. And in it is the
exercise of our taste; or Mouth being perpetually 4. Of the Taste and its
qualities: that they are bodies.
wet within; by means of which moisture, our Tongue receives into it some
little parts of the substance which we chew in our Teeth, and which passes over
it. You may observe how, if we take any herb or fruit, and, having chopped or
beaten it small, put it into a wooden dish of water and squeeze it a little;
the juice, communicating and mingling it self with the water, infects it with
the taste of it self, and, remaining a while in the bowl, sinks by little and
little into the very pores of the wood: as is manifest, by its retaining a long
time after the taste and smell of that herb. In like manner, nature has taught
us, by chewing our meat, and by turning it in our mouths and pressing it a
little (that we may the more easily swallow it), to imbue our Spittle with such
little parts as easily diffuse themselves in water. And then, our Spittle being
continuate to the moisture within our tongue, (in such sort as we declared of
the moisture of the earth, that soaks into the root of a plant), and
particularly in the sinews of it, must of necessity affect those little
sensible strings with the qualities which these petty bodies, mixed every where
with the moisture, are themselves imbued withal.

And if thou ask, what motions or qualities these be? Physicians (to whom it
belongs most particularly to look into them) will tell you, that some dilate
the tongue more, and some less; as if some of these little bodies had an
aereal, and others a watery disposition: and these two they express by the names
of sweet and fatty. That some contract and draw the tongue together; as choaky
and rough things do most, and, next to them, crabby and immature sharpness.
That some corrode and pierce the Tongue; as Salt and sour things. That bitter
things search the outside of it, as if they swept it: and that other things as
it were prick it; as spices and hot drinks. Now all these are sensible material
things; which admit to be explicated clearly, by the varieties of rarity and
density concurring to their compositions; and are so proportionable to such
material instruments, as we cannot doubt but they may be thoroughly declared by
our former principles.

The next Element above Water is Air; which our Nostrils being our Instrument
to suck in, we cannot doubt but what affects 5. That the Smell and its
qualities are real bodies.
a man by his Nose must come to him in Breath or Air. And, as humidity receives
grosser and weightier parts, so those which are more subtle and light rise up
into the Air: and these we know attain to this lightness by the commixtion of
fire, which is hot and dry. And therefore we cannot doubt, but that the nature
of Smells is more or less tending to heat and drought: which is the cause that
their commixtion with the brain proves comfortable to it; because, of its own
disposition, it is usually subject to be too moist and too cold.

Whether there be any immediate instrument of this sense to receive the passion
or effect, which by it other bodies make upon us, or whether the sense it self
be nothing but a passage of these exhalations and little bodies to the brain,
fitly accommodated to discern what is good or hurtful for it, and accordingly
to move the body to admit or reject them; it imports not us at present to
determine: let Physicians and Anatomists resolve that question, Whiles it
suffices us to understand, that the operations of bodies by Odours upon our
sense, are performed by real and solid parts of the whole substance; which are
truly material, though very little bodies; and not by imaginary qualities.

And those bodies, when they proceed out of the same things 6. Of the
conformity betwixt the two Senses of Smelling and Tasting.
that yield also tastive particles, (although without such material violence,
and in a more subtle manner), must of necessity have in them the same nature,
which those have that affect the taste; and they must both of them affect a man
much alike, by his taste by his smell: and so are very proportionate to one
another; excepting in those properties which require more cold or liquidity
then can well stand with the nature of a smell. And accordingly, the very
names, which men have imposed to express the affections of both, many times
agree; as savor and sweet which are common both to the smell and taste; the
strongest of which we see oftentimes make themselves known, as well by the one
as by the other sense; and either of them in excess will turn a man's stomach.
And, the Physicians that write of these senses find them very conformable:
whence it happens that the losing of one of them is the loss also of the other.

And, experience teaches us in all Beasts, that the Smell is given to living
creatures, to know what meats are good for them, and what are not. And
accordingly, we see them still smell for the most part at any unknown meat,
before they touch it; which seldom fails of informing them rightly: nature
having provided this remedy against the gluttony, which could not choose but
follow the convenient disposition and temper of their parts and humors;
through which they often swallow their meat greedily and suddenly, without
expecting to try it first by their taste: Besides that, many meats are so
strong, that their very tasting them after their usual manner would poison, or
at least greatly annoy them: and therefore nature has provided this sense, to
prevent their taste; which being far more subtle then their taste, the final
atoms by which it is performed are not so very noxious to the health of the
Animal, as the other grosser atoms are.

And doubtlesly, the like use men would make of this sense; had they not, on
the one side, better means then it to know the 7. The reason why the sense of
Smelling is not so perfect in man as in beasts: with a wonderful history of a
man who could wind a scent as a well as any beast.
qualities of meats, and therefore, this is not much reflected on: And, on the
other side, were they not continually stuffed and clogged with gross vapors of
streamy meats, which are daily reeking from the Table and their stomachs; and
permit not purer Atoms of bodies to be discerned, which require clear and
uninfected organs to take notice of them. As we see it fare with dogs: who
have not so true and sensible noses, when they are high fed, and lie in the
kitchen amidst the steams of meat; as when they are kept in their kennel, with
a more spare diet, fit for hunting.

One full example this age affords us in this kind; of a man, whose extremity
of fear wrought upon him to give us this experiment. He was born in some
Village of the Country of Liege: and therefore, among strangers, he is known by
the name of John of Liege. I have been informed of this story by several, (whom
I dare confidently believe) that have had it from his own mouth; and have
questioned him, with great curiosity, particularly about it.

When he was a little boy, there being wars in the Country, (as that State is
seldom without molestations from abroad, when they have no distempers at home,
which is an inseparable effect of a Countries situation upon the Frontiers of
powerful neighboring Princes that are at variance), the village of whence he
was had notice of some unruly scattered Troops that were coming to pillage
them: which made all the people of the village fly hastily with what they
could carry with them, to hide themselves in the woods; which were spacious
enough to afford them shelter, for they joined upon the Forest of Ardenne.
There they lay, till some of their Scouts brought them word, that the
Soldiers, of whom they were in such apprehension, had fired their Town and
quitted it. Then all of them returned home, excepting this boy: who, it seems,
being of a very timorous nature, had images of fear so strong in his fantasy,
that first he ran further into the wood then any of the rest, and afterward
apprehended that every body he saw through the thickets, and every voice he
heard, was the Soldiers; and so hid himself from his parents, that were in
much distress seeing him all about, and calling his name as loud as they could.
When they had spent a day or two in vain, they returned home without him; and
he lived many years in the woods, feeding upon roots and wild fruits, and maste.

He said that, after he had been some time in this wild habitation, he could
by the smell judge of the taste of any thing that was to be eaten: and that he
could, at a great distance, wind by his nose, where wholesome fruits or roots
grew. In this state he continued (still shunning men with as great fear as when
he first ran away; so strong the impression was, and so little could his little
reason master it): till, in a very sharp winter, when many beasts of the
forest perished for want of food, necessity brought him to so much confidence,
that, leaving the wild places of the forest, remote from all peoples
dwellings, he would, in the evenings, steal among cattle that were fothered;
especially the Swine, and, among them, glean that which served to sustain
wretchedly his miserable life. He could not do this so cunningly, but that,
returning often to it, he was on a time espied: and they who saw a beast of so
strange a shape (for such they took him to be, he being naked and all overgrown
with hair), believing him to be a Satyr or some such prodigious creature as
the recounters of rare accidents tells of, laid wait to apprehend him. But he,
that winded them as far off as any beast could do, still avoided them; till at
length, they laid snares for him, and took the wind so advantagiously of him,
that they caught him: and then soon perceived he was a man, though he had quite
forgotten the use of all language; but by his gestures and cries he expressed
the streatest affrightedness that might be. Which afterward he said (when he
had learned a new to speak) was because he thought those were the soldiers he
had hidden himself to avoid, when he first betook himself to the Wood; and were
always lively in his fantasy, through his fears continually reducing them
thither.

This man, within a little while after he came to good keeping and full
feeding, quite lost that accuteness of smelling, which formerly governed him in
his taste; and grew to be in that particular as other ordinary men were. But,
at his first living with other people, a woman (that had compassion of him, to
see a man so near like a beast, and that had no language to call for what he
wished or needed to have) took particular care of him; and was always very
sollicitous to see him furnished with what he wanted: which made him so apply
himself unto her in all his occurrents, that, whenever he stood in need of
ought, if she were out of the way, and were gone abroad in the fields, or to
any other village near by, he would senther out presently by his scent; in such
sort as with us those dogs use to do which are taught to draw dry foot. I
imagine he is yet alive, to tell a better story of himself then I have done;
and to confirm what I have here said of him: for, I have from them who saw him
but few years agone, that he was an able strong man, and likely to last yet a
good while longer.

And of another man I can speak assuredly my self; who, being a very temperate
or rather spare diet, could likewise perfectly discern by his smell the
qualities of whatever was afterward to pass the examination of his taste, even
to his bread and bear. Wherefore to conclude, it is evident both by reason and
experience, that the objects of our Touch, our Taste, and our Smell, are
material and corporeal things, derived from the division of quantity into more
rare and more dense parts; and may with ease be resolved into their heads and
springs, sufficiently to content any judicious and rational man. Who, if he be
curious to have further satisfaction in this particular (as far as concerns
odours and savours), may look over what Johannes Bravus (that judicious, though
unpolished, Physician of Salamanca) has written thereof.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the sense of Hearing, and of the sensible quality, Sound.
BUt, to proceed with the rest of the Senses. Because nature 1. Of the sense of
Hearing: and that Sound is purely motion.
saw, that some things came suddenly upon a living creature, which might do it
hurt, if they were not perceived afar off; and that other things were placed at
distance from it, which would greatly help it, if it could come near to them:
she found a means to give us two Senses more, for the discovery of remote
things. The one, principally and particularly, to descry their motion. The
other, to mark their bulk and situation.

And so, to begin with the former of these; we must needs acknowledge (after
due examination of the matter) that the thing which we call sound is purely
motion. And if it be objected, that many motions are made without any
discernable Sound; We shall not make difficulty to grant it; considering that
many motions dye before they come to touch the ear; or else are so weak, that
they are drowned by other stronger motions; which round about besiege our ears
in such manner, that notice is not taken of these. For, so it fares in what
depends merely of quantity, especially concerning our senses; that not every
thing of the kind, but a determinate quantity or multitude of parts of it,
makes an object sensible.

But, to come close to the point: We see that Sound, for the most part, is made
in the air; and that, to produce it, there is required a quick and smart motion
of that Element, which, of all the the rest, is the most moveable. And, in
motion, velocity or quickness is proportionate to density in magnitude (as we
have at large declared): Which makes quantity become perceptible in bulk, as
this does in motion. And, as the one consists in a greater proportion of
substance to the same quantity; so the other does, in the passage of more parts
of the medium in the same time.

And, in the moderating of this, such of the Liberal Arts are employed, as
belong to the cultivating man's voice: as Rhetoric, Meetering, and Singing.
It Is admirable how finely Galileo has delivered us the consonances of Music
(toward the end of his First Dialogue, of Motion; from the 95 page, forward 2.
Of diverse arts belonging to the sense of Hearing: all which confirm that Sound
is nothing but motion.
on), and now he has showed that matter clearly to the sight (so making the
eye as well as the ear Judge of it), in motions of the water, in Pendants
hanging loose in the air, and in permanent notes or traces made upon letton. To
the moderation of the same, many other mechanical arts are implied; as the
Trade of Belfounders, and of all Makers of musical instruments by wind, or by
water, or by strings.

Neither can I slip over without mention the two curious Arts of Echoing and
Whispering. The first of which teaches to iterate voices several times; and is
frequently put in practice by those, that are delighted with rarities in their
gardens: And the other shows how to gather into a narrow room the motions of
the air, that are diffused in a great extent; whereby one that shall put his
ear, to that place where all the several motions meet, shall hear what is
spoken so low, as no body between him and the speaker can discern any sound at
all. Of which kind there are very fine curiosities in some Churches of England:
and my self have seen, in an upper room of a capacious round Tower vaulted
overhead, the walls so contrived (by chance I believe); that two men, standing
at the utmost opposite points of the Diameter of it, could talk very currently
and clearly with one another, and yet none that stood in the middle could hear
a syllable. And, if one turned his face to the wall and spoke against that
(though never so softly); the others ear, at the opposite point, would discern
every word. Which puts me in mind of a note made by one that was no friend to
Auricular Confession, (upon occasion of his being with me in a Church that had
been of a Monastery); where, in one corner of it, one might sit and hear almost
all that was whispered through the whole extent of the Church: who would not be
persuaded but that it was on purpose contrived so by the subtilty of the
Friars; to the end that the Prior, or some of them, might sit there and hear
whatever the several Penitents accused themselves of to their Ghostly Fathers,
so to make advantage by this artifice, of what the Confessors durst not of
themselves immediately reveal.

He allowed better of the use in Rome, of making voices rebound, from the top
of the Cupula of St. Peter's in the Vatican, down to the floor of the Church;
when, on great days, they make a Quire of Music go up to the very highest part
of the arch, which is, into the Lanthorn: from whence while they sing, the
people below just under it are surprised with the smart sound of their voices,
as though they stood close by them, and yet can see no body from whom these
notes should proceed. And in the the same Cupula, if two men stand upon the
large cornish or border, which circles the bottom of it; they may observe the
like effect as that I spoke of above in the round Tower.

In like manner, they that are called Ventriloqui, persuade ignorant people,
that the Devil speaks from within them (deep in their belly); by their sucking
their breath inwards, in a certain manner, whiles they speak: whence it
follows, that their voice seems to come not from them, but from somewhat else
hidden within them; if at least you perceive it comes out of them; but, if you
do not, then it seems to come from a good way off.

To this art belongs the making of Sarabatanes or Trunks, to help the hearing;
and of Echo-glasses, that multiply sounds, as Burning-glasses do light. All
which arts, and the rules of them, follow the laws of motion; and every effect
of them is to be demonstrated by the principles and proportions of motion:
therefore, we cannot with reason imagine them to be any thing else.

We see likewise, that great noises, not only offend the hearing, but even
shake houses and Towers. I have been told by inhabitants 3. To same is
confirmed by the effects caused by great noises.
of Dover, that, when the Archduke Albertus made his great battery aganst
Calais (which for the time was a very furious one; for he endeavored all he
could to take the Town before it could be relieved): the very houses were
shaken, and the glasswindows shivered, with the report of his Artillery. And I
have been told by one that in Sevil, when the gunpowder-house of that Town
(which was some two miles distant from that place where he lived) was blown up;
that it made the wooden shutters of the windows in his house beat and clap
against the walls with great violence: and split the very walls of a fair
Church, that, standing next it (though at a good distance), hand no other
building between to shelter it from the impetuosity of the airs sudden violent
motion.

And, after a fight I once had with some Galleasses and Galliones in the rode
of Scanderone (which was a very hot one for the time, and a scarce credible
number of pieces of Ordnance were shot from my Fleet); the English Consul of
that place coming afterward aboard my ship told me, that the report of our
guns had, during all the time of the fight, shaken the drinking-glasses that
stood upon shelvs in his house, and split the paper-windows all about, and
spoiled and cracked all the eggs that his Pigeons were then sitting upon:
which loss he lamented exceedingly; for they were of that kind which commonly
it called Carriers, and serve them daily in their commerce between that place
and Aleppo.

And, I have often observed at Sea, in smooth water, that the Ordnance shot
off, in a ship some miles distant, would violently shake the glass-windows in
another: And I have perceived this effect in my own, more then once; at the
report of a single gun from a ship, so far off, that we could not descry her. I
remember how, one time upon such an occasion, we altered our course and steered
with the sound, or rather with the motion at first; observing upon which point
of the Compass the shaking appeared (for we heard nothing, though soon after,
with much attention and silence, we could discerna dull clumsie noise). And such
a motion grows at the end of it so faint, that, if any strong resisting body
check it in its course, it is presently deaded and will afterward shake nothing
beyond that body: and therefore it is perceptible only at the outside of the
ship, if some light and very moveable body hang loosly on that side it comes,
to receive the impression of it; as this sound at the gallery windows of my
Cabin upon the poop, which were of light Moscovia glass. And by then we had run
somewhat more then a watch, with all the sails abroad we could make, and in a
fair loom gale; we found our selves near enough to part the fray of two ships,
that, in a little while longer fighting would have sunk one another. 4. That
solid bodies may convey the motion of the air or sound to the organ of hearing.


But, besides the motions in the air (which received them easily, by reason of
the fluidity of it); we see that even solid bodies participate of it. As, if
you knock never so lightly at one end of the longest beam you can find; it will
be distinctly heard at the other end. The trampling of men and horses, in a
quiet night, will be heard some miles off, if one lay their ear to the ground;
and more sensibly, if one make a little hole in the earth, and put ones ear
into the mouth of it: but most of all, if one set a Drum smooth upon the
ground, and lay ones ear to the upper edge of it; for, the lower membrane of
the Drum is shaked by the motion of the earth, and then multiplies that sound
by the hollow figure of the Drum, in the conveying it to the upper membrane
upon which your ear leans. Not much unlike the Tympane or Drum of the ear;
which, being shaked by outward motion, causes a second motion on the inside of
it correspondent to this first; and this, having a free passage to the brain,
strikes it immediately, and so informs it how things move without; which is
all the mystery of hearing.

If any thing break or stop this motion, before it shake our 5. Where the
motion is interrupted, there is no sound.
ear, it is not heard. And accordingly, we see that the sound of Bells or
Artillery is heard much further, if it have the conduct of waters, then through
the pure air: because in such bodies, the great continuity of them makes that
one part cannot shake alone, and upon their superficies there is no notable
unevenness, nor any dense thing in the way to check the motion (as in the air,
hills, buildings, trees, and such like;) so that the same shaking goes a great
way. And, to confirm that this is the true reason, I have several times
observed that, standing by a river side, I heard the sound of a ring of Bells
much more distinctly and loud, then if I went some distance from the water,
though nearer to the steeple from whence the sound came.

And it is not only the motion of the air, that makes sound 6. That not only
the motion of the air, but all other motions coming to our ears, make sounds.
in our ears: but any motion that has access to them, in such a manner as to
shake the quivering membranous Tympane within them, will represent to us those
motions which are without, and so make such a sound there as if it were
conveyed only by the air. Which is plainly seen, when a man, lying a good way
under water, shall there hear the same sounds, as are made above in the air;
but in a more clumsie manner; according as the water, by being thicker and more
corpulent, is more unwieldy in its motions. And this I have tried often;
staying under water as long as the necessity of breathing would permit me.
Which shows that the air, being smartly moved, moves the water also, by means
of its continuity with it; and that liquid element, being fluide and getting
into the ear, makes vibrations upon the drum of it like to those of air.

But all this is nothing, in respect of what I might in some sort say, and yet
speak truth. Which is, that I have seen one, who 7. How own sense may supply
the want of an other.
could discern sounds with his eyes. It Is admirable, how one sense will
oftentimes supply the want of another: whereof I have seen an other strange
example, in a different strain from this; of a man that, by his grosser senses,
had his want of sight wonderfully made up. He was so thoroughly blind, that his
eyes could not inform him when the Sun shined; for all the cry: stalline humor
was out in both his eyes: yet his other senses instructed him so efficaciously,
in what was their office to have done, as what he wanted in them seemed to be
overpay'd in other abilities. To say that he would play at Cards and Tables, as
well as most men, is rather a commendation of his memory and fantasy, then of
any of his outward senses: But, that he should play well at Bowls and
Shovelbord and other games of aim, which in other men require clear sight and
an exact level of the hand, according to the qualities of the earth or table,
and to the situation and distance of the place he was to throw at; seems to
exceed possibility. And yet he did all this.

He would walk in a chamber, or long alley in a garden (after he had been a
while used to them) as straight, and turn as just at the ends, as any seeing
man could do. He would go up and down every where so confidently, and demean
himself at table so regularly; as strangers have sitten by him several meals,
and seen him walk about the house, without ever observing any want of seeing in
him: which he endeavored what he could to hide; by wearing his hat low upon
his brows. He would, at the first abord of a stranger, as soon as he spoke to
him, frame a right apprehension of his stature, bulk and manner of making. And,
which is more, when he taught his Scholars to declame (for he was
Schoolmaster to my sons, and lived in my house) or to represent some of
Seneca's Tragedies, or the like; he would by their voice know their gesture,
and the situation they put their bodies in: so that he would be able, as soon
as they spoke, to judge whether they stood or sat, or in what posture they
were; which made them demean themselves as decently before him whiles they
spoke, as if he had seen them perfectly.

Though all this be very stange, yet me thinks his discerning of lights is
beyond it all. He would feel in his body, and chiefly in his brain (as he has
often told me) a certain effect, by which he knew when the Sun was up; and
would discern exactly a clear from a cloudy day. This I have known him
frequently do without missing, when, for trial sake, he has been lodged in a
close chamber, whereto the clear light or Sun could not arrive, to give him any
notice by its actual warmth: nor any body could come to him, to give him
private warnings of the Changes of the weather,

But this is not the relation I intended, when I mentioned one that could hear
by his eyes; (if that expression may be permited 4. Of one who could discern
sounds of words with his eyes.
me). I then reflected upon a Noble man of great quality that I knew in Spain;
the younger brother of the Constable of Castile. But, the reflection of his
seeing of words, called into my remembrance the other that felt light: in whom
I have often remarked so many strange passages, with amazement and delight;
that I have adventured upon the Readers patience to record some of them,
conceiving they may be of some use in our course of doctrine. But, the Spanish
Lord was born deaf; so deaf, that, if a Gun were shot off close by his ear, he
could not hear it: and consequently, he was dumb; for not being able to hear
the sound of words, he could never imitate nor understand them, The loveliness
of his face, and especially the exceeding life and spiritfulness of his eyes,
and the comeliness of his person and whole composure of his body throughout,
were pregnant signs of a well tempered mind within: and therefore all that knew
him lamented much the want of means to cultivate it, and to imbue it with the
motions which it seemed capable of, in regard of its self; had it not been so
crossed by this unhappy accident. Which to remedy, Physicians and Chyrurgians
had long employed their skill; but all in vain: at last, there was a Priest who
undertook the teaching him to understand others when they spoke, and to speak
himself that others might understand him. What at the first he was laughed at
for, made him, after some years, be looked on as if he had wrought a miracle.
In a word, after strange patience, constancy and pains, be brought the young
Lord to speak as distinctly as any man whoever; and to understand so perfectly
what others said, that he would not lose a word in a whole days conversation.

They who have a curiosity, to see by what steps the Master proceeded in
teaching him, may satisfy it by a Book which he himself has written in
Spanish upon that subject, to instruct others how to teach deaf and dumb
persons to speak. Which when one shall have looked heedfully over, and
considered what a great distance there is between the simplicity and nakedness
of his first principles, and the strange readiness and vast extent of speech
resulting in process of time out of them: we will forbear pronouncing an
impossibility in their pedigree, whiles he wonders at the numerous effects
resulting in bodies out of rarity and density, ingeniously mingled together by
an allknowing Architect, for the production of various qualities among mixts,
of strange motions in particular bodies, and of admirable operations of life
and sense among vegetables and animals. All which are so many several words of
the mystical language; in which the Great Master has taught his otherwisedumb
scholars (the Creatures), to proclaim his infinite art, wisdom, perfections,
and excellency.

The Priest who, by his book and art, occasioned this discourse, I am told is
still alive, and in the service of the Prince of Carignan; where he continues
(with some that have need of his pains) the same employment he had with the
Constables brother: with whom I have often discoursed, whiles I waited on the
Prince of Wales (now our gracious Sovereign) in Spain. And I doubt not but His
Majesty remembers all I have said of him, and much more: for, His Majesty was
very curious to observe and enquire into the utmost of it. It is true, one
great misbecomingness he was apt to fall into, whiles he spoke; which was, an
uncertainty in the tone of his voice: for, not hearing the sound he made when
he spoke, he could not steadily govern the pitch of his voice; but it would be
sometimes higher, sometimes lower; though, for the most part, what he deliverd
together he ended, in the same key as he begun it. But, when he had once
suffered the passages of his voice to close; at the opening them again, chance,
or the measure of his earnestness to speak or reply, gave him his tone: which
he was not capable of moderating by such an artifice, as it is recorded Caijus
Grachus used, when passion, in his Orations to the people, drove out his voice
with too great a vehemence or shrilness.

He could discern in another, whether he spoke shril or low: and he would
repeat after any body any hard word whatever. Which the Prince tried often; not
only in English, but by making some Welchmen that served his Highness speak
words of their language: Which he so perfectly ecchoed, that I confess I
wondered more at that, then at all the rest. And his Master himself would
acknowledge, that the rules of his art reached not to produce that effect with
any certainty: and therefore concluded, this in him must spring from other
rules he had framed to himself, out of his own attentive observation; which,
the advantage that nature had justly given him in the sharpness of his other
senses, to supply the want of this, endowed him with an ability and sagacity to
do, beyond any other man that had his hearing. He expressed it (surely) in a
high measure, by his so exact imitation of the Welsh pronunciation: for, that
tongue (like the Hebrew) employs much the guttural Letters; and the motions of
that part which frames them cannot beseen or judged by the eye, otherwise then
by the effect they may happily make by consent in the other parts of the mouth,
exposed to view. For, the knowledge he had of what they said sprung, from his
observing the motions they made: so that he could converse currently in the
light, though they he talked with whispered never so softly: and I have seen
him, at the distance of a large chambers breadth, say words after one, that I,
standing close by the speaker could not hear a syllable of. But, if he were in
the dark, or if one turned his face out of his sight, he was capable of nothing
one said.

But, it is time we return to our theme; from whence my blind 9. Diverse reasons
to prove sound to be nothing else but a motion of some real body.
Schoolmaster, and this deaf Prince (whose defects were overpai'd an other way)
have carried us with so long a digression: which let yet will not be altogether
useless (no more then the former, of the wild man of Liege); if we make due
reflections on them. For, when we shall consider, that Odors may be tasted,
that the relish of meats may be smelled, that magnitude and figure may be
heard, that light may be felt, and that sounds may be seen; (all which is true
in some sense): we may by this changing the offices of the senses, and by
looking into the causes thereof, come to discern, that these effects are not
wrought by the intervention of aerie qualities; but by real and material
applications of bodies, to bodies, which, in different manners, make the same
results within us.

But when I suffered my pen to be steered by my fantasy, that pleased it self
and rioted in the remembrance of these two notable persons: I was speaking, how
the stong continuity of the parts of a thing that is moved draws on the motion,
and consequently the sound, much further than wherethat which is moved suffers
breaches, or the rarity of it occasions that one part may be moved without
another; for, to the proportion of the shaking, the noise continues. As we see
in trembling Bells, that hum a great while longer then others, after the
Clapper has stricken them: and the very sound seems to quiver and shake io our
ears, proportionable to the shaking of the Bell. And in a Lute, as long as a
string that has been stricken shakes sensibly to our eye; so long, and to the
same measure, the sound shakes in our ear. Which is nothing else but an
undulation of the Air, caused by the smart and thick vibrations of the cord,
and multiply^d in the belly of the instrument (which is the reason that the
concave figure is affected in most): and so, when it breaks out of the
instrument, in greater quantity then the string immediately did shake; it
causes the same undulations in the whole body of Air round about. And that,
striking the Drum of the ear, gives notice therein what tenor the string moves;
whose vibrations if one stop, by laying his finger upon it, the sound is
instantly at an end: for then there is no cause on foot that continues the
motion of the Air; which, without a continuation of the impulse, returns
speedily to quiet; through the resistance made to it by other parts of it that
are further off.

Out of all which it is plain, that motion alone is able to effect, and give
account of all things whatever that are attributed to Sound: and that Sound and
motion go hand in hand together; so that whatever is said of the one is
likewise true of the other. Wherefore, it cannot be denied but that hearing is
nothing else, but the due perception of motion: and that motion and sound are
in themselves one and the same thing, though express^d by different names, and
comprised in our understanding under different notions. Which proposition seems
to be yet further convinced, by the ordinary experience of perceiving music by
mediation of a stick: for, how should a deaf man be capable of music by
holding a stick in his Teeth, whose other end lies upon the Vial or Virginals;
were it not that the proportional shaking of the stick (working a like dancing
in the man's head) make a like motion in his brain, without passing through his
ear; and consequently, without being otherwise sound, then as bear motion is
sound.

Or, if any man will still persist in having sound be some other thing then as
we say; and that it effects the sense otherwise then purely by motion: he must
nevertheless acknowledge that, whatever it be, it has neither cause nor
effect, nor breeding, nor dying, that we either know or can imagine. And then,
if he will let reason sway, he will conclude it unreasonable to say or suspect
so ill grounded a surmise, against so clear and solid proofs: which our ears
themselves not a little confirm, their whole figure and nature tending to the
perfect receiving, conserving, and multiplying the motions of air which happen
without a man; as, who is curious may plainly see, in the Anatomists books and
discourses.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Sight, and Colors.
THere is yet left the object of our Sight, which we call Colors, 1. That
Colors are nothing but light mingled with darkness; or the disposition of a
bodies superficies, apt to reflect light so mingled.
to take a survey of; for, as for light, we have at large displayed the nature
and properties of it; from which whether color be different or no, will be the
question we shall next discuss. For, those who are cunning in Optics will, by
refractions and reflections, make all sorts of colors out of pure light: as we
see in Rainbows, in those Triangular Glasses or Prisms (which some call Fools
Paradises), and in other inventions for this purpose. Wherefore in brief, to
show what color is, let us lay for a ground, that Light is, of all other
things in the world, the greatest and the most powerful agent upon our eye;
either by it self, or by what comes in with it: and that, where light is not,
darkness is. Then consider, that light may be diversely cast; especially through
or from a transparent body, into which it sinks in part, and in part it does
not: and you will conclude, that it cannot choose but come out from such a
body, in diverse sorts mingled with darkness. Which, if it be in a sensible
quantity, accordingly makes diverse appearances; and those appearances must of
necessity have diverse hues, representing the colors which are middle colors
between white and black: since white is the color of light, and darkness seems
black. Thus those colors are engendered, which are called apparent ones. And
they appear sometimes but in some one position; as in the Rainbow, which changes
place as the looker on does: but, at other times, they may be seen from any
part; as those which light makes by a double refraction through a Triangular
Glass.

And that this is rightly delivered may be gathered, out of the conditions
requisite to their production. For that Crystal, or water, or any refracting
body does not admit light in all its parts, is evident by reason of the
reflection it makes, which is exceeding great; and, not only from the
superficies, but even from the middle of the body within: as you may see
plainly, if you put it in a dark place and enlighten but one part of it, for
then you may perceive, as it were, a current of light pass quite through the
body, although your eye be not opposite to the passage; so that manifestly, it
reflects to your eye from all the inward parts which it lights upon.

Now, a more oblique reflection or refractiom more disperses the light, and
admits more privations of light in its parts, then a less oblique one: as
Galileo has demonstrated, in the First Dialogue of his Systeme. Wherefore a
less oblique reflection or refraction may receive that in quality of light,
which a more oblique one makes appear mingled with darkness; and consequently,
the same thing will appear color in one, which shows it self plain light in
another; for, the greater the inclination of an angle is, the greater also is
the dispersion of the light.

And, as colors are made in this sort, by the medium through which light
passes; so, if we conceive the superficies from which the light reflects to be
diversely ordered in respect of reflection, it must of necessity follow, that it
will have a diverse luster and sight: as we see by experience in the necks of
Pigeons, and in certain positions of our eye; in which the light, passing
through our eyebrows, makes an appearance, as though we saw diverse colors
streaming from a candle we look upon. And accordingly we may observe, how some
things, or rather most, appear of a color more inclining to white, when they
are irradiated with a great light, then when they stand in a lesser. And we see
Painters heighten their colors, and make them appear lighter, by placing deep
shadows by them; even so much, that they will make objects appear nearer and
further off, merely by their mixtion of their colors: Because objects, the
nearer they are, the more strongly and lively they reflect light, and therefore
appear the clearer, as the others do more dusky.

Wherefore, if we put the superficies of one body to have a 2. Concerning the
disposition of those bodies, which produce white or black colors.
better disposition for the reflection of light, then another has; we cannot
but conceive, that such difference in the superficies must needs beget variety
of permanent colors in the bodies: and, according as the superficies of the
same body is better or worse disposed to reflection of light, by polishing, or
by compressure together, or the like; so, the same body, remaining the same in
substance, will show it self of a different color. And, it being evident, that
white (which is the chiefest color) reflects most light, and as evident, that
black reflects least light (so that it reflects shadows in lieu of colors, as
the Obsidian stone among the Romans witness), as also, that, to be dense and
hard and of small parts is the disposition of the object which is most apt to
reflect light: we cannot doubt, but that white is that disposition of the
superficies. That is to say, It is the superficies of a body consisting of
dense, of hard, and of small parts; and on the contrary side, black is the
disposition of the superficies, which is most soft and full of greatest pores:
for, when light meets with such a superficies, it gets easily into it; and is
there as it were absorpt and hidden in caves, and comes not out again to
reflect toward our eye.

This doctrine of ours, of the Generation of Colors, agrees exactly with
Aristotle's principles; and follows evidently out of his definitions of Light,
and of Colors. (And, for suming up 3. The former doctrine confirmed by
Aristotle's authority, reason, and experience.
the general sentiments of mankind, in making his Logical definitions; I think
none will deny his being the greatest Master that ever was). He defines Light
to be actus Diaphani; which we may thus explicate: It is that thing which makes
a body, that has an aptitude or capacity of being seen quite through in every
interior part of it, to be actually seen quite through, according to that
capacity of it. And he defines Colors to be: The term or ending of a
diaphanous body: the meaning whereof is, That Color is a thing which makes a
diaphanous body reach no further, or, the cause why a body is no further
diaphanous, then till where it begins; or, that Color is the reason why we can
see no further, then to such a degree, through or into such a body.

Which definition fits most exactly with the thing it gives us the nature of.
For, it is evident that, when we see a body, the body we see hinders us from
seeing any other, that is in a straight line beyond it: and therefore, it cannot
be denied, but that Color terminates and ends the diaphaneity of a body by
making it self be seen. And, all men agree in conceiving this to be the nature
of Color; and that it is a certain disposition of a body, whereby that body
comes to be seen. On the other side, nothing is more evident, then that, to
have us see a body, light must reach from that body to our eye. Then, adding to
this what Aristotle teaches concerning the producton of seeing; which, he
says, is made by the action of the seen body upon our sense: it follows, that
the object must work upon our sense, either by light, or at least with light;
for, light rebounding from the object round about by straight lines some part
of it must needs come fom the object to our eye. Therefore, by how much an
object sends more light to our eye, by so much that object works more upon it.

Now, seeing that diverse objects send light in diverse manners to our eye,
according to the diverse natures of those objects in regard of hardness,
density, and littleness of parts: we must agree, that such bodies work
diversely, and make different motions or impressions upon our eye; and
consequently, the passion of our eye from such objects must be diverse. But,
there is no other diversity of passion in the eye from the object, in regard of
seeing, but that the object appear diverse to us in point of Color. Therefore we
must conclude, That diverse bodies (I mean diverse or different, in that kind we
hear talk of) must necessarily seem to be of diverse colors, merely by the
sending of light to our eye in diverse fashions. Nay, the very same object must
appear of different colors, whenever it happens that it reflects light
differently to us. As we see in Cloth, if it be gathered together in foulds,
the bottoms of those foulds show to be of one kind of color; and the tops of
them, or where the cloth is stretched out to the full percussion of light,
appears to be of another much brighter color: And accordingly, Painters are
fain to use almost opposite colors to express them. In like manner, if you
look upon two pieces of the same cloth, or plush, whose grains lie contrariwise
to one another, they will likewise appear to be of different colors. Both
which accidents, and many other like them in begetting various representations
of Colors arise out of lights being more or less reflected from one part then
from another.

Thus then you see, how Color is nothing else, but the disposition of the
bodies superficies, as it is more or less apt to reflect 4. How the diversity
of colors follows out of various degrees of rarity and density.
light; since, the reflection of light is made from the superficies of the seen
body, and the variety of its reflection begets variety of colors. But, a
superficies is more or less apt to reflect light; according to the degrees of
its being more or less penetrable by the force of light striking upon it. For,
the rays of light, that gain no entrance into a body they are darted upon, must
of necessity fly back again from it. But, if light gets entrance and penetrates
into the body, it either passes quite through it, or else it is swallowed up
and lost in that body: The former constitutes a diaphanous body, as we have
already determined; and the semblance which the latter will have, in regard of
color, we have also showed must be black.

But, let us proceed a little further. We know that two things render a body
penetrable, or easy to admit another body into it; Holes (such as we call
pores), and softness or humidity; so that dryness, hardness, and compactedness,
must be proproperties which render a body impenetrable. And accordingly we see,
that, if a diaphanous body (which suffers light to run through it) be much
compressed beyond what it was (as, when water is compressed into ice), it
becomes more visible, that is, reflects more light; and consequently, it
becomes more white: for, white is that which reflects more light.

On the contrary side, softness, unctuousness, and viscousness, increases
blackness. As you may experience, in oyling or greasing of Wood which before
was but brown; for thereby it becomes more black; by reason that the unctuous
parts, added to the other, more easily, then they single, admit into them the
light that sticks upon them; and, when it is gotten in, it is so entangled
there (as though the wings of it were birdlimed over), that it cannot fly out
again. And thus it is evident, how the origin of all colors in bodies is
plainly deduced out of the various degrees of rarity and density, variously
mixed and compounded.

Likewise, out of this discourse, the reason is obvious, why some bodies are
diaphanous and others are opacous: for since 5. Why some bodies are Diaphanous,
others Opacous.
it falls out in the constitution of bodies, that one is composed of greater
parts then another; it must needs happen that light be more hindered in passing
through a body composed of bigger parts, then another whose parts are less.
Neither does it import that the pores be supposed as great as the parts; for,
be they never so large, the corners of the thick parts they belong to must
needs break the course of what will not bow, but goes all in straight lines,
more then if the parts and pores were both less; since, for so subtle a
piercer as light, no pores can be too little to give it entrance. It Is true,
such great ones would better admit a liquid body into them; such a one as water
or air; but the reason of that is, because they will bow and take any ply, to
creep into those cavities, if they be large enough; which light will not do.

Therefore it is clear, That freedom of passage can happen to light, only there,
where there is an extreme great multitude of pores and parts, in a very little
quantity or bulk of body (which pores and parts must consequently, be extreme
little ones); for, by reason of their multitude, there must be great variety in
their situation: from whence it will happen, that many lines must be all of
pores quite through, and many others all of parts; although the most will be
mixed of both pores and parts. And so we see that, although the light pass
quite through in many places, yet it reflects from more; not only in the
superficies, but in the very body it self of the Diaphanous substance. But, in
another substance of great parts and pores, there can be but few whole lines of
pores, by which the light may pass from the object, to make it be seen; and
consequently it must be Opacous: which is the contrary of Diaphanous, that
admits many Rays of Light to pass through it from the Object to the Eye;
whereby It is seen, though the Diaphanous hard body intervene between them.

Now, if we consider the generation of these two Colors 6. The former doctrine
of colors confirmed by the generation of white and black in bodies.
(White and black) in bodies, we shall find that likewise to justify and
second our doctrine. For, white things are generally cold and dry: and therefore
are by nature ordained to be receptacles and conservers of heat, and of
moisture; as Physicians note. Contrariwise, Black, as also green, (which is
near of kin to black) are growing colors, and are the die of heat incorporated
in abundance of wet; as we see in smoke, in pitcoal, in garden ground, and in
Chemical putrefactions, all which are black; as also in young herbs; which are
generally green as long as they are young and growing. The other colors,
keeping their standing betwixt these, are generated by the mixture of them;
and, according as they partake more or less of either of them, are nearer or
further off from it.

So that, after all this discourse, we may conclude in short, that The color
of a body is nothing else, but the power which that body has of reflecting
light to the eye, in a certain order and position: and consequently, is nothing
else but the very superficies of it, with its asperity or smoothness, with its
pores or inequalities, with its hardness or softness; and such like. The Rules
and limits whereof, if they were duly observed and ordered, the whole nature and
science of colors would easily be known and described. But, out of this little
we have delivered of this subject, it may be rightly inser'd, that Real Colors
proceed from Rarity and Density (as even now we touched), and have their head
and spring there: and are not strange qualities in the air, but tractable
bodies on the earth, as all are, which as yet we have found and meddled withal,
and are, indeed, the very bodies themselves, causing such effects upon our eye
by reflecting of light, which we express by the names of Colors.

CHAP. XXX. Of Luminous or apparent Colors.
AS for the Luminous Colors, whose natures, Art has 1. Apparitions of colors
through a Prism, or triangular-glass, are of two sorts.
made more maniable by us, than those which are called real Colors, and are
permanent in bodies: their generation is clearly to be seen, in the Prism or
Triangular glass, we formerly mentioned. The considering of which will confirm
our doctrine, That even the colors of bodies are but various mixtures of light
and shadows, diversely reflected to our eyes. For the right understanding of
them, we are to note, That this glass makes apparitions of colors in two
sorts: one, when looking through it there appear various colors in the objects
you look on (different from their real ones), according to the position you
hold the glass in when you look on them. The other sort is, when the beams of
light that pass through the Glass are, as it were, tincted in their passage:
and are cast by the Glass upon some solid object, and appear there in such and
such colors; which continue still the same, in what position soever you stand
to look upon them, either before or behind, or on any side of the Glass.

Secondly, we are to note, that these colors are generally made by refraction
(though sometimes it may happen otherwise, as 2. The several parts of the object
make several angles at their entrance into the Prism.
above we have mentioned). To discover the reason of the first sort of colors
that appear by refraction when one looks through the glass; let us suppose two
several bodies, one black, the other white, lying close by one another, and in
the same horisontal parallel, but so, that that the black be further from us
then the white; then, if we hold the Prism, through which we are to see these
two oppositely colored bodies, somewhat above them, and that side of it, at
which the colored bodies must enter into the glass to come to our eye,
parallel to those bodies; it is evident, That the black will come into the Prism
by lesser angles then the white. I mean, that in the line of distance from that
face of the glass at which the colors come in, a longer line or part of black
will subtend an angle, no bigger then a lesser line or part of white does
subtend.

Thirdly, we are to note, That, from the same point of the object, there come
various beams of light to that whole superficies 6 The reason why sometimes the
same object appears through the Prism in two places; and in one place mor
lively, in the other place more dim.
of the glass; so that it may, and sometimes does happen, that, from the some
part of the object, beams are reflected to the eye from several parts of that
superficies of the glass at which they enter. And, whenever this happens, the
object must necessarily be seen in diverse parts; that is, the picture of it
will at the same time appear to the eye in diverse places. And particularly, we
may plainly observe two pictures; one a lively and strong one, the other a
faint and dim one. Of which, the dim one will appear nearer us then the lively
one, and is caused by a secondary ray; or rather, I should say, by a longer
ray, that, striking nearer to the hither edge of the glasses superficies (which
is the furthest from the object), makes a more acute angle then a shorter ray
does, that strikes upon a part of the glass further from our eye, but nearer
the object: and therefore, the image made by this secondary or longer ray must
appear both nearer and more dusky, then the image made by the primary and
shorter ray. And, the further from the object that the glass through which it
reflects is situated, (keeping still in the same parallel to the Horizon), the
further the place where the second dusky picture appears is, from the place
where the primary strong picture appears.

If any man have a mind to satisfy himself by experience of the truth of this
note, let him place a sheet of white paper upon a black carpet covering a
table, so as the paper may reach within two or three fingers of the edge of the
capet, (under which, let there be nothing to succeed the black of the carpet,
but the empty dusky Air); and then let him set himself at a convenient
distance, (the measure of which is, that the paper appear at his feet, when he
looks through the glass), and look at the paper through his Prism, situated in
such sort as we have above determined: and he will perceive a whitish or
lightsome shadow proceed from the lively picture that he sees of white, and
shoot out nearer toward him then that lively picture is; and he will discern
that it comes into the glass, through a part of it nearer to his eye or face,
and further from the object then the strong Image of the white does. And
further, if he causes the nearer part of the paper to he covered with some thin
body of a sadder color; this dim white vanishes: which it does not if the
further part of the paper be covered. Whereby it is evident, that it is a
secondary image, proceeding from the hither part of the paper.

Now then, to make use of what we have said, toward finding out the reason,
why the red, and blew, and other colors appear, 4 The reason of the various
colors that appear in looking through a Prism.
when one looks through a Prism: let us proceed upon our former example, in
which a white paper lies upon a black carpet (for, the diametral opposition of
those colors makes them most remarkable) so that there be a parcel of black on
the hither side of the paper; and therein let us examine, according to our
grounds, what colors must appear at both ends of the Paper, looking upon them
through the triangular glass.

To begin with the furthest end, where the black lies beyond the white: we may
consider, there must come from the black a secondary dark misty shadow (besides
the strong black that appears beyond the paper), which must shoot toward you
(in such sort as we said of the whitish lightsome shadow); and consequently,
must lie over the strong picture of the white paper. Now in this case, a third
midling color must result, out of the mixture of these two extremes of black
and white: since they come to the eye almost in the same line; at least in
lines that make so little a difference in their angles, as is not discernable.

The like whereof happens in Clothes, or Stuffs, or Stockings, that are woven of
diverse colored, but very small threads. For if you stand so far off from such a
piece of Stuff, that the little threads of different colors, which lie
immediate to one another, may come together as in one line to your eye; it will
appear of a midling color, different from both those it results from: But, if
you stand so near, that each thread sends Rays enough to your eye, and that the
Basis of the Triangle, which comes from each Thread to your eye, be long enough
to make, at the vertex of it (which is in your eye), an angle big enough to be
seen singly by it self; then each color will appear apart, as it truly is.

Now, the various natures of midling colors we may learn of Painters; who
compose them upon their Pallets by a like mixture of the extremes. And they
tell us that, if a white color prevail strongly over a dark color, Reds and
Yellows result out of that mixture: but if black prevail strongly over white,
then blews, violets, and sea-greens are made. And accordingly, in our case we
cannot doubt but that the primary lively picture of the white must prevail over
the faint dusky sable mantle, with which it comes mingled to the eye: and doing
so, it must needs make a like appearance as the Sunbeams do, when, reflecting
from a black cloud, they fringe the edges of it, with Red and with Yellow; and
the like they do, looking through a rainy or a windy cloud: and, much like
hereto, we shall see this mixture of strong white with a faint shadow of
black, make, at this brim of the Paper, a fair ledge of Red; which will end and
vanish in a more lightsome one of Yellow.

But at the hither edge of the paper, where the secondary weak picture of white
is mingled with the strong black picture, in this mixture the black is
prevalent; and accordingly (as we said of the mixture of the Painters colors)
there must appear, at the bottom of the paper, a Lemb of deep blew: which will
grow more and more lightsome, the higher it grows; and so passing through
violet and seagreen, vanish in light, when it reaches to the mastering field
of primary whiteness, that sends his stronger Rays by direct lines. And this
transposition of the colors, at the several ends of the paper, shows the
reason why they appear quite contrary, if you put a black paper upon a white
Carpet: And therefore, we need not add any thing particularly concerning that.

And likewise, out of this we may understand why the colors appear quite
contrary (that is, Red, where before the blew appeared, and blew, where Red),
if we look upon the same object through the Glass in another position or
situation of it; namely, if we raise it so high, that we must look upwards to
see 5. The reason why the Prism in one position, may make the colors appear
quite contrary to what they did, when it was in another position.
the object: which thereby appears above us; whereas, in the former situation, it
came in through the lower superficies, and we looked down to it, and it
appeared under us. For, in this second case, the objects coming into the glass
by a superficies, not parallel as before, but sloaping from the object-wards:
it follows, that, the nearer the object is, the lesser must the angle be which
it makes with the superficies; contrary to what happened in the former case.
And likewise, that, if, from one point of the nearer object, there fall two
rays upon the glass, the ray that falls uppermost will make a lesser angle,
then the other that falls lower: and so, by our former discourse, that point
may come to appear in the same place with a point of the further object, and
thereby make a midling color.

So that, in this case, the white which is nearer will mingle his feeble
picture with the black that is further off: whereas before, the black that was
further off mingled his feeble shadow with the strong picture of the nearer
white. Wherefore, by our rule we borrowed of the Painters, there will now appear
a blew on the further end of the paper, where before appeared a red; and by
consequence, on the nearer end a red will now appear, where in the former case
a blew appeared. This case we have chosen, as the plainest to show the nature
of such colors; out of which he that is curious may derive his knowledge to
other cases; which we omit, because our intent is only to give a general
doctrine, and and not the particulars of the Science; and rather to take away
admiration, than to instruct the Reader in this matter.

As for the various colors, which are made by straining light through a glass,
or through some other Diaphanous body; to 6. The reason of the various colors
in general, by pure light passing through a Prism.
discover the causes and variety of them, we must examine what things they are
that concur to the making of them; and what accidents may arrive to those
things, to vary their product. It Is clear, that nothing intervenes or concurs
to the producing of any of these colors; besides the light it self which is
dyed into color, and the glass or Diaphanous body through which it passes. In
them therefore, and in nothing else, we are to make our enquiry.

To begin then: we may observe, that light, passing through a Prism, and being
cast upon a reflecting object, is not always color; but in some circumstances
it still continues light, and in others it becomes color. Withal we may
observe, that those beams which continue light and endure very little mutation
by their passage, making as many refractions, make much greater deflexions from
the straight lines by which they came, into the glass, then those Rays do which
turn to color. As you may experience, if you oppose one surface of the Glass
Perpendicularly to a Candle, and set a Paper (not irradiated by the Candle)
opposite to one of the other sides of the Glass: for, upon the paper, you shall
see fair light shine without any color, and you may perceive, that the line,
by which the light comes to the Paper, is almost Perpendicular to that line by
which the light comes to the Prism. But, when light becomes color, it strikes
very obliquely upon one side of the glass; and comes likewise very obliquely
out of the other, that sends it in color upon a reflectent body; so that in
conclusion, there is nothing left us whereon to ground the generation of such
colors; besides the littleness of the angle, and the sloapingness of the line,
by which the illuminant strikes one side of the Glass and comes out at the
other, when colors proceed from such a percussion.

To this then we must wholly apply our selves, and knowing that generally, when
light falls upon a body with so great a sloaping or inclination, so much of it
as gets through must needs be weak and much diffused; it follows, that the
reason of such colors must necessarily consist in this diffusion and weakness
of light; which the more it is diffused, the weaker it grows, and the more
lines of darkness are between the lines of light, and mingle themselves with
them.

To confirm this, you may observe, how, just at the egress, from the Prism, of
that light, which going on a little further, becomes colors, no color at all
appears upon a paper opposed close to the side of the Glass; till removing it
farther off, the colors begin to show themselves upon the edges: thereby
convincing manifestly, that it was the excess of light, which hindered them from
appearing at the first. And, in like manner, if you put a burning glass between
the light and the Prism, so as to multiply the light which goes through the
Prism to the paper; you destroy much of the color, by converting it into
light. But on the otherside, if you thicken the air, and make it dusky with
smoke or dust; you will plainly see, that, where the light comes through a
unequal glass (perpendicularly opposed to the illuminant), there will appear
colors on the edges of the cones that the light makes. And peradventure the
whole cones would appear colored, if the darkning were conveniently made for,
if an opacous body be set within either of the cones, its sides will appear
colored, though the air be but moderately thickened; which shows that the
addition of a little darkness would make that, which otherwise appears pure
light, be thoroughly dyed into Colors. And thus you have the true and adequate
cause of the appearance of such colors.

Now, to understand what colors, and upon which sides, will 7. Upon what side
every color appears, this is made by pure light passing through a Prism.
appear: we may consider, that, When light passes through a glass or other
Diaphanous body, so much of it as shines in the air, or upon some reflecting
body bigger then it self, after its passage through the glass, must of
necessity have darkness on both sides of it, and so be comprised and limited by
two darknesses; but if some opacous body less then the light be put in the way
of the light, then it may happen contrariwise, that there be darkness (or the
shadow of that opacous body) between two lights.

Again, we must consider, that, when light falls so upon a Prism as to make
colors, the two outward Rays, which proceed from the light to the two sides of
the superficies at which the light enters, are so refracted, that, at their
coming out again through the other superficies, that Ray which made the less
angle with the outward superficies of the glass, going in, makes the greater
angle with the outside of the other superficies, coming out; and contrariwise,
that Ray, which made the greater angle, going in, makes the lesser, at its
coming out: and the two internal angles, made by those two Rays and the outside
of the superficies they issue at, are greater then two right angles. And so we
see, that the light dilates it self at its coming out.

Now, because Rays that issue through a superficies, the nearer they are to be
perpendiculars to that superficies, so much the thicker they are; it follows,
that this dilation of light at its coming out of the glass must be made and
increase from that side, where the angle was least at the going in and greatest
at the coming out: so that, the nearer to the contrary side you take a part of
light, the thinner the light must be there; and contrariwise, the thicker it
must be, the nearer it is to the side where the angle at the rays coming out is
the greater. Wherefore, the strongest light (that is, the place where the light
is least mixed with darkness) must be nearer that side than the other.
Consequently hereto, if by an opacous body you make a shadow comprehended
within this light; that shadow must also have its strongest part nearer to one
of the lights betwixt which it is comprised, then to the other: for, shadow
being nothing else but the want of light, hindered by some opacous body; it must
of necessity lie aversed from the illuminant, just as the light would have lain
if it had not been hindered. Wherefore, seeing that the stronger side of light
more impeaches the darkness, then the feebler side does, the deepest dark must
incline to that side where the light is weakest; that is, toward that side on
which the shadow appears, in respect of the opacous body or of the illuminant;
and so be a cause of deepness of Color on that side, if it happen to be
fringed with color.

CHAP. XXXI. The causes of certain appearances in luminous Colors; with a
Conclusion of the discourse touching the Senses and the Sensible Qualities.
OUt of these grounds we are to seek the resolution of all such Symptoms, as
appear to us in this kind of colors. 1. The reason of each several color in
particular caused by light passing through a Prism.
First therefore, calling to mind, how we have already declared, that the red
color is made by a greater proportion of light mingled with darkness, and the
blew with a less proportion: it must follow, that, when light passes through a
glass in such sort as to make colors, the mixture of the light and darkness,
on that side where the light is strongest, will incline to a red; and their
mixture on the otherside, where the light is weakest, will make a violet or
blew. And, this we see fall out accordingly, in the light which is tincted by
going through a Prism; for, a red color appears on that side from which the
light dilates or increases, and a blew is on that side toward which it
decreases.

Now, if a dark body be placed within this light, so as to have the light come
on both sides of it; we shall see the contrary happen, about the borders of the
picture or shadow of the dark body: that is to say, the red color will be on
that side of the picture which is toward or over against the blew color made
by the glass, and the blew of the picture will be on that side which is toward
the red made by the glass; as you may experience, if you place a slender
opacous body along the Prism, in the way of the light, either before or behind
the Prism. The reason whereof is, that the opacous body standing in the middle,
environed by light, divides it and makes two lights of that which was but one;
each of which lights, is comprised between two darknesses; to wit, between each
border of Shadow that joins to each extreme of the light that comes from the
glass, and each side of the Opacous bodies shadow. Wherefore in each of these
lights, or rather in each of their comixtions with darkness, there must be red
on the one side, and blew on the other; according to the course of light which
we have explicated.

And thus it falls out, agreeable to the Rule we have given, that blew comes to
be on that side of the opacous bodies shadow, on which the glass casts red; and
red on that side of it, on which the glass casts blew. Likewise, when light,
going through a unequal glass makes two cones: the edges of the cone, betwixt
the glass and the point of concourse, will appear red (if the room be dark
enough); and the edges of the further cone will appear blew; both for the
reason given. For, in this case, the point of concourse is the strong light
betwixt the two cones: of which, that betwixt the glass and the point is the
stronger; that, beyond the point, the weaker. And for this very reason, if an
opacous body be put in the axis of these two cones, both the sides of its
picture will be red, if it be held in the first cone which is next to the
glass, and both will be blew, if the body be situated in the further cone: for,
both sides being equally situated to the course of the light, within its own
cone, there is nothing to vary the colors, but only the strength and weakness
of the two lights of the cones on this and that side the point of the
concourse; which point being, in this case, the strong and clear light, whereof
we made general mention in our precedent note, the cone toward the glass and
the illuminant is the stronger side, and the cone from the glass is the weaker.

In those cases where this reason is not concerned, we shall see the victory
carried, in the question of colors, by the shady side of the opacous body:
that is, the blew color will still appear on that side of the opacous bodies
shadow that is furthest from the illuminant. But, where both causes concur and
contest for precedence, there the course of the light carries it: that is to
say, the red will be on that side of the opacous bodies shadow where it is
thicker and darker, and blew on the otherside where the shadow is not so
strong; although the shadow be cast that way that the red appears: as is to be
seen, when a slender body is placed betwixt the Prism and the reflectant body,
upon which the light and colors are cast through the Prism. And it is evident,
that this cause of the course of the shadow is in it self a weaker cause, than
the other of the course of light, and must give way to it whenever they
encounter (as it cannot be expected but that, in all circumstances, shadows
should be light) because the colors which the glass casts in this case, are
much more faint and dusky, than in the other.

For effects of this latter cause, we see that, when an opacous body lies cross
the Prism, whiles it stands end-ways, the red or blew color will appear on the
upper or lower side of its picture; according as the illuminant is higher or
lower then the transverse opacous body: the blew ever keeping to that side of
the picture, that is furthest from the body and the illuminant that make it;
and the red, the contrary. Likewise, if an opacous body be placed out of the
axis, in either of the cones we have explicated before; the blew will appear on
that side of the picture which is furthest advanced in the way that the shadow
is cast, and the red on the contrary. And so, if the opacous body be placed in
the first cone, beside the axis; the red will appear on that side of the
picture, in the basis of the second cone, which is next to the circumference,
and the blew on that side next the axis: but if it be placed on one side of the
axis in the second cone; then the blew will appear on that side the picture is
next the circumference, and the red on that side, which is next the center of
the basis of the cone.

There remains yet one difficulty of moment to be determined: (...). (...) ^ing
the Prism*
which is Why, when through a glass two colors (namely, blew and red) are cast
from a Candle upon a paper or wall; if you put your eye in the place of one of
the colors that shines upon the wall, and so that color comes to shine upon
your eye (so that another man who looks upon it will see thot color plainly
upon your eye) nevertheless, you shall see the other color in the glass? as
for example, if on your eye there shines a red, you shall see a blew in the
glass; and if a blew shines upon your eye, you shall see a red.

The reason hereof is, that The colors which appear in the glass are of the
nature of those luminous colors we first explicated, that arise from looking
upon white and black bordering together. For, a candle standing in the air, is,
as it were, a white situated between two blacks; the circumstant dusky air,
having the nature of a black: so then, that side of the candle which is seen
through the thicker part of the glass appears red, and that which is seen
through the thinner appears blew; in the same manner, as when we look through
the glass. Whereas the colors shine contrariwise upon a paper or reflecting
object; as we have already declared, together with the reasons of both these
appearances; each fitted to its proper case of looking through the glass upon
the luminous object surrounded with darkness, in the one; and of observing the
effect wrought by the same luminous object in some medium, or upon some
reflectent superficies, in the other.

And to confirm this, if a white paper be set standing hollow before the glass,
(like half a hollow pillar, whose flats stands edgeways toward the glass, so
as both the edges may be seen through it); the further edge will seem blew, and
the nearer will be red, and the like will happen, if the paper be held in the
free air parallel to the lower superficies of the glass, without any black
carpet to limit both ends of it (which serves to make the colors the smarter.
(So that, in both cases, the air serves manifestly for a black; in the first,
between the two white edges, and in the second, limiting the two white ends:
and by consequence, the air about the candle must likewise serve for two blacks
including the light candle between them.

Several other delightful experiments of luminous color I might produce; to
confirm the grounds I have laid, for the nature and making of them: But, I
conceive, these I have mentioned are abundantly enough, for the end I propose
to my self. Therefore, I will take my leave of this subtle and nice subject;
referring my Reader (if he be curious to entertain himself with a full variety
of such shining wonders) to our ingenious Countreyman and my worthy friend, Mr.
Hall: who, at my last being at Liege, showed me there most of the experiences I
have mentioned, together with several other very fine and remarkable
curiosities concerning light; which he promised me he would shortly publish in
a work, that he had already cast and almost finished upon that svbject. And in
it I doubt not but He will give entire satisfaction to all the doubts and
Problems that may occur in this subject: whereas my little exercise formerly in
making experiments of this kind, and my less convenience of attempting any now,
makes me content my self with thus spining a course thread (from wool carded me
by others) that may run through the whole doctrine of colors, whose causes
have hitherto been so much admired, and that it will do so, I am strongly
persuaded; both because, if I look upon the causes which I have assigned a
prirori, me thinks they appear very agreeable to nature and to reason; and if I
apply them to the several Phenomens which Mr. Hall showed me, and to as many
others as I have otherwise met with, I find they agree exactly with them, and
render a full account of them.

And thus, you have the whole nature of luminous colors resolved into the
mixion of light and darkness; by the due ordering of which, who have skill
therein may produce any middle color he please: as I my self have seen the
experience of infinite changes in such sort made; so that it seems to me,
nothing can be more manifest, then that luminous colors are generated in the
way here delivered. Of which how that gentle and obedient Philosophy of
Qualities (readily obedient to what hard task soever you assign it) will render
a rational account; and what discreet virtue it will give the same things to
produce different colors and maked different appearances, merely by such nice
changes of situation: I do not well understand. But peradventure, the Patrones
of it may say that every such circumstance is a Conditio sine qua non: and
therewith (no doubt) their Auditors will be much the wiser, in comprehending the
particular nature of light, and of the colors that have their origin from it.

The Rainbow, for whose sake most men handle this matter of luminous colors,
is generated in the first of the two ways we 3 Of the Rainbow; and how, by the
color of any body, we may know the composition of the body it self.
have delivered for the production of such colors: and has its origin from
refraction; when the eye, being at a convenient distance from the refracting
body, looks upon it to discern what apears in it. The speculation of which may
be found in that excellent discourse of Mounsir des Carts, which is the sixth
of his Meteors: where he has, with great accurateness, delivered a most
ingenious doctrine of this mystery; had not his bad chance, of missing in a
former principle (as I conceive) somewhat obscured it. For, he there gives the
cause, so neat and so justly calculated to the apearances, as no man can doubt
but that he has found out the true reason of this wonder of nature, which has
perplexed so many great wits: as may almost be seen with our very eyes; when,
looking upon the fresh dew, in a Sunshiny morning, we may, in due positions,
perceive the Rainbow colors not three yards distant from us; in which we may
distinguish even single drops with their effects. But he, having deterned the
nature of light to consist in motion, and proceeding consequently, concludes
colors to be but certain kinds of motion: by which, I fear, it is impossible
that any good account should be given of the experiences we see.

But, what we have already said in that point, I conceive, is sufficient to
give the Reader satisfaction therein: and to secure him, that the generation of
the colors in the Rainbow, as well as all other colors, is reduced to the
mingling of light and darkness; which is our principal intent to prove. Adding
thereto, by way of advertisement, for others whose leisure may permit them to
make use thereof; that who shall balance the proportions of luminous colors
may, peradventure, make himself a step to judge of the natures of those bodes,
which really and constantly wear like dies: for, the figures of the least parts
of such bodies, jointly with the connection or mingling of them with pores, must
of necessity be that which makes them reflect light to our eyes, in such
proportions, as the luminous colors of their tincture and semblance do.

For, two things are to be considered in bodies, in order to reflecting of
light: either the extancies and cavities of them or their hardness and
softness. As for the first, the proportions of light mingled with darkness will
be varied, according as the extancies or the cavities exceed, and as each of
them is great or small: since cavities have the nature of darkness, in respect
of extancies; as our modern Astronomers show, when they give an account of
theface (as some call it) in the Orb of the Moon. Likewise, in regard of soft
or of resistent parts; light will be reflected by them more or less strongly,
that is, more or less mingled with darkness. For, whereas it rebounds smartly
back, if it strikes not upon a hard and a resistent body; and accordingly will
show it self in a bright color: it must of necessity not reflect at all, or
but very feebly, if it penetrates into a body of much humidity, or loses it
self in the pores of it; and that little which comes so weakly from it, must
consequently appear of a duskie die. And, these two being all the causes of the
great variety of colors we see in bodies; according to the quality of the body
in which the real color appears, it may easily be determined from which of
these it proceeds: and then, by the color, you may judge of the composition
and mixture of the rare and dense parts, which by reflecting light begets it.

In fine, out of all we have hitherto said in this Chapter, we may conclude the
Primary intent of our so long discourse: which 4 That all the Sensible
Qualities are real bodies, resulting out of several mixtures of Rarity and
Density.
is, That the Senses of Living Creatures, and the Sensible Qualities in Bodies,
are made by the Mixtion of Rarity and Density; as well as the Natural Qualities
we spoke of in their place. For, it cannot be denied but that heat and cold,
and the other couples or pairs which beat upon our Touch, are the very same as
we see in other bodies; the qualities which move our Taste and Smell are
manifestly a kin and joined with them; Light we have concluded to be Fire; and
of Motion (which affects our ear) there is no dispute: so that it is evident, how
all sensible quaqualities are as truly bodies, as those other Qualities which
we call natural.

To this we may add, that the Properties of these sensible qualities are such
as proceed evidently from Rarity and Density. For (to omit those which our
Touch takes notice of, as too plain to be questioned) Physicians, judge and
determine the natural qualities of meat and medicines and simples, by their
Tastes and Smells. By those qualities they find out powers in them to do
material operations; and such as our instruments of cutting, filling, brushing,
and the like, do to ruder and grosser bodies: all which virtues being in these
instruments by the different tempers of Rarity and Density is a convincing
argument, that it must be the same causes, which produce effects of the same
kind in their smell and tastes. And, and as for light, it is known how
corporeally it works upon our eyes.

Again, if we look particularly into the composition of the organs of our
Senses, we shall meet with nothing but such qualities, as we find in the
composition of all other natural bodies. If we search into our Eye, we shall
discover in it nothing but diaphanety, softness, diverse colors, and
consistencies; which all Anatomists, to explicate, parallel in other bodies:
the like is of our Tongue, our Nostrils, and our Ears. As for our Touch, that
is so material a sense, and so diffused over the whole body; as we can have no
difficulty about it. Seeing then that all the qualities we can discover in the
organs of our Senses are made by the various minglings of Rarity with Density;
how can we doubt, but that the active powers over these patients must be of the
same nature and kind?

Again, seeing that examples above brought convince, That the objects of one
sense may be known by another; who can doubt of a community among them, if not
of degree, at least of the whole kind? as we see that the Touch is the
groundwork of all the rest; and consequently, that being evidently corporeal
and consisting in a temper of Rarity and Density, why should we make difficulty
in allowing the like of the rest?

Besides, let us compose of Rarity and Density such tempers as we find in our
Senses; and let us again compose of Rarity and Density such actors, as we have
determined the qualities, we call sensible to be: and will it not manifesty
follow, that these two, applied to one another, must produce such effects, as
we affirm our Senses have; that is, to pass the outward objects, by different
degrees, to an inward receiver?

Again, let us cast our eyes upon the natural resolution of 5 Why the Senses
are only Five in number, with a conclusion of all the former doctrine
concerning them.
bodies, and how they move us; and we shall thereby discover, both what the
Senses are, and why they are just so many, and that they cannot be more. For,
an outward body may move us either in its own bulk or quantity; or as it works
upon another: The first is done by the Touch; the second by the Ear, when a
body, moving the air, makes us take notice of his motion. Now in resolution,
there are three active parts proceeding from a body, which have power to move
us: the fiery part; which you sees works upon your eyes, by the virtue of
light: the airy part; which we know moves our nostrils, by being sucked in with
the air. And lastly, the salt; which dissolves in water, and so moves our watery
sense, which is, our taste.

And, these being all the active parts, that show themselves in the resolution
of a body; how can we imagine there should be any more senses to be wrought
upon? For, what the stable body shows of it self will be reduced to the touch:
what as it moves, to hearing: what the resolutions of it, according to the
natures of the resolved atoms that fly abroad, will concern the other three
senses; as we have declared. And, more ways of working, or of active parts, we
cannot conceive to spring out of the nature of a body.

Finally, if we cast our eyes upon the intention of nature: to what purpose are
our Senses, but to bring us into knowledge of the natures of the substances we
converse withal? Surely, to effect this, there cannot be invented a better or
more reasonable expedient, then to bring to our judgment seat the likenesses or
extracts of those substances; in so delicate a model, that they may not be
offensive or cumbersom; like so many patterns presented to us, to know by them
what the whole piece is. (For all similitude is a communication between two
things, in that quality wherein their likeness consists). And therefore we cannot
doubt, but that nature has given us, by the means when have explicated, an
essay to all things in the world that fall under our commerce; whereby we judge
whether they be profitable or nocive to us: and yet in so delicate and subtle
a quantity, as may, in no way be offensive to us; whiles we take our measures
to attract what is good, and avoid what is noxious.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Sensation, or the motion whereby Sense is properly exercised.
OUt of the considerations which we have delivered in these last Chapters, the
Reader may gather the unreasonablenesse 1. Monsir des Carts his opinion
touching Sensation.
of vulgar Philosophers; who, to explicate life and sense, are not content to
give us terms with out explicating them; but will force us to believe
contradictions. Telling us, that Life consisted in this, That the same thing
has a power to work upon it self; and that Sensation is a working of the
active part of the same sense upon its passive part: and yet will admit no
parts in it; but will have the same indivisible power work upon it self. And
this, with such violence and downbearing of all opposition, that they deem him
not considerable in the Schools, who shall offer only to doubt of what they
teach him hereabout; but brand him with the censure of one who knows not, and
contradicts the very first principles of Philosophy. Wherefore it is requisite
we should look somewhat more particularly, into the manner how sensation is
made.

Monsir des Carts, (who, by his great and Heroic Attempts, and by showing
mankind how to steer and husband their reason to best advantage, has left us
no excuse for being ignorant of any thing worth the knowing), explicating the
nature of Sense, is of opinion, that the bodies without us, in certain
circumstances, give a blow upon our exterior Organes: from whence, by the
continuity of the parts, that blow or motion is continued, till it come to our
brain and seat of knowledge; upon which it gives a stroke, answerable to that
which the outward sense first received. And there this knock causing a
particular effect according to the particular nature of the motion (which
depends of the nature of the object that produces it); our soul and mind has
notice, by this means, of every thing that knocks at our gates: and, by the
great variety of knocks or motions that our brain feels, (which rises from as
great a variety of natures in the objects that cause them), we are enabled to
judge of the nature and conditions of every thing we converse withal.

As for example; he conceives Light to be nothing else but a percussion made by
the illuminant upon the air, or upon the ethereal substance, which he puts to
be mixed with, and to run through all bodies: which being a continuate medium
between the illuminant and our sense, the percussion upon that strikes also our
sense; which he calls the nerve that reaches from the place stricken (to wit,
from the bottom of your eye) to the brain. Now, by reason of the continuity of
this string or nerve, he conceives that the blow, made upon the outward end of
it by the other, is convei'd by the other end of it to the brain; the end
striking the brain in the same measure as the other struck the other end of it:
like the Jack of a Virginal, which strikes the sounding cord, according as the
Musicians hand presses upon the stop. The part of the brain which is thus
stricken he supposes to be the fantasy; where he deems the soul resides; and
thereby takes notice of the Motion and Object that are without. And what is
said thus of Sight, is to be applied proportionably to the rest of the Senses.

This then is the sum of Monsir des Carts his opinion; which he has very
finely expressed, with all the advantages that opposite examples, significant
words, and clear method can give to a witty Discourse: Which yet is but a part
of the commendations he deserves, for what he has done on this particular: He
is, over and above all this, the first that I have ever met with, who has
published any conceptions of this nature, whereby to make the operations of
sense intellegible. Certainly, this praise will ever belong to him, that he
has given the first hint of speaking groundingly, and to the purpose, upon
this Subject; and, whoever shall carry it any further (as what important
Mystery was ever born and perfected at once?) must acknowledge to have derived
his light from him.

For my part, I shall so far agree with him, as to allow motion alone
sufficient to work sensation in us: and not only to allow it sufficient, but
also to profess, that, not only this, but no 2. The Authors opinion touching
sensation.
other effect whatever can be wrought in us, but motion, and by means of
motion. Which is evident out of what we have already delivered, speaking of
bodies in general, that all action among them either is local motion, or else
follows it; and no less evident, out of what we have declared in particular,
concerning the operations of the outward senses, and the objects that work upon
them: and therefore, whoever shall in this matter require any thing further then
a difference of motion, he must first seek other instruments in objects to
cause it. For, examining from their very origin the natures, of all the bodies
we converse withal; we cannot find any ground to believe they have power or
means to work any thing beyond motion.

But, I shall crave leave to differ from him, in determining what is the
subject of this motion, whereby the brain judges of the nature of the thing that
causes it. He will allow no local change of any thing in a man, further then
certain vibrations of strings, which he gives the objects to play upon, from
the very sense up to the brain: and, by their different manners of shaking the
brain, he will have it know what kind of thing it is that strikes the outward
sense; without removing any thing within our body from one place to another.
But, I shall go the more common way; and make the Spirits to be the porters of
all news to the brain: only adding thereto, that these news, which they carry
thither, are material participations of the bodies, that work upon the outward
organs of the senses, and, passing through them, mingle themselves with the
Spirits, and so go whether they carry them; that is, to the brain, to which,
from all parts of the body, they have immediate resort, and a perpetual
communication with it.

So that, to exercise Sense (which the Latins call sentire, but in English we
have no one word common to our several particular motions of diverse perceptions
by sense) is, Our brain to receive an impression from the extern object, by the
operation or mediation of an organical part made for that purpose, and some one
of those which we term an extern Sense; from which impression usually flows
some motion proper to the living creature. And thus you see that the outward
Senses are not truly Senses, as if the power of sensation were in them: but in
another meaning; to wit, so far as they are instruments of qualifying or
conveying the object to the brain.

Now, that the Spirits are the instruments of this conveyance 3. Reasons to
persuade the Authors opinion.
is evident, by what we daily see; that, if a man be very attentive to some one
extern object (as, to the hearing or seeing of something that much delights or
displeases him), he neither hears or sees any thing but what his mind is bent
upon: though, all that while, his eyes and ears be open; and several of their
objects be present, which at other times would affect him. For, what can be the
reason of this, but that the brain, employing the greatest part of his store of
Spirits about that one object, which so powerfully entertains him, the other
find very few free for them to imbue with their Tincture? And therefore they
have not strength enough to give the brain a sufficient taste of themselves, to
make it be observed; nor to bring themselves into a place where they may be
distinctly discerned: but, striving to get to it, they lose themselves in the
throng of the others, who for that time besiege the brain closely. Whereas in
Monsir des Carts his way, (in which no spirits are required), the apprehension
must of necessity be carried precisely according to the force of the motion of
the extern object.

This argument, I confess, is not so convincing against his opinion, but that
the necessity of the consequence may be avoided; and another reason be given
for this effect, in Monsir des Carts his doctrime. For he may say, that the
affection, being vehemently bent upon some one object, may cause the motion to
be so violent, by the addition of inward percussions, that the other coming
from the outward sense, being weaker, may be drowned by it: as lesser sounds
are by greater, which forcibly carry our ears that way, and fill them so
entirely that the others cannot get in to be heard, or as the drawing of one
man, that pulls backwards, is not felt, when a hundred draw forwards. Yet this
is hard to conceive, considering the great eminency which the present object
has over an absent one, to make it self be felt; whence it follws, that
multiplication of motion must be extremely increased wthin, to overtop and bear
down the motion, caused by a present object actually working without.

But, that which indeed convinces me to believe I go not wrong in this course,
which I have set down, for extern bodies working upon our sense and knowledge,
is first, the convenience and agreeablness to nature, both in the objects and
in us, that it should be done in that manner: and next, a difficulty in Monsir
des Carts his way, which, me thinks, makes it impossible that his should be
true. And then, his being absolutely the best of any I have hitherto met
withal, and mine supplying what his falls short in, and being sufficient to
perform the effects we see: I shall not think I do amiss in believing my own to
be true, till some body else show a better.

Let us examine these considerations one after another. It Is 4. That Vital
Spirits are the immediate instruments of Sensation, by conveying sensible
qualities to the brain.
manifest, by what we have already established, that there is a perpetual flux
of little parts or atoms out of all sensible bodies, that are composed of the
four Elements, and are here in the sphere of continual motion by action and
passion: and such it is, that, in all probability, these little parts cannot
choose but get in at the doors of our bodies, and mingle themselves with the
spirits that are in our nervs. Which if they do, it is unavoidable, but that, of
necessity, they must make some motion in the brain; as, by the explication we
have made of our outward senses, is manifest: and the brain being the source
and origin of all such motion in the Animal, as is termed voluntary, this
stroke of the object will have the power to cause some variation in its motions
that are of that nature, and by consequence, must be a Sensation, for, that
change, which, being made in the brain by the object, is cause of voluntary
motion in the Animal, is that we call sensation.

But, we shall have best satisfaction, by considering how it fares with every
sense in particular. It Is plain, that our Touch or feeling is affected by the
little bodies of heat, or cold, or the like, which are squees'd or evaporated
from the object, and get into our flesh, and consequently, mingle themselves
with our spirits: and accordingly, our hand is heated with the flood of subtle
fire, which, from a great one without, streams into it; and is benumbed with
multitudes of little bodies of cold, that settle in it. All which little
bodies, of heat or of cold or of what kind soever they be, when they are once
got in, must needs mingle themselves with the spirits they meet with in the
nerve: and consequently, must go along with them up to the brain. For, the
channel of the nerve being so little, that the most accurate Inspectors of
nature cannot distinguish any little cavity or hole running along the substance
of it; and the spirits which ebb and flow in those channels being so in
infinitely subtle, and in so small a quantity as such channels can contain:
it is evident, that an atome of insensible bigness is sufficient to imbue the
whole length and quantity of spirit that is in one nerve; and that atome, by
reason of the subtilty of the liquor it is immersed in, is, presently and as it
were instantly, diffused through the whole substance of it. The source therefore
of that liquor being in the brain, it cannot be doubted, but that the force of
the extern object must needs affect the brain, according to the quality of the
said atome; that is, give a motion or knock, conformable to its own nature.

As for our Taste, it is as plain, that the little parts, pressed out of the body
which affects it, mingle themselves with the liquor that being in the tongue, is
continuate to the spirits: and then, by our former argument it is evident, they
must reach to the brain. And for our Smelling, there is nothing can hinder
Odors from having immediate passage up to our brain, when by our nose they are
once gotten into our head.

In our Hearing, there is a little more difficulty, for Sound being 5. How
found is conveyed to the brain by vital spirits.
nothing but a motion of the air which strikes our ear; it may seem more then
needs, to send any corporeal substance into the brain: and that it is
sufficient, that the vibrations of the outward air, shaking the drum of the
Ear, do give a like motion to the air within the ear, that on the inside
touches the Tympane; and so this air thus moved shakes and beats upon the
brain. But this, I conceive, will not serve the turn; for, if there were no
more, but an actual motion, in the making of Hearing, I do not see how sounds
could be conserved in the Memory; since, of necessity, motion must always
reside in some body: which argument we shall press anon against Monsir des
Carts his Opinion for the rest of the Senses.

Out of this difficulty, the very inspection of the parts within the ear seems
to lead us. For, had there been nothing necessary besides motion, the very
striking of the outward air against the Tympanum would have been sufficient,
without any other particular and extraordinary organization, to have produced
Sounds, and to have carried their motions up to the brain: as, we see, the head
of a Drum brings the motions of the Earth to our Ear, when we lay it thereto; as
we have formerly delivered. But, Anatomists find other Tool and Instruments,
that seem fit to work and forge bodies withal, which we cannot imagine nature
made in vain. There is a Hammer and an Anvile: whereof, the Hammer, striking
upon, the Anvile, must of necessity beat off such little parts of the brainy
streams, as, flying about, light and stick upon the top of the Anvile. These,
by the trembling of the air following its course, cannot miss of being carried
up to that part of the brain, whereto the air within the ear is driven by the
impulse of the found; and, as soon as they have given their knock, they rebound
back again into the cells of the brain, fitted for harbors to such winged
messengers; where they remain lodged with quietness, till they be called for
again, to renew the effect with the sound made at first. And the various blows
which the Hammer strikes, according to the various vibrations of the Tympanum
(to which the Hammer is fastened, and therefore is governed by its motions),
must needs make great differences of bignesses, and cause great variety of
smartnesses of motion in the little bodies they forge.

The last Sense is of Seeing; whose action we cannot doubt 6. How colors are
conveyed to the brain by Vital Spirits.
is performed by the reflection of light to our eye, from the bodies which we
see; and this light comes impregnated with a tincture drawn from the
superficies of the object it is reflected from; that is, it brings along with
it several of the little atoms, which of themselves stream, and it cuts from
the body it struck upon and rebounds from, and they mingling themselves with the
light, in company of it get into the eye, whose fabric is fit to gather and
unite those species (as you may see by the Anatomy of it). And from the eye,
their journey is but a short one to the brain; in which we cannot suspect they
should lose their force: considering how others, that come from organes further
off, conserves theirs; and likewise considering the nature of the optic
spirits, which are conceived to be the most refined of all that are in man's
body.

Now, that light is mingled with such little atoms, issuing out of the bodies
from which it is reflected, appears evidently enough, out of what we have said
of the nature and operations of fire and light: and it seems confirmed, by what
I have often observed in some chambers where people seldom come; which having
their windows to the South, so as the Sun lies upon them a great part of the
day in his greatest strength, and their curtains being continually drawn over
them, the glass becomes dyed very deep of the same color the Curtain is of.
Which can proceed from no other cause, but that the beams which shoot through
the glass, being reflected back from the Curtain, take something along with them
from the superficies of it: which, being of a more solid corpulence then they,
is left behind (as it were in the strainer) when they come to press themselves
through passages and pores, too little for it to accompany them in; and so
those atoms of color stick upon the glass, which they cannot penetrate.

Another confirmation of it is, that, in certain positions, the Sun, reflecting
from strong colors, will cast that very color upon some other place; as I
have often experienced in lively Scarlet, and cloth of some other smart
colors: and this, not in that gloating wise, as it makes colors of pure
light, but like a true real dye, and so as the color will appear the same to a
man, wherever he stands.

Having thus showed, in all our Senses, the convenience and 7. Reasons against
Monsir des Carts his opinion.
agreeableness of our opinion with nature; which has been deduced out of the
nature of the objects, the nature of our spirits, the nature and situation of
our nerves, and lastly from the property of our brain: our next consideration
shall be, of the difficulty that occurs in Monsir des Carts his opinion.
First, we know not how to reconcile the repugnancies appearing in his position
of the motion of the Either; especiaclly in light. For, that Ethereal substance,
being extreme rare, must perforce be either extreme liquid, or extreme brittle:
if the first, it cannot choose but bow and be pressed in foulds, and bodies of
unequal motions swiming every where in it; and so it is impossible it should
bring to the eye any constant apparition of the first mover.

But, let us suppose there were no such general interruptions every where
incountring and disturbing the conveyance of the first simple motion: yet how
can we conceive that a push given so far off, in so liquid an element, can
continue its force so far? We see that the greatest thunders and concussions,
which at any time happen among us, cannot drive and impart their impulse the
ten thousandth part of the vast distance, which the Sun is removed from our
eye; and can we imagine, that a little touch of that luminous body should make
an impression upon us, by moving another so extremely liquid and subtle, as
the Either is supposed; which, like an immense Ocean, tossed with all varieties
of motion, lies between it and us?

But, admit there were no difficulty nor repugnance in the medium, to convey to
us a stroke made upon it by the Suns motion: let us at least examine, what kind
of motions we must allow in the Sun, to cause this effect. Certainly, it must
needs be a motion toward us; or else it cannot strike and drive the medium
forward, to make it strike upon us. And if it be so, either the Sun must
perpetually be coming nearer and nearer to us; or else it must ever and anon be
receding backwards, as well as moving forwards. Both which are too chymerical
for so great a wit to conceit.

Now, if the Either be brittle, it must needs reflect upon every rub it meets
with in its way; and must be broken and shivered by every body that moves
across it: and therefore, must always make an uncertain and most disorderly
percussion upon the eye.

Then again; after it is arrived to the sense, it is no ways likely it should be
conveyed from thence to the brain; or that nature intended such a kind of
instrument as a nerve, to continue a precise determinate motion. For, if you
consider how a Lute string, or, any other such medium, conveys a motion made in
it; you will find that, to do it well and clearly, it must be stretched
throughout to its full extent, with a kind of stiffness: whereas our nerves are
not straight, but lie crooked in our body; and are very lither, till, upon
occasion, spirits coming into them swell them out. Besides, they are bound to
slesh, and to other parts of the body; which being cessible, must needs dull
the stroke, and not permit it to be carried far. And lastly, the nerves are
subject to be at every turn contracted and dilated, upon their own account,
without any relation to the strokes beating upon them from an extern agent:
which is, by no means, a convenient disposition for a body, that is to be the
porter of any simple motion; which should always lie watching in great
quietness, to observe scrupulously and exactly the errand he is to carry. So
that, for my part, I cannot conceive nature intended any such effect, by
mediation of the sinews.

But Monsir des Carts endeavors to confirm his opinion, 8. That the symptom,
of the Palsy do no way confirm Monsir des Carts his opinion.
by what uses to fall out in Palsies; when a man looses the strength of moving
his hands or other members, nevertheless retains his feeling: which he imputes
to the remaining entire of the strings of the nerves, while the spirits are
some way defective. To this we may answer, by producing examples of the
contrary in some men, who have had the motion of their limbs entire and no ways
prejudiced, but no feeling at all quite over their whole case of skin and
flesh. As particularly, a servant, in the College of Physicians in London;
whom the learned Harvey (one of his Masters) has told me was exceeding strong
to labor, and very able to carry any necessary burden, and to remove things
dexterously, according to the occasion: and yet he was so void of feeling, that
he used to grind his hands against the walls, and against course lumber, when
he was employed to rummage any; in so much that they would run with blood,
through grating of the skin, without his feeling of what occasioned it.

In our way, the reason of both these conditions of people (the paralytike, and
the insensible) is easy to be rendered. For, they proceed out of the diverse
disposition of the animal spirits in these parts: which if they thicken too
much and become very gross, are not capable of transmitting the subtle
messengers of the outward world, to the tribunal of the brain, to judge of
them; on the otherside, if they be too subtle, they neither have, nor give
power to swell the skin, and so to draw the muscles to their heads. And surely
Monsir des Carts takes the wrong way, in the reason he gives of the Palsy:
for, it proceeds out of abundance of humors, which, clogging the nerves,
renders them washy, and makes them lose their dryness, and become lither; and
consequently, unfit and unable, in his opinion, for sensation (which requires
stiffness) as well as for motion.

Yet besides all these, one difficulty more remains against this doctrine, more
insuperable (if I mistake not) then any 9. That M^asir des Carts his opinion
cannot give a good account how things are conserved in the Memory.
thing, or altogether we have yet said: which is, how the memory should
conserve any thing in it, and represent bodies to us, when our fancy calls
for them; if nothing but motions come into the brain. For it is impossible,
that, in so divisible a subject as the Spirits, motion should be conserved any
long time: as we see evidently in the air; through which move a flaming Taper
never so swiftly, and, as soon as you set it down, almost in the very instant,
the flame of it leaves being driven or shaken on one side, and goes quietly and
evenly up its ordinary course. Thereby showing, that the motion of the air,
which for the time was violent, is all of a sudden quieted and at rest: for
otherwise, the flame of the Taper would blaze that way the Air were moved.
Assuredly, the bodies, that have power to conserve motion long, must be dry and
hard ones, Nor yet can such conserve it very long, after the cause, which made
it, ceases from its operation. How then can we imagine, that such a multitude
of pure motions, as the memory must be stored withal for the use and service of
man, can be kept on foot in his brain, without confusion; and for so long a
time as his memory is able to extend to? Consider a lesson played upon the Lute
or Virginals; and think with your self, what power there is or can be in
nature, to conserve this lesson-over continually playing; and reflect, that if
the impressions upon the common fense are nothing else but such things, then
they must be actually conserved, always actually moving in our head; to the end
they be immediately produced, whenever it pleases our will to call them.

And if peradventure it should be replied, that it is not necessary the motions
themselves should always be conserved in actual being; but it is sufficient there
be certain causes kept on foot in our heads, which are apt to reduce these
motions into act, whenever there is occasion of them: All I shall say hereto
is, That this is merly a voluntary Position, and that there appears no ground
for these motions to make and constitute such causes; since we neither meet
with any instruments, nor discover any signs whereby we may be induced to
believe or understand any such operation.

It may be urged, that diverse sounds are by diseases oftentimes made in our
ears, and appearances of colors in our fantasy. But first, these colors and
sounds are not artificial ones, and disposed and ordered by choice and
judgment: for, no story has mentioned, that, by a disease, any man ever heard
twenty verses of Virgil, or an Ode of Horace in his ears; or, that ever any man
saw fair pictures in his fancy, by means of a blow givin him upon his eye. And
secondly, such colors and sounds, as are objected, are nothing else but (in
the first case) the motion of humors in a man's eye, by a blow of upon it; which
humors have the virtue of making light, in such sort as we see Seawater has,
when it is clash'd together: and (in the second case) a cold vapor in certain
parts of the brain, which causes beatings or motions there; whence proceeds the
imitation of sounds: so that these examples nothing advantage that party,
thence to infer that the similitudes of objects may be made in the
common-sense, without any real bodies reserved for that end.

Yet I intend not to exclude Motion from any commerce with the Memory; no more
then I have done from Sensation For, I will not only grant, that all our
remembering is performed by the means of motion; but also acknowledge, (that in
men) it is, for the most part, of nothing else but of motion. For, what are
words but motion? And words are the chiefest objects of our remembrance. It Is
true, we can, if we will, remember things in their own shapes, as well as by
the words that express them; but experience tells us, that, in our familiar
conversation, and the ordinary exercise of our memory, we remember and make use
of the words, rather then of the things themselves.

Besides, the impressions that are made upon all our other sense, as well as
upon our hearing, are likewise for the most part of thing in motion: as, if we
have occasion to make a conception of a Man or of a Horse, we ordinarily
conceive him Walking, or Speaking, or eating, or using some motion in time.
And, as these impressions are successively made upon the outward Organs; so are
they successively carried into the fantasy, and by like succession, are
delivered over into the memory; from whence, when they are called back again
into the fantasy, they move likewise successively. So that in truth, all our
memory will be of motion; or at least, of bodies in motion: yet it is not
chiefly of motion, but of the things that are moved, unless it be when we
remember words; and how those motions frame bodies which move in the brain, we
have already touched.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Memory.
BUt how are these things conserved in the brain? And how do they revive in the
fantasy the same motions, by which 1. How things are conserved in the Memory.
they came in thither at the first? Monsir des Carts has put us in hope of an
explication: and, where I so happy as to have seen that work of his, which the
world of learned men so much longs for; I assure my self, I should herein
receive great help and furtherance by it. Although with all, I must profess, I
cannot understand how it is possible, that any determinate motion should long
be preserved untainted in the brain; where there must be such a multitude of
other motions in the way, to mingle with it, and bring all into confusion. One
day I hope this Jewel will be exposed to public view; both to do the Author
right, and to instruct the World.

In the mean time, let us see what our own Principles afford us. We have
resolved, that Sensation is not a pure driving of the animal Spirits, or of
some penetrable body in which they swim, against that part of the brain where
knowledge resides: but, that it is indeed the driving thither of solid material
bodies (exceeding little ones) that come from the Objects themselves. Which
position, if it be true, it follows, that these bodies must rebound from thence
upon other parts of the brain, where at length they find some vacant Cell, in
which they keep their Ranks and Files, in great quiet and order; all such
sticking together, and keeping company with one another, that entered in
together: and there they lie still and are at rest; till they be stirred up,
either by the natural appetite (which is the ordinary course of Beasts), or by
chance, or by the will of the Man in whom they are, upon the occasions he meets
with of searching into them. Any of these three Causes raises them up, and
gives them the motion that is proper to them; which is the same with that
whereby they came in at the first, (for, as Galilaeus teaches us, every body
has a particular motion peculiarly proper to it, when nothing diverts it) and
then they slide successively through the fantasy, in the same manner as when
they presented themselves to it the first time. After which, if it require them
no more, they return gently to their quiet habitation in some other part of the
brain; from whence they were called and summoned by the fantasies messengers,
the Spirits: but, if it have longer use of them, and would view them better
then once passing-through permits; then they are turned back again, and lead a
new over their course, as often as is requisite; like a Horse, that a Rider
paces sundry times along by him that he shows him to, whiles he is attentive to
mark every part and motion in him.

But, let us examine a little more particularly, how the Causes 2. How things
conserved in the Memory are brought back into the Fantasy.
we have assigned raise these bodies that rest in the memory, and bring them to
the fantasy. The middlemost of them (namely Chance) needs no looking into;
because the principles that govern it are uncertain ones: But the first and the
last (which are, the Appetite and the Will) have a power (which we will
explicate hereafter) of moving the brain and the nerves depending of it,
conveniently and agreeably to their disposition. Out of which it follows, that
the little similitudes in the caves of the brain wealing and swimming about,
(almost in such sort, as you see in the washing of Currants or of Rice, by the
winding about and circular turning of of the Cooks hand), diverse sorts of
bodies go their courses for a pretty while; so that the most ordinary objects
cannot choose but present themselves quickly, because there are many of them,
and are every where scattered about: but others that are fewer, are longer ere
they come in view; much like as in a pair of Beads, that, containing more
little ones then great ones, if you pluck to you the string they all hang upon,
you shall meet with many more of one sort, then of the other.

Now, as soon as the brain has lighted on any of those it seeks for, it puts
as it were a stop upon the motion of that; or at least, it moves it so, that it
goes not far away, and is revocable at will, and seems like a bait to draw into
the fantasy others belonging to the same thing, either through similitude of
nature, or by their connection in the impression: and, by this means, hinders
other objects, not pertinent to the work the fancy has in hand, from offering
themselves unseasonably in the multitudes that otherwise they would do. But, if
the fancy should have mistaken on object for another, by reason of some
resemblance they have between themselves; then it shakes again the liquid
medium they all float in, and rouse's every species lurking in remotest corners
and runs over the whole Beadroul of them: and continues this inquisition and
motion, till either it be satisfied with retriving at length what it required,
or that it be grown weary with tossing about the multitude of little
inhabitants in its numerous empire; and so gives over the search, unwillingly
and displeasedly.

Now, that these things be as we have declared will appear, 3. A Confirmation
of the former doctrine.
out of the following considerations. First, we see that things of quite
different natures, if they come in together, are remembered together: upon which
principle the whole art of memory depends. Such things cannot any way be
comprised under certain Heads, nor be linked together by order and consequence,
or by any resemblance to one another: and therefore, all their connection must
be, that, as they came in together into the fantasy, so they remain together
in the same place in the memory; and their first coupling must proceed from the
action, that bound them together in driving them in together.

Next, we may observe, that, when a man seeks and tumbles in his memory for any
thing he would retrive, he has first some common and confused notion of it;
and sometimes he has a kind of flasking or fading likeness of it, much like as
when, in striving to remember a Name, men use to say, it is at their tongues
end: and this shows, that he attracts those things he desires and has use of,
by the likeness of something belonging to them. In like manner, when hunger
makes one think of meat, or thirst makes one dream of drink, or in other such
occasions, wherein the natural appetite stirs objects in the memory and brings
them to the fantasy; it is manifest, that the spirits informing the brain of
the defect and pain which several parts of the body do endure for want of their
due nourishment, it gives a motion to the heart, which sends other spirits up
to supply the brain, for what service it will order them: by which the brain
being fortified, it follows the pursuit of what, the living creature is in want
of; till the distempered parts be reduced into their due state, by a more solid
enjoying of it.

Now, why objects drawn out of the memory use to appear 4. How things renewed
in the fantasy return, with the same circumstances they had at first.
in the fantasy, with all the same circumstances which accompanied them, at
the time when the sense sent them thither, (as when, in remembrance of a
friend, we consider him in some place, and at a certain time, and doing some
determinate action) the reason is, that the same body, being in the same
medium, must necessarily have the same kind of motion; and so consequently,
must make the same impression upon the same subject. The medium which these
bodies move in (that is, the memory) is a liquid vaporous substance, in which
they float and swim at liberty.

Now, in such a kind of medium, all the bodies that are of one nature will
easily gather together, if nothing disturb them. For as, when a tuned
Lute-string is stricken, that string, by communicating a determinate species of
vibration to the Air round about it, shakes other strings within the compass of
the moved air; not all, of what extent soever, but only such, as by their
natural motion would cause like curlings and foulds in the Air, as the other
does (according to what Galileus has at large declared) even so, when some
atome in the brain is moved, all the rest there about, which are apt to be
wafted with a like undulation, must needs be moved in chief; and so they
moving, whiles the others of different motions, that, having nothing to raise
them, either lie quiet or move very little in respect of the former, it is no
wonder if they assemble together, and (by the proper course of the brain) meet
at the common rendezvous of the fantasy.

And, therefore, the more impressions are made from the same object upon the
sense, the more participations of it will be 5: How the memory of things past
is lost, or confounded: and how it is repaired again.
gathered together in the memory; and the stronger impressions it will, upon
occasion, make in the fantasy: and themselves will be the stronger to resist
any cause that shall strive to deface them. For we see that multitude of
objects overwhelms the memory; and puts out, or at least makes unprofitable,
those that are seldomest thought on. The reason of which is, that they, being
little in quantity, because there are but few species of them, can never strike
the seat of knowledge, but in company of others; which being more and greater,
make the iwpression follow their nature against the lesser: and in tract of
time, things seldom thought of grow to have but a maimed and confused shape in
the memory; and at length are quite forgotten. Which happens, because in the
liquid medium they are apt to moulder away, if they be not often repaired;
which mouldring and defacing is helped on by the shocks they receive from other
bodies: like as in a Magazin, a thing that were not regarded (but carelessly
tumbled up and down to make room for others, and all things were promiscuously
thrown upon it) would soon be bruised and crushed into a misshapen form, and in
the end broken all in pieces.

Now, the repairing of any thing in the memory is done, by receiving new
impressions from the object: or, in its absence, by thinking strongly of it;
which is an assembling and due piecing together of the several particles of
bodies, appertaining to the same matter. But, sometimes it happens, that when
the right one cannot be found entire, nor all the orderly pieces of it retriv'd
with their just correspondence to one another; the fancy makes up a new one in
the place of it: which afterward, upon presence of the object, appears to have
been mistaken; and yet the memory, till then, keeps quietly and unquestion'dly
for the true object, what either the thought or chance, mingling several parts,
had patched up together.

And, from hence, we may discern how the losing or confounding of ones memory
may happen; either by sicknesses, that distemper the spirits in the brain and
disorder their motions, or by some blows on the head, whereby a man is astonished
and all things seem to turn round with him. Of all which effects the causes are
easy to be found, in these suppositions we have laid.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Voluntary Motion, Natural Faculties, and Passions.
HItherto we have labored to convey the Object into the brain: but when it is
there, let us see what further effects 1. Of what matter the brrain is composed.
it causes; and how that action which we call voluntary motion; proceeds from
the brain. For the discovery whereof, we are to note, that the Brain is a
substance composed of watery parts mingled with earthy ones: which kind of
substances we see are usually full of strings; and so, in strong hard Beer, and
Vinegar, and other Liquors of the like nature, we see (if they be exposed to
the Sun) little long flakes, which make an appearance of Worms or Maggats
floating about. The reason whereof is, that some-dry parts of such Liquors are
of themselves as it were hairy or sleasy, that is, have little downy parts
(such as you see upon the legs of Flies, or upon Caterpillars, or in little
locks of wool) by which they easily catch and stitck to the other little parts
of the like nature, that come near them; and if the liquor be moved, (as it is
in the boiling of beer, or making of vinegar by the heat of the sun) they
become long strings, because the liquor breaks the ties which are cross to its
motion: but such as lie along the stream, or rather the bubling up, maintain
themselves in unity, and peradventure grow stronger, by the winding or folding
of the end of one part with another; and, in their tumbling and rouling still
in the same course, the downy hairs are crushed in, and the body grows long and
round, as happens to a lump of dough, or wax, or wool, roul'd a while in one
uniform course. And so, (coming to our purpose) we see that the brain, and all
that is made of it is stringy; witness the membranes, the flesh, the bones,
etc. But, of all the rest, those called fibers are more stringy; and the nerves
seem to be but an assembly of them: for, though the Nervs be but a great
multitude of strings lying in a cluster, nevertheless, by the consent of
Physicians and Anatomists, they are held to be of the very substance of the
brain, dried to a firmer consistence, than it is in the head.

This heap of strings (as we may call it) is enclosed in an outside made of
membranes; whose frame we need not here display: only we may note, that it is
very apt and fit to stretch; and, after stretching, to return again to its own
just length. Next, we are to consider, how the brain is of a nature apt to
swell and to sink again; even so much that, Fallopius reports, it swells
according to the increase of the Moon: which whether it be true or no, there
can be no doubt but that it, being of a substance which is full of skins and
strings, is capable of being stretched and of swelling, upon light occasions,
and of falling or sinking again upon as light; as being easily penetrable by
vapors and liquors, whose nature it is, to swell and to extend that which they
enter into. Out of which it follows, that it must be the nature of the Nerves
to do the like; and indeed, so much the more, by how much more dry they are,
than the brain: for we see that (to a certain measure) drier things are more
capable of extention by the ingression of wet, than moist things are; because
these are not capable of receiving much more wet into them.

These things being premised, let us imagine that the brain, 2. What is
voluntary motion.
being first swelled, afterward contracts it self; and it must of necessity
follow, that, seeing the Nerves are all open toward the brain (though their
concavities cannot be discerned), the spirits and moisture in the brain must
needs be pressed into the Nerves: which being already stored with spirits,
sufficiently to the proportion of their hard skins, this addition will make
them swell and grow hard; as a Balloon does, which, being competently full of
air, has nevertheless more air pressed into it.

Since therefore, the Masters of Anatomy teach us, that in every muscle there is
a nerve, which is spread into a number of little branches along that muscle; it
must follow, that, if these little branches be swollen, the flesh likewise of
that muscle must also needs be swollen. Now, the muscle having both its ends
fastened, the one in a greater bone, the other in a lesser, and there being
least resistance on that part, where the bone is lesser and more movable; the
swelling of the muscle cannot choose but draw the little bone toward the great
one, and by consequence, move that little bone: and this is that, which
Philosophers usually call Voluntary motion. For, since our knowledge remains in
the brain, whatever is done by knowledge must be done by the brain: and most of
what the brain works for the common service of the living creature proceeds
also from knowledge: that is from the motion of fansy, which we have expressed.

This matter being thus far declared, we may now enter upon 3. What those
powers are which are called Natural Faculties.
the explication of certain effects; which peradventure might have challenged
room in the precedent Chapter, but indeed could not well be handled without
first supposing this last discourse: and it is, what is meant by those powers,
that are called Natural Faculties; which however in their particulars, they be
manifold in a living creature, yet, whenever any of them is resolved, it
appears to be compounded of some of these five, to wit, the Attractive, the
Retentive, the Secretive, the Concoctive, and the Expulsive faculty.

Of which, the Attractive, the Secretive, and the Concoctive 4. How the
Attractive and Secretive faculties work.
seem not to belong to the nervs: for though we may conceive that the part of
the Animal turns it self toward the thing which it attracts, nevertheless,
that very turning seems not to be done by virtue of the muscles and nervs, but
rather in a natural way, as the motion of the heart is performed; in such sort
as we have formerly declared. As for example, if the stomach, when it is greedy
of meat, draws it self up toward the throat; it seems rather to be a kind of
dryness and wrapping, (such as we see in bladders or leather, either by fire or
cold, which make them shrivel up and grow hard), than a true faculty of the
living creature to seek after meat.

Nor need we extend our discourse any further about these three faculties;
seeing that we have already declared in common, how attraction, drying, and
mixture of active bodies with passive ones, is performed: which needs but
applying to these particulars, to explicate fully their nature. As, for
example, if the Kidneys draw the matter of Urine to them out of the Veinet, it
may be by any of the following three manners; to wit, either by draught, by
wet, or by steam. For, if the serous parts that are in the blood which runs in
the Veins, touch some dry parts conformable to their nature, tending toward
the Kidneys; they will infallibly adhere more to those dry parts, than to the
rest of the blood. Which if they do in so great a quantity, that they reach to
other further parts more dry than these, they will leave the first parts to go
to the second: and thus by little, and little, will draw a line of Urine from
the blood, if the blood abound with it; and, the nearer it comes to the
Kidneys, the stronger still the attraction will be.

The like will happen, if the serosity which is in the blood touch some part
weted with a like serosity; or where such has lately passed. For, as we see
water will run more easily upon a wet part of a board or a stone, than on a dry
one: so you cannot doubt, but that, if the serous part which is mixed with the
blood, light upon a current of its own nature, it will stick more to that, than
to the current of the blood; and so part from the blood, to go that way which
the current of its own nature goes.

Besides, it cannot be doubted, but that, from the Kidnyes, and from the
passages between the Kidneyes and the Veins, in which the blood is conveyed,
there arises a steam: whose nature is to incorporate it self with serous
matter, out of whose body it has been extracted. This steam therefore, flying
still to the serous blood which passes by, must of necessity precipitate (as I
may say) the serous parts of the blood; or rather must filter them out of their
main stock: and so will make them run in that current from which it self flows.
And thus you see how Attraction and Secretion are made: for, the drawing of the
serosity, without drawing the blood, is the parting of the Urine from the
blood. And this example, of the Kidneys operation, may be applied to the
attractions of all the other parts.

Now, the Concoctive faculty (which is the last of the three 5. Concerning the
concoctive faculty.
we took together) consists of two parts: one is, as it were, a drying of the
humor which is to be concocted; the other is a mingling the substance of the
vessel in which the humor is concocted, with the humor it self. For as, if
you boil diverse kinds of liquors in brass pans, the pans will taint the liquor
with the quality of the brass; and therefore Physicians forbid the use of such,
in the boiling of several medicines: so, much more in a living creatures body
there can be no doubt, but that the vessel in which any humor is concocted
gives a tincture thereto. Now, concoction consisting in these two, it is evident
what the concoctive virtue is; to wit, heat, and the specifical property of
vessel which by heat is mingled with the humor.

There remain yet the Retentive and the Expulsive faculties 6. Concerning the
Retentive and Expulsive faculties.
to be discoursed of; whereof one kind is manifestly belonging to the voluntary
motion which we have declared: namely, that retension and that expulsion which
we ordinarily make of the gross excrements either of meat, or drink, or of
other humors, either from our head, or stomach, or Lungs: for, it is
manifestly done, partly by taking in of wind, and partly by compressing of some
parts and opening of others; as Galen shows in his curious book de usu partium.

Another kind of Retention and Expulsion, in which we have no sense when it is
made, (or if we have, it is of a thing done in us without our will, though
peradventure we may voluntarily advance it) is made by the swelling of fibers
in certain parts, through the confluence of humors to them (as in our stomach
it happens, by the drink and the juice of the meat that is in it): which
swelling closes up the passages by which the contained substance should go out
(as the moistening of the strings and mouth of a purse almost shuts it); till
in some (for example, the stomach after a meal) the humor, being attenuated by
little and little, gets out subtilely, and so, leaving less weight in the
stomach, the bag, which weighs down lower, than the nearer Orifice at which the
digested meat issues, rises a little. And this rising of it is also furthered
by the wrinkling up and shortning of the upper part of the stomach; which still
returns into its natural corrugation, as the mass of liquid meat leaves soaking
it (which it does by degrees, still, as more and more goes out) and so what
remains fills less place, and reaches not so high in the stomach. And thus at
length, the residue and thicker substance of the meat, after the thinnest is
got out in steam and the midling part is boiled over in liquor, comes to press
and gravitate wholly upon the Orifice of the stomach: which being then helped
by the figure and lying of the rest of the stomach, and its strings and mouth
relaxing, by having the juice which swelled them squeezed out of them; it opens
it self, and gives way to that which lay so heavy upon it to tumble out. In
others (for example, in a woman with child) the enclosed substance (retained
first by such a course of nature as we have set down) breaks it self a passage
by force, and opens the orifice at which it is to go out by violence; when all
circumstances are ripe according to natures institution.

But yet there is the expulsion made by Physic, that requires 7. Concerning
expulsion made by Physic.
a little declaration. It Is of five kinds; Vomiting, Purging by Stool, by
Urine, Sweating, and Salivation: every one of which seems to consist of two
parts; namely, the Disposition of the Thing to be purged, and the Motion of the
Nervs or Fibers for the expulsion. As for example, when the Physician gives a
Purge, it works two things: one is, to make some certain humor more liquid and
purgeable than the rest; the other is, to make the stomach or belly suck or
vent this humor. For the first, the property of the Purge must be, to
precipitate that humor out of the rest of the blood; or, if it be thick, to
dissolve it that it may run easily: For the second, it ordinarily heats the
stomach, and, by that means, causes it to suck out of the veins; and so to draw
from all parts of the body. Besides this, it ordinarily fills the belly with
wind; which occasions those gripings men feel when they take physic, and is
cause of the guts discharging those humors, which otherwise they would retain.

The like of this happens in Salivation; for the humors are by the same means
brought to the stomach, and thence sublimed up to be spitten out: as we see in
those, who, taking Mercury into their body, either in substance or in smoke or
by application, do vent cold humors from any part; the Mercury rising from all
the body up to the mouth of the patient, as to the helm of a sublimatory, and
the like some say of Tobacco.

As for Vomiting, it is in a manner wholly the operation of the fibers,
provoked by the feelling of some inconvenient body; which makes the stomach
wrinkle it self, and work and strive to cast out what offends it.

Sweating seems to be caused, by the heating of some nitrous body in the
stomach: which, being of subtle parts, is by heat dispersed from the middle to
the circumference; and carries with it light humors, which turn into water as
they come out into the air. And thus you see, in general, and as much as
concerns us to declare, what the Natural Faculties are: and this, according to
Galen's own mind, who affirms, that these faculties follow the complexion or
temper of parts of a man's body.

Having explicated how Voluntary motion proceeds from the brain: our next work
ought to be, to examine what it is 9. How the brain is moved to work Voluntary
motion.
that such an object (as we brought, by means of the senses, into the brain
from without) contributes, to make the brain apply it self to work such
voluntary motion. To which purpose, we will go a step or two back, to meet the
object at its entrance into the sense; and from thence accompany it in all its
journey and motions onwards. The object which strikes at the senses door and
getting in, mingles it self with the spirits it finds there, is either conform
and agreeable to the nature and temper of those spirits, or it is not; that is
to say, in short, it is either pleasing or displeasing to the living creature:
Or it may be a third kind, which, being neither of these, we may term
indifferent. In which sort soever the obect affects the sense, the spirits
carry it immediately to the brain; unless some distemper, or strong thought, or
other accident hinder them.

Now, if the object be of the third kind, that is, be indifferent, as soon as
it has stricken the brain, it rebounds to the circle of the memory; and there,
being speedily joined to others of its own nature, it finds them annexed to
some pleasing or displeasing thing, or it does not: if not, in beasts it serves
to little use, and, in men, it remains there till it be called for; but if,
either in its own nature it be pleasing or displeasing, or afterward in the
memory it bebecame joined to some pleasing or annoying fellowship, presently
the heart is sensible of it. For, the heart being joined to the brain by
straight and large nervs, full of strong spirits which ascend from the heart;
it is impossible, but that it must have some communication with those motions,
which pass in the brain: upon which the heart (or rather the spirits about it)
is either dilated or compressed.

And these motions may be either totally of one kind, or moderated and allayed
by the mixture of its contrary: if of the former sort, one of them we call Joy,
the other Grief; which continue about the heart (and peradventure oppress it,
if they be in the utmost extremity) without sending any due proportion of
spirits to the brain, till they settle a little, and grow more moderate.

Now, when these motions are moderate, they immediately send up some abundance
of spirits to the brain; which, if they be in a convenient proportion, are by
the brain thrust into such nervs as are fit to receive them: and swelling them,
they give motion to the muscles and tendons that are fastened to them; and they
move the whole body, or what part of it is under command of those nervs, that
are thus filled and swelled with spirits by the brain.

If the object was conformable to the living creature, then the brain sends
spirits into such nervs as carry the body to it: but if otherwise, it causes a
motion of aversion or flight from it. To the cause of this latter we give the
name of Fear: and the other, that carries one to the pursuit of the object, we
call Hope, Anger, or Audacity, is mixed of both these; for it seeks to avoid an
evil by embracing and overcoming it: and proceeds out of abundance of spirits.

Now, if the proportion of spirits sent from the heart be too great for the
brain, it hinders or perverts the due operation, both in man and beast.

All which it will not be amiss to open a little more particularly: 9. Why
pleasing objects dilate the spirits, and displeasing ones contract them.
and first, why painful or displeasing objects contract the spirits, and
grateful ones, contrariwise, dilate them. It is, because the good of the heart
consists in use, that is, in heat and moisture; and it is the nature of heat to
dilate it self in moisture; whereas cold and dry things contract the bodies
they work on; and such are enemies to the nature of men and beasts. And
accordingly, experience, as well as reason, teaches us, that all objects, which
be naturally good, are hot and moist, in due proportion to the creature that is
affected and pleased with them.

Now, the living creature being composed of the same principles, as the world
round about him is; and the heart, being an abridgment of the whole sensible
creature, and besides full of blood, and that very hot: it comes to pass, that
if any of these little extracts of the outward world arrive to the hot blood
about the heart, it works in this blood such like an effect, as we see a drop
of water falling into a glass of wine, which is presently dispersed into a
competent compass of the wine: so that, any little object must needs make a
notable motion in the blood about the heart.

This motion, according to the nature of the object, will be either conformable
or contrary; unless it be so little a one as no effect will follow of it, and
then it is of that kind, which above we called indifferent. If the ensuing
effect be connatural to the heart, there rises a motion of a certain fume about
the heart, which motion we call Pleasure; and it never fails of accompanying
all those motions which are good, as Joy, Love, Hope, and the like: but, if the
motion be displeasing, there is likewise a common sense of a heaviness about
the heart, which we call Grief: and it is common to Sorrow, Fear, Hate, and the
like.

Now, it is manifest by experience, that these motions are all different ones,
and strike against diverse of those parts of of our body which encompass the
heart: out of which striking follows, that the spirits sent from the heart,
affect the brain diversely, and are by it conveyed into diverse nerves; and so
set diverse members in action. Whence follows, that certain Members are
generally moved, upon the motion of such a passion in the heart; especially in
beasts, who have a more determinate course of working, than man has: and if
sometimes we see variety even in beasts, upon knowledge of the circumstances we
may easily guess at the causes of that variety. The particularities of all
which motions we remit Physicians and Anatomists: advertising only, that the
fume of pleasure, and the heaviness of grief, plainly show that the first
motions participate of Dilatation, and the latter of Compression.

Thus you see, how, by the senses, a living creature becomes 10. Concerning the
Five Senses, of what Use and End they are.
judge of what is good, what bad for him: which operation is performed more
perfectly in Beasts, and especially in those that live in the free air, remote
from humane conversation (for their senses are fresh and untainted, as nature
made them); than in Men. Yet without doubt nature has been as favorable in
this particular, to men, as them; were it not that, with disorder and excess,
we corrupt and oppress our senses: as appears evidently by the Story we have
recorded of John of Liege, as also by the ordinary practice of some Hermites in
the Deserts; who by their taste or smell, would presently be informed whether
the herbs, and roots, and fruits they met with, were good or hurtful for them,
though they never before had had trial of them.

Of which excellency of the Senses, there remains in us only some dim sparks,
in those qualities which we call sympathies and antipathies; whereof the
reasonss are plain, out of our late discourse: and are nothing else, but a
conformity or opposition of a living creature, by some individual property of
it, to some body without it; in such sort as its conformity or opposition to
things by its specifical qualities is termed natubal or against nature. But of
this we shall discourse more at large hereafter.

Thus it appears, how the senses are seated in us, principally for the end of
moving us to or from objects, that are good for, or hurtful to us. But, though
our Reader be content to allow this intent of nature, in our three inferior
senses; yet he may peradventure not be satisfied, how the two more noble ones
(the Hearing and the Seeing) cause such motions to or from objects, as are
requisite to be in living creatures for the preservation of them: for (may he
say) how can a man, by only seeing an object, or by hearing the sound of it,
tell what qualities it is imbued with? or, what motion of liking or disliking,
can be caused in his heart, by his mere receiving the visible species of an
object at his eyes, or by his ears hearing some noise it makes? And, if there
be no such motion there, what should occasion him to prosecute or avoid that
object? When he tastes, or smells, or touches a thing, he finds it sweet, or
bitter, or stinking, or hot, or cold; and is therewith either pleased or
displeased: but, when he only sees or hears it, what liking or disliking can he
have of it, in order to the preservation of his nature.

The solution of this difficulty may in part appear, out of what we have
already said. But, for the most part, the objects of these two nobler senses
move us, by being joined in the Memory with some other thing, that either
pleased or displeased some of the other three senses. And from thence it is,
that the motion of going to embrace the object, or aversion from it,
immediately proceeds. As, when a dog sees a man that uses to give him meat, the
species of the man coming into his fancy calls out of his memory the others
which are of the same nature, and are former participations of that man, as
well as this fresh one is. but, these are joined with spicies of meat, because
at other times they did use to come in together; and therefore, the meat being a
good unto him, and causing him (in the manner we have said) to move toward it,
it will follow that the dog will presently move toward that man, and express a
contentedness in being with him. And this is the ground of all assuefaction in
beasts, and of making them capable of receiving any instructions.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the material instruments of Knowledge and Passion: Of the
several effects of Passions: Of Pain and Pleasure, and how the vital spirits
are sent from the brain into the intended parts of the body, without mistaking
their way.
TO conclude this great business, which concerns all 1. That (...) Luc dum is
the seat of the fancy.
the mutations and motions that are made by outward Agents in a living
creature, it will not be amiss to take a short and general survey, of the
material instruments which concur to this effect. Whereof the brain being
principal, or at least, the first and next of the principals; we may take
notice that it contains, toward the middle of its substance, four concavities,
as some count them: but in truth, these four are but one great concavity, in
which four, as it were, diverse rooms may be distinguished. The nether part of
these concavities is very unequal, having joined to it a kind of a net, wrought
by the entangling of certain little arteries, and of small emanations from a
Sinus, which are interwoven together. Besides this, it is full of kernels,
which make it yet more uneven.

Now, two rooms of this great concavity are divided by a little body, somewhat
like a skin, (though more fryable) which of it self is clear; but there it is
somewhat dimmed, by reason that, hanging a little slack, it somewhat shrivels
together: and this, Anatomists call, Septum lucidum, or speculum; and it is a
different body from all the rest that are in the brain. This transparent body
hangs as it were straightwards, from the forehead toward the hinder part of
the head: and divides the hollow of the brain, as far as it reaches, into the
right and the left ventricles.

This part seems to me, (after weighing all circumstances and considering all
the conveniences and fitnesses) to be that, and only that, in which the fancy
or common sense resides: though Monsir des Carts has rather chosen a kernel to
place it in. The reasons of my assertions are; First, that it is in the middle
of the brain, which is the most convenient situation to receive the messages
from all our body, that come by nervs, some from before, and some from behind.
Secondly, that, with its two sides, it seems conveniently opposed to all such
of our senses, as are double; the one of them sending its little messengers or
atoms, to give it advertisements on one side, the other on the other side: so
that it is capable of receiving impression indifferently from both. Again, by
the nature of the body, it seems more fit to receive all differences of motion,
than any other body near it. It is also most conformable to the nature of the
eye; which, being our principal outward sense, must needs be in the next degree
to that, which is elevated a strain above our outward senses. Fifthly, it is of
a singular and peculiar nature; whereas the kernels are many, and all of them of
the same condition, quality, and appearance. Sixthly, it is seated in the very
hollow of the brain: which of necessity must be the place and receptacle, where
the specieses and similitudes of things reside; and where they are moved and
tumbled up and down, when we think of many things. And lastly, the situation we
put our head in, when we think earnestly of any thing, favors this opinion:
for then we hang our head forwards, as it were forcing the specieses to settle
toward our forehead; that from thence they may rebound, and work upon this
diaphanous substance.

This then supposed, let us consider, that the atoms or likenesses of bodies,
having given their touch upon this Septum or Speculum, do thence retire back
into the concavities, and stick 2. What causes us to remember, not only the
object it self, but also that we have thought of it before.
(as by chance it happens) in some of the inequalities they encounter with
there. But, if some wind or forcible steam should break into these caves, and
as it were brush and sweep them over; it must follow, that these little bodies
will loosen themselves, and begin to play in the vapor which fills this hollow
place: and so, floting up and down, come anew to strike and work upon the
Speculum or fantasy. Which being also a soluble body, many times these atoms,
striking on it, carry some little corporeal substance from it sticking upon
them: whence ensues, that they, returning again with those tinctures or
participations of the very substance of the fantasy, make us remember, not only
the objects themselves, but also that we have thought of them before.

Further, we are to know, that all the nervs of the brain have their beginnings
not far from this speculum: of which we shall 3. How the motions of the
fantasy are derived to the heart.
more particularly consider two, that are called the sixth pair or couple;
which pair has this singularity, that it begins in a great many little
branches, that presently grow together and make two great ones contained within
one skin. Now this being the property of a sense (which requires to have many
fibers in it; that it may be easily and vigorously stricken, by many parts of
the object lighting upon many parts of those little fibers): it gives us to
understand, that this sixth couple has a particular nature, conformable to the
nature of an extern sense; and that the Architect who placed it there intended,
by the several conduits of it, to give notice to some part they go to, of what
passes in the brain. And accordingly one branch of this nerve reaches to the
heart; not only to the Pericardium, as Galen thought, but even to the very
substance of the heart it self, as later Anatomists have discovered: by which
we plainly see how the motion, which the senses make in the Speculum, may be
derived down to the heart.

Now therefore let us consider, what effects the motions so conveyed from the
brain will work in the heart. First, remembering 4. Of Pain and Pleasure.
how all that moves the heart is either pain or pleasure (though we do not use
to call it pain, but grief, when the evil of sense moves us only by memory, and
not by being actually in the sense); and then calling to mind, how pain (as
Naturalists teach us) consists in some division of a nerve, (which they call
Solutio continui; and must be in a nerve, for that no solution can be the cause
of pain without sense, nor sense be without nerves): we may conclude, that the
effect which we call pain, is nothing else but a compression. For, although
this solution of continuity may seem to be a dilatation, yet in truth, it is a
compression in the part where the evil is: which happens to it in the same
manner as we showed (when we spoke of the motion of Restitution) it does to
stiff bodies, that by violence are compressed and drawn into a less capacious
figure, than their nature affects; and return into their own state, as soon as
the mastring violence leaves them at liberty.

Pleasure, therefore, must be contrary to this, and consist in a moderate
dilatation: for, an immoderate one would cause a compression in some adherent
parts; and there would become pain. And conformable to this, we experience,
that generally they are hard things which breed pain to us, and those which
breed pleasure are oily and soft; as meats and odours, which are sweet to the
taste and smell, and soft substances, which are grateful to the touch: the
excess of all which proves offensive and painful; so that, from the extremity
of pleasure, one enters presently upon the confines of pain.

Now then let us consider, how the little similitudes of bodies, which from
without come into the fantasy, must of necessity work there, according to their
little power, effects proportionable to what they wrought first in the outward
senses, from whence they were conveyed to the brain. For, the senses (that is
the nervs) and the Septum lucidum, having both of them their origin from the
very substance of the brain, and differing only in degrees of purity and
refinement; the same object must needs work like effects in both, compressing
or dilating them proportionaby to one another. Which compression or dilatation
is not pain or pleasure, as it is in the outward sense; but as it is reported
to the heart: and that, being the seat of all pains or pleasures wrought in
other parts, and that (as it were) dies them into those qualities, is not
capable of feeling either it self; so that the strokes of any little
similitudes upon the fantasy make only compressions or dilatations there, not
pains or pleasures.

Now these bodies or similitudes, if they be reverberated from the fantasy or
Septum Lucidum upon the little roots of the nervs 5. Of Passion.
of the fixed couple, which go to the heart, must needs work there a
proportionable impression to what they wrought upon the fancy, either
compressing or dilating it; and the heart being extremely passive, by reason of
its exceeding tenderness and heat, cannot choose but change its motion, at
least in part, if not in whole: and this with relation to two causes; one the
disposition of the heart it self, the other, the vehemence of the stroke.

This change of motion and different beating of the heat is that which properly
is called Passion; and is ever accompanied with pleasure or with grief,
according to the nature of the impression, that either contracts or dilates the
heart and the spirits about it: and is discovered by the beating of the
arteries and of the pulse, Conformable whereunto, Physicians tell us, that every
passion has a distinct pulse.

The pulses are divided in common, by abundance, or by 6. Of several Pulses
caused by Passion.
want of spirits; yet it both kinds, they may have common disferences: for in
abundance, the pulse may be quick or slow, regular or irregular, equal or
unequal; and the like may happen in defect of spirits, according to the motions
of the heart which are their causes. Again, the object, by being present or
further off, makes the stroke greater or lesser, and accordingly, varies the
motion of the heart.

Let us then call to mind, how we have formerly declared, that life consists in
heat and humidity; and that these two joined together make a thing great: and
we may conclude that, of necessity, the motion which is most lively must have a
great, full, and large stroke, like the even rolling waves of a wide and smooth
sea; and not too quick or smart, like the breaches of a narrow Fretum, agitated
by tempestuous winds. From this other motions may vary, either by excess, or by
deficiency: the first makes the stroke become smart, violent, and thick; the
other slackens it, and makes it grow little, slow, weak, and thin, or seldom.

And if we look into the motions of our heart, we shall see these three
differences of them follow three several chief passions. The first follows the
passion of Joy; the second, the passion of Anger; and the third, the passion of
Grief. Nor need we look any further into the causes of the several motions; for
we see that Joy and Grief, following the stroke of sense, the one of them must
consist in, an oily dilatation, that is, the spirits about the heart must be
dilated by a gentle, large, great, and sweet motion, in a moderation between
velocity and slowness: the other contrariwise (following the stroke of sense in
pain, as the first did in pleasure) must contract the spirits; and
consequently, make their motion or stroke become little, and deficient from all
the properties we have above set down.

As for Anger, the motion following that passion is, when the abundance of
spirits in the heart is a little checked by the contrary stroke of sense, but
presently overcomes that opposition: and then, as we see a hindered water, or a
man, that suddenly or forcibly brake through what withstood their motion, go
on with a greater violence than they did, and as it were precipitately; so the
heart, having overcome the contraction, which the sense made in it, dilates it
self with a fury, and makes its motion smart and vehement. Whence also it
follows, that the spirits grow hotter than they were: and accordingly, it is
often seen, that, in the scoulding of a woman, and in the irritation of a dog,
if ever now and then one thwart them and interpose a little opposition, their
fury will be so sharpened and heightened, that the woman will be transported
beyond all limits of reason, and the dog will be made mad, with nothing else
done to him, but angring him at convenient times: and some men likewise have,
by slight oppositions iterated speedily upon them, before their spirits could
relent their vehement motion (and therefore, must still increase it,), been
angered into feavors.

This passion of Anger seems almost to be solitary, on the side of excess
beyond joy (which is, as it were the standard and perfection of all passions;
as light or whiteness is of all colors): but on the other side, of deficiency,
there are several middle passions, which participate more or less of joy and
grief. As, particularly, those two famous ones, which govern man's life, Hope
and Fear. Concerning which Physicians tell us, that the pulse or beating of
Fear is quick, hard, and unequal: to which I conceive we may safely add, that
it must also be small and feeble; the perfection of joy decreasing in it on one
side, to wit, from greatness and largeness, but not entirely, so that a kind of
quickness supplies in part the other defect. Hope, on the other side, is in
such sort defective from joy, that nevertheless it has a kind of constancy,
and moderate quantity, and regularity in its motion: and therefore is accounted
to be the least hurtful of all the passions, and that which more prolongs man's
life. And thus you see how those motions, which we call passions; are
engendered in the heart; and what they are.

Let us then in the next place consider, what will follow in the 7. Of several
other effects caused naturally in the body by passions.
rest of the body, out of these varieties of Passions, once raised in the
heart, and sent into the brain. It Is evident, that, according to the nature and
quality of these motions, the heart must needs in every one of them void, out
of it self into the arteries, a greater or lesser quantity of blood; and that
in diverse fashions; and the arteries, which lie fittest to receive these sudden
egestions of blood, are those which go into the brain: which course being
directly upwards, we cannot doubt, but that it is the hottest and subtilest
part of the blood, and the fullest of spirits, that flies that way. These
spirits then running a long and perplexed journey up and down in the brain, by
various meanders and anfractuosities, are there mingled with the humid steam of
the brain it self, and therewith cooled; and come at last to smoke at liberty in
the hollow ventricles of the brain, by reeking out of the little arterial
branches, that weave the plexus choroides or net we spoke of erewhile: and
they, being now grown heavy, fall (by their natural course) into that part or
process of the brain, which is called medulla spinalis, or the marrow of the
backbone; which, being beset by the nervs that run through the body, it cannot
happen otherwise, but that these thick'ned and descending spirits must either
fall themselves into those nervs, or else press into them other spirits which
are before them, that, without such new force to drive them violently forwards,
would have slided down more leisurely. Now, this motion being downwards, and
meeting with no obstacle, till it arrive to its utmost period that way; the
lowest nervs are those, which naturally feel the communication of these spirits
first.

But, it is true, if the flowing tide of them be great, and plentiful, all the
other nerves will also be so suddenly filled upon the filling of the lowermost,
that the succession of their swellings, will hardly be perceptible: as a sudden
and violent inundation of water seems to rise on the sides of the channel, as
it does at at the Mill-dam; though reason assures us, it must begin there,
because there it is first stopped.

On the contrary side, if the spirits be few, they may be in such a proportion,
as to fill only the lower nervs, and to communicate little of themselves to any
of the others. And this is the case in the passion of fear: which being stored
with fewer spirits, than any other passion that causes a motion in the body, it
moves the legs most; and so carries the animal, that is afraid, with violence
from the object that affrights him. Although, in truth, it is a faint hope of
escaping, mingled with fear, which begets this motion: for, when fear is
single, and at its height, it stops all motion by contracting the spirits, and
thence is called Stupor; as well as grief, for the same reason. And accordingly
we see extreme cowards, in the extremity of their fear, have not the courage to
run away no more than to defend or help themselves by any other motions.

But, if there be more abundance of spirits, then the upper parts are also
moved, as well as the legs; whose motion contributes to defense: but the brain
it self and the senses which are in the head, being the first in the course of
this flood of spirits that is sent from the heart to the head, it is impossible
but that some part of them should be pressed into the nervs of those senses;
and so will make the animal vigilant and attentive to the cause of its fear or
grief.

But, if the fear be so great, that it contracts all the spirits and quite
hinders their motion (as in the case we touched above), then it leaves also the
nervs of the senses destitute of spirits; and so, by too strong apprehension of
a danger, the animal neither sees nor apprehends it: but as easily precipitates
it self into it, as it happens to avoid it, being merely governed by chance;
and may peradventure seem valiant through extremity of fear.

And thus you see, in common, how all the natural operations of the body
follow, by natural consequence, out of the passions of the mind: without
needing to attribute discourse or reason, either to men or beasts, to perform
them. Although, at first sight, some of them may appear, to those that look not
into their principles and true causes, to flow from a source of intelligence:
whereas it is evident, by what we have laid open, they all proceed from the due
ranging and ordering of quantitative parts, so or so proportioned by rarity and
density. And there is no doubt, but, who would follow this search deeply, might
certainly retrive the reasons of all those external motions, which we see, use
to accompany the several passions in Men and Beasts. But, for our intent, we
have said enough; to show by what kind of order and course of nature they may
be effected (without confining our selves over scrupulously to every
cincumstance that we have touched); and to give a hint, whereby others, that
will make this inquiry their task, may compile an entire and well grounded and
intelligible doctrine of this matter.

Only we will add one advertisment more; which is, that these external motions,
caused by passion, are of two kinds: for, some of them are, as it were, the
beginnings of the actions, which nature intends to have follow out of the
passions that cause them; but others are only bare signs of passions that
produce them, and are made by the connection of parts, unnecessary for the main
action that is to follow out of the passion, with other parts that by the
passion are necessarily moved. As for example, when an hungry man's mouth waters
at the sight of good meat, it is a kind of beginning of eating, or of
preparation for eating; for, when we eat, nature draws a moisture into our
mouth, to humectate our meat and convey the taste of it into the nervs of the
tongue, which are to make report of it to the brain: but, when we laugh, the
motion of our face aims at no further end; and follows only by the connection of
those muscles, which draw the face in such a sort, to some inward parts, that
are moved by the passion out of which laughing proceeds.

But, we must not leave this subject without some mention of the Diaphragma;
into which the other branch of those nervs, 8. Of the Diaphragma.
that are called of the sixth conjugation, comes: for, the first branch we have
said goes into the heart, and carries thither the objects that come into the
brain; and this, we shall find, carries back to the brain the passion or
motion, which by the object is raised in the heart. Concerning this part of our
body, you are to note, that it is a musculous membrane, which in the middle of
it has a sinewy circle; whereto is fastened the case of the heart, called the
Pericardium. This Diaphragma is very sensible, receiving its virtue of feeling
from the above mentioned branch of the sixth couple of nervs; and, being of a
trembling nature, is, by our respiration, kept in continual moon: and flaps,
upon all occasions; as a drum head would do, if it were slack and moist, or as
a sail would do, that were brought into the wind.

Out of this description of it, it is obvious to conceive, that all the changes
of motion in the heart must needs be expressed in the Diaphragma. For, the
heart beating upon the Pericardium, and the Pericardium being joined to the
Diaphragma; such jogs and vibrations must needs be imprinted and ecchoed there,
as are formed in the heart: which, from thence, cannot choose but be carried to
the brain, by the sixth couple of nervs. And thus it comes about, that we feel
and have sensation of all the passions, that are moved in our heart. Which
peradventure is the reason, why the Greeks call this part (...), and from it
derive the verb (...), that in Latin signifies Sapere, with Us, to Savor or
to like; for, by this part of our body, we have a liking of any object, or a
motion of inclination toward it: from whence (...) is derived, by composition
of (...) with (...); for a prudent man is he, that likes and is moved to
compass wholesome and good things. Which Etymology of the word seems to me more
natural, than from the phrensy, from whence some derive it; because a great
distemper or inflammation in the Diaphragma often causes that disease.

Now, because the object is covey'd from the brain to the heart some part of
its way, by the same passage as the motion of the heart is re-convey'd back to
the brain: it must of necessity follow, that who is more attentive to outward
sense, less considers or reflects on his passion; and who is more attentive to
observe and be governed by what passes in his heart, is less wrought upon by
external things. For, if his fantasy draws strongly to it, the emanations from
outward agents upon the senses; the stream of those emanations will descend so
strongly from the overfill'd fantasy into the heart, that it will hinder the
ascent of any fewer and weaker spirits by the same pipe: But, if the current
set strongest upwards, from the heart by the Diaphragma to the brain; then, it
will so fill the pipe by which it ascends, that little of a weaker tide can
make a contrary eddy water in the same channel.

And, by this means nature effects a second pleasure or 9. Concerning pain and
pleasure caused by the memory of things past.
pain in a living creature, which moves it (oftentimes very powerfully) in
absence of the primary object: as we may observe, when, thinking of any
pleasing or displeasing action, we find about our heart a motion which entices
us to it, or averts us from it. For, as the first pleasure was occasioned, by
the stroke which the object, applied to the outward sense, made upon the
fantasy, (which can judge of nothing without being stricken by it): so, the
second pleasure springs from the spirits moved in the heart, by messengers from
the brain; which by the Diaphragma rebound a stroke back again upon the
fantasy. And, from hence it proceeds, that Memory delights or afflicts us: and
that we think of past things with sweetness or with remorse: and thereby
assuefaction is wrought in beasts, as far as the appetitive part contributes
thereto; to perfect what was begun in their cognoscitive part, by the ingression
of corporeal specieses into their fantasy, in order to the same effect, as we
10. How so small bodies, as atoms are, can cause so great motions in the heart.
have touched before.

But now let us examine, how so small a quantity of a body, as comes from an
object into our sense, can be the cause of so great a motion about our heart.
To which purpose we are to remember, that this motion is performed in the most
subtle and thin substance, that can be imagined. They are the vital spirits
that do all this work; which are so subtle, so agil, and so hot, that they may
in some sort be termed fire. Now, if we reflect how violent fire is; we need
not wonder at the sudden and great motion of these passions.

But we must further take notice, that they are not in the greatest excess, but
where the living creature has been long inured and exercised to them, either
directly or indirectly: so that they arrive not to that pitch so much out of
the power of the agent, as out of the preparation and disposition of the
patient. As when cold water has been often heated by extinguishing red hot
irons in it; after some repetitions, a few quenchings will reduce it from cold
to boiling, that at the first would scarce have made it lukewarm: and
accordingly we see a heart, that for a long time has loved and vehemently
desired enjoying, is transported in a high degree, at the least sight and
renuance of strokes from its beloved object; and is as much dejected, upon any
the least deprivation of it. For, to such an object the living creature is
hurried away, by a force much resembling the gravity or celerity of a dense
body, that is set on running down a steep hill; to which, the only taking away
of a weak let or the least stop gives a precipitate course, not out of the
force of what is done to it, but out of the force which was formerly in the
thing, though for the present it lay there undiscovered: and so likewise in
these cases, the object rather gives the occasion of the violent motion, than
the force or power to it.

These things being thus determined, some peradventure may How the vital
spirits, sent from thebrain, run to the intended part of the body, without
mistake.
ask, how it comes to pass that the spirits, which cause motion, being sent on
their errand by the brain, always hit the right way; and light duly into those
very sinews, which move the living creature according as is requisite for its
nature? Since all the passages are open, what is it that governs them, so as
they never mistake; and the animal is never driven toward harm, in stead of
flying from it? Who is their guide in these obscure paths? But, it were to
impute ignorance to the Maker, to think that he framed all the passages alike;
and so every one of them promiscuously apt to receive into them all sorts of
spirits, however they be moved. And therefore, we may assure our selves that
since, in these diversities of occasions, there are likewise diverse kinds of
motions from the heart; either there is, proportionable to them, diverse kinds
of passages fit to receive and entertain the spirits, according to the
condition they are in (so as the passages, which are ajusted to one kind of
spirits, will not admit any of another nature): orelse, the first motions of
liking or disliking in the heart, which (as we have said) cause a swelling or a
contradiction of it against this or that part, stops and hinders the entrance
of the spirits into some sinews, and opens others, and drives the spirits into
them; so as, in the end by a result of a chain of swellings and contractions of
several parts successively one against another, the due motions of prosecution
or aversion are brought about.

As, for example, an object that affects the heart with liking, by dilating the
spirits about the heart, sends some into the optic nervs, and makes the living
creature turn his eye toward it, and keep it steady upon what he desires: as
contrariwise, if he dislike and fear it, he naturally turns his eye and head
from it. Now, of this motion of the eye and head may depend the running to the
thing, in one case, and the running from it, in the other: for, the turning of
the neck one way may open a passage for the spirits into those sinews which
carry the rest of the body toward the object; and the turning of it to the
other side may open other sinews, which shall work a contrary effect, and carry
the animal from the object. And the moving of those sinews, which at first turn
the neck, proceeds from the quality and number of the spirits that ascend from
the heart, and from the region of the heart whence they are sent: according to
the variety whereof, there are diverse sinews fitted to receive them.

To make up which discourse, we call to mind, what we have said a little above;
concerning the motions caused in the external parts of the body, by passion
moving within: as when Fear mingled with hope gives a motion to the legs. Anger
to the arms and hands, and all the rest of the body, as well as to the legs, and
all of them, an attention in the outward senses; which neverthelessperverts
every one of their functions, if the passion be in extremity. And then surely
we may satisfy our selves, that either this, or some way like it, (which I
leave to the curious in Anatomy to settle with exactness; for it is enough for
my intent, to show in gross, how these operations may be done, without calling
in some incomprehensible qualities to our aid) is the course of nature in
motions, where no other cause intervenes besides the object working upon the
sense: which all the while it does, it is the office of the eye of fantasy (or
common sense) to lie ever open; still watching to observe what warnings the
outward senses send to him, that accordingly he may direct and chang the
motions of the heart and whole body.

But, if the object make violent impressions upon the sense, 1. How men are
blinded by passion.
and the heart, being then vehemently moved, thereupon send abundance of spirits
up to the brain; this multitude of spirits, thronging upon the common sense,
oppresses it (as we have already said) in such sort, that the notice which the
sense gives of particular circumstances cannot prevail to any effect in the
brain: and thus, by the misguidance of the heart, the work of nature is
disordered. Which when it happens, we express in short, by saying that Passion
blinds the creature, in whom such violent and disorderly motions have course:
for Passion is nothing else, but a Motion of the Blood and Spirits about the
Heart; and is the preparation or beginning of the Animals working, as we have
above particularly displayed.

And thus you see in common, how the circuit is made from the Object to the
Sense, and from it, by the Common sense and Fantasy, to the Heart, and from
the heart back again to the brain; which then sets on work those Organs or
parts the animal is to make use of in that occasion; and they either bring him
to or carry him from the object, that at the first caused all this motion, and
in the end becomes the period of it.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of some actions of Beasts, that seem formal acts of reason; as
doubting, resolving, inventing.
IN the last Chapter the foundations are laid, and the way is opened for
discovering how all operations which proceed 1. The order and connection of the
subsequent Chapters.
from nature and passion, are performed among living creatures: and therefore, I
conceive, I have thereby sufficiently compli'd with the obligation of my
intention; which is but to express and show in common, how all the actions of
sensible bodies may be reduced to local motion and material application of one
body to another, in a like manner (though in a different degree) as those
motions which we see in lifeless bodies: Yet because, among such animals as
pass for irrational, there happen some operations of so admirable a strain, as
resemble very much the higest effects which proceed from a man: I think it not
a miss, to give some further light, by extending my discourse to some more
particulars, than hitherto I have done; whereby the course and way, how they are
performed, may be more clearly and easily looked into. And the rather, because
I have met with some men, who (either wanting patience to bestow* on thoughts
of this kind, so much time as is necessary for the due scanning of them, or
else, through a promptitude of nature, passing swiftly, from the effect they
look upon in gross, to the most obvious seeming cause) suddenly and strongly
resolve, that beasts use discourse upon occasions, and are endued with reason.

Yet I intend not here to run through all the several species of their
operations, for that were to write the history of every particular animal; but
will content my self with touching the causes in common: yet in such sort, that
the indifferent Reader may be satisfied of a possibility, that these effects
may proceed from material causes; and that I have pointed out the way to those
who are more curious, and have the patience and leisure to observe diligently
what passes among beasts, how they may trace these effects from step to step,
till at length they discover their true causes.

To begin then. I concieve we may reduce all those actions of Beasts, which
seem admirable and above the reach of an irrational animal, to three or four
several heads. The first may be of such, as seem to be the very practice of
reason; as doubting, resolving, inventing, and the like. The next shall be of
such, as, by docility or practice, beasts oftentimes arrive to. In the third
place, we will consider certain continuate actions of a long tract of time; so
orderly performed by them, as that discourse and rational knowledge seem
clearly to shine through them. And lastly, we will cast our eye upon some
others, which seem to be even above the reason that is in man himself; as, the
knowing of things which the sense never had impression of before, a prescience
of future events, providence, and the like.

As for the first, the doubting of Beasts, and their long wavering sometimes
between objects that draw them several ways, 2. From whence proceeds the
doubting of beasts.
and at last their resolving, upon some one of them, and their steady pursuance
of that afterward; these will not be matter of hard digestion to him, that
shall have well relished and meditated on the contents of the last Chapter.
For, it is evident, that, if several objects of different natures at the same
time present themselves to a living creature, they must of necessity make diverse
impressions in the heart of it, proportionable to the causes from whence they
proceed: so that, if one of them be a motion of hope, and the other of fear, it
cannot choose but follow thence, that what one of them begins, the other will
presently break off. By which means it will come to pass, that, in the Beasts
heart, there must needs be such waverings as we may observe in the Sea, when,
at the beginning of a tide of flood, it meets with a bank that checks the
coming in of the waves, and, for a while bears them back as fast as they press
upon it: they offer at getting over it, and by and by retire back again from
the steepness of it, as though they were apprehensive of some danger on the
other side; and then again attempt it afresh, and thus continue laboring, one
while one way, another while another; till, at length the flood increasing, the
water seems to grow bolder, and breaks amain over the banks, and then flows on
till it meets with another that resists it, as the first did. And thus you see,
how the Sea can doubt and resolve, without any discoursing. In like manner it
fares with the heart of a Beast (whose motions steer the rest of the body),
when it beats between hope and fear, or between any other two contrary passions;
without requiring any other principles from whence to deduce it, than those we
have already explicated.

But now to speak of their invention: I must confess that, among several of
them, there appears so much cunning in laying of their plots (which when they
have compassed, they seem to grow careless and unbend their intention, as
having obtained what with earnestness they desired), that one might think they
wrought by design, and had a distinct view of an end; for the effecting of
which, they used discourse to choose the likeliest means.

To this purpose the subtilties of the Fox are of most note. They say, he uses
to lie as if he were dead; thereby to make Hens 3. Concerning the invention of
Foxes and other beast.
and Ducks come boldly to him. That, in the night when his body is unseen, he
will fix his eyes upon poultry; and so make them come down to him from their
roost. That, to rid himself of the fleas that afflict him in the Summer, he
will sink his body by little and little into the water, while the fleas creep
up to his head (to save themselves from drowning) and from thence to a bough he
holds in his mouth; and will then swim away, leaving them there. That, to
cosen the Badger of his earth, he will piss in it; as knowing that the rank
smell of his Urine will drive the other cleanlier beast to quit it. That, when
Dogs are close upon him and catching at him, he will piss upon his Tail, and,
by firking that up and down, will endeavor (you may believe) to make their
eyes smart; and so retard their pursuit, that he may escape from them.

And there are particular stories, that express yet more cunning than all
these. As, of a Fox, that, being sore hunted, hanged himself by the teeth among
dead vermin in a Warren; till the Dogs were passed by him, and had lost him.
Of another, that, in like distress, would take into his mouth a broom bush
growing upon a sleep cliff on the side hand near his Den (which had another way
to it, easy enough of access) and, by help of that, would securely cast
himself into his hole, while the Dogs, that followed him hastily and were
ignorant of the danger, would break their necks down the rocks.

It Is said, that, in Thracia, the Country people know whether the rivers, that
are frozen in the winter, will bear them or no, by marking whether the Foxes
venture boldly over them, or retire, after they have laid their ears to the
Ice, to listen whether they can hear the noise of the water running under it:
from whence (you may imagine) they collect, that, if they hear the current of
the stream, the Ice must needs be thin; and consequently dangerous to trust
their weight to it.

And, to busy my self no longer with their subtilties, I will conclude with a
famous tale of one of these crafty animals, that, having killed a Goose on the
other side of the river, and being desirous to swim over with it, to carry it
to his den; before he would attempt it (lest his prey might prove too heavy for
him to swim withal, and so he might lose it) he first weighed the Goose with a
piece of wood, and then tried to carry that over the river, whiles he left his
Goose behind in a safe place: which when he perciev'd he was able to do with
ease, he then came back again, and ventured over with his heavy bird.

They say it is the nature of the Iacatray to hide it self, and imitate the
voice of such beasts, as it uses to prey upon: which makes them come to him, as
to one of their own fellows; and then he seises on and devours them.

The Iaccal, that has a subtle sent, hunts after beasts, and, in the chase, by
his barking, guides the Lion, (whose nose is not so good) till they overtake
what they hunt; which peradventure would be too strong for the Iaccall: but the
Lion kills the quarry, and, having first fed himself, leaves the Iaccal his
share; and so between them both, by the ones dexterity and the others strength,
they get meat for nourishment of them both.

Like stories are recorded of some Fishes. And every day we see the invention
of Beasts to save themselves from catching: as Hares, when they are hunted,
seeks always to confound the sent; sometimes by taking hedges, otherwhiles
waters; sometimes running among sheep and other beasts of stronger sent;
sometimes making doubles, and treading the same path over and over; and sometimes
leaping with great jumps hither and thither, before they betake themselves to
their rest, that so the continuateness of the sent may not lead dogs to their
form.

Now, to penetrate into the causes of these and of such like actions; we may
remember, how we showed in the last Chapter, 4. Of Foxes that catch hens by
lying under their roost and by gazing upon them.
that the beating of the heart works two things: one is, that it turns about
the specieses, or little corporeities (streaming from outward objects) which
remain in the memory; the other is, that it is always pressing on to some
motion or other. Out of which it happens, that, when the ordinary ways of
getting victuals or escaping from enemies, fail a creature whose constitution
is active; it lights sometimes (though peradventure very seldom) upon doing
something, out of which the desired effect follows (as it cannot choose but
fall out now and then, though chance only govern their actions): and, when
their action proves succesful, it leaves such an impression in the memory,
that, whenever the like occasion occurrs, that animal will follow the same
method; for the same specieses do come together from the memory into the
fantasy. But, the many attempts that miscarry, and the ineffectual motions
which straights do cast beasts upon, are never observed; nor are there any
stories recorded of them: no more than, in the Temple of Neptune, were kept
upon the registers the relations of those unfortunate wretches, who, making
vows to that God in their distress, were nevertheless drowned.

Thus peradventure, when the Fox sees his labor, in chasing the hens, to be to
no purpose, and that, by his pursuit of them, he drives them further out of his
reach; he lays himself down to rest, with a watchful eye; and perceiving those
silly animals to grow bolder and bolder, by their not seeing him stir, he
continues his lying still, till some one of them comes within his reach; and
then, on a sudden, he springs up and catches her. Or peradventure, some poultry
might have strai'd within his reach whiles he was asleep, and have then wakened
him with some noise they made; and so he happned to seize upon one of them,
without either design or pains taking beforehand. By such degrees he might
chance to catch one the first time: and they, being settled in his memory,
together with the effect, it happened that, another time when hunger pressed him
and sent up to his brain like spirits to those which ascended thither, whiles
he say watching the hens; these spirits brought the other from his memory into
the fantasy (in such sort as we have showed in the last Chapter), and so drove
him to the same course, till by frequent repetition, it became ordinary and
familiar with him. And then, they, that look only upon the performance of the
artifice, are apt to infer discourse and a design of reason, out of the orderly
conduct of it.

But how can we concieve the Fox has judgment, to know when the hen is come
within his leap, and accordingly offers not at her, till then; unless we resort
to some other principles, than what is yet declared? The answer to this
objection I think will not be hard to find: for if the motion, which the
presence of the object makes in the heart, be proportioned out by nature (as
there is no doubt but it is), it will not be so great and powerful, as to make
the Fox leap at it, till it be arrived so near him, that he, by his nimbleness,
can reach it; and so without any aim, further than by the mere flux of his
passion conveniently raised, he does the feat. But, if his passion be too
violent, it makes him miss his aim: as we may frequently observe both in men
and beasts; and particularly, when fear presses either of them to leap over a
ditch, which being too broad, he lights in the midst of it.

The same watchfulness and desire to have the poulen, which then sit upon a
tree out of his reach, makes him fix his eyes on them, when they are at roost;
and at length, either the brightness and sparkilng of them dazles the birds,
and makes them come down to him, (as flies do in the night about the flame of a
candle, or as fishes do to a light in a boats head), or else they are afraid;
and their fear increasing, their spirits return to the heart, which thereby is
oppressed, and their outward parts are bereaved of strength and motion: from
whence it follows necessarily, that their footing looses their hold fast, and
they tumble down half dead with fear; which happens also frequently to cats,
when they look wishly upon little birds that sit quietly. Or peradventure,
their fear makes them giddy: as when some man, looking down a precipice from a
dangerous standing, falls, by the turning of his brain, though nothing be
behind him to thrust him forwards. Or it may be, some steam comes from the Fox,
which draws such creatures to him: as it is reported that a great and very
poisonous Toad will do a Weasel, who will run about the Toad a great while, and
still make his circle lesser and lesser, till at length he pe^ishes in the
center, were his foe sits still, and draws him to him. Which he does in such
sort, as animated Mercury will draw leaf-gold duly prepared, or as the Load
stone attracts Iron: and yet it is apparent, the Weasel comes not with his good
will, but that there are some powerful chains, steaming from the body of the
Toad, which pluck him thither against his liking; for, by his motions and
running, he will express the greatest fear that can be.

The method which Foxes practice to rid themselves of their 5. From whence
proceeds the Foxes invention to rid himself of Flea.
fleas (if it be true) is obvious enough for them to fall upon: for in Summer,
their sleas, together with their thick fur'd coat, cannot choose but cause an
exceeding great itching and heat in their bodies; which will readily invite
them to go into the water to cool themselves. As the Merchants, at the Isles of
Zante and of Cephalonia, told me (when I was there), it was the custom of our
English Dogs (who were habituated to a colder clime) to run into the Sea in the
heat of Summer, and lie there most part of the day, with only their noses out
of the water, that they might draw breath; and would sleep there with their
heads laid upon some stone; which raised them up, whiles their bodies were
covered with the Sea: and those Dogs which did not thus, would, in one Summer
usually, be killed with heat and Fleas.

Now, when the Fox feels the ease that the coolness of the water affords that
part of him which sits in it, he goes further and further; yet would not put
himself to swim (which is a labor, and would heat him, and therefore he avoids
it): so that whiles he thus cools himself in some shady place (for, it is
natural to him, in such an occasion, to resort to the cool shade, rather than
to I Will in the Son) and in such there being for the most part some boughs
hanging over the water; it happens naturally enough, that he takes some of the
lowest in his mouth, to support him and save hi m the labor of swiming, whiles
he lies at his ease, soaking and cooling himself in the River. By which means
it comes to pass, that the Fleas, finding no part of him free from water, creep
up the bough to rescue themselves from drowning: and so, when he is cooled
enough, he goes away and leaves them there. In all which finding a benefit and
satisfaction, whenever the like occasion brings those species from his memory
into his fantasy, he betakes himself to the same course; and therein finding his
remedy, at length it grows familiar to him.

In like manner, Thales his Mule, that was heavily laden with Salt, hap'ning
to stumble and fall in a River, she was going over, the Salt melted by the
water soaking into the sacks, and so she was eased of her burden: which
success made her, that whenever she came to a River, and was troubled with her
loading, she would lie down in the water; and could not be reclaimed from it,
till they charged sacks of wool upon her back, which, growing heavier by their
imbibing of water, weaned her from her former crafty habit. By which it is
apparent, that it was memory, and not judgment, which made her for a while
behave her self so subtly.

For the Foxes driving the Badger from his earth, you will 6. An explication of
two other inventions of Foxes.
not think it needful to allow him a forecast or design in pissing in it: but,
as it natural for him, to rest in a place that he meets with, fit for that
purpose, so it is for him to piss in it, if the list take him while he is
there; which in all likelihood it will, if he stay any time there, and give a
relaxation to all his parts by sleep.

And, when he pisses in his tail and shakes it in the Dogs eyes, it is evident
that fear, not craft, causes this effect; for it avails him little, and
therefore is not likely to proceed from judgment: and of the other, when it is
violent, it is a natural effect in all beasts, to contract their tails between
their legs, and to make their urine come from them, (by compressing the spirits
in their heart, which should support their outward parts, and strengthen their
splincter muscle); which then being snap'd at and seized on by the Dogs shakes
from their bushy tails (fit to retain it), and then, lighting in the Dogs eyes
the acrimony of it hurts them, and makes them shut their lids.

The story (if it be true) of the Fox, that, to save himself from the Dogs he
heard following him in full cry, hung by his teeth among dead vermin in a
warren, is a very strange one, I confess. But it is conceivable, how fear and
weariness might cause him to seek a shelter to hide himself; and, in so plain a
tract of ground, as warrens use to be, without any bush or hill to have
recourse to for relief, there appearing nothing but a gallows hanging full of
vermin, his fantasy might be moved (he being able to run no further) to thrust
himself among those dead bodies, that he saw rest quietly: and, having no way
to mingle himself with them but hanging by his teeth, he might continue in that
posture, till the Dogs, not suspecting him in the air, might run under him and
overshoot the sent; which whiles they cast about to recover, by running to beat
the next wood or shelter in view (as is their custom in losses of their chase,
to which they are brought by their masters hunting them in that method at the
first) the wily animal steals another way, and recovers himself.

This over-runing of the sent by Dogs, in the earnestness of their chase puts
me in mind of Montagues Argument, out 7. Concerning Montagues argument, to
prove that Dogs make syllogisms.
which he will infer, that Dogs use discourse and make syllogisms in their
hunting: for (says he) when they have followed their chase down a Lane, that,
at length, divides it self into three others, they will carefully smell at the
first and second, and, not finding that it has gone in either of those, they
boldly run upon the third, without ever laying their Noses to the ground; as
being assured by their discourse and reason, that, since it went not in the two
first, and there being but one remaining, it must of necessity have gone there.

But this needs no other cause, than that their eagerness of hunting having
made them overshoot the sent, (which for a while remains in their noses; after
they are parted from the object that caused it), they cast back again (as they
are accustomed to be made to do, in like occasions, by the hunters that train
them up), and with their noses try the ground all the way they go; till, coming
near where the chase went indeed, the sent strikes their Noses (that by this
time are grown empty of it) before they come at the place: and then they run
amain in pursuit of it, with their heads held up, (which is their convenientest
posture for running), and all the way the sent fills them at that distance,
without their needing to smell upon the Earth, to fetch it from thence.

That Fox, which used to cast himself by the advantage of 8. A declaration how
some tricks are performed by Foxes, which seem to argue discourse.
a bough into his Den, was so closely pursued by the Dogs, the first time he
ventured upon this fear, that he had not time to go into his Earth (his
ordinary retreat, when he is near it) by the easy and accessible way: but, on
one side, to get thither being strong in his fantasy, and on the other side,
the precipice, which he had often seen, coming likewise thither from his
memory; these two concurring could not choose, but make him go warily thither.
And in so dangerous a leap, it is natural for him to help himself by any thing
in the way that can advantage him; which happening to be by catching in his mouth
a bough that hung over his Den, (the only sudden means he had to take hold of
any thing), and from thence taking, as it were, a new rise for a second leap,
he finds himself in security: whiles the Dogs, unacquainted with the place, run
violently on, as in the rest of their chase, and so are upon the brim of the
precipice, before they perceive it; and then it is too late for them to stop
their course, and consequently they break their necks. Which mischief to them
the Fox needs not have in his design, and accordingly toll them that way; but,
chance begeting this deliverance of him at the first when he was so hard
pressed, his memory teaches him to follow the same course, whenever the lik
occasion occurrs.

But, how many Foxes perish in attempts, which, if they succeeded, would have
been accounted by slight iudgers to be notable subtilties; but miscarrving, are
esteemed tumultuary motions without defign, caused by that animals fantasy and
spirits, when he is in extremity? I remember how, upon a time when I was
hunting one, he, being hard set, and but a little before the Dogs and Hunters,
caught in his mouth the bough of a crooked Ash-tree, and run up a pretty way:
which being in a hedge, he thereby hung down along the side of the hedge, and
when we struck him over the ribs with our poles, he would not quit his hold,
(so strongly the fear of the dogs wrought in his fantasy), till greater blows
knocked him on the head. Which shows evidently, that this action was the effect
of chance pressing his fantasy to do something; and not any reason or discourse
providing for his safety: as we have already said, upon occasion of the other
hanging among the dead vermin in the Warren.

Those in Thracia that will not go over a frozen River, when the ice is too
thin to bear them, are by their memory, not by their judgment taught to retire;
for at other times they have been wetted, when they have heard the noise of the
stream running under the ice: or, the very running of the water calls the
specieses of swimming out from their memory along with it into their fantasy
(neither of which is pleasant to them in the winter); and so disliking the
noise, for the other effects sake that used to accompany it, they avoid that
which begets it, and so retire from the river. And the reason of their listening
to the noise proceeds from the spirits, that their passion, upon apprehension
of a danger, presses into the nervs of their senses, as well as into the other
nervs of their brains: which accordingly makes them so vigilant, and attentive
then to outward objects and motions.

That the Jaccatray or Hyaena, when he is hungry, should 9. Of the Jaccatrays
invention in calling beasts to himself.
have his fantasy call out from his memory the Images of those Beasts which use
to serve him in that occasion, is the ordinary course of nature; and that,
together with those Images, there should likewise come along the actions and
sounds which used to accompany them, and are lodged together with them in the
memory, is also natural: then, as little strange it is, that by his own voice
he should imitate those sounds which at that time so powerfully possess his
imagination. And, having a great docility in those Organs which form the voice,
like a Parrat, he represents them so lively, that the deceived beasts flock to
him, and so are caught by him: which at first happens by chance; but afterward
by memory, and grows familiar to him. 10. Of the Jaccils design in servi^g the
Lion.


Nor can we imagine, that the Jaccal has a design of servihg the Lion; but his
nature being (like a Dog) to bark when he feels the sent hot (which he pursues
for his own sake), the Lion, that dwells in the same woods with him, meets with
the noise and follows it; and peradventure would kill the Jaccal himself, as
well as what he hunts, if he could overtake him: but he, being too nimble for
the Lion, keeps out of his reach; till, having wearied the beast he chases, the
Lion, that follows by the cry, comes in when he is at a bay, and soon tears in
pieces what the other had not strength enough so suddenly to master, and feeds
himself upon the Quarry, till he be full. All this while the (...) dares not
come near the Lion, but stands at a distance with fear, waiting till he have
done, and then, after he is gone away, he takes his turn to feed upon what his
surly Master has left.

The like reason, it is probable, we might find out, among those Fishes that
serve one another; if we had the convenience of 11. Of several intentions of
Fishes.
observing particularly how they behave themselves: as when the Whale has
service from his little guide (if the report be true; which is a necessary
circumstance to be inserted in every such tale), and others of the like strain.

The subtilty of the Torpedo (who hides himself in the mud to benum Fishes,
that may afterward serve him to feed upon) will not require to have its origin
from reason, and be done by design: when you shall consider it is natural for
such cold Creatures to immud themselves, and then the Fishes that swim within
the reach of his benuming faculty will be stayed and frozen there (which,
because they see him not, they apprehend not, till it be too late for them to
avoid it); and then, when the Torpedo comes out, he feeds upon what he finds
lying ready in his way.

And in like manner, the Scuttle-fish, when he is in straights of being taken
by the Fishermen, casts out a blackness that is within him; and so, making the
water become like Ink, he oftentimes escapes their hands in the darkened
Element: which arises from no discourse of his; but fear makes him void this
12: A discovery of diverse things done by Hares which seem to argue discourse,
liquor that is in him (as it made the Fox void his Urine), and in consequence
ther' to the effect follows.

Lastly, when Hares use those means we have mentioned, to confound the sent and
save themselves from the Dogs that hunt them; we may observe, that they take
therein the readiest ways, and the most obvious to sense, to avoid the evil they
fly from. For, what can be more direct to that effect, than to hide themselves
in Hedg-bottoms, or in Woods? Or to swim over a River, when that is the most
immediate way to run from the Dogs? And when they are in a plain, where there
is no other shelter but flocks of Sheep or herds of Deer, what can be more
natural, than for them to hide themselves among them, and run along with them;
till the cry of the approaching Hounds fright them away, whiles those tamer
beasts abide it nearer?

Their doublings backward and forward may proceed from their fear, that diverts
them still from the way they are in at present; till the Dogs coming near put
them out of those wavering, and makes them run straight away: for they never
double, but when they are a great way before the dogs, and do not hear them. Or
else it may be, that, not hearing or seeing the dogs, their fear may be almost
passed; and then the agitation which their spirits are in, governs the motions
of their body, and will not let them rest, till they be more appeased, (as you
may see weary people, that at their first ceasing from running, cannot sit
still: the like of which happens also frequently in the motions of joy or of
anger), and so it makes them walk backwards and forwards, in a pace
proportionate to the agitation of the spirits within: and sometimes those moved
spirits make them bound and leap to and fro (like the L^af with Quicksilver, we
have heretofore spoken of) as they issue from the heart by pulses and strokes;
which happens when they begin to settle toward rest. Or else peradventure
their form is so framed, that, if they should get into it otherwise, than by a
jump, they would disorder some part of it; and so be unfenced and a cold, or
otherwise at uneasy, during their repose: and therefore their jumping to and
fro, before they leap plumb in, is to take their aim (not much unlike to Dogs,
turning about several times before they lie down); for Hare-finders (who use to
watch them, say they will do thus, though they be not pursued. And thus these
actions which are imputed to craft, thereby to confound the Dogs, or to wisdom,
to walk themselves till they be grown into a fitting temper to sit still; may
all of them be reduced to those material and corporeal causes, which make them
to do their other ordinary motions, wherein we find no difficulty.

If that of the Foxes weighing his Goose, before he would 13. Of a Fox reported
to have weigh^ a Goose, before he would venture with it over a River; and of
fabulous stories in common.
venture to carry it over the River, were plainly true, as it is set down; I
avow, I should be hard set, to find the principles from whence that discretion
in him proceeded: but I conceive his tale may be pa^ed with that, which tells
us of another Fox, who, having his prey taken from him by an Eagle, brought the
next day a new prize into the same place, having first rolled it in the fire,
so that some burning coals stuck upon it; which the Eagle coming again and
snatching from him, carried to her Nest, which was thereby set on fire, and the
young ones, falling down, became the Foxes share, instead of what their Dam had
robbed him of. Such stories, so quaintly contrived, are fitter for a moral, than
for a natural Philosopher. Aesope may entertain himself and his Disciples with
them; whiles all the reflection I shall make upon them, is, that when I hear
any such finely ordered Tales, I cannot doubt but they are well amended in the
relation, by those that tell them: it being the inclination and custom of most
men, (partly through a desire of having strange things come from them, and
partly out of a care that what they say may appear like truth, and so be the
easier believed) to add circumstances beyond the truth of the matter; which
increasing at every new man's relation of the same accident (for this humor
reigns very generally), at length, so handsome and yet so strange a Tale is
composed, that the first Author or Teller of it, wonders at it as well as
others, and cannot discern that his story begot this latter.

Therefore, when one of these fine tales is proposed to speculate on, and that I
have no light to guide me in determining what part of them to allow, and what
to reject; I think it better to expect an authentic record of it, than to be
too hasty at guesses: leaving such as pretend ability in reading of Riddles, to
descant of the ways how such actions may be effected. But for others, that have
a semblance of truth or happen ordinarily, be they at the first sight never so
like the operations of reason, I doubt not, but the causes of them may be
reduced to the principles we have already established; and the ways of
performing them may be pitched upon by such discourses about them, as we have
made about those examples we have above produced. Especially, if the actions
themselves were observed by one that could judge of them, and were reported with
a desire of expressing the truth nakedly as in it self it lies: for, diverse
times it happens that men, saying nothing but truth, express it in such a
manner and with such terms, that the ignorant hearer conceives the thing quite
another way, than indeed it is, merely for the too emphatical expressions;
especially, if the relator himself misses in conceiving the true causes of what
he reports, and so expresses it proportionably to those which he apprehends.

To conclude then this first branch; we see how the Doubting, the Resolving,
the Aiming, the Inventing, and the like, which we experience in Beasts, may, by
the vestigia's we have traced out, be followed to their root, as far as the
division of Rarity and Density: without needing repair to any higher principle,
but the wisdom of the Orderer and Architect of Nature, in so admirably
disposing and mingling these material, gross, and liveless bodies, that strange
effects, and incomprehensible to them who will not look into their several
joints, may follow out of them, for the good of the creature in whose behalf
they are so ordered.

But, before we go to the next point, we cannot for bear mentioning 14. Of the
several Cryings and Tones of Beasts: with a refutation of those Authors who
maintain them to have complete Languages.
their vanity, as well as ignorance, who to purchase the estimation of deeper
knowers of Nature would have it believed, that Beasts have complete Languages,
as Men have, to discourse with one another (...); which they van^d they had the
intelligence of. ^Tis (...)* that, (...) us, speaking or talking is an
operation of reason; not because it flows immediately from reason, but because
by the command and direction of reason it is formed, and is no where to be found
without reason: which those irrational Philosophers which pretended to
understand the Language of Beasts, allowed them, as well as the ability of
talking to one another; but it was because they had more pride than knowledge.
Of which rank one of the chief was Apollonius, surnamed from Th^na: for, if he
had known how to look into the nature of beasts, he would have perceived the
reason of the diverse voices, which the same beast in diverse occasions forms.

This is evident, that an Animals lungs and chest, lying so near as they do, to
his heart; and all voice being made by the breath's coming out of his mouth and
through his windpipe: it must necessarily follow, that, by the diverse ordering
of these instruments, his voice will become diverse; and these instruments will
be diversely order, in him, according to the diverse motions of his heart, that
is, by diverse passions in him, (for so we may observe in our selves, that our
breath is much changed by our being in passion). And consequently, as a beast
is agitated by various passions, he must needs utter variety of voices; which
cannot choose but make diverse impressions in other beasts, that have commerce
with him, whether they be of the same kind as he is, or of a different. And so
we see, that, if a Dog, setts upon a Hog, and the bitten hogs cry makes an
impression in the other Hogs, to come to their fellows rescue; and in other
Dogs to run after the crying Hog: in like manner, anger in a Dog makes snarling
or barking, pain, whining, desire, another kind of barking; and his joy of
seeing a person that he uses to receive good by, will break out in another kind
of whining. So in a Hen, her diverse passions work diverse kinds of clocking; as,
when she sees a Kite, she has one voice, when she meets with meat another,
when she desires to gather her Chickens under her wings, a third: and so, upon
diverse occasions, a diverse sound; according to the diverse ordering of her vocal
instrustruments, by the passion which presses her heart: So that, who would
look curiously into the motions of the variously disposed vocal instruments of
Beasts, and into those of the spirits about a Beasts heart (which motion, we
have showed, is passion) would be able to give account, why every voice of that
beast was such a one, and what motion about the heart it were that caused it.

And as much may be observed in Men, who, in pains, and griefs; and other
passions, use to break out into those voices, which we call Interjections; and
which signify nothing in the Understanding of them that form them, but to the
Hearer are signs of the passion from whence they proceed: which if a man
heedfully mark in himself, he will perceive, that they are nothing else, but
the sudden eruptions of a great deal of breath together; caused by some
compression made within him, by the pain he is in. Which is the reason, that
the striving against groaning, in certain occasions, does fick persons much
harm: for, it disorders the natural motions of some principal parts within
them, that are already too much agitated; and the counter motion, by which they
are checked, puts them further into a more violent agitation. In the
observation of these natural cruptions of men's breath, caused by passion, our
Forefathers of old were so industrious; as to transfer the imitation of nature
in this particular into Mufick: so that their kinds of Music were
distinguished, according to the division of men's passions; and, by similitude,
would raise them in the hearers.

Out of this discourse also a reason may be given, why Birds are more musical,
than other creatures; to wit, because they are of a hotter complexion, and
therefore, to their bigness require more breath and air to cool them; and
consequently make more noise, and more variety of it. Likewise, among Beasts,
Dogs are the most vocal of any that converse with us; who, by their ready
anger, appear to be the hottest. Among Men, those that are merry, or soon
become heated with a little wine, are given to talking or singing: and so are
children, and women likewise; not so much through abundance of heat, as because
their heat does easily vent.

And thus it is evident, that there is no true Language among Beasts: their
voices not being tokens of diverse things or conceptions, but merely the effects
of diverse breathings, caused by diverse passions. Wherefore, since both breathing
and passion are easily reduced to the common principles of Rarity and Density;
we need not trouble our selves any further, to seek into the origin of this
vocal faculty of Beast.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Docility of some irrational animals: and ^f certain
continuate actions of a long tract of time, so orderly perfarm'dly them, that
they seem to argue knowledge in them.
AS for Docility, (which is our second head), Apes and Elephants are most
famed. Though peradventure, the 1. How Hawks and other creatures are taught to
do what they are brought up to.
cunning and obedience of our Hawks and Dogs is no whit inferior to what is
reported of them; and would be as much admired, were it not so common. I have,
by sundry persons who have seen him, been told of a Baboon, that would play
certain Lessons upon a Gittar. The Indian Histories make mention of Apes, that
will go to the Tavern and fetch Wine for their Masters; as Lipsius's Dog would
bring his Master, as much meat from the Market, as he carried money to his
Butcher to pay for. Of Elephants likewise strange things are told. But, because
we cannot easily judge how to understand reports, whereof we have not seen the
experience, nor how far to believe them; I intend not to insist upon the
examining of them; for, by looking into the nature and aut of our Hounds that
follow a sent of blood, or that draw dry foot; and of our Hawks, especially of
the decoy-Ducks and Cormorants; a guess may be given at all the rest. And
although these things, told at random, may justly seem very admirable to any
man, the first time he hears of them; yet, to him that understands how they are
taught, there is no one passage but will appear plain enough.

The first degree is, to tame the Hawk, by watching her from sleep; and to
acquaint her with the man, by continually carrying her upon his fist, and using
her to take her meat quietly, as she sits upon his hand. Then he makes her hop
a little way to it in a pair of cranes, and, after a while, kill a seeled
pigeon; from which he takes her, when she is grown steady in her lesson so far,
and feeds her up with other meat: and thus, in time, he brings her to his fly
at what he will have her, and to be content with a small reward; leaving her
quarry to her Master: So that a spectator, who understands not the Mystery nor
ever saw Hawking before, may well admire to see a Bird so dutifully and exactly
obey a man's command; and may conceive she has a reasonable soul, whereby to
understand him and discourse of the means to bring his purpose to effect:
whereas indeed, all this is no more, than to make her do, for you, and when you
please, the same which she does by nature to seed her self.

The cunning of Dogs is begotten the same way. Coy-ducks are beaten and whipped
to what they are taught; like settingdogs. Cormorants have their throats tied,
that they may not swallow the fish, they catch; but be constrained to bring it
to the man that imploys them. So that, looking along step by step, you shall
meet with nothing but what is plain and easy to be taught, and performed by
sense and memory; without needing to attribute any discourse or reasoning to
beasts.

Apes are likewise taught, as dogs may be, to carry things to a certain house;
where, receiving what is given them, they return home with it: and you may be
confident, this serviceableness of the Ape grew out of his being carried first
to the Tavern by the maid or boy, who there gave him somewhat that pleased him;
and then being made to carry the pot along by the boy; and afterward money in
one hand, and the pot in the other, whereof some drawer discharged him, taking
the one, and filling the other, and withal giving him a reward, which also was
repeated to him, at his return home with his full pot: till at last, when he
was sufficiently used to this exercise, he would of himself, go straight
thither, as soon as he was harnessed so, as he he used to be for this service.
Which appears to be assuefaction and custom, not judgment; by his receiving
indifferently whatever is put into his pot.

And, by the Tale of Lipsius's dog; from whom other less dogs snatching, as he
troted along, part of what hung out of his Basket (which he carried in his
mouth), he set it down to worry one of them: whiles, in the mean time, the
others fed at liberty on the meat that lay there unguarded; till he, coming
back to it, drove them away, and himself made an end of eating it up. Whereby we
may concieve, that the species of carrying his basket to his Master (which
custom had settled in his memory) was disordered and thrust out of his
fantasy, by a stronger, of fighting, for his meat with the other currs: after
which it followed naturally in his fantasy, to eat what he had fought for. And
that sending then spirits into his nervs, agreeable to the nature of it, and
governing the parts depending of the brain; a motion and action ensued, which
was suitable to the object in the fantasy; and this could be none other, but of
eating what the fantasy found conformable to its nature.

The Baboon, we have mentioned, might be taught some 2. Of the Baboon that
played on a Guittar.
lessons made on purpose with very few stops, and upon an instrument whereon all
the strings may be stricken with one blow, and but one fret to be used at a
time, and that fret to be stopped with one finger: of which much labor and
time might beget a habit in him; and then, imitation of the sound might make
him play in due measure. And, if we will mark it in our selves, we shall see
that, although, in the first learning of a lesson on the Lute, we employ our
reason and discourse about it; yet, when we have it very perfect, our fingers
(guided by a slight fantasy) fall by custom, without any reflection at all,
to play it as well, as if we thought never so carefully upon it. And there is
no comparison, between the difficulty of a Gittar and of a Lute.

I have been told, that at the Duke of Florence's marriage, there was a dance
of Horses, in which they kept exact time of Music. The means used for bringing
them to it, is said to have been, by tying and hampering their legs in such a
sort, that they could lift them up, but in a determinate way: and then seting
them upon a pavement, that was heated underneath so hot that they could not
endure to stand still; whiles such Musical Airs were played to them, as fitted
their motions. All which being often repeated, the Horses took a habit, that,
in hearing those Airs, they would lift up their legs in that fashion; and so 3:
Of the teaching of Elephants and other beasts to do diverse tricks.
danced to the tune they had been taught.

Of the Elephants, it is said that they may be taught to write; and that, purely
upon words and commanding them, they will do what they are bidden; and that they
are able to keep account; and will leave working at a precise number of
revolutions of the same action, which measures out their task to them. All
which (as I said before), if it were plainly and literally true, would require
a very great consideration: but because the teachers of Beasts have certain
secrets in their art, which standers by, do not reach to, we are not able (upon
such scanty relations, as we have of them) to make sufficient judgment how such
things are done; unless we had the managing of those creatures, whereby to try
them in several occasions, and observe what cause produces every operation they
do, and by what steps they attain to their instructions and serviceableness.

It Is true, the uncontrolled reports of them oblige us to believe some
extraordinary matter of their docility, and of strange things done by them: but
with all, the example of other taughtbeasts among us, and of the strange
judgments that are made of them, by persons who do not penetrate into their
causes, may instruct us how easily it is to mistake the matter; and assure us,
that the relations made us do not always punctually agree with the truth of
what passed. He that should tell an Indian what feats Banks's Horse would do;
how he would restore a glove to the due owner, after his Master had whispered
that man's name in his ear; how he would tell the just number of pence in any
piece of silver coin, barely showed him by his Master; and even obey presently
his command, in discharging himself of his excrements, when ever he bad him (so
great a power art may have over nature:) would make him, I believe, admire more
at this learned beast, than we do at their docile Elephants, upon the relations
we have of them. Whereas, every one of us knows, by what means his painful Tutor
brought him to do all his tricks; and they are no whit more extxaordinary, than
a Fawkners manning of a Hawk, and training her to kill Partridges, and to fly
at the retrive: but do all of them (both these, and all other juggling artifices
of beasts) depend upon the same or like principles; and are known to be but
directions of nature, ordered by one that composes and levels her operations to
another end further of off (in those actions) than she of her self would aim
at. The particulars of which, we need not trouble our selves to meddle with.

But, it is time we come to the third sort of actions performed by beasts, which
we promised to discourse of. These seem 4. Of the orderly ^ain of actions
perrformd by (...), in breeding their young ones.
to be more admirable, than any we have yet touched; and are chiefly concerning
the breeding of their young ones. Above all others, the orderly course of
Birds, in this affair, is most remarkable. After they have coupled, they make
their nest, they line it with (...), s^w and fathers; they lay their eggs, they
(...) upon them, they (...) them, they feed their young one, and they teach
them to she: all which they do with so continuate and regular a method, as no
man can direct or imagine a better.

But, as for the regularity, orderliness, and continuance of these actions, the
matter is easy enough to be conceived. For, seeing the operation of the male
makes a change in the female; and this change beginning from the very first,
grows by time into diverse proportions: it is no wonder that it breeds diverse
dispositions in the female; which cause her to do different actions,
correspondent to those diverse dispositions. Now, those actions must of
necessity be constant and orderly, because the causes, whence they proceed, are
such.

But, to determine in particular, how it comes to pass, that every change in
the female disposes her to such and such actions, there is the difficulty; and
it is no small one: as well for that there are no careful and due observations
made, of the effects and circumstances which should guide us to judge of their
causes; as because these actions are the most refined ones of Sensitive
creatures, and flow from the top and perfection of their nature, and are the
last strain of their utmost vigor, to which all others are subordinate. As, in
our enquiry into the motions and operations of the bodies of a lower Orb, than
these, we meet with some (namely, the Loadstone, and such like) of which it is
very hard to give exact and plain account; the Author of them reserving
something from our clear and distinct knowledge, and suffering us to look upon
them but through a mist: in like manner we cannot but expect, that, in the
depth of this other perfecter nature, there must be somewhat whereof we can have
but a glimering and imperfect notion. But as in the other, it served our turn,
to trace out a way how these operations might be effected by bodies, and by
local motion (though peradventure, we did not in every circumstance hit exactly
upon the right); thereby to defend our selves from admiting those chymerical
Qualities, which we had already condemned upon all other occasions: so, I
conceive, it will be sufficient for us in this, to show how these actions may
be done by the senses, by the motion of corporeal spirits, and by material
impressions upon them; without being constrained to resort to an immaterial
principle, which must furnish birds with reason and discourse. In which, it is
not necessary for my purpose, to determine precisely every step by which these
actions are performed, and to settle the rigorous truth of them: but, leaving
that to those who shall take pains to deliver the history of their nature, I
will content my self with the possibility and probability of my conjectures.
The first of which qualities I am obliged to make plain; but the latter
concerns this Treatise no more, than it would do a man to enquire anxiously
into the particulars of what it is that a beast is doing, whiles, looking upon
it at a great distance, he perceivs plainly that it moves it self: and his
errant is, but to be assured whether it be alive or dead; which the moving of
it self in common sufficiently demonstrates, without descending into a
particular search of what his motions are.

But let us come to the matter. First, I conceive no man will make any
difficulty in allowing, that it is the temper of the blood and spirits in Birds
(brought thereto by the quality of their food, and the season of the year),
which makes them couple with one another; and not any aim or desire of having
young ones, that occasions this action in them. Then it follows, that the Hens
eggs will increase in her belly; and, when they grow big, they cannot choose
but be troublesome unto her: and therefore, must of necessity breed in her an
inclination to rest in some soft place, and to be rid of them. And, as we see a
Dog or a Cat, pressed by nature, searches about to find a convenient place to
disburthen themselves in, not only of their young ones, but even of their
excrements; so do Birds: whose eggs within them making them heavy and unfit to
fly, they begin to sit much and are pleased in a soft and warm place; and
thereupon are delighted with straws and moss and other gentle substances, and
so carry them to their sitting place. Which that they do not by design is
evident by the manner of it: for, when they have met with a straw or other fit
material, they fly not with it directly to their nest, but first to a bough of
some tree, or to the top of a house; and there they hop and dance a while with
it in their beaks, and from thence skip to another place, where they entertain
themselves in like manner, and at last, they get to their nest. Where, if the
straws should lie confusedly, their ends would prick and hurt them; and
therefore they turn and alter their positions till they lie smooth: which we
that look upon the effect, and compare them with our performing of like actions
(if we had occasion), may call a judicious ordering of them; whereas in them, it
is nothing but removing such things as press upon their sense, till they cause
them no more pain or unquierness.

Their plaistering of their nests may be attributed to the great heat reigning
in them at that time; which makes them still be dabling in moist clay, and
water, and gravel, (without which, all birds will soon grow sick, blind, and at
length die): which (for the coolness of it) they bring home to their nests, in
their beaks and upon their feet; and, when it grows dry and consequently
troublesome to them, they wipe it off, and rub their dirty parts upon the place
where they use to sit, and then fly for more to refresh themselves with.

Out of all which actions (set on foot by the wise orderer of nature, to
compass a remote end, quite different from the immediate end that every one of
them is done for) there results a fit and convenient place for these little
builders (that know not what they do, whiles they build themselves houses) to
lie and lay their eggs in: which the next year, when the like occasion occurrs,
they build again; peradventure then, as much through memory of the former, as
upon their temper and other circumstances, moving their fantasy, so as we have
set down.

In like manner, that, whiles the Halcyon lays and hatches her eggs, the Sea
is calm, needs no more be attributed to the wisdom and providence of that bird,
in choosing a fit season, than to any good nature or discourse in that rouling
and merciless Element; as though it had a pious care of preserving the eggs
committed to his trust: no such supplements are requisite to be added to the
distributions of nature; who has set material causes on foot to produce a
conjuncture of both those effects, at the same period of time, for the
propagation of this animal's species.

In fine, both the time and place of the Halcyon's breeding, and the manner and
order and season of all birds making their nests, proceeds from secret motions:
which require great observing and attention to understand them; and serve for
directions to every bird, according to her kind, to make her nest fittest for
her use. Which secret motions, we cannot doubt but are material ones, and a^se
out of the constitution and temper of their bodies and spirits; which, in like
circumstances, are alike in them all: for all the birds of one kind make their
nests exactly alike. Which they would not do, if this work proceeded from
reason in them, and were governed by their own election and design: as we see
it happen among men upon all occasions, either of building houses, or of making
clothes, or of what action soever is guided by their reason governing their
fantasy; in all which we see so great variety and inconstancy.

Therefore, this invariability in the birds operations must proceed from a
higher intellect, that has determinately and precisely ordered a complex or
assembly of sundry causes, to meet infallibly and by necessity, for the
production of an effect he has designed: and so, the birds are but material
instruments to perform, without their knowledge or reflection, a superior
reason's counsels; even as in a clock, that is composed of several pieces and
wheels, all the parts conspire to give notice of the several effluxes and
periods of time, which the maker has ordered it for.

And, though this be a work of reason and discourse in him that set it
together; yet the instrumental performance of it depends merely of local
motion, and the revolutions of bodies, so orderly proportioned to one another
that their effects cannot fail, when once the engine is wound up. In like
manner then, the Bird is the engine of the Artificer, infinitely more perfect
and knowing and dexterous than a poor clockmaker: and the plummets which make
it go, are the row and order of causes chained together; which, by the design
of the supreme workman, bring to pass such effects as we see in the building of
their nests, and in doing such other actions, as may be compared to the
strikings of the clock, and the ringing of the alarm at due times.

And as that King of Claina, upon his first seeing a Watch, thought it a living
and judicious creature, because it moved so regularly of it self; and believed
it to be dead, when it was run out: till the opening and winding it up
discovered to him the artifice of it. So any man may be excused, that looking
upon these strange actions and this admirable economy of some living
creatures, should believe them endew'd with reason; till he have well reflected
upon every particular circumstance of their nature and operations: for then he
will discern how these are but material instruments of a rational agent,
working by them; from whose orderly prescriptions they have not power to swerve
in the least circumstance that is. Every one of which, considered singly by it
self, has a face of no more diffrently, than that (for example) an Engineer
should so order his matters, that a Mine should be ready to play exactly at
such an hour; by leaving such a proportion of kindled match hanging our of one
of the barrels of powder, whiles, in the mean time, he either sleeps or attends
to something else.

And, when you have once gained thus much of your self, to agree to an orderly
course and generation of any single effect, by the power of a material cause
working in it; raise but your discourse a strain higher, and look with
reverence and duty upthe Immensity of That Provident Architect, out of whose
hands these masterpieces issue, and to whom it is as easy to make a chain of
causes, of a thousand or million of links, as to make one link alone: and then
you will no longer stick at allowing the whole economy of those actions, to be
nothing else but a production of material effects, by a due ranging and
ordering of material causes.

But, let us return to our theme. As we see that milk coming into the breasts
of live-bearing female creatures, when they grow very big, heats and makes them
seek the mouths of their young ones, to disburthen and cool them: so, the
carriage and bigness of the Eggs heats exceedingly the breasts and bodies of
the Birds; and this causes them to be still rubbing of their breasts against
the sides of the nests (whereto their unwieldiness then contines them very much)
and with their Beaks to be still picking their Feathers, which being then apt
to fall off and mew (as we see the hair of women with child is apt to shed) it
happens that, by then they are ready to lay their Eggs, they have a soft bed of
their own Feathers made in their Nests, over their courser mattress of straws
they first brought thither. And then, the Eggs powerful attracting of the
annoying heat from the Hens breast (whose imbibing of the warmth, and
stone-like shell, cannot choose but cool her much) invites her to sit
constantly upon them; till sitting hatches them. And it is evident, that this
sitting must proceed from their temper at that time, or from some other
immediate cause which works that effect; and not from a judgment that does it
for a remote end: for, house-wives tells us, that, at such a season, their Hens
will be sitting in every convenient place they come to, as though they had Eggs
to hatch, when never a one is under them; so as it seems, that at such time,
there is some inconvenience in their bodies, which by sitting is eased.

When the Chickens are hatched, what wonder is it, if the little cryings of
tender creatures, of a like nature and language with their Dam, move those
affections or passions in her bosom, which causes her to feed them; and so
defend and breed them, till they be able to shift for themselves? For all this
there needs no discourse or reason; but only the motion of the blood about the
heart (which we have determined to be passion) stirred by the young ones
chirpings, so as may carry them to those actions, which by nature (the supreme
intellect) are ordered for their preservation. Wherein the Birds (as we have
already said) are but passive instruments, and know not why they do those
actions: but do them they must, whenever such and such objects (which
infallibly work in their due times) make such and such impressions upon their
fantasies; like the allarum that necessarily strikes, when the hand of the Dial
comes to such a point, or the Gunpowder, that necessarily makes a ruin and
breach in the wall, when the burning of the match reaches to it.

Now, this love in the Dam, growing by little and little wearisome and
troublesome to her, and not being able to supply their increased needs, which
they grow every day stronger to provide for of themselves; the strait commerce
begins to die on both sides: and by these degrees the Dam leaves her young ones
to their own conduct.

And thus you see, how this long series of actions may have orderly causes,
made and chained together, by him that knew what was fitting for the work, he
went about. Of which, though it is likely I have missed the right ones (as it
cannot choose but happen in all disquisitions, where one is the first to break
the Ice, and so slenderly informed of the particular circumstances of the
matter in question, as I profess to be in this); yet I concieve, this discourse
plainly shows, that he, who has done more, than we are able to comprehend and
understand, may have set causes sufficient for all these effects, in a better
order and in completer ranks, than those we have here expressed: and yet in
them, so coursely hewed out, appears a possibility of having the work done by
corporeal agents. Surely, it were very well worth the while, for some curious
and judicious person to observe carefully and often the several steps of nature
in this progress: for I am strongly persuaded, that, by such industry, we might
in time arrive to very particular knowledge of the immediate and precise
causes, that work all these effects. And, I conceive, that such observation
needs not be very troublesome; as not requiring any great variety of creatures
to institute it upon: for, by marking carefully all that passes among our
homebred Hens. I believe it were easy to guess very nearly at all the rest.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Prescience of future events, Providence, the knowing of
things never seen before; and such other actions, observed in some living
creatures: which seem to be even above the reason that is in man himself.
THe fourth and last kind of actions, which we may with 1. Why beasts are afrad
of men.
astonishment observe among beasts, I conceive will avail little to infer, that
the creatures which do them, are endew'd with reason and understanding: for
such they are, as, if we should admit that, yet we should still be as far to
seek for the causes, whence they proceed. What should move a Lamb to tremble at
the first sight of a Woolf? or a Hen at a Kite never before seen? neither the
grimest Mastiff, nor the biggest Owl will at all affright them.

That which, in the ordinary course of nature causes beasts to be afraid of
men, or of other beasts, is the hurt and evil they recive from them: which
coming into their fantasy, together with the Idea of him that did it, is also
lodged together with it in the memory; from whence they come linked or glew'd
together, when ever the stroke of any new object calls either of them back into
the fantasy. This is confirmed by the tameness of the birds and beasts, which
the first discoverers of Islands not inhabited by men, found in those they met
with there. Their stories tell us, that, at their first arrival upon those
coasts, (where it seems men had never been) the birds would not fly away, but
suffered the Mariners to take them in their hands; nor the beasts, which with
us are wild, would run from them; but, their discourteous guests used them so
hardly, as they soon changed their confidence into distrust and aversion; and
by little and little, grew by their commerce with men, and receiving injuries
from them, to be as wild, as any of the like kind in our parts.

From the Dams and Sires, this apprehension and fear at the sight of men, so
deeply rooted in them, is doubtless transmitted to their young ones; for it
proceeds out of the disposition of the body, and the passion immediately made
in the heart; and that is as truly a material motion as any whatever can be,
and must have settled material instruments fitted to it, if it be constant, as
well as any other natural operation whatever. And this passion of the heart
proceeds again from a perpetual connection of the two objects in the memory:
which, being a perpetually constant thing, is as true a quality of that beasts
brain in whom it is, as the being of a quick or dull apprehension, or apt to
know one kind of meat from another (which is natural to the whole species); or
any other quality whatever, residing in that beast.

Wherefore it is no wonder, that it passes by generation to the offspring (which
is a thing so common, even in mankind, 2. How some qualities caused at first by
chance, in beasts, may pass by generation to the whole offspring.
as there can be no doubt of it) and is at first made by a violent cause, that
greatly alters the body: and consequently the seed must be imbew'd with a like
disposition; and so it passes together with the nature of the Sire, or of the
Dam, into the brood. From hence proceeds, that children love the same meats and
exercises, that their Fathers and Mothers were affected with; and fear the like
harms.

This is the reason, why a Grandchild of my Lord of Dorset (whose honored
name must never be mentioned by me, without a particular respect, and humble
acknowledgment of the noble and steady friendship, he has ever been pleased to
honor me with) was always extremely sick, if but the Nurse did eat any Capers
(against which my Lord's antipathy is famous) whiles she gave suck to that
pretty infant. The Children of great Mathematicians, who have been used to
busy their fantasies continually with figures and proportions, have been
oftentimes observed to have a natural bent to those Sciences. And we may note,
that, even in particular gestures, and in little singularities in familiar
conversation, children will oftentimes resemble their Parents; as well as in
the lineaments of their faces. The young ones of excellent setting Dogs will
have a notable aptitude to that exercise; and may be taught with half the
pains, that their sire or dam was; if they were chosen out of a race of
Spaniels not trained to setting. All which effects can proceed from no other
cause, but (as we have touched already) that the fantasy of the parent alters
the temper and disposition of his body and seed, according as it self is
tempered and disposed; and consequently, such a creature must be made of it, as
retains the same qualities: as it is said, that sufficient Tartar, put at the
root of a tree, will make the fruit have a winy taste.

But, nothing confirms this so much, as certain notable accidents; 3. How the
parents fantasy oftentimes works strange effects in their issue.
whereof though every one in particular would seem incredible, yet the number of
them, and the weight of the reporters (who are the witnesses) cannot choose but
purchase a general credit to the kind of them. These accidents are, that, out
of some strong imagination of the parents, but especially of the mother in the
time of conception, the children draw such main differences, as were
incredible, if the testifying authority were not so great: but, being true,
they convince beyond all question the truth we have proposed, of the parents
imagination working upon, and making an impression in the seed, whereof children
or young ones of their kind are made. Some children of white parents are
reported to havebeen black, upon occasion of a Black-moors picture too much in
the mothers eye. Others are said to have been born with their skins all hairy;
out of the sight of St John Baptist's picture as he was in the desert, or of
some other hairy image. Another child is famed to have been born disformed, so
as Devils are painted; because the sather was in a Devils habit when he got the
child.

There was a Lady, a kinswoman of mine, who used much to wear black patches
upon her face (as was the fashion among young women); which I, to put her from,
used to tell her in jest, that the next child she should go with, whiles the
solicitude and care of those patches was so strong in her fantasy, would come
into the world with a great black spot in the midst of its forehead: and this
apprehension was so lively in her imagination at the time she proved with
child, that her daughter was born marked just as the mother had fansied; which
there are at hand witnesses enough to confirm, but non more pregnant, than the
young Lady her self, upon whom the mark is yet remaining. Among other
creatures, it is said, that a Hen hatched a Chicken with a Kites bill; because
she was frighted with a Kite, whiles the Cock was treading her. The story of
Jacol's Sheep is known to all; and some write, that the painting of beautiful
colored pigeons in a Dove-house will make the following race become like them:
and in Authors, store of such examples may be found.

To give a reasonable and fully satisfying cause of this great effect, I
confess, is very difficult; since, for the most part, the parents seed is made
long time before the accoupling of the male and female: and though it were not,
we should be mainly to seek for a rational ground to discourse in particular,
upon it. Yet, not to leav our Reader without a hint which way to drive his
inquisition, we will note thus much; that Aristotle and other natural
Philosophers and Physicians affirm, that, in some persons, the passion is so
great in the time of their accoupling, that, for the present, it quite bereavs
them of the use of reason, and they are for the while in a kind of short fit of
an Epilepsie. By which it is manifest, that abundance of animal spirits then
part from the head, and descend into those parts which are the instruments of
generation. Wherefore, if there be abundance of specieses of any one kind of
object then strong in the imagination, it must of necessity be carried down
together with the spirits into the seed: and by consequence, when the seed
infected with this nature begins to separate and distribute it self, to the
forming of the several parts of the Embryon; the spirits, which resort into the
brain of the child (as to their proper Element) and from thence finish all the
outward cast of its body (as we have above described) sometimes happen to fill
certain places of the child's body with the infection and tincture of this
object; and that according to the impression with which they were in the
mothers fantasy: for so, we have said, that things which come together into the
fantasy naturally stick together in the animal spirits. The hairiness therefore
will be occasioned in those parts, where the Mother fansied it to be: the
color likewise, and such extancies or defects, as may any way proceed from
such a cause, will happen to be in those parts, in which they were fansied. And
this is as far, as is fit to wade into this point; for so general a discourse
as ours is, and more, than was necessary for our turn; to the serving whereof,
the verity of the fact only, and not the knowledge of the cause, was required:
for we were to show no more, but that the apprehensions of the parents may
descend to the children.

Out of this discourse, the reason appears, why beasts have an aversion from
those who use to do them harm: and why this aversion descends from the old ones
to their brood; though it should never have happened that they had formerly
encountered with, what, at the first sight, they fly from and avoid.

But yet the reason appears not, why (for example) a 4. Of antipathies.
Sheep in England (where there are no Wolves bred, nor have been these many
ages) should be afraid and tremble at sight of a Wolf; since neither he, nor
his dam or sire, nor these, in multitudes of generations, ever saw a Wolf, or
received hurt by any. In like manner, how should a tame Weasell, brought into
England from Ireland (where there are no poisonous creatures), be afraid of a
Toad as soon as he sees one? Neither he, nor any of his race, ever had any
impressions of following harm made upon their fantasies; and as little can a
Lion receive hurt from a household Cock: therefore we must seek the reasons of
these and such like Antipathies a little further; and we shall find them
hanging upon the same string, with Sympathies proportionable to them.

Let us go by degrees: We daily see, that Dogs will have an aversion from
Glovers, that make their ware of Dogs skins: they will bark at, and be churlish
to them, and not endure to come near them; though they never saw them before.
The like hatred they will express to the Dog-killers in the time of the Plague,
and to those that flea Dogs. I have known of a man that used to be imploid in
such affairs, who, passing, sometimes over the grounds near my Mothers house
(for he dwellt at a Village not far off), the Dogs would wind him at a very
great distance, and all run furiously out the way he was, and fiercely fall
upon him; which made him go always well provided for them: and yet he has been
sometimes hard put to it, by the fierce Mastiffs there, had it not been for some
of the Servants coming in to his rescue; who, by the frequent happening of such
accidents, were warned to look out when they observed so great commotion and
fury in the dogs, and yet perceived no present cause for it. Warreners observe,
that vermin will hardly come into a trap wherein another of their kind has been
lately killed: and the like happens in Mouse-traps, into which no Mouse will
come to take the bait, if a Mouse or two have already been killed in it; unless
it be made very clean, so that no scent of them remain upon the Trap, which can
hardly be done on the sudden, otherwise than by fire.

It Is evident, that these effects are to be referred to an activity of the
object upon the sense: for, some smell of the skins, or of the dead dogs, or of
the vermin, or of the Mice, cannot choose but remain upon the Men and Traps;
which, being altered from their due nature and temper, must needs offend them.
Their conformity, on the one side, (for something of the canine nature remains)
makes them have easy ingression into them; and so they presently make a deep
impression: but, on the other side, their distemper from what they should be
makes the impression repugnant to their nature, and be disliked by them; and to
affect them worse, than if they were of other creatures, that had no conformity
with them. As we may observe, that stinks offend us more, when they are
accompanied with some weak perfume, than if they set upon us single; for the
perfume gets the stink easier admittance into our sense: and in like manner,
it is said that poisons are more dangerous, when they are mingled with a cordial
that is not able to resist them; for it serves to convey them to the heart,
though it be not able to overcome their malignity.

From hence then it follows, that, if any beast or bird prey upon some of
another kind, there will be some smell about them, exceedingly noisome to all
others of that kind: and, not only to beasts of that same kind, but (for the
same reason) even to others likewise, that have a correspondence and agreement
of temper and constitution with that kind of beast, whose hurt is the original
cause of this aversion. Which being assented to, the same reason holds to make
those creatures, whose constitutions and tempers consist of things repugnant
and odious to one another, be at perpetual enmity, and fly from one another at
the first sight, or at least, the sufferer from the more active creature: as we
see among those men, whose unhappy trade and continual exercise it is to empty
Jakeses, such horrid stinks are by time grown so conformable to their nature,
as a strong perfume will as much offend them, and make them, as sick as such
stinks would do another man bred up among perfumes; and a Cordial to their
spirits is some noisome smell, that would almost poison another man. And thus,
if in the breach of the Wolf or the steam coming from his body, any quality be
offensive to the Lamb (as it may very well be, where there is so great a
contrariety of natures) it is not strange, that, at the first sight and
approach of him, he should be distempered and fly from him; as one fighting
Cock will do from another that has eaten Garlike: and the same happens between
the Weasel and the Toad, the Lion and the Cock, the Toad and the Spider; and
several other creatures, of whom like enmities are reported.

All which are caused in them, not by secret instincts, and Antipathies, and
Sympathies, whereof we can give no account; (with the bare sound of which words
most men pay themselves, without examining what they mean): but by downright
material qualities, that are of contrary natures, (as fire and water are); and
are either begotten in them in their original constitution, or implanted
afterward by their continual food, which, nourishing them, changes their
constitution to its complexion. And, I am persuaded, this would go so far,
that, if one man were nourished continually with such meat (and greedily
affected it) which another had aversion from; there would naturally follow much
dislike between them: unless some superior regard should master this aversion
of the sense. And I remember to have seen two notable examples of it One, in
Spain, of a Gentleman that had a horror to Garlike, who (though he was very
subject to the impressions of beauty) could never wean himself from an aversion
he had settled in him to a very handsome woman, that used to eat much Garlike;
though, to win him, she forbore the use of that meat, which to her was the most
savoury of all others. And the like I knew in England between two, whereof one
extremely loved Cheese, and the other as much hated it; and would fall into a
strange agony, and be reduced (one would think) to the point of death, if by
inadvertency or others trial of him, he had swallowed never so little of what
the other would have quitted all meats else to live upon.

And, not only such aversions, as spring from differences of complexions in the
constitutions of several animals, cause these effects of fear and trembling,
and flying from those that make such impressions; but even the seeing them
angry and in fury does the like: for, such passions alters the spirits; and
they, issuing from the body of the animal in passion, cannot choose but be
received by another in a different manner, than if they were of another temper.
Then, if the one kind be agreeable to their nature, the other must needs be
displeasing. And this may be the reason, why Bees never sting such as are of a
mild and gentle disposition; and will never agree with others, that are of a
froward and angry nature: And the same one may observe among Dogs. And
peradventure, a man's fantasy may be raised to such a height of fury, that the
fiercest beast may be afraid to look on him, and cannot endure that those
mastering spirits, which stream out of the man's eye, should come into his; so
much they distemper his fantasy: and therefore he will turn away from the man,
and avoid him. Which discourse may be confirmed, by sundry examples of Lions
and Bears, that have run from angry and confident men; and the like. Since
then, a man, that in his natural hew, gives no distaste, so much affrights
fiercest beasts, when he puts on his threatening looks; it is no wonder that
beasts, of a milder and softer nature, should have fear of him settled in them,
when they never saw him otherwise than angry, and working mischief to them.
And, since their brood receive from their parents a nature easily moved to fear
or anger, by the sight of what moved them; it is not strange, that, at the first
sight, they should tremble or swell, according as the inward wotion of the
spirits affords:

Now, if this has rendered the Birds in the wild Islands afraid of men, who
otherwise would be indifferent to them; it is no marvel to see more violent
effects in the Lambs aversion from the Wolf, or in the Larks from the Hobbey:
since they peradventure have, over and above the hurt they use to do them, a
deformity in their constitutions; and therefore, though a Lark will fly, as
well from a man as from a Hobbey, yet because there is one cause more for his
dislike against the Hobbey than against the man (namely the deformity of their
constitutions), he will fly into the man's hand, to avoid the Hawks talons.

To some of these causes all Antipathies may be reduced: and 5. Of Sympathies.
the like reason may be given for the Sympathies we see between some creatures.
The little corporeities which issue from the one have such a conformity with
the temper of the other, that it is thereby moved to join it self to the body
from whence they flow, and affects union with it in that way, as it receives
the impression. If the smell please it, the beast will always be smelling at
it: if the taste, nothing shall hinder it from feeding upon it, when it can
reach it. The Fishermen upon the bank over against Newfound Land report, that
there flocks about them a kind of Bird, so greedy of the Fishes livers, which
they take there, as that, to come at and feed on them, they will suffer the men
to take them in their hands; and not fly away, as long as any of their desired
meat is in their eye: whence the Frenchmen that fish there, call them Hap
Foyes. The like power a certain Worm has with Nightingales.

And thus you see, how they are strong impressions upon sense, and not any
discouse of reason, that govern Beasts in their actions. For, if their avoiding
men did proceed from any s^gacity in their nature, surely they would exercise
it when they see that, for a bit of meat, they incur their destruction: and
yet, neither the examples of their fellows killed before their eyes in the same
pursuit, not the blows which themselves do feel, can serve them for warning,
where the sense is so strongly affected; but as soon as the blow that removed
them is passed, (if it miss killing or laming them), and they be gotten on wing
again, they will return to their prey, as eagerly and as confidently as if nothing
were there to hinder them.

This then being the true reason of all Sympathy and Antipathy; 6. That the
Antipathy of Beasts toward one another may be taken away by assuefaction.
we cannot admit that any Beasts should love or hate one another, for any other
cause, than some of those we have touched. All which are reduced to local
motion, and to material application of bodies of one nature, to bodies of
another; and are as well trasmitted to their young ones, as begotten in
themselves.

And as the satisfying of their sense is more prevalent in the Hap Foyes,
than the fear which from other grounds is begotten in their fantasy; and so
makes them approach to what the other would drive them from: In like manner,
any aversion of the fantasy may be mastered, not only by a more powerful agent
upon the present sense; but also by assuefaction, and bringing into the
fantasy, with pleasing circumstances, that object which before was displeasing
and affrightful to it. As we see that all sorts of Beasts or Birds, if they be
taken young may be ^amed and will live quietly together. Dogs that are used to
hunt and kill Deer, will live friendly with one that is bred with them; and
that Fawn, which otherwise would have bin afraid of them, by such education
grows confident and plays boldly with them. Of which we can no longer remain in
doubt, if we will believe the story of a Tiger (accounted the cruellest beast
of all others); who, being shut up with a Deer, that had bin bred with him from
a Kid and from his being a Whelp, and no meat given him, used means to break
prison when he was half starved, rather than he would hurt his familiar friend.
You will not suspect, that it was a moral consideration which made him so kind:
but the Deer had never come into his fantasy accompanied with other
circumstances, than of play or of warmth; and therefore hunger (which calls only
the species of meat out of the memory into the fantasy) would never bring the
Deer thither, for remedy of that passion.

And that which often happens to those men, in whom the fantasy only works, is
not much unlike to this: among whom I have seen some frentick persons, that, if
they be persuaded they are tied and cannot stir from the place where they are,
will lie still and make great complaints for their imprisonment; and not go a
step to reach any meat or drink that should lie in sight near them, though they
were never so much pressed with hunger or thirst. The reason is evident; for,
the apprehension of being tied is so strong in their fantasy, that their
fantasy can send no spirits into other parts of their body, whereby to cause
motion.

And thus the Deer was beholding to the Tyger's fantasy, not to his discourse
of moral honesty, for his life. The like of this Tiger and Deer is to be seen
every day in the Tower of London: where, a little Dog, that was bred with a
Lion from his birth, is so familiar and bold with him, that they not only sleep
together, but sometimes the Dog will be angry with him, and bite him; which the
Lion never resents from him, though any other Dog that is put to him he
presently tears in pieces.

And thus we plainly see, how it comes about, that beasts may have strange
aversions from things, which are of an annoying or destructive nature to them,
even at the first sight of them; and again, may have great likings of other
things, in a manner contrary to their nature: without needing to allow them
reason, whereby to discourse and judge what is hurtful to them; or to instruct
the Tiger we have spoken of, or Androdus's Lion, the duties of friendship and
gratitude.

The Longing marks which are oftentimes seen in children, 7. Of Longing marks
seen in children.
and remain with them all their life, seem to be an offspring of the same root
or cause; but in truth, they proceed from another, though of kin to this: for,
the operation of the seed is passed, when these Longing marks are imprinted,
the child being then already formed and quickn'd: and they seem to be made
suddenly, as by the print of a seal. Therefore, to render the cause of them; let
us consider another sympathy, which is more plain and common. We see that the
laughing of one man will set another on laughing, that sees him laugh; though
he know not the cause, why the first man laughs; and the like we see in yawning
and stretching, which breed the like effect in the looker on. I have heard of a
man, that, seeing a roasted Pig, after our English fashion with the mouth
gaping, could not shut his own mouth, as long as he looked upon the Pigs: and
of another, that, when he saw any man make a certain motion with his hand,
could not choose but he must make the same; so that, being a Tyler by his
Trade, and having one hand employed with holding his tools, while he held
himself with the other upon the eav's of a house, he was mending, a man
standing below on the ground made that sign or motion to him whereupon he quited
his holdfast to imitate that motion, and fell down, in danger of breaking his
neck.

All these effects proceed out of the action of the seen object, upon the
fantasy of the looker on, which, making the picture or likeness of its own
action in the others fantasy, makes his spirits run to the same parts; and
consequenty, move the same members, that is, do the same actions. And hence it
is, that, when we hear one speak with love and tenderness of an absent person,
we are also inclined to love that person, though we never saw nor heard of him
before; and that whatever a good Orator delivers well (that is, with a
semblance of passion agreeable to his words) raises, of its own nature, like
affection in the hearers: aod that generally men learn and imitate (without
design) the customs and manners of the company, they much haunt.

To apply this to our intent, it is easy to conceive, that, although the child
in the mothers womb can neither see nor hear what the mother does;
nevertheless there cannot pass any great or violent motion in the mothers body,
whereof some effect does not reach to the child, which is then one continuate
piece with her: and the proper effect of motion or trembling in one body, being
to produce a like motion or trembling in another, (as we see in that ordinary
example of tuned strings, whereof one is moved at the striking of the other, by
reason of the stroke given to the air, which, finding a movable easily moved
with a motion of the same tenor, communicates motion to it); it follows, that
the fantasy of the child being as it were well tuned to the fantasy of the
mother, and the mothers fantasy making a special and very quick motion in her
own whole body, (as we see sudden passions do), this motion or trembling of the
mother must needs cause the like motion and trembling in the child, even to the
very swiftness of the mothers motion. Now, as we see, when one blushes the
blood comes into his face, so the blood runs in the mother to a certain place,
where she is stricken by the thing longed for: and the like hap'ning to the
child, the violence of that sudden motion dies the mark or print of the thing
in the tender skin of it; the blood in some measure piercing the skin, and not
returning wholly into its natural course: which effect is not permanent in the
mother, because her skin, being harder, does not receive the blood into it; but
sends it back again; without receiving a tincture from it.

Far more easy is it, to discover the secret cause of many Why diverse men hate
some certain meats, and particularly Cheese,
antipathies or sympathies, which are seen in children, and endure with them,
the greatest part, if not the whole term, of their life, without any apparent
ground for them. As, some do not love Cheese, others Garlic, others Ducks;
others diverse other kinds of meat, which their parents loved well: and yet, in
token that this aversion is natural to them, and not arising from some dislike
accidentally taken and imprinted in their fantasy; they will be much harmed,
if they chance to eat any such meat, though, by the much disguising it, they
neither know, nor so much as suspect they have done so. The story of the Lady
Hennage (who was of the Bedchamber to the late Queen Elizabeth); that had her
cheek blister'd by laying a Rose upon it, whiles she was asleep, to try if her
antipathy against that flower were so great, as she used to pretend, is famous
in the Court of England. A Kinsman of mine, whiles he was a Child, had like to
have died of drought, before his Nurse came to understand, that he had an
antipathy against Beer or Wine: till the tender nature in him, before he could
speak, taught him to make earnest signs for water, that by accident he saw; the
greedy drinking of which cured presently his long languishing and pining
sickness. And such examples are very frequent.

The cause of these effects many times is, that their mothers, (upon their
first suppression of their usual evacuations, by reason of their being with
child) took some strong dislike to such things: their stomachs being then
oppressed by unnatural humors, which overflow their bodies upon such retentions
and make them oftentimes sick and prone to vomiting (especially in the
mornings, whiles they are fasting) and sometimes to desire earnestly (which they
call longing) to feed upon some unwholesome, as well as some particular wholesome
things; and other whiles, to take aversion against meats, which at other
seasons they affected well. Now, the child being nourished by the so-imbued
blood of the mother; no wonder if it takes affections or dislikes, conformable
to those which at that present reign in the mother. Which, for the most part,
use to be purged away, or are overwhelmed by the mastering qualities of better
aliments succeeding; but if, by some mischance, they become too much grafted in
the child's stomach, or in some other part through which the mass of blood must
pass, then the child gets an aversion from those meats: and we often see, that
persons retain a strong conversion to such meats or drinks, as their mothers
affected much or longed for whiles they bred them.

And thus we will leave this particular; adding only one note, why there are
more persons, generally, who have antipathy against Cheese, than against any
one sort of meat besides whatever. A principal reason of which symptom (where
the precedent one has not place) I conceive to be that their nurses proved
with child, whiles they gave them suck: for I have by experience found it to
have been so, in as many as I have made inquiry into. And it is very
conformable to reason: for the nurses milk crudling in her breast upon her
breeding of child, and becoming very offensive to the child's tender stomach,
(whose being sick, obliges the Parents to change the Nurse, though peradventure
they know nothing of the true reason that makes her milk unnatural) he has a
dislike of Cheese (which is strong curdled milk) ever after settled in him, as
people, that have once surfeited violently of any meat, seldom arrive to brock
it again.

Now, as concerning those animals who lay up in store for winter, and seem
therein to exercise a rational providence: who 9. Concerning the providence of
Arts, in laying up store for winter.
sees not, that it is the same humor, which moves rich misers to heap up
wealth, even at their last gasp; when they have no child nor friend to give it
to, nor think of making any body their heirs? Which actions, because they have
no reason in them, are to be imputed to the passion or motion of the material
appetite. In the doing of them these steps may be observed; First the Object,
presenting itself to the eye, provokes love and desire of it; especially if it
be joined with the memory of former want: then, this desire stirs up the animal
(after he has fed himself) to gather into the place of his chief residence, as
much of that desired object, as he meets with; and when ever his hunger
returning brings back into his fantasy the memory of his meat, it being joined
with the memory of that place (if he be absent from it) he presently repairs
thither for relief of what presses him; (and thus Dogs, when they are hungry,
rake for bones they had hidden when their bellies were full.) Now, if this
food, gathered by such providence (which is nothing else but the conformity of
it, working upon him by his sense) and laid up in the place where the owner of
it resides, (as the Corn is, which the Ants gather in Summer) be easily
portable; he will carry it abroad with him, the first time he stirs after a
long keeping in: for then nothing works so powerfully in his fantasy, as his
store; and he will not easily part from it, though other circumstances invite
him abroad. From hence it proceeds, that. when a fair day comes after long foul
weather, the Ants, who all that while kept close in their Dens with their Corn
lying by them, then come abroad in the Sun, and carry their Grain along with
them: or peradventure it happens, because the precedent wet weather has made
it grow hot, or musty, or otherwise offensive within; and therefore they carry
it out, as soon as themselves dare peep abroad, which is, when the fair weather
and heat of the day invites them out into the open air: and, before night, that
they return into their holes, the offensive vapors of the corn are exhaled and
dryd up, and move their fantasies no longer to aversion; whereupon they carry it
back again, having then nothing but their long contracted love to it, to work
upon them. The like whereof men doing by discourse, to air their corn and keep
it sweet, and the same effect following therein; they will presently have it,
that this is done by the Ants for the same reason, and by design. Then, the
moisture of the earth swelling the grain, and consequently, making it begin to
shoot at the ends, (as we declared, when we spoke of the generation of Plants,
and as we see in the moistning of Corn to make Malt of it) those littte
creatures, finding that part of it more tender and juicy, than the rest, nibble
upon it there, and feed themselves first with that, which consequently hinders
the growth of the corn. And here again, men will contend that this must be done
by providence and discourse; to prevent, that their store should not grow out
of their reach and changing nature, become useless to them in their need.

To conclude, the Foreknowing of Beasts is nothing else, but their timely
receiving impressions, from the first degrees of 10. Concerning the Foreknowing
of Beasts.
mutations in things without them: which degrees are almost imperceptible to
us, because our fantasies and spirits have otherwise such violent agitations,
more than theirs; which hinder them from discerning gentle impressions upon
them. If you be at Sea, after a long calm, a while before a gale blows to fill
your Sails, or to be discernible by your sense in quality of wind, you shall
perceive the Sea begin to wrinkle his smooth face that way the wind will come:
which is so infallible a sign that a gale will come from that coast, as
mariners immediately fall to triming their sails accordingly; and usually,
before they can have done, the wind is with them; shall we therefore saythat the
Sea has a providence, to foresee which way the wind will blow? or that the
corns upon our toes, or calluses, or broken bones, or joints that have been
dislocated, have discourse and can foretell the weather? It Is nothing else, but
that the wind rising by degrees, the smooth Sea is capable of a change by it,
before we can feel it: and that the Air, being changed by the forerunners of
worse weather, works upon the crasiest parts of our body, when the others feel
not so small a change. So beasts are more sensible, than we (for they have less
to distract them) of the first degrees of a changing weather: and that mutation
of the air without them makes some change within them, which they express by
some outward actions or gestures.

Now, they who observe how such mutations and actions are constantly in them,
before such or such weather, think they know beforehand, that rain (for
example) or wind, or drought is coming; according to the several signs they
have marked in them. Which proceeds out of the narrowness of their discourse;
that makes them resort to the same causes, when ever they meet with like
effects: and so they conceive, that things must needs pass in Beasts, after the
same tenor, as they do in men. And this is a general and main error, running
through all the conceptions of mankind, (unless great heed be taken to prevent
it, that, what subject soever they speculate on, whether it be of substances
that have a superior nature to theirs, or of creatures inferior to them; they
are still apt to bring them to their own standard, and to frame such
conceptions of them, as they would do of themselves: As, when they will have
Angels discourse, and move, and be in place, in such sort as is natural to men;
or when they will have beasts ratiocinate and understand, upon their observing
some orderly actions performed by them, which in men would proceed from
discourse and reason. And this dangerous Rock (against which many fine
conceptions suffer shipwreck) whoever studies truth must have a main caution to
avoid.

Sed nos immensum spatiis confecimus aequor:
Et jam tempus equum fumantia solvere colle.
CONCLUSION.
THus at last (by Gods assistance) we have climbed up to the top of the Hill;
from whence looking down over the whole region of bodies, we may delight our
selves, with seeing what a height the weary steps we ascended by have brought us
to. It Is true, the path we have walked in, is of late so untrodden, and so
overgrown with briars, as it has not been without much labor, that we have
made our way through. And peradventure, it may seem toilsome to others to
follow us; especially such as are not much enured to like journeys: but, I
hope, the fruit, which both we and they are now arrived to gather of our pains,
in this general view we have taken of the Empire of matter, and of corporeal
agents, is such, as none of us has reason to be ill satisfied with the
employing of them. For, what can more powerfully delight, or more nobly
entertain an understanding soul, than the search and discovery of those works
of nature; which being in their effects so plainly exposed to our eyes, are in
their causes so abstru^e and hidden from our comprehension, as (through despair
of success) they deter most men from enquiring into them?

And I am persuaded, that, by this summary discourse (short indeed, in regard
of so large a scope, how ever my lame expressions may peradventure make it
appear tedious), it appears evidently, that none of natures greatest secrets,
whereof our senses give us notice in the effects, are so overshaded with an
impenetrable veil, but that the diligent and wary hand of reason might unmask
and show them to us, in their naked and genuine forms, and delight us with the
contemplation of their native beauties: if we had as much care and constancy in
the pursuit of them, as we daily see men have in heaping up wealth, or in
striving to satisfy their boundless ambitions, or in making their senses swim
in the muddy lake of base and contemptible pleasures. For, who shall thoroughly
consider and weigh what we have hitherto said, will plainly see a continual and
orderly progress, from the simplest, highest, and most common conception that
we frame of a Body in general, to the furthest and most abstruse effects, that
in particular are to be found in any Body whatever: I mean, any that is merely
corporeal, without mixture of a nobler nature; for, hitherto we have not moved,
nor so much as looked out of that Orb. He shall find one continued thread, spun
out from the beginning to the end: He will see, that the various twisting of the
two species of Bodies, Rare and Dense, make the yarn, of which all things and
actions within the sphere of matter are woven.

And though peradventure, in the drawing out of the thread, there may be some
little bracks; or the stuff made of it be not every where so close wrought, as
a better workman at more leisure might have done: yet truly, I believe, that
the very consent of things throughout is such, as demonstrates, that the main
contexture of the doctrine I have here touched is beyond quarreling at. It may
well be that, in sundry particulars, I have not lighted on exact truth: and I
am so far from maintaining peremptorily any thing I have here said, as I shall
most readily hearken to whatever shall be objected against it; and be as ready,
upon cause, to desert my own opinions, and yield to better Reason. But withal,
I conceive, that, as the failing of a brick here and there in the rearing of
the walls of a house does nothing at all prejudice the strength and security of
the fabric; no more (I hope) will the slight escapes, which so difficult a
task, as this is subject to, endamage or weaken the main body of what I have
here delivered. I have not yet seen any piece upon this subject made up with
this method; beginning from the simplest and plainest notions, and composing
them orderly, till all the principal variety, which their nature is capable of,
be gone through: and therefore it cannot be expected, but the first model of
this kind (and molded by one distracted with continual thoughts of a much
different strain; and whose exercise, as well as profession, has allowed him
but little commerce with books and study) must needs be very rough hewed, and
require a great deal of polishing. Which whoever shall do, and be as exact and
orderly in treating of Philosophy and Theology, as Mathematicians are in
delivering their Sciences; I assure my self, that Demonstrations might be made,
and would proceed in them as currently, and the conclusions be as certain and
full, as in the Mathematics themselves. But, that is not all; these
Demonstrations would have the odds exceedingly of the other, and be to us
inestimably more advantageous: for, out of them, spring much higher and nobler
effects for man's use and life, than out of any Mathematical ones. Especially
when they extend themselves to the government of Man, as Man; which is an art,
as far beyond all the rules of Physic, or other government of our Body, or
Temporal goods, as the End is beyond the Means we employ to gain it: for, all
the others but serve instrumentally to this end, That we may live well; whereas
these immediately teach it.

These are the fruits, in general, that I hope may in some measure grow out of
this discourse, in the hands of equal and judicious Readers: but, the
particular aim of it is, to show what actions can proceed from a Body, and what
cannot. In the conduct whereof, one of our chief endeavors has been to show,
that those actions, which seem to draw strongly into the order of bodies the
unknown nature of certain Entities, named Qualities, either do or may proceed
from the same causes which produce those known effects, that all sides agree,
do not stand in need of any such mystical Philosophy. And, this being the main
hinge, upon which hangs and moves the full and clear resolving of onr main and
great question, Of the immortallity of the Soul; I assure my self, the pains I
have taken in this particular will not be deemed superfluous or tedious: and
withal, I hope, I have employed th'em with so good succes, as henceforward we
shall not be any more troubled with objections drawn from their hidden and
incomprehensible nature, and that we stand upon even ground with those of the
cnotrary opinion; for, since we have show d, how all actions may be performed
among Bodies, without having any recourse to such Entities and Qualities as
they pretend and paint out to us, it is now their parts (if they will have them
admitted) to prove that in nature there are such.

Having then brought the Philosophy of Bodies to these terms; that which
remains for us to perform is, to show that those actions of our Souls, for
which we call her a Spirit, are of such a nature as cannot be reduced to those
principles, by which all corporeal actions are effected. For the proof of our
original intent, no more than this can be exacted at our hands; so that, if our
positive proofs shall carry us yet beyond this, it cannot be denyd, but that we
give over-measure, and illustrate with a greater light what is already
sufficiently discerned. In our proceeding, we have nature preceding as, for
laying for our ground the natural conceptions which mankind makes of Quantity,
we find that a Body is a mere passive thing, consisting of diverse parts, which
by motion may be diversely ordered; and consequently, that it is capable of no
other change or operation, than such as Motion may produce, by various ordering
the diverse parts of it: And then, seeing that Rare and Dense is the primary and
adequate division of Bodies; it follows evidently, that what cannot be effected
by the various disposition of rare and dense parts, cannot proceed or be
effected by a pure body: And consequently, it will be sufficient for us to show
that the Motions of our Souls are such. And they, who will not agree to this
conclusion, must take upon them to show, that our first premise is defective:
by proving that other unknown ways, are necessary, for bodies to be wrought on,
or work by; and that the motion and various ordering of rare and dense parts in
them is not cause sufficient for the effects we see among them. Which whoever
shall attempt to do, must remember, he has this disadvantage before he begins,
that whatever has been hitherto discovered (...) the science of Bodies, by the
help either of Mathematics or Physics, has all been resolvd and fallen into
this way which we declare.

Here I should set a period to all further discourse conceurning this first
Treatise of Bodies; did not I apprehend, that the prejudice of Aristotle's
Authority may dispose many to a harsh conceit of the draught, we have made.
But, if they knew how little reason they have to urge that against us, they
would not cry us down, for contradicting that Oracle of nature; not only
because he himself, both by word and example, exhorts us, when verity leads us
another way, to forsake the tracts which our Forefathers have beaten for us; so
we do it with respect and gratitude for the much they have left us: nor yet
because Christian Religion, as it will not hear of any man (purely such) free
from sin, so it inclines to persuade us, that no man can be exempt from error;
and therefore it savours not well to defend peremptorily any man's sayings
(especially if they be many) as uncontrollable, (howbeit I intend not to
prejudice any person, that, to defend a worthy Authors honor, shall endeavor
to vindicate him from absurdities and gross errors) nor lastly, because it ever
has been the common practice of all grave Peripateticks and Thomists to leave
their Masters, some in one article, some in another: But indeed, because, the
very truth is, that the way we take is directly the same solid way, which
Aristotle walked in before us: and they who are scandalized at us for leaving
him are exceedingly mistaken in the matter, and out of the sound of his words
(not rightly understood) frame a wrong sense of the doctrine he has left us,
which generally we follow.

Let any unpartial Aristotelian answer, whether the conceptions we have
delivered of Quantity, of Rarity and Density, of the four first Qualities, of
the combinations of the Elements, of the repugnance of vacuities, be not
exactly and rigorously Aristotle's? Whether the motion of weighty and light
things, and of such as are forced, be not, by him as well as by us, attributed
to extern causes? In which all the difference between us is, that we enlarge
our selves to more particulars, than he has done. Let any man read his Books of
Generation and Corruption, and say, whether he does not expressly teach, that
Mixtion (which he delivers to be the generation or making of a mixed body (is
done por minima, that is, in our language and in one word, by Atoms;
signifies, that all the qualities, which are natural ones following the
composition of the Elements, are made by the mingling of the least parts or
atoms of the said Elements; which is in effect to say, that all the Nature of
Bodies, their Qualities, and their Operations, are compassed by the mingling of
atoms; the showing and explicating of which has been our labor in this whole
Treatise. Let him read his Books of Meteors, and judge whether he does not give
the causes of all the effects, he treats of there, by mingling and separating
of great and little, gross and subtle, fiery and watery, aerie and earthy
parts, just as we do. The same he does in his Problems, and in his Perva
naturalia: and in all other places, wherever he has occasion to render
Physically the causes of Physical effects. The same do Hippocrates and Galen:
the same, their Master Democritus; and with them the best sort of Physicians.
The same do Alchymists with their Master, Geber; whose Maxim to this purpose
we cited above: the same do all natural Philosophers, either ancient
Commentators on Aristotle, or modern enquirers into natural effects, in a
sensible and understandable way; as who will take the pains to look into them
will easily perceive. Wherefore let any judicious Reader, that has looked
further into Aristotle than only upon his Logical and Metaphysical works, judge
whether in bulk our Doctrine be not conformable to the course of his, and of
all the best Philosophers that have been, and are; though in retail or
particulars, we sometimes mingle therewith our own private judgments: as every
one of them has likewise showed us the way to do, by the liberty themselves
have taken to dissent in some points from their predecessors.

And, were it our turn to declare and teach Logic and Metaphysics, we should
be forced to go the way of matter and forms and privations; as Aristottle has
trodden it out to us, in his works of that strain. But, this is not our task
for the present; for, no man, that contemplates nature as he ought, can choose
but see, that these notions are no more necessary, when we consider the framing
of the Elements, than when we examine the making of compounded bodies: and
therefore, these are to be set apart, as higher principles, and of another
strain, than need be made use of for the actual composition of compounded
things, and for the resolution of them into their material ingredients, or to
cause their particular Motions; which are the Subjects we now discourse of.

Upon this occasion, I think it not amiss to touch, how the latter Sectatours,
or rather pretenders, of Aristotle, (for truly they have not his way) have
introduced a model of doctrine (or rather of ignorance) out of his words, which
he never so much as dreamed of; howbeit they allege Texts out of him to
confirm what they say (as Heretics do out of Scripture, to prove their
Assertions). For, whereas he called certain Collections or Positions of things
by certain common names (as the Art of Logic requires), terming some of them
Qualities, others Actions, others Places, or Habits, or Relatives, or the like:
these his later followers have concieted, that these names did not design a
concurrence of sundry things, or a diverse disposition of the parts of any
thing, out of which some effect resulted; which the understanding, considering
all together, has expressed the notion of it by one name: but have imagined,
that every one of these names had, correspondent to it, some real positive
Entity or thing, separated (in its own nature) from the main thing or substance
in which it was, and indifferent to any other substance; but, in all to which
it is linked, working still that effect, which is to be expected from the
nature of such a quality, or action, etc. And thus, to the very negatives of
things, (as to the names of points, lines, instants, and the like,) they have
imagined positive Entities to correspond: likewise, to the names of actions,
places, and the like, they have framed other Entities; as also to the names of
colors, sounds, tastes, smells, touches, and the rest of the sensible quality,
and generally to all qualities whatever Whereas, nothing is more evident, than
that Aristotle meant by qualities no other thing, but that disposition of
parts, which is proper to one body and not found in all; as you will plainly
see, if you but examine what beauty, health, agility, science, and such other
qualities, are (for by that name he calls them, and by such examples gives us
to understand what he means by the word Quality): the first of which is nothing
else but a composition of several parts and colors, in due proportion to one
another: the next, but a due temper of the humors, and the being of every part
of the body in the state it should be: the third, but a due proportion of the
spirits and strength of the sinews: and the last, but ordered Phantasmes.

Now, when these perverters of Aristotle have framed such Entities under that
conception which nature has attributed to substances; they, immediately upon
the nick, with the same breath that described them as substances deny them to
be substances: and thus they confound the first apprehensions of nature, by
seeking learned and strained definitions for plain things. After which; they
are fain to look for glue and paste, to join these Entities to the substance
they accompany: which they find with the same facillity, by imagining a new
Entity, whose nature it is to do that which they have need of.

And this is the general course of their Philosophy; whose great subtilty and
queint speculations, in enquiring how things come to pass, afford no better
satisfaction, than to say upon every occasion, that there is an Entity which
makes it be so. As, if you ask them, how a wall is white, or black; They will
tell you, there is an Entity or Quality, whose essence is to be Whiteness or
blackness, diffused through the wall? If you continue to ask, how does
whiteness stick to the wall. They reply, that it is by means of an Entity
called Union, whose nature it is actually to join whiteness and the wall
together. And then, if you enquire, how it comes to pass, that one white is
like another? They will as readily answer, that this is wrought by another
Entity, whose nature is to be likeness, and it makes one thing like another.
The consideration of which doctrine makes me remember a ridiculous Tale of a
trewant Schoolboys Latin; who, upon a time when he came home to see his
friends, being asked by his Father, what was Latin for bread? answered
bredilus, and for beer? beeribus, and the like of all other things he asked
him, adding only a termination in bus, to the plain English word of every one
of them: which his Father perceiving, and (though ignorant of Latin, yet)
presently apprehending that the mysteries his son had learned deserved not the
expense of keeping him at School, bade him immediately put off his hosibus and
shoosibus, and fall to his old Trade of treading Morteribus. In like manner,
these great Clerks do as readily find a pretty Quality or mood, whereby to
render the nature or causes of any effect in their easy Philosophy; as this Boy
did a Bus to stamp upon an English word, and coin it into his mock Latin.

But, to be serious, as the weight of the matter requires, let these so
peremptory pretenders of Aristotle show me but one Text in him, where he admits
any middle distinction (such as those modern Philosophers do and must needs
admit, who maintain the qualities we have rejected) betwixt that which he calls
Numerical, and that which he calls of Reason, Notion, or Definition, (the first
of which we may term to be of or in things, the other to be in our heads or
discourses; or, the One Natural, the other Logical): and I will yield that they
have reason; and I have groslly mistaken what he has written, and do not reach
the depth of his sense. But this they will never be able to do.

Besides, the whole scope of his Doctrine, and all his discourses and
intentions, are carried throughout, and built on the same foundations, that we
have laid for ours. Which being so, no body can quarrel with us for Aristotle's
sake: who, as he was the greatest Logician and Metaphysician and universal
Scholar, peradventure that ever lived; (and so highly esteemed, that the good
turn, which Sylla did the world in saving his works, was thought to recompense
his many outrageous cruelties and tyranny), so, his name must never be
mentioned among Scholars, but with reverence, for his unparalleld'd worth, and
with gratitude, for the large stock of knowledge he has enriched us with. Yet
withal we are to consider, that, since his reign was but at the beginning of
Sciences, he could not choose but have some defects and shortnesses, among his
many great and admirable perfections.

SECOND TREATISE: DECLARING THE NATURE AND OPERATIONS OF MAN'S SOUL: OUT OF
WHICH THE IMMORTALITY OF REASONABLE SOULS IS CONVINCED.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1669.

PREFACE.
It Is now high time for us to cast an Eye on the other Leaf of our Accounts; or
peradventure, I may more properly say, to fall to the perusal of our own
accounts: for hitherto, our time and pains have been taken up, in examining and
casting the accounts of others; to the end, that, from the Foot and Total of
them, we may drive on our own the more smoothly. In ours then, we shall meet
with a new Capital; we shall discover a new World, of a quite different strain
and nature from that, which all this while we have employed our selves about.
We will enter into them, with taking a survey of the great Master of all that
large Family, we have so summarily viewed; I mean of Man, as Man: that is, not
as he is subject to those Laws whereby other bodies are governed, (for therein he
has no preeminence, to raise him out of their throng: but as he exceeds the
rest of Creatures subject to his managing, and rules over nature her self
(making her serve his designs,, and subjecting her noblest powers to his Laws)
and is distinguished from all other creatures whatever. To the end we may
discover, whether that principle in him, from whence those actions proceed
which are properly his, be but some refined composition, of the same kind we
have already treated of: or whether it derives its Sourse and Origin from some
higher Spring and Stock, and be of a quite different nature.

Having then, by our former Treatise, mastered the oppositions, which else
would have taken arms against us, when we should have been in the midst of our
edifice; and cleared the objections which lay in our way, from the perverse
Qualities of the Souls Neighbors, the several Commonwealths of Bodies: we
must now begin with David, to gather together our Materials, and take a survey
of our own provisions: that so we may proceed, with Solomon, to the sacred
building of Gods Temple. But, before we go about it, it will not be amiss, that
we show the reason why we have made our Porch so great; and added so long an
entry, that the house is not likely to have thereto a correspondent bulk: and
when the necessity of doing so, shall appear, I hope my pains will meet with a
favorable censure, and receive a fair admittance.

We proposed to our selves to show, That our Souls are immortal: whereupon,
casting about to find the grounds of Immortality, and discerning it to be a
negative, we conceived that we ought to begin our search, with enquiring what
Mortality is, and what be the causes of it. Which when we should have
discovered, and brought the Soul to their test; if we found they trench'd not
upon her, nor any way concerned her condition; we might safely conclude, that
of necessity she must be immortal. Looking then into the causes of mortality,
we saw that all Bodies round about us were Mortal; whence, perceiving that
Mortality extended it self as far corporeity, we found our selves obliged, if we
would free the Soul from that Law, to show that she is not corporeal. This
could not be done, without enquiring what corporeity was. Now, it being a rule
among Logicians that a definition cannot be good, unless it comprehend and
reach to every particular of that which is defined; we perceived it impossible
to know completely what a Body is, without taking a general view of all those
things which we comprise under the name and meaning of Bodies. This is the
cause we spent so much time in the First Treatise; and I hope to good purpose:
for, there we found, that the nature of a Body consisted in being made of
parts; that all the Differences of Bodies are reduced to having more or less
parts, in comparison to their substance, thus and thus ordered: and lastly,
that all their operations are nothing else but Local Motions, which follows
naturally out of having parts. So, as it appears evidently from hence, that, if
any thing have a being, and yet have no parts, it is not a body, but a
substance of another quality and condition: and consequently, if we can find
the Soul's being to be without parts, and that her operations are no local
translation; we evidently conclude her to be an immaterial or spiritual
substance.

Peradventure it may be objected, that all this might have been done a much
more shorter way than we have taken; and that we needed not have branc'd our
discourse into so many particulars, nor driven them so home as we have done:
but might have taken out our first rise from this ground, which is as evident,
as light of reason can make it) that, seeing we know bigness and a body to be
one and the same, as well in the notion as in the thing: it must of necessity
follow, that what has not parts, nor works, nor is wrought upon by Division,
is not a Body. I confess, this Objection appears very reasonable; and the
consideration of it weighed so much with me, as, were all men of a free
judgment and not imbued with artificial errors, I would, for its sake have
saved my self a great deal of pains: but I find (as in the former Treatise I
have frequently complained) that there is crept into the world a Fansy so
contrary to this pregnant truth, and that it is so deeply settled in many men's
minds (not of the meanest note) as all we have said is peradventure too little
to root it out.

If any (satisfied with the rational Maxim we even now mentioned, therefore not
deeming it needful to employ his time in reading the former Treatise) should
wish to know, how this is come to pass: I shall here represent to to him the
Sum of what I have, more at large, scattered in several places of the former
Treatise. And, shall entreat him to consider, how Nature teaches us to call the
Proprieties of things, whereby one is distinguished from another, the Qualities
of those things: and that, according to their varieties, they have diverse names
suited out to diverse of them: some being called Habits, others Powers, and
others by other names. Now, what Aristotle and the Learned Grecians meant by
these things is clear, by the examples they give of them: they term Beauty and
Health, Habits: the Dispositions of our Bodies to our Bodily Motions, Powers:
as Strength (which is the good temper of the Sinews) a Power, and Agility a
Power; so they use the names of the Concoctive, the Nutritive, the Rentitive,
the Excretive, Power: the health of the Eyes, the Ears, the Nostrils, etc. they
call the Powers of Seeing, of Hearing, of Smelling, etc. and the like of many
others. But, later Philosophers, being very disputative, and desiring to seem
ignorant of nothing, (or rather, to seem to know more, than any that are gone
before them, and to refine their conceptions) have taken the Notions (which by
our first Masters were set for common and confused explications of the Natures,
to serve for convenience and succinctness of Discourse) to be, truly and
really, particular Entities, or things of themselves: and so have filled their
Books, and the Schools with unexplicable opinions, out of which no account of
Nature can be given; and which is worse, the way of searching on is barred to
others, and a mischievous Error grown into men's beliefs that nothing can be
known. By this means they have choked the most plain and evident definition of
a Body: bringing so many instances against it, that unwary men are forced to
desert and deny the very first Notions of Nature and reason, For, in truth,
they turn all Bodies into Spirits, making (for example) Heat, or Cold, to be of
it self indivisible, a thing by it self, whose nature is not conceivable; not
the disposition or proportion of the parts of that body which is said to be hot
or cold, but a real thing, that has a proper Being and Nature peculiar to it
self: whereof they can render you no account; and so it may as well be against
the notion of a body, as not. For, if Light, the virtue of the Loadstone, the
power of Seeing, Feeling, etc. be things that work without time, in an instant;
if they be not the dispositions of parts, as parts, (whose nature is to be more
or less, to be next or far off, etc.) how can it be truly said, that the notion
of a Body is to be of Parts? For, if this be a true definition of a Body, it
follows that all corporeal qualities and actions must likewise be some
disposition and order of parts, as parts: and that what is not so, is no body,
nor bodilily quality or propriety.

This, then, was it that obliged me to go so far about, and to show in common
how all those effects, which are so much admired in bodies, are or may be made
and continued by the sole Order of Quantitative Parts and Local Motion: this
has forced us to anatomize Nature, and to begin our dissection with what first
occurrs to our sense from a body. In doing which, out of the first and most
simple notion of Bigness or Quantity, we found out the prime division of
Bodies, into Rare and Dense: then, finding them to be the Qualities of Dividing
and of being Divided (that is, of local motion), we gained knowledge of the
common properties of Gravity and Levity, from the combination of these we
retrived the four first Qualities, and by them, the Elements. When we had
agreed how the Elements were made, we examined how their action and composition
raises those Second Qualities, which are seen in all Mixed bodies and make their
divisions. Thence proceeding into the operations of life, we resolved they are
composed and ordered merely by the varieties of the former: nay, that Sense and
Fantasy (the highest things we can discern out of man) have no other sourse,
but are subject to the Laws of Parts, and of Rarity and Density. So that in the
end, we became assured of this important Maxim, that nothing whatever we know
to be a Body can be exempted frow the declared Laws and orderly motions of
bodies. To which, let us add two other positions, which fell also within our
discovery; the First, that it is constantly founded in nature, that none of the
bodies we know move themselves, but their motion must be founded in some thing
without them; the Second, that no body moves another, unless it self be also
moved: and it will follow evidently out of them, (if they be of necessity and
not prevaricable), that some other principle beyond bodies, is required, to be
the root and first ground of motion in them; as Mr. White has most acutely and
solidly demonstrated, in that excellent Work I have so often cited in my former
Treatise.

But it is time we should fall to our intended discourse; leaving this Point
settled, by what we have already said, that, if we show our Soul and her
operations to be not-composed of parts, we also therein conclude, that she is a
Spiritual Substance, and not-a body. Which is our design and intention in this
Treatise.

And, for this intent, we must look upon those actions of Man, which are
peculiarly his; and upon those things which result out of them, and are called
Opera or labores Hominum: as Houses, Towns, Tillage, Handicrafts, Arms, Ships,
Commonwealths, Armies, Books, and the like; in which Great Men's lives and
thoughts have been spent. In all these we find one general third to run quite
through them, and that all of them are composed of the same stuff, and built
upon the same foundation; which is a long Chain of Discourses, where every
little part or Link is that which Scholars call a Syllogism: and Syllogisms we
know are framed of Enuntiations, and they of single or uncomposed
Apprehensions; all which are actions wrought by the Understanding of a man. But
beyond these, we cannot proceed to any further sub-division of parts, and
continue our selves within the Orb of Humane Actions; for simple apprehensions
cannot be further resolved into other parts, beyond the degree of apprehensions
and yet still remain actions to a peculiar man. So that, we may be sure, we
shall have left nothing out to enquiry concerning Man's actions, as he is man,
if we begin with anatomizing his first bare apprehensions; and so go on by
degrees, compounding them, till we come to faddom th^se great and admirable
machines of Books and Works, which h^ (as I may say) weaves out of his own
bowels; and the like of which is done by no other creature whatever, upon the
face of our contemptible Earth.

These then (which are all comprised under the names of Apprehensions, of
Enunciations or Judgments, and of Discourses) shall be the Subject of this
second Treatise: and in it, we will first consider these operations in
themselves; which done, we will endeavor to prove, out of the nature and manner
of performing them, that the Souls to whom they belong are Immaterial and
Immortal.

SECOND TREATISE: DECLARING The nature and operations of Man's Soul.
CHAP. I. Of simple Apprehensions.
THat we may duly understand what a right Apprehension 1. What is a right
apprehension of a thing.
is, let us consider the preeminence that a man, who apprehends a thing
rightly, has over him who misses of doing so. This latter can but rove wildly
at the nature of the thing he apprehends: and will never be able to draw any
operation into act, out of the apprehension he has framed of it. As for
example, if a man be to work upon Gold, and, by reason of its resemblance to
brass, has formed an apprehension of Brass, instead of an apprehension of
Gold; and then (knowing that the action of fire will resolve Brass into its
least parts, and sever its moist from its dry ones) will go about to calcine
Gold in the same manner as he would do Brass: he will soon find that he loses
his labor; and that ordinary fire is not an adequate Agent, to destroy the
homogeneal nature and sever the minute parts of that fixed metal: All which
happens, out of the wrong apprehension he has made of Gold. Whereas on the
other side, he that apprehends a thing rightly, if he pleases to discourse of
what he apprehends, finds in his apprehension all the parts and qualities which
are in the thing he discourses of. For example, if he apprehends rightly a
Knife, or a Beetle, or a Sieve, or any other thing whatever: in the Knife he
will find Haft and Blade; the Blade of iron, thick on the back and thin on the
edg, tempered to be hard and tough, thus beaten, so ground, in such manner
softened, thus quenched, and whatever else concerns the Being or making of a
Knife. And all this he draws out of his notion or apprehension of a Knife;
which is, that it is An instrument fitted to cut such and such things, in such a
manner: for, hence he finds, that it has a Haft, fit to hold it by in ones
hand, to the end it may not hurt the hand, whiles it presses upon the Knife;
and that the Blade is apt to slide in betwixt the parts of the thing which is
to be cut, by the motion of being pressed or drawn by the hand: and so he
proceeds on, descending to the qualities of both parts; and how they are to be
joined, and held fast together. In the like manner, he discourses of a Beetle,
a Sieve, or whatever else comes in his way. And he does this, not only in such
manufactures as are of man's invention; but (if he be capable) he does the like
in Beasts, in Birds, in Trees, in Herbs, in Fishes, in Fossiles, and in what
creature soever he meets within the whole extent of nature. He finds what they
are made for; and, having discovered Natures aim in their production, he can
instruct others what parts and manner of generation they have, or ought to
have: and, if he, that in this manner apprehends any thing rightly, has a mind
to work upon it, either to make, or use and order it to some end of his own: he
is able, by his right apprehension, to compare it to other things, to prepare
what is any way fitting for the making of it, to apply it to what it will work
its effect upon, and to conserve it from what may wrong or destroy it. So, if
he have framed a right apprehension of a Sieve, he will not employ it in
drawing water; if of a Beetle, he will not go about to cut with it: neither
will he offer, if he have a due apprehension of a Knife, to cut stone or steel
with it, but wood, or what is softer. He knows what will whet and maintain the
edge of it; and understands what will blunt or break it: In fine, he uses it in
such sort, as the Knife it self (had it knowledge and will) would wish to be
used; and moves it in such a manner, as, if it had power of motion, it would
move it self. He goes about the making of it, even as Nature would do, were it
one of her Plants: and in a word, the Knife, in this apprehension made in the
man, has those causes, proprieties, and effects, which are natural to it, and
which nature would give it, if it were made by her; and which are
proportionable to those parts, causes, proprieties, and effects, that Nature
bestows on her children and creatures, according to their several essences.

What then can we imagine, but that the very nature of a 2. The very thing it
self is truly in his understanding who rightly apprehends it.
thing apprehended is truly in the man who apprehends it? And that, to
apprehend ought is to have the nature of that thing within ones self? And that
man, by apprehending, becomes the thing apprehended; not by change of his
nature to it, but by assumption of it to his?

Here peradventure some will reply, that we press our inference too far; and
will peremptorily deny the things real Being in our mind, when we make a true
and full apprehension of it: accounting it sufficient for our purpose, that
some likeness or image of the thing be there; out of which we may drawall
these, whether contemplations or works, or disposals of the thing. But, by that
time this objection is thoroughly looked into, and so much as they allow duly
examined, I believe we shall find our quarrel to be only about the word, not
the matter; and that indeed both of us mean the same though diversely conceived,
their expression, in what they grant, importing in substance the same as ours:
which, it is true, they first deny in words; but that may be, because the thing
is not by them rightly understood.

Let us then discuss the matter particularly. What is likeness, but an
imperfect unity between a thing and that which it is said to be like to? If the
likeness be imperfect, it is more unlike than like to it: and the liker it is,
the more it is one with it; till at length, the growing likeness may arrive to
such a perfection, and to such an unity with the thing it is like to, that then
it shall no longer be like, but is become wholly the same with that formerly it
had but a resemblance of. For example, let us consider, in what consists the
likeness to a Man, of a Picture, drawn in Black and White representing a Man:
and we shall find, it is only in the proportion of the limbs and features; for
the colors, the bulk, and all things else are unlike. But, the proportions are
the very same, in a Man and in a Picture; yet that Picture is but a likeness,
because it wants bigness and color: give it them, and nevertheless it will be
but a likeness; because it wants all the dimensions of corporeity or bulk,
which are in a man's body. Add also those to it, and still it will be but a
likeness or representation of a man, because it wants the warmth, the sostness,
and the other qualities of, a living body, which belongs to a man: but if you
give it all these, then it is no longer a likeness or image of a living
creature, but a living creature indeed. And if peradventure this living
creature continue still to be but the likeness of a man, it is because it wants
some perfections or proprieties belonging to a man; and so in that regard it is
unlike a man: but, if you allow it all those: so that in nothing it be unlike,
then your taking away all unlikeness takes away likeness too; and as before, of
dead, it became a living creature so now, of another living creature, it
becomes a man's and is no longer, like a man. You see then plainly the reason,
why that, which we call a like thing is not the same; for in some part it is
unlike: but if the likeness were complete in every regard, then it were no
longer to be called like, but the very thing it self. And therefore we may
conclude, that, if the likeness of a thing, which the objection allows to be in
our knowledge, contains all that is in the thing known; then it is in truth, no
more a likness, but the very known thing it self: and so what they grant
amounts to, as much as we require; though at first they go about to exclude it.

Haying thus concluded, that, when we apprehend any thing, that very thing is
in Us, let us in the next place examine how it 3. The apprehension of things,
coming to us, by our senses, are resolvable into other more simple
apprehensions.
comes thither, and what it is there. Which we shall best do, by anatomising
and looking narrowly into the nature of such apprehensions, as we daily make of
things: It Is true, we said even now, that we cannot divide the actions of man's
mind, further than into Apprehensions; and therefore we called them simple and
uncomposed: and with good reason; for, if we reflect upon the operations of our
mind, we shall evidently perceive, that our bare apprehensions, and only they,
are such. But withal, we must acknowledge, that all the apprehensions we make,
of things coming unto us, by our Senses, are composed of other more single
apprehensions, and may be resolved into them: all which are as it were the
limbs and parts, that make up and constitute the other total one. 4. The
apprehension of a being is the most simple, and basis of all the rest.


Let us make use of our former example, and dissect the apprehension we make of
a Knife. I find in my understanding, that it is a thing so long, so broad, so
sharp, so heavy, of such a color, so molded, so tempered, etc. as is fit to
cut withal. In this total apprehension, I discover three kinds of particular
apprehensions; every one more simple and refined than the other. The highest of
them, and the foundation upon which the others are built, is the notion of
Being; which is of so high and abstracted a nature, that we cannot retrive
words to express in what manner we conceive it: but are fain to content our
selves with the outward sound of a word, by which, without describing our own,
we stir up the like conception in another; and that is the word, Is, by which
we intimate the Being of the thing we apprehend. And this notion can be in our
mind, without infering any other: and therefore is the simplest of all others;
which, of necessity, must imply it, and cannot be without it, though it can be
without them.

Our next apprehension is of that which has Being; and is 5. The apprehension
of a thing is in next degree to that of Being; and it is the Basis of all the
subsequent ones.
expressed by the word Thing. This is not so simple as the former; for it is
composed of it, and of what receives it (of Being and what has Being): yet it
is much simpler than the next degree of apprehensions, which is caused in our
mind by the great variety of things, that come thither through our senses; and
can be conceived without any of them, though none of them can without it. For,
I can have in me the notion of a thing, abstracting from all accidents whatever
(as, magnitude, figure, color, resemblance, or the like); but, I cannot
conceive it to be long, or sharp, or blew, etc. without allowing it first to be
somewhat or something, so affected: so that the apprehension of a thing, or of
that which has Being, is the Basis of all our other subsequent apprehensions;
as the apprehension of Being is the Basis of the apprehension of a thing. For,
had it not Being, it were not a thing, and were it not a thing, it could not be
said to be a long thing or a sharp thing, nor indeed, that it were long or
sharp; for to be so includes Being, and what has Being is a Thing. And thus we
may observe, how the bulk of our apprehensions is composed of something
adventitious, and of something formerly within us: which is of a very different
nature from all 6. The apprehension of things known to us, by our senses,
consists in certain respects betwixt two things.
the others; and yet so fitted and necessary to them, that none of them can be
without it, though it not only can be, but is best conceived without relation
to any of them.

We shall easily discern, of how different a strain this conception of Being is
from all others, that enter by our Senses, (as from the conceptions of colors,
of sounds, and the like); if we but reflect upon that act in us which makes it,
and then compare it with the others. For, we shall find, that all they consist
in or of certain respects betwixt two things; whereas this of Being is an
absolute and simple conception of it self, without any relation to ought else:
and cannot be described or expressed with other words, or by comparing it to
any other thing; only we are sure, we understand and know what it is.

But, to make this point the clearer, it will not be amiss, to show more
particularly, wherein the other sorts of apprehensions are different from this
of Being: and how they consist in certain respects between different things,
and are known only by those respects; whereas this is known only in it self,
abstracting from all other things whatever. An example will do it best. When I
apprehend the whiteness in the Wall, I may consider how that white is a thing
which makes such an impression upon my fantasy; and so accordingly, I know or
express the nature of white, by a respect or proportion of the wall to work
upon my fantasy. In like manner, if we take a notion that arises out of what
enters immediately by our senses, (for, by joining such also to the notion of
Being, we make ordinary apprehensions); we shall find the same nature: as, when
I consider how this white wall is like to another white wall; the apprehension
of likeness that I have in my mind is nothing else but a notion, arising out of
the impression which both those walls together make upon my fantasy. So that,
this apprehension is, as the former, a certain kind of respect or proportion of
the two walls to my imagination: not as they make their impressions immediately
upon it; but, as another notion arises, out of comparing the several
impressions which those two white walls made in it.

Let us proceed a little further, and examine what kind of thing 7. Respect or
relation has not really any formal being, but only in the apprehension of man.
that is, which we call respect or proportion; and where it resides. We shall
find, that there is a very great difference, between what it is in it self, or
in its own essence; and what it is in the things that are respective. For, in
them, it is nothing else but the things being plainly and bluntly what they are
really in themselves: as for example, two white walls to be like is, in them,
nothing else, but each of them to be white; and two quantities to be half and
whole is, in the^; nothing else, but each quantity to be just what it is. But a
respect, in its own nature, is a kind of tie, co mparison, tending, or order,
of one of those things to another; and is no where to be found in its formal
subsistence, but in the apprehensiou of man: and therefore it cannot be
described by any similitude, nor be expressed by any means, but (like Being) by
the sound of a word, which we are agreed on to stir up in such a notion. For in
the things, it is not such as our notion of it is, (which notion is that we use
to express by Prepositions and Conjunctions, and which Aristotle and Logicians
express in common, by the word (...) or ad) and therefore there is nothing out
of us to paint it by (as I could do white or square, or round, or the like,
because these have a beings in the things that are white, or square, etc. and
consequently they may be expressed by others of the like nature): but the
likeness that one white has to another, or the respect that either of them
has to man's imagination, is only in man; who, by comparing them, gives birth
to the nature and being of respect.

Out of this discourse, we may collect two Singularities of 8. That Existence
or being is the proper affection of man: and that man's Soul is a comparing
power.
Man; which 'twill much import us to take particular notice of. One is, that
Being or a thing (the formal notion of which is merely Being) is the proper
affection of man. For, every particular thing is in him, by being (as I may
say) grafted upon the stock of Existence or being. And accordingly we see, that
whatever we speak of we say) is something, and whatever we conceive we give the
nature of a thing (as when we have said, the wall is white, we frame whiteness
as a thing; so immediately before speaking of Respect, we took respect as it
were a thing, and enquired, where it is): so that it is evident, all the
negotiation of our understanding trades in all that is apprehended by it, as if
they were things.

The other Singularity we may observe in man is that he is a co^paring power:
for all his particular knowledges are nothing else but respectsa nd comparisons
between particular things; as 9. A thing by coming into the understanding of
man, loses nothing of its own peculiar nature.
for example, for a manto know heat, or cold, etc. is to know what effects fire
or water, etc. can work upon such or such bodies.

Out of the first of these proprieties it follows, that what effects a man, or
makes impression upon his understanding, does not thereby lose its own peculiar
nature, nor is modified to the recipient: the contrary of which, we see happens
perpepetually in bodies. Observe the sustenance we take; which, that it may
become part of our body, is first changed into a substance like our body, and
ceases being, what it was. When water or any liquid body is received into a
vessel; it loses its own figure, and puts on the figure of the vessel it is in.
If heat enters into a body, that is already hot, that heat becomes thereby more
heat; if into a cold body, it is converted into warmth. And, in like manner,
all other corporeal things are accommodated to the quallities of the recipient;
and in it they lose their own proper terms and cosistences: but what comes into
the understanding of a man is so received by, or joined to him, that it still
retains its own proper limitations and particular nature notwithstanding its
assumption to him. For, Being is joined to every thing there; since as we have
said) it is by Being, that any thing comes thither: and consequently, this stock
of Being makes every graft, that is inoculated into it, Be what of its own
nature it is. For, Being joined to another motion, does not change that notion,
but makes it be, what it was before; since, if it should be changed, Being were
not added to it: as for example, add Being to the notion of knife, and it makes
a knife, or that notion to Be a knife; and if, after the addition, it does not
remain a knife, it was not Being that was added to a knife!

Out of the later of the singularities proper to man, it follows, 10. A
multitude of things may be united in man's understanding, without being mingled
or counfounded together.
that a multitude of things may beunited in him, without suffering any
confusion among themselves;) but every one of them will remain with its
proprieties, and distinct limitations. For so of necessity, it must be, when
that which unites them to him is the comparing them to something besides
themselves: which work could not be performed, unless what is to be compared
retain exactly its own nature, whereby the comparison may be made no more, than
one can weigh two quantities one against another, unless he keep asunder what
is in each seal, and keep all other weights from mingling with them. And
accordingly we see, that we cannot compare black to white, or a Horse to an
Ox; unless we take together the properties, by which black differs from white,
or an ox from an horse: and consequently they must remain unmingled and
without confusion, precisely what in themselves they are, and be indifferent in
the sight of the comparer.

But indeed, if we look well into the matter, we shall find, that, setting
aside the notion of Existence or Being, all our other notions are nothing else
but comparisons and respects: and that, by the mediation of respects, the
natures of all things are in us; and, by the varying of them, we multiply our
Notions. Which in their first division) that reduces their several kinds into
general heads) increase into the Ten famous Tribes, that Logicians call
Predicaments: and they comprehend under them all the particular notions that
man has, or can have; according to the course of knowledge in this life. Of
which Predicaments the seven last are so manifestly respective, that all men
acknowledge them to be so. Substance we have already showed to have a respect to
Being. Quantity we proved (in the first Chapter of the former Treatise, of the
Nature and Operation of Bodies) to consist in a respect to Parts. Quality is
divided into four branches: whereof, Power is clearly a respect to that over
which it has power, or from which it may suffer: Habit is a respect to the
substance wherein it is; as being the property by which it is well or ill,
conveniently or inconveniently affected, in regard of its own nature (as you
may observe in health, or sickness, or the like): The Passible Qualities are
those we have explicated, in discoursing of the Elements and of Mixts; and
whose natures, we have there showed,, consist in respects of acting or
suffering: Figure or shape (which is the last branch of the division of the
Predicament of Quality) is nothing else, but a certain disposition of one part
of a body to another. And so you see, how all the Ten Predicaments consist
purely in diversity of Respects: and by consequence, all our conceits and
notions (excepting that of Being, which is the stock upon which all the rest
are grafted) are nothing else but various respects; since all of them whatever
are comprised under those general heads. Concerning which, we shall not need to
dilate our selves any further; seeing they are to be found in Aristotle, and his
Commentators, largely discoursed of

In the next place, let us observe, how our understanding behaves 11. Of
Abstracted and Concrete terms.
it self, in considering and apprehending these Respects. We have already
declared, that the variety of our notions arises out of the respects which
diverse things have to one another. Hence will follow, that, of the same thing,
we may have various notions: for, comparing it to different things, we shall
meet with different respects between them; and consequently, we shall consider
the same thing, under different notions. As when we consider an Apple, under
the notions of greenness, of sweetness, of roundness, of mellowness, etc. as we
have amply declared in the First Treatise; and therefore need not here enlarge
our selves any further upon this particular. Now, these notions are so
absolutely severed one from another, and every one of them has such a
compleatness within it self; that we may use any one of them, without meddling
at all with any of the others. And this we do two several ways: One, when our
manner of appehension determins us to one precise notion, which is so sum'd up
within it self, as it not only abstracts from all other notions, but also quite
excludes and admits no society with them: The other, when we consider a thing
under a determinate notion, yet in such a manner, that though we abstract from
all other notions, nevertheless we do so, rather by neglecting, than by
excluding them; and, even in the manner of our expression of it, we insinuate
that there are other notions (without specifying what) belonging to it.

Of the first kind of notions are Whiteness, Weight, Heat, and such like; whose
names are called abstracted terms: which, though they rise out of our comparing
the things that are white, heavy, hot, etc. to our fantasy, or to other things;
yet these notions are so precise and shut up within themselves, that they
absolutely exclude all others, (as of long, short, square, rough, sharp, or
whatever else) which may in the things accompany the whiteness, weight, heat,
etc. that our consideration is then busied only with. Of the second kind of
notions are white, heavy, hot etc. whose names, expressing them, are called
Concrete Terms: which, though they cause in us no other apprehensions, than of
whiteness, weight, heat, etc. yet they are not so rigorously paled in, as the
others are, from admitting society with any besides; but imply tacitly, that
the thing which is white, heavy, hot, etc. has, besides that, some other
consideration belonging to it (whatever it be) which is not expressed.

Now, in this later abstraction, it happens sometimes, that the notion expressed
has but an accidental connection with the other notions, that are in the thing
unexpressed: as for example, it is merely accidental to the white wall, as it is
white, to be high, or low, of stone, of plaster, or the like. But,
otherwhiles, the expressed notion is so essential to the concealed ones, that
they cannot be without it: as, when we apprehend a cloven foot, though this
apprehension abstracts from all other notions besides cloven-footedness (if so
I may say); yet, (as above we have declared) it is in such a manner, that it
implies other considerations, not yet expressed, in that cloven foot. Among
which, some may be of that nature, that they cannot have a being without
pre-supposing cloven-footedness; but others may be merely accidental to that
notion. As (for instance sake) let one be, that the foot is cloven into three
parts; and let another be, that it is black or hairy: of these, this later
notion, of black or hairy, is of the first kind of abstractions, which we said
had but an accidental connection with that which comprehended them without
expressing them (for, other things besides the cloven foot may be black or
hairy; as height or lowness, to be of stone or of plaster, may belong to other
structures besides the white wall); but to be cloven footed into three parts so
necessarily depends of being cloven footed in general, (which implies this
particular) and so directly includes it, as it cannot subsist without
clovenfootedness. For, though we may conceive a foot to be cloven, without
determining in our apprehension, into how many toes it is cloven; yet we cannot
conceive it to have three, four, or five toes, without apprehending it to be
cloven. So that, in such like apprehensions, the notion expressed is so
essential to the notion that is concealed and added to it, as the concealed one
cannot be conceived without the expressed one; and whenever it is mentioned,
the other is necessarily also brought in and affirmed with it.

Now, some of these later kinds of notions, (in which what is 12. Of Universal
n^tions.
expressed is essential to what is concealed) may be of such a nature, as to be
capable of receiving the addition of sundry other notions, so repugnant to one
another, that they cannot agree together in one subject; and yet that general
notion, without determining any of the others, be indifferent to the contrary
additions that include it, and belong as much to any one, as to any them: and
so consequently, whatever may be affirmed, and is true, of the primary notion,
may as well be affirmed, and is as true, of the several particulars, arising
out of the repugnant additions. Such a notion Logicians term an Universal one:
that is, one that reaches, indifferently and equally, to all the particulars
comprised under ^t. As for example, to the notion of a living creature may be
added the notions of Reasonable and Unreasonable: which first notion when it is
barely expressed determines no one of the two secondary notions, more than the
other, but is alike indifferent to either: and whatever belongs to a Living
Creature belongs entirely both to a Man and to a Beast: yet no one thing can be
both Reasonable and Unreasonable. In like manner, when I say, a man is a
discursive creature, under this word man there lies a notion, by which may be
signified any particular man, as Thomas, John, William, etc. though of it self,
it determine no one man whatever and consequently, every one of these
particular men, must be allowed to be a discursive creature, because the being
such belongs to the notion of man, and that notion to all the particulars of
Thomas, John, William, etc. and yet no particular man can be both Thomas and
John, or John and William, etc.

In this kind of notion, we may observe yet one propriety more: which is, that
of it self, and in its common term, it does not cause ones thought to range to
several objects, nor imply's that there are many particulars comprised under
it; yet, if there be never so many, that conceit will fit them every one, and
if there be but one, still it will be no less accommodated to that one. As for
example, He that makes a right apprehension of a Sun, does not by that
conception determine, whether there be many Suns or but one: and if every one
of the Stars (which we call fixed) be Suns to other Earths, it fits them all;
and if there be no other Sun, than that which shines to us, it is satisfied and
taken up with that. So likewise, before the production of Eve, the notion of a
man was as fully taken up by Adam alone, as it is now by his numerous progeny
that fills the world: nor does our understanding, when that term is pronounced
consider (out of the force of the term) whether there be many 13. Of
apprehending a multitude under one notion.
men, or only one.

Another propriety in man's apprehension, not much unlike to this, is, that he
is able to comprise a Multitude in one indivisible notion; and yet, that notion
shall express the multiplicity of what it contain^. As we see in Numbers, where
the indivisible conception of ten, a hundred, a thousand, etc. plainly
expresses the subject to be many; and yet that notion of the number binds them
up (as I may say) into one bundle, that in it self admits no division, nor will
permit that the least part be taken from it: for, if it be, the whole bundle is
destroyed and vanishes; as when I take ten, if one be diminished from it, it is
no longer ten, but nine. It fares in like manner with the conceptions we frame
of All and Every one, as it does with Numbers: for, if but one be deficient, it
is but a part, and not all, or every one. So that these notions do indivisibly
terminate a Multitude. And, like to this notion is the name or term whole; in
respect of things which as yet have not division, but are capable of being
divided: for, it is so rigorous, that if the least atome or thought, be
wanting, it is no longer the whole, but only a part.

And, this is as much as at present appears needful to be said, concerning
Single apprehensions. Unless I be permitted 14. The power of the understanding
reaches as far as the extent of being.
to add, for a conclusion, this little note, (which peradventure might have
been more properly set down in another place, where we discoursed of Being; but
that it occurred not then to me); that, Apprehension being rooted in the nature
of Being, the power of it spreads it self as far as the extent of Being: and
consequently reaches to all things whatever; for, whatever is a thing, has
Being, and that to which Being does not reach is nothing. Nay, it is not
limited there, but grasps even at nothing, and aims to make a notion of it;
and plants its generation, multiplying it self by negations of whatever is.
Hence we have the notions of Deafness, Dumbness, Blindness, Lameness, Baldness,
Death, Sin, and of all Evils whatever; by the want of such Goods, as are
sensible to us.

CHAP. II. Of Thinking, and Knowing.
HAving thus declared the nature of single apprehensions, 1. How a Judgment is
made by the Understanding.
the method we have prescribed our selves requires, that we examine, in the
next place, what effect the joining them together may have: for, from thence
spring Enuntiations or Judgments, which are in the next rank after simple
Apprehensions, and the materials whereof Discourses are immediately framed; as
when of the two apprehensions, knife and sharp, we may make this Enunciation,
the knife is sharp. In this enquiry the first thing that occurrs to us is, to
consider in what manner two differing simple Apprehensions become joined to one
another. And we shall find, that they are not tied together, like several
distinct things, in one bundle, or like stones in a heap, where all that are
comprised under one multitude are yet circumscribed within their own limits,
and thereby wholly distinguished from each other: but, that they are as it were
grafted upon one stock, which, being common to both, gives the same life to
both; and so, becoming one with each of them, makes them to be one and the same
thing between themselves. And this is the notion of Being or Existence, in the
subject we speak of: which (as we have already showed) is the Basis and
Foundation of all other Apprehensions, and, by being common and indifferent to
all, is the fittest glue to unite those that are capable of such conjunction.
And accordingly we see, that most of our speech runs upon this strain, that
this is that, or does that (which is as much to say, as, is doing that), that
Socrates is a man, or that Socrates runs, (which signifies, is running); and the
like: and, since our speech proceeds from the conceptions of our mind, it is
clear, that as the words which express Being or Existence join together the
other words that we use, (or at least, the greatest part of them); so likewise
in our mind, the Apprehension of Being is the glue that joins our Apprehensions
corresponding to our words.

All which will appear to be said with great reason, if we reflect on it. For,
when diverse apprehensions may be thus joined together, it is indeed, that one
and the same thing affecting us veral ways, and under different considerations,
those different expressions beget different apprehensions in us, and so, till
we examine the matter, every one of them seems to be a different thing: but,
when we trace these streams up to the Fountainhead, we discern that all of
them belong to one and the same thing, and that, by being in that thing, they
are among themselves the very same thing, however they affect us variously; and
therefore may truly be said to be one, as indeed they are. And consequently,
nothing is more fit to join together in our mind those different apprehensions,
than the apprehension of Being; which makes us apprehend as one thing those
notions, which, really, and in the thing it self, are but one: as we have often
touched, both in the former Treatise, and lately in this. For, this is the way
to join things in the mind intelligently, and according to the proper nature of
the mind; which receiving impressions from things existent, ought to consider
those impressions as they flow from the very things, and not as they are in the
mind it self; and, by mediation of those impressions, must take a survey of the
things themselves; and not stay at the intellectual impressions they make in
her. And consequently, must apprehend those things to be one in themselves,
(though in us they be not so) according to the course of our Original and
Legitimate apprehensions of things, which is, as they are existent; that is, as
they are in their own nature, and in themselves; and not according to the
discourses and secondary apprehensions we make of the images we find of them in
our mind. And thus things are rightly joined by apprehension: without caution
in which particular, we shall run into great errors in our discourse. For, if
we be not very careful herein, we are apt to mistake the use of the impressions
we receive from things; and to ground our judgments concerning them, according
to what we find of them in our mind, and not according to what they are in
themselves: which two several considerations have quite different faces, though
('it is true) those impressions are made by the things, and are the only means by
which we may rightly judge of them; provided, that we consider them, as they are
in the things, and not as they are in us.

Now, this conjunction of apprehensions, by the mediation and glue of Being, is
the most natural and fitting, not only in regard of the things, but even of us:
for (as we have already showed) it is of all others the most common and
universal, the most simple or uncomposed, and the most natural and deepest
rooted in man. Out of all which it is evident, that this union of apprehensions
by the means of Being is, in truth, an Identification of them: for, Unity being
a negation of multiplicity, it follows, that what is one, is the same: and this
Identification is truly and naturally expressed by saying, that the one is the
other.

But, insisting a little further upon this consideration, how different
apprehensions become joined and united together by the 3. How the notions of a
Substantive and an Adjective are united in the Soul, by the common stock of
Being.
notion of Being; we may observe that this happens, not only to two single
ones, but to more: according as more than two may belong to one thing; and it
may so fall out, that more than one be on either side the common ligament.
Thus, when we say, A man is a discursive creature, or a rational Soul is an
immortal substance; the two apprehensions, of discursive and creature, are
joined together in a third, of Man, by the tie of one Being: and the two
apprehensions, of Immortal and Substance, are likewise united to the two
others, of Rational, and of Soul, by the ligament of one single Being: Evident
it is then, that the extremes are united by one Being: but, how the two
apprehenons, that are ranked together on the same side of the ligament, (as in
our former examples, the apprehensions of Discursive and Creature, of Rational
and Soul, of Immortal and Substance) are between themselves joined to one
another, is not so easy to express. It Is clear, that it is not done by mere
conglobation; for, we may observe, that they belong, or are apprehended to
belong, to the same thing; (and the very words that express them, intimate so
much, by one of them being an Ajective; which shows, they are not two things;
for, if they were, they would require two Substantives to describe them; and
consequently it follows that one of them must needs appertain to the other, and
so both of them make but one thing.

And, there is no doubt, but, in the inward apprehension, there is a variety
correspondent to the variety of words which express it; since all variety of
words, that is made by intention, results out of some such variety of
apprehensions. Therefore, since the words import, that the things have a
dependence one of the other; we cannot doubt, but that our apprehensions have
so too. Which will be conceived best, by looking into the act of our mind, when
it frames such variety of apprehensions belonging to one thing, correspondent,
to the variety in words of an Adjective glew'd to its Substantive; and
attending heedfully to what we mean, when we speak so. The Hebrews express this
union, or comprising of two different apprehensions under one notion, by
putting in the Genitive case the word which expresses one of them; (much like
the rule in Lillie's Grammar, that When two Substantives come together, if they
belong to the same thing, the one is put in the Genitive case): As when in the
Scripture we weet with these words, the Judge of injustice, the Spence of
wickedness, the man of sin, or of death; which, in our phrase of speaking,
signify an unjust Judge, a wicked Spence, and a sinful or dead man. In which
it is evident, that as well the manner of understanding, as of speaking, takes
each pair of these notions to belong to one thing; that is, to have both of
them one and the same Existence, though there intervene not the formal
expression of their being one. Thus we see, how one Being serves two different
ways to join and unite several apprehensions: and, if we will examine all the
negotiations of our understanding, we shall hardly find any notions so far
distant, but may be brought together, either by the one of these ways, or by
the other.

But, this composition and joining of several apprehensions by 4. That a settled
judgment becomes a part of our Soul.
the glue of Being is not sufficient, to make us deem a thing to be really
such, as their union paints in the mind, or as the words so tied together
express in speech. Well may it cause us to think of the thing: but to think or
deem it such an one (which word, deeming, we shall be obliged hence forward to
use frequently, because the word thinking is subject to equivocation) requires
the addition of something more, than barely this composition of apprehensions;
which unless they be kept straight by some level, may as well swarve from the
subject, as make a true picture of it. Here then we are to examine, what it is
that makes us think any thing to be such as we apprehend it. This we are sure
of, that, when we do so, our actions, which proceed upon reason, and have
relation to that thing, are governed and steered in every circumstance, just as
if the thing were truly so, As for example, if a man really deem the weather to
be cold, or that his body is distempered, he puts on warmer clothes, or takes
physic, though peradventure he is mistaken in both: for, his deeming them to
be so, makes him demean himself as if really they were so. It Is then evident,
that, by such thinking or deeming, the nature conceived is made an active
principle in us. To which if we add, that all the knowledge we have of our Soul
is no more, but that it is an active force in us; it seems, that a thing, by
having apprehensions made of it in our mind and being really thought agreeable
to such apprehensions, becomes, (as it were) a part or affection of our Soul,
and one thing with it. And this peradventure is the cause, why an understanding
man cannot easily leave an opinion once deeply rooted in him; but wrestles and
strives against all arguments that would force him from it, as if part of his
Soul or Understanding were to be torn from him: in such manner as a beast will
cry and struggle to save his body, from having any of his limbs disjonted or
pulled in pieces.

But, this observing the effect, which follows of our deeming 5. How the Soul
comes to deem or settle a Judgment.
a thing to be thus or so, is not sufficient to inform us, what it is that
causes that deeming. We must therefore take the matter a little higher, and
look into its immediate principles: and there we shall find, that it is the
knowing of what we say to be true, and the assurance that the things are as we
deem them, which quiets our Soul, and makes it consent to them, and proceed to
action upon that consent. Now, this knowledge is the most eminent part of
deeming, and, of all our acquisitions, the most inseparable from us: and
indeed, in rigor, it is absolutely inseparable by direct means; however
peradventure by indirect means it may be separated.

Let us then consider how we attain to it, and how sometimes we fail in the
purchase of it; and what degrees of assurance or of probability there are
between It and Error. To this intent, we may observe, that the greatest
assurance and most eminent knowledge we can have of any thing is, of such
Propositions as in the Schools, are called Identical; as if one should say,
John is John, or a man is a man: for, the truth of these propositions is so
evident and clear, as it is impossible any man should doubt of them, if he
understand what he says; and, if we should meet with one that were not
satisfied of the verity of them, we would not go about to prove them to him,
but only apply our selves to make him reflect on the words he speaks, without
using any further industry to gain his assent thereto. Which is a manifest sign,
that, in such Propositions, the apprehending or understanding them, is the same
thing, as to know and consent unto them: or at the least, that they are so
necessarily conjoined, as the one follows immediately out of the other; without
needing any other cause to promote this effect, more than that a man be
disposed, and willing to see the truth. So as we may conclude, that, to
understand a Proposition, which carries its evidence with it, is to know it.
And by the same reason, though the evidence of a Proposition should not at
first sight be presently obvious to us; yet, if with unfolding and explicating
it, we come at length to discern it, the apprehending of it is the knowing it.

We must therefore enquire, what it is that causes this evidence. And to that
purpurpose, reflecting upon those instances we have given of Identical
Propositions, we may in them observe, that evidence arises out of the plain
Identification of the extremes that are affirmed of one another: so that, in
what Proposition soever the Identification of the extreme is plain, the truth
of it is evident to us, and our mind is satisfied and at quiet; as being
assured that it knows it to be so, as the words say it. Now, all affirmative
Propositions, by their form, import an Identification of their extremes; for
they all agree in saying, This is that. Yet they are not all alike in the
evidence of their Identification: for, in some it shows it self plainly,
without needing any further help to discover it; and those are, without any
more ado, known of themselves, (as, such Identical sayings, we even now gave for
examples): others require a journey somewhat further about, to show their
Identification. Which if it be not so hidden, but that it may in the end be
discovered and brought to light; as soon as that is done, the knowledge settled
by them in the Soul is certain and satisfactory, as well as the other: but, if
it be so obscure, that we cannot display the Identification of it; then our
mind suspends his assent, and i^ unquiet about it, and doubts of the truth of
it. In some Propositions, whiles he searches and enquires after the
Identification of their extremes, peradventure he discerns, that it is
impossible there should be any between them; and then, on the other side, he is
satisfied of the falsity of them: for, if a Proposition be affirmative, it must
necessarily be a false one, if there be no Identification between the extremes
of it.

By this discourse, we have found two sorts of Propositions, which beget
knowledge in us. One, where the Identification of the extremes is of it self so
manifest, that, when they are but explicated, it needs no further proof: The
other, where though in truth they be Identifi'd, yet the Identification appears
not so clear, but that some Discourse is required to satisfy the understanding
therein. Of the first kind are such Propositions, as make one of the extremes
the Definition of the other, whereof it is affirmed: as when we say, A man is a
reasonable Creature; which is so evident, if we understand what is meant by a
Man, and what by a Reasonable Creature, as it needs no further proof to make us
know it. And knowledge is begotten in us, not only by a perfect Identification
of the extremes, but as well by an imperfect one: as when what is said of
another is but part of its definition; for example, if one should say, a man is
a creature, no body that knows him to be a rational creature, (which is his
complete definition) could doubt of his being a creature, because the being a
Creature is partly Identifi'd to being a rational creature. In like manner,
this obvious evidence of Identification, appears as well where a complete
Division of a thing is affirmed of the other extreme, as where that affirmation
is made by the total or partial Definition of it: as when we say, Number is
Even or Odd, an Enuntiation is True or False, and the like; where, because what
is said comprises the differences of the thing whereof it is said, it is plain
that one of them must needs be that, whereof we speak.

Peradventure some may expect, that we should give Identical Propositions
(among others) for examples of this plain evidence: but because they bring no
acquisition of new knowledge to the Soul, (the doing of which, and reflecting
on the manner, is the scope of this Chapter) I let them pass without any
further mention; having produced them once before, only to show, by an
undeniable example, what it is that makes our Soul consent to an enunciation,
and how knowledge is begotten in her, that we might afterward apply the force
of it to other Propositions.

Let us therefore proceed to the second sort of Propositions; which require some
Discourse, to prove the Identification of their Extremes. Now the scope of such
Discourse is, by comparing them to some other third thing, to show their
Identification between themselves; for it shows, that each of them apart is
identified with that new subject it brings in: and then our understanding is
satisfied of their identity, and our Soul secure of that knowledge it thus
acquires; as well as it is of that which results out of those Propositions,
which bear their evidence in their first aspect

This negotiation of the understanding, to discover the truth of Propositions
when it is somewhat hidden, (which we call Discourse), as it is one of the
chiefest and noblest actions of the Soul. So it challenges a very heedful
inspection into it, and therefore we will allow it a peculiar Chapter by it
self, to explicate the nature and particularities of it. But, this little we
now have said concerning it is sufficient for this place; where all we aim at
is, to prove (and, I conceive, we have done it very fully) that when Identity
between two or more things Presents it self to our understanding, it makes and
forces knowledge in our Soul.

Whence is manifest, that the same power or Soul, which, in a Single
Apprehension is possessed with the Entity or Unity of it, is that very power or
Soul, which, applied to Enuntiation, knows or deemes: knowing is nothing else,
but the Apprehending of manifest Identity in the extremes of Proposition, or an
effect immediately consequent out of it, in the Soul that applies it self to
apprehend that Identity. Which apprehension is made, either by the force of the
extremes, applied immediately to one another; or else by the application of
them to some other thing, which peradventure may require yet a further
application to new apprehensions: to make the Identity between 6. H^w Opinion
is begotten in the Understanding.
the first extremes appear evidently.

Now, as when Identity, truly appears, it makes evidence to our understanding,
and begets assured knowledge in our Soul: so; when there is only an apparent
Identity, but not a real one, it happens that the understanding is quieted
without evidence; and our Soul is fraught with a wrong or slight belief,
instead of certain knowledge. As for example, it is for the most part true, that
what Wise Men affirm is so as they say: but, because wise men are but men (and
consequently, not infallible), it may happen that, in some one thing, the
wisest men that are may miss; though, in most, and generally speaking, they hit
right. Now if any one in a particular occasion should (without examining the
matter) take this proposition rigorously and peremptorily, that What wise men
affirm is true, and there upon subsume with evidence, that Wise men say such a
particular thing; and should thence proceed to believe it: in this case he may
be deceived, because the first proposition is not verily, but only seemingly,
evident.

And this is the manner, how that kind of deeming, which is either opposed or
inferior to knowledge, is bred in us: to wit, when, either through temerity (in
such cases where we may, and it is just we should examine all particulars so
carefully that no equivocation or mistake in any part of them be admitted to
pass upon us for a truth; and and yet we do not), or else through the
limitedness and imperfection of our nature, when the minuteness and variety of
petty circumstances in a business is such, as we cannot enter into an exact
examination of all that belongs to that matter, (for, if we should exactly
discuss every slight particular, we should never get through any thing of
moment), we settle our understanding upon grounds that are not sufficient to
move and determine it. Now, in some of these cases, (and particularly in the
later) it may happen, that the understanding it self is aware that it neither
has discovered, nor can discover evidence enough, to settle its assent with
absolute assurance: and then it judges the belief it affords such a
proposition, to be but probable; and, instead of knowledge, has but opinion
concerning it. Which Opinion appears to it more or less probable, according as
the motives it relyes on are stronger and weaker.

There remains yet another kind of deeming for us to speak of: which, though it
ever fail of Evidence, yet sometimes it is 7. How Faith is begotten in the
understanding.
better than Opinion; for sometimes it brings certitude with it. This we call
Faith; and it is bred thus: when we meet with a man who knows something we do
not; if withal we be persuaded that he neither does, nor will tell a lie, we
then believe, what he says of that thing to be true. Now, according to the
persuasion we have of his knowledge and veracity, our belief is strong, or
mingled with doubt. So that, if we have absolute assurance and certainty that
he knows the truth and will not lie; then we may be assured, that the faith, we
yield to what he says, is Certain; as well as Evident Knowledge is Certain,
and admits no comparison with Opinion, be it never so probable. But so it may
happen, that we may be certainly assured that a man knows the truth of what he
speaks; and that he will not lie in reporting it to us: for, seeing no man is
wicked without a cause, and that to tell a lie in a serious matter is a great
wickedness; If once we come to be certain that he has no causes as it may,
fall out we may then it follows that we are assured of the thing which he
reports to us.

Yet still such* Faith falls short of the evidence of knowledge; in this regard,
that its evidence sticks one degree on this side the thing it self, and at the
push, in such a case we see but with another eyes: and consequently, if any
opposition arise against our thought therabout, it is not the beams and light of
the thing it self, which strengthen us against such opposition, but the
goodness of the party upon whom we rely.

Before I go any further, I must needs remember one thing, 8. Why Truth is the
perfection of a Reasonable Soul: and why it is not found in Simple
Apprehensions as well as in Enuntiations.
that our Masters teach us: which is that Truth and Falsehood are first found in
Sayings or Enuntiations; and that, although Single Apprehensions are in our
mind before these judgments; yet are they not true or false themselves, nor is
the understanding so by them. To comprehend the reason of this maxim, let us
consider what truth and falsehood are. Surely, Truth is nothing else but the
conformity of the understanding with the things that make impression upon it;
and consequently, Falsehood is a disagreeing between our mind and those things:
If the Existence which the things have in us be agreeable to the Existence they
have in themselves, then our Understanding is true; otherwise it is false. Now,
the natural perfection of our Soul or understanding is, to be fraught with the
rest of the whole World, that is to have the knowledge of all things that are;
the knowledge of their essences, natures, proprieties, operations, and of
whatever else belongs to them all in general, and every one in particular: but
our Soul cannot be stored or fraught with any thing, by other means then by her
assent or deeming: whence it follows, that she cannot have her perfection till
her deemings or judgments be perfect, that is be agreeable to things in the
world; when they are so, then are they true. And this is the reason why Truth
is the aim and perfection of the Soul. Now then, truth residing only in the
assents and judgments of the Soul, (which are the traffic whereby she inriches
her self with the rest of the world): and they being framed, by her discerning
an Identity between two things; which she expresses by affirming one of them of
the other: it follows, that nothing can be true or false, but where there is a
composition of two extremes, made by the ones being affirmed of the other;
which is done only in Enuntiacions or judgments. Whiles Single Apprehension
assent to nothing, and therefore settle no knowledge in the Soul; and
consequently are not capable of verity or falsity: but are like Pictures made
at fancy, some one of which may happen to be like some Person; but cannot be
said to be the Picture of him, because it was not drawn, from him. So, these
bare Apprehensions; because there is not in them an union of the Soul to the
outward world, or to the Existence which actuates its object; therefore they
make not the Soul to be the image of the things existent: but the Judgment,
which still takes a thing existent, or as existent, in the Subject of the
Proposition, draws its Picture from the thing it self; and therefore makes the
Soul to be well or ill painted in respect of the thing, that is, true or false.

And this is the reason why, in one sense, doubtful propositions, which the
understanding (not being yet resolved) makes inquiringly, to inform it self of
the truth of them, cannot be said to be true or false: for, all that while, the
Soul yields no assent to them, either one way or other. Yet in another sense,
they may, which is, taking them as subjects that the understanding determines
to it self to treat of: for there being two extremes in them, and the
proposition consisting in this, whether these extremes be Identified or no; it
follows, that, since one part must of necessity be, such a proposition, spoken
at random or written by chance without design, is of necessity either true or
false, according as the extremes of it are or are not one thing. 9. What is a
solid Judgment, and what a slight one.


There occurrs no more to my consideration to be said in this place, concerning
the assents and judgments of the mind: unless it be, to explicate, in a word or
two, the several qualities of them, which are found in several Persons; and to
point at the reason why they are called by those names, which they are
universally known by. To which purpose we may observe, that judgment or deeming
being a quieting of the mind; it follows that the mind must needs be at
disquiet and unrest, before it comes to judgment: so that we may conclude,
judgment or thinking is a good attained by a former motion. Now, according to
the quality of this motion, the judgment or assent is qualified and
denominated. We must therefore consider what belongs to motion; which when we
have done, we shall in judgments find something proportionable thereto.

We know there is a beginning and ending in motion; and that there are parts by
which it is drawn out in length: all which must be particularly considered, in
our comparing of motions to judgments. Now then, as he that would know
precisely the nature of any motion, must not begin his survey of it, after it
has been some time in flux, nor give over his observing it, before it have
arrived to its utmost period; but ought to carry his intention along from its
first origin, and pass with it through all its parts, till it ceafing, give
him leave to do so too, (for otherwise, it may happen that the course of it be
differing in those parts he has not observed, from those that he has; and
accordingly, the picture he shall make of it, by that imperfect scantling, will
prove an erroneous one): so, when a man is to make a judgment of any matter in
question, to give a good account of it, he must begin at the root, and follow
successively all the branches it divides it self into, and drive every one of
them to their utmost extremity and period; and according as in judging he
behaves himself well or ill, in the several circumstances that are
proportionable to the beginning, ending, and parts of motion, so his judgment is
qualified with the names of several virtues agreeing thereto, or of their
opposite defects.

If he begin his considerations very low, and from the very bottom and root of
the affair, (which is, from the first and all comprehending principles of the
question) and proceed on orderly, taking all before him; his judgment is
accounted deep, profound, and solid: for he that casts so far, as to leave
behind him no part of the matter he is inquiring about, and then drives his
course steadily and smoothly forwards, without any leaps over ruged passages,
or interuptions, or loose breaches, must of necessity make a well grounded
judgment, and such an one, as cannot easily be overthrown, or he be easily
removed from it.

And this is indeed the full reason of what, a little above, we only glanced
at: namely, why Understanding Men are usually accounted obstinate in their
tenets, and are hard to be removed from opinions once settled in their minds.
For, when other men oppose them, they urge nothing (for the most part) against
these judicious men's resolutions or beliefs, but what they have already
thoroughly foreseen; but these, on the other side, see a great deal, that their
opposers reach not to: so that, notwithstanding all such opposition, they
continue still unshaken in their judgments; for which, the others, which see
not as much as they, think them obstinate and not led by reason, because they
follow not that short reason, beyond which themselves cannot reach.

The contrary vice to this is called a slight judgment; and consists herein,
that a man, out of a few and insufficient number of circumstances, resolves the
whole case: which temerity and short sightedness of judgment is significantly
taxed in our English Proverb, that A fools Bolt is soon shot.

Thus much for the Beginning of a Judgment: the next consideration may be
concerning the End of it. In regard whereof, if 10. What is an acute judgment,
and what a dull one.
it reach to the utmost extent and period of what is considerable in a hard
question proposed, it gains the title of sharp, or of subtle, and acute: for,
the hardness of the matter, that perplexes ones judgment, consists in the
involution of things; which, looked upon in gross, seem to have no distinction
or opposition among themselves, and yet are in truth of very different and
contrary natures. Now, a good judgment divides and cuts through them, and
allots to every particular thing its proper limits and bounds: wherefore, as in
corporeal substances, the virtue of dividing is sharpness and edge; by
translation from thence, such a judgment, as pierces neatly and smartly between
contradictories that lie close together, is called sharp and acute. In like
manner, subtility is a virtue, whereby a liquor or other body searches every
little hole, and part of what it works upon, till it get through it; and from
thence, it is used in judgments to signify the same: whose opposite vice is
called dullness.

In the last place we are to examine, what proportion a judgment 11. In what
consists quickness and clearness of judgment: and their opposite vices.
holds with the parts of motion. In these, two things are to be considered;
namely, the quantity or multitude of those parts, and the order of them. As for
the quantity in a motion, it belongs either to long or short, or to quick and
slow. Now, where the beginning and ending are already known and determined, and
consequently the length is determined and depends not at all of the Judge to
alter it, (for he must take it as the matter gives it); there a judgment can
acquire no denomination of perfection or deficiency, from length or shortness,
(for, they belong originally to the matter of the judgment; and the judgment
must accordingly fit it self to that; and therefore is liable neither to
commendations nor reproach, for being long or short): It remains then, that the
virtue in judging, answerable to the quantity of motion, must consist in
quickness and celerity; and the contrary vice, in slowness and heaviness.

As for order in the several parts of motion; we know that, if they be well
ordered, they are distinct and easily discernable: which virtue, in our
subject, is called clearness of judgment; as the contrary vice is confusion.

CHAP. III. Of Discoursing.
IN the last Chapter we have showed, how two Apprehensions joined together make
a Judgment: How, in this our first 1. How discourse is made.
employment will be, to show how three of these thoughts or Judgments, well
chosen and duly ordered, compose the first and most simple of perfect
discourses, which Logicians call a Syllogism; whose end and effect is, to gain
the knowledge of something, before, hidden and unknown. The means whereby this is
compassed, is thus. By the two first Judgments, we join the extremes of the
proposition we desire to know to some third thing; and then, by seeing that
they both are one third thing, and that one can be but one, we come to discern
that truly one of them is the other; which before we saw not. So that the
Identity, which first made an Identical proposition be known and agreed to, and
afterward caused the like assent to be yielded to those maxims whose
Identification presently showed it self; now, by a little circuit and bringing
in of a third term, makes the two first (whose Identification was hidden and
obscure, whiles we looked upon the terms themselves) appear to be in very truth
but one thing.

The various mingling and disposing of these three terms, in the two first
propositions, begets a variety in the Syllogisms 2. Of the Figures and Mo^ds of
Syllogisms.
composed of them: and it consists in this, that the assumed term, to which the
other two are interchangably joined, is either said of them, or they of it.
And, from hence spring three different kinds of Syllogisms; for, either the
assumed or middle term is said of both the other two, or both they are said of
it, or it is said of one of them, and the other is said of it. Nither is there
any deeper mystery than this in the three figures, our great Clerks talk so
much of: which being brought into Rules, to help our memory in the ready use of
this transposition of the terms, if we spin our thoughts upon them into over
small threads, and thereof weave too intricate webs (mean while not reflecting
upon the solid ground within our selves, whereon these rules are built, nor
considering the true end why,) we may spend our time in trivial and useless
subtilities; and, at length, confound and misapply the right use of our natural
discourse, with a multitude of precepts drawn from artificial Logic.

But, to return to our matter in hand. Under this primary threefold variety is
another of greater extent, growing out of the diverse composition of the three
terms, as they are qualifyed by affirmation or negation, and by universality or
particularity: for, that unity, which the two terms, whose Identification is
enquired after, must have by being joined with the third, becomes much varied
by such diverse application; and from hence shoots up that multitude of kinds of
Syllogisms, which our Logicians call Moods. All which I have thus particularly
expressed, to the end we may observe how this great variety hangs upon the sole
string of Identity.

Now, these Syllogisms, being as it were interlaced and woven 3. That the life
of man, as man consists in Discourse; and of the vast extent of it.
one within another, (so that many of them make a long chain, whereof each is a
link) breed, or rather are, all the variety of man's life. They are the steps by
which we walk in all our conversations and businesses. Man, as Man, does
nothing else, but weave such chains; whatever he does, swerving from this work,
he does as deficient from the nature of man: and if he do ought beyond this by
breaking out into diverse sorts of exterior actions, he finds nevertheless, in
this linked sequel of simple discourses, the art, the cause, the rule, the
bounds, and the model of it.

Let us take a summary view of the vast extent of it; and in what an immense
Ocean one may securely sail, by that never varying Compass, when the needle is
rightly touched, and fitted to a well molded box: making still new discoveries
of regions, far out of the sight and belief of them, who stand upon the hither
shore. Humane Operations are comprised under the two general heads of Knowledge
and Action: if we look but in gross upon what an infinity of divisions these
branch themselves into, we shall become giddy, our brains will turn, our eyes
grow weary and dim, with aiming only at a sudden and roving measure of the
most conspicuous among them, in the way of knowledge.

We see what mighty works men have intended their labors to; not only by wild
discourses, of which huge volums are composed, but even in the rigorous method
of Geometry, Arithmetic, and Algebra; in which, an Euclide, an Apollonius, an
Archimedes, a Diophantus, and their followers, have reached such admirable
heights, and have wound up such vast bottoms. Sometimes showing by effects, that
the thing proposed must needs be as they have set down, and cannot possibly be
any otherwise; otherwhiles, appaying the understanding (which is never truly at
rest, till it has found the Causes of the effects it sees) by exposing how it
comes to be: so that, the Reader, calling to mind how such a thing was taught
him before, and now finding another unexpectedly convinced upon him, easily
sees that these two put together make and force that third to be, whereof he was
before in admiration how it could be effected; which two ways of discourse are
ordinarily known by the names of Demonstrations, the one called a priori, the
other a posteriori.

Now, if we look into the extent of the deductions outof these, we shall find
no end. In the Heavens, we may perceive Astronomy measuring whatever we can
imagine; and ordering those glorious lights which our Creator has hanged out
for us, and showing them their ways, and picking out their paths, and
prescribing them (for as many ages as he pleases before hand) the various
motions they may not swerve from in the least circumstance. Nor want their
Sublime Souls, that tell us what metal they are made of, what figures they
have, upon what pillars they are fixed, and upon what gimals they move and
perform their various perious; witness that excellent and admirable Dial. de
Mundo.
work, I have so often mentioned in my former Treatise. If we look upon the
Earth, we shall meet with those that will tell us how thick it is, and how much
room it takes up: they will show us how Men and Beasts are hanged to it by the
heels; how the Water and Air covers it; what force and power Fire has upon them
all, what working is in the depths of it; and of what composition the main body
of it is framed, where neither our eyes can reach, nor any of our Senses sends
its messengers to gather and bring back any relations of it. Yet are not our
Masters contented with all this; the whole world of Bodies is not enough to
satisfy them: the knowledge of all corporeal things, and of this machine of
heaven and earth, with all that they enclose, cannot quench the unlimited
thirst of a noble mind, once set on fire with the beauty and love of Truth.

Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi,
Ut Gy^rae clausus scopulis, parvaque Seripho.
But, such heroic spirits cast their subtle nets into another world, after
the winged inhabitants of the heavens; and find means to bring them also into
account, and to serve them (how imperceptible soever they be to the senses) as
dainties at the Souls table. They enquire after a Maker of the world we see,
and are our selves a main part of: and having found Him, they conclude Him (out
of the force of contradiction) to be Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Omniscient,
Immutable; and a thousand other admirable qualities they determine of him. They
search after his Tools and Instruments, wherewith he built this vast and
admirable palace; and seek to grow acquainted with the Officers and Stewards,
that under him govern this orderly and numerous Family. They find them to be
Invisible Creatures exalted above us more than we can estimate; yet infinitely
farther short of their and our Maker, than we are of them. If this occasion
them to cast their thoughts upon Man himself, they find a nature in him ('it is
true) much inferior to these admirable Intelligences: yet such an one, as they
hope may one day arrive to the likeness of them; and that, even at the present,
is of so noble a mould, as nothing is too big for it to fathom, nor any thing
too small for it to discern.

Thus, we see, knowledge has no limits; nothing escapes the toils of Science:
all that ever was, that is, or can ever be, is by them circled in; their extent
is so vast, that our very thoughts and ambitions are too weak, and too poor to
hope for or aim at, what by them may be compassed. And, if any man, that is not
inured to raise his thoughts above the pitch of the outward objects he
converses daily with, should suspect what I have now said, is rather like the
longing dreams of passionate Lovers, whose desires feed them with
impossibilities, than that it is any real truth, or should imagine it but a
Poetic Idea of Science, that never was nor will be in act; or if any other,
that has his discoursing faculty vitiated and perverted, by having been imbued
in the Schools with unsound and umbratile principles, should persuade himself,
that, however the pretenders to learning and Science may talk loud of all
things, and make a noise with Scholastic terms, and persuade their ignorant
hearers that they speak and unfold deep mysteries, yet, in very truth, nothing
at all can be known: I shall beseech them both to suspend their conjectures or
beliefs herein, and to reserve their censure of me, whether or no, I have
strained too far, till the learned Author of the Dialogues of the World has
enriched it with the Work he has composed of Metaphysics; in which, going
orderly and rigorously by continued propositions, as Mathematicians demonstrate
their undertakings, he has left no scope for wrangling brains to make the
least cavil against his doctrine, and, casting his sharpsighted thoughts over
the whole extent of nature, and driving them up to the Almighty Author of it,
he has left nothing out of the verge of those rules and all-comprehending
principles he gives of true Science. And then I doubt not, but they will
thoroughly absolve me, from having used any amplification, in aiming at the
reach of this all grasping power. For my part, the best expression I am able to
make of this admirable piece, I must borrow from witty Galileus, when he speaks
of Archimedes's long missed Book of Glasses; and profess, that, having some of
the Elements or Books of it entrusted in my hands by the Author, I read them
over with extreme amazement, as well as delight, for the wonderful subtilty and
solidness of them.

Thus much for knowledge. Now let us cast an eye upon 3. Of humane actions; and
of those that concern our selves.
humane actions. All that we do (if we do it as we should, and like men) is
governed and steered by two sorts of qualities: the one of which, we call Arts;
the other, Prudence. An Art is a collection of general rules, comprehending
some one subject, upon which we often work. The matters we work on (out of
which the particular subjects of Arts do spring) are of three kinds: our
Selves, our Neighbors, and such dumb or insensible things as compose the Rest
of the World.

Our actions on our Selves are the highest and noblest of all the rest, and
those by which we live and work as men: or, (to express my self better) they
are those by which we perfect that part of us, which makes us men; and by which
we direct and level all we do, according to the rule of reason, not suffering
our actions to swerve from what she dictates to us. This is done, by
multiplying and heightning the thoughts of those things, which maintain us in
reason; whether the motives be moral (as, the examples of worthy persons, and
the precepts and persuasions of wise men, and the like) or natural, (as, the
consideration of the sweet and contented life, which virtue givs us here, by
good conversation, honor, profit, quiet, pleasure, and what else soever grows
out of so excellent a root:) as also, of the Beatitude and Happiness it brings
us to in the next state; and of the contrary effects which spring from vice.
Again, by observing the motives and ways of our passions and animal desires,
we learn how to prevent them, how to terrify them, and how to wear them away
by little and little, through sometimes giving them diversions, otherwhiles
restraining them with moderation, and oftentimes cutting off the occasions, and
abridging them of their natural encreasings. All these things are brought into
art and rule; whose lessons were men but as careful and industrious to study,
as they are to become masters in vain and trivial things, they would enjoy
happy lives.

In the next place, we are to consider the actions whereby we 5. Of humane
actions, as they concern our neighbors.
work upon our Neighbors. They are chiefly government and negotiation: both
which are of one kind; and have but this difference, that the one is done in
common, the other is performed in particular. The means by which we command are
rewards and punishments; which who has in his hands may assuredly, by wise
using them, bring to pass whatever he has a mind to.

Upon occasion of mentioning these two powerful motives, which have so main an
influence in men's actions, we may note by the way, that many of them, (and that
work most forcibly upon men's minds) are things whose subfistence we know not
where to find; as honor, praise, glory, command, singularity, eminency, shame,
infamy, subjection, reproach, and the like: to any of which none of our senses
can reach; and yet they govern man's life, in a manner wholly and perfectly.

In negotiation, we propose to single men their own interests and profits; not
such as the proposer can or will effect; but such as are likely to arise out of
the action we endeavor to draw him to with whom we treat. In both these, the
usual labor is, to make our neighbors willing to leave some present good, in
hope of a greater to come; or to be content to undergo some present harm, for
fear of a greater to ensue. The general instrument which we use is Discoursing;
whose virtue consists partly in our own mind, and partly in delivering our mind
to others: for, first we must know what we should say, and next in what manner
we should say it.

The art which directs our own mind, and teaches us what to 6. Of Logic.
say, is Logic: whose parts are two; according as the affairs falling into
discourse are, likewise of a twofold nature. The one instructs us how to manage
and order our reason, when it deals with such subjects as we may attain to
Certainty in: and here the rules of Demonstration take place; teaching us to
define, to divide, and to conclude. The other instructs us how to behave our
selves when we meet with such subjects, as a good and probable guess is the
furthest we can reach to toward the knowledge of them: and for these the
Topical part of Logic serves; which, taking a view of all the Accedents
belonging to any thing propounded, shows how to draw probabilities from every
of them.

Our discoursing to others is either to open our minds barely 7. Of Grammar.
to them, or to persuade them of somewhat our selves believe, or to win them to
somewhat we would have them do. For the bare delivery of our minds to others,
we have Grammar; the scope of which art consists; first, in teaching us to
deliver our conceptions plainly and clearly, (which is the main intent of
speaking), next, in making our discourse be succinct and brief, (which is the
measure of our speaking, both for our selves and others), and lastly, in
sorting our words so as what we say may be accompanied with sweetness both in
common, in regard of the ear, by avoiding such harsh sounds as may offend it,
and in particular, in regard of the custom of the language we speak, and of the
persons to whom we speak.

The art whereby we may persuade others, and win them to 8. Of Rhetoric.
assent to what we would have them, is Rhetoric or Oratory. Her rules instruct
us how to dispose and order with best advantage, in regard of the Auditors
disposition, both the reasons which Logic affords us, and the words which
Grammar stores us with: as also, how to give life and motion to what we say by
our action and gesture; that so we may persuade our Auditory such passions
reign in us, as we seek to stir up in them. For, as we may observe, that one
who yawns makes another likewise yawn, and as our seeing others laugh provokes
laughing also in us (the reasons whereof we have touched in the former
Treatise): after the same manner, what passion soever we exhibit in our
selves, the same steals insensibly upon those we speak to; while their mind,
attending to the words they hear, is not aware of the subtle spirits motions
that, by a kind of contagion, rise and swell in their hearts. According to
which natural inclination in all men, the Master of Poets, and excellent
observer of men's humors, said passing well

Si vis me flere, dolendum est Horat. de Art. Poet.

Primum ipsi tibi:
Hence grow those increases by Metaphors, Hyperboles, and other Tropes and
Figures: hence those fervors by Interrogations, Exclamations, Apostrophes, and
the like; which, when they are fitly placed, carry the Auditor even against his
will.

Poetry is not a governor of our actions; but by advantageous 9. Of Poetry.
expressing some eminent ones, it becomes an useful directour to us, and
therefore challenges a place here. The delight of it is, by representing humane
actions in a more august and admirable hew, than in themselves they usually
have, to frame specious Ideas; in which the people may see what is well done,
what amiss, what should be done, and what by error is wont to be done: and to
imprint in men's minds a deep conceit of the goods and evils, that follow their
virtuous or vicious comportment in their lives.

If those who assume the title of Poets did aim at this end, and would hold
themselves strictly to it, they would prove as profitable instruments as any
the Commonwealth had: for, the delightfulness and blithness of their
compositions invites most men to be frequently conversant with them, (either in
Songs, or upon the Stage, or in other Poems); while the sober aspect and
severity of bare precepts deturn many from lending a pleased ear to their
wholesome doctrine; and, what men swallow with delight, is converted into
nourishment. So that, if their drift were to settle in men's minds a due
valuation of virtue, and a detestation of vice; no art would do it more
universally, nor more effectually: and by it, men's hearts would be set on fire
to the pursuit of the one, and be shrunk up with dislike and horror against the
other. But, to such a Poet as would aim at those noble effects, no knowledge of
Morality, or the nature and course of humane actions and accidents must be
wanting: he must be well versed in History, he must be acquainted with the
progress of nature, in what she brings to pass, he must be deficient in no part
of Logic, Rhetoric, or Grammar; in a word, he must be consummate in all arts
and Sciences, if he will be excellent in his way.

But while we thus entertain our selves with those arts, which serve us in
discoursing with others, it were a great oversight to 10. Of the power of
speaking.
forget that faculty, which is the basis and groundwork of all those: and,
that is the power of speech, which nature has bestowed on us. It consists in
two actions: the one outward, the other inward. The outward is the giving of
various sounds to our breath, as it passes through our mouth, by diverse
conjunctions of our tongue, teeth, and lips, to themselves, or to diverse parts
of our mouth, or by their separations from them; in which, we see that Birds
are able to imitate us; and I am persuaded, the like might be effected by
insensible creatures, if a dexterous man would employ his time, in contriving
and making an instrument to express those different sounds; which, not having
more than seven substantial differences besides the vowels, (as some who have
carefully noted them affirm) it would peradventure be no hard matter to compose
such an engine.

The inward action of locution is the framing of convenient answers to what is
asked, of fit replies to what is said; and, in a word, to speak oppositely and
to the purpose: whereto, neither Beast nor dead Instrument can be brought;
unless the Artificer be able to endue it with understanding.

All other arts instruct us how to work orderly upon beasts 11. Of arts that
concern dumb and insensible creatures.
and insensible bodies: By some of them we cultivate living creatures; as when
Husbandmen nourish sheep, oxen, foul, and the like, for slaughter: by others,
we discipline them; as when we teach Horses, Dogs, Apes, Hawks, Parrats, and
some kind of Fishes, to hunt, to play, and in a word, to do somewhat either for
our profit, or for our pleasure: and again, by others, we use their natures to
our end; as when we lay baits to catch them, when we set eggs under hens to
have the chickens, and the like. By other arts, we work as powerfully upon
insensible creatures; among which, by knowing the natures of diverse Trees,
Herbs, Minerals, etc. we are able to bring any of them to what use soever we
find most expedient for our service. From hence grow all those Arts and Trades,
in which we see men daily spend their whole lives; so as it is needless to
insist upon the particulars of them, since Towns and the Cities are composed of
the several Tribes of persons that profess and live by them.

But, we must not leave this subject, without noting how admirably man's wit
turns it self to so different sorts, and to such an infinite variety of things.
For, what man is there, (if he be a man) but might have become Master in any of
these so differing Trades; in cause he had applied himself as constantly to
that, as he has done to some other, he is perfect in? Again, let us consider
how it happens often, that he does not the same thing twice the same way; but
according to his own or another man's fancy, changes his work at will: now
doing it after one fashion, now after another; as having no law or
determination from nature, but being wholly left to his own direction.

There remains one art, not yet spoken of, which knows not 12. Of Arithmetic.
where to challenge a place) whether among the Moderatours of our own actions,
or among those whereby we govern things); and that is Arithmetic: which seems
to belong to things, and yet it medles not with them; and again, it seems to be
a main directour of our internal actions, and yet belongs neither to Morals,
nor to Logic. Wher'so're its due be, to be placed, I am sure its not to be
forgotten; seeing it is so principal an one, as our life can hardly consist
without it. It works upon notions that are no where; for every thing that is in
the World, is but one: and to be, or to make a number, cannnot happen without
an understanding. The affections likewise of them are, as the subject, all
invisible; as, to be even or odd, to be cubes, squares, roots, etc. and yet how
great the power and extent of this art is none can rightly understand or
believe, but he that has the knowledge, or has seen the virtue and efficacity
of it.

All these arts consist in common rules, which require the second 13. Of
Prudence.
of those qualities, whereby we said humane actions are governed, to apply them
to their particular matter; and that is Prudence: which we may define to be a
quality or power, by whose assistance we apply to the matter we are to work on
such Instruments, as in our present judgment appear fittest to bring it to that
pass which serves best for our intentions; when, by our senses or other
guesses, we know the particular dispositions of the matter, and of the
Instruments wherewith we are to change it. Now, although this occurs generally
in all Arts, yet its special place and necessity is in governing and moderating
our own, or other men's Moral actions: and accordingly, its name is especially
addicted thereto; and that man is said to be prudent or discreet, who governs
himself and others well.

This quality of Moral Prudence, in general, is divided into three particular
ones: the first of which belongs to a Governor in a State or Commonwealth: the
next may be assigned to him that is skilful in the Laws: and the third concerns
the managing and conduct of Military actions. The reason of this long-receiv'd
distribution peradventure is, because, in these occurrences, our passion sways
us generally more than in any others: and, the operation and effect of Prudence
(whose Province is to curb and moderate our Passions by Reason) is greatest,
and appears most, in those subjects, where Passion reigns usually with greatest
impetuosity.

Thus have we run over the main parts of discourse, and the general heads of
man's action as Man: which peradventure 14. Observations upon what has been
said in this Chapter.
may, through their numerousness, appear to be, as it were, but loosly
scattered from our pen, (as happens to all materials, that must serve for after
buildings, and that, till they be employed, require no more but sorting, and
laying together in several heaps, to the end they may be ready for use); and
therefore, before we go any further, it will not be amiss to make reflections on
what we have said, and to draw it nearer our intended scope, and to square out
and give some figure and polishing to these stones here, where we dig them out
of the quarry, whereby they may hereafter, with less ado, fit the places we have
assigned them in the structure we intend. And so, a little trouble here, while
our tools are still in our hands, and our matter lies ready for our strokes,
and our thoughts are warm with working upon them, may save us a great deal
there, where our main employment will be, to lay artificially, and to join
closely, what now we but hew out; and therefore will require finer instruments,
and a sharper edge, than what at present serves our turn.

Let us then bring back to account all we have said in this Chapter: and, when
we have well reflected upon every particular, we shall find they all agree in
this, that they are nothing else but a due Ordering of one thing with another.
A Syllogism is an Ordering of some few Notions; a Science is an Ordering of
Syllogisms, so as a new Proposition may follow out of those which went before:
and as we see that, when in our thoughts diverse Syllogisms are well-ordered,
hidden things come to be disclosed in our understanding; even so among bodies,
if things, whose proprieties are known, be likewise Ordered and put together,
those very Effects, which were discovered by the Ordering of Notions in our
Head, will spring forth in Nature. As for example, if, by knowing the natures
of fire and tow, our discourse finds that tow put to fire will presently become
fire; the same will happen in nature, if we put material tow, or some other
body that has the qualities of it, to real fire, or to some other substance
that is endew'd with the virtues of fire. In like manner, if, by knowing that
Colors are nothing else but various mixtures of light and of darkness in
bodies, our Discourse assures us, that, by several compoundings of these
extremes, Reds, Blews, Yellows, Greens, and all other intermediate colors may
be generated: accordingly we shall find in effect, that, by the several
minglings of black and white bodies (because they reflect or drown light most
powerfully) or by interweaving streams of pure light and shadows one with
another, we may procreate new colors in bodies, and beget new luminous
appearances to our eyes. So that hence it appears clearly, that the same nature
is in our Understanding, and in the Things: and that the same Ordering, which
in the one makes Science, in the other causes natural transmutations.

Another reflection, which will be fit for us to make upon these long
discourses, is this, that of necessity there must be a joining of some things,
now actually in our knowledge, to other things we think not of. For it is
manifest, that we cannot at the same time actually think of a whole book of
Euclide; and yet, to the due knowledge of some of the last Propositions, the
knowledge of almost all the former is required: likewise it is impossible we
should at the same time think of all the multitude of rules belonging to any
Art, as of Grammar, of Metering, of Architecture; and yet, when we write in
Latin, make a Poem, or lay the design of a House, we practice them whiles we
think not of them, and are assured we go not against them, however we remember
them not.

Nay, even before we know a thing, we seem to know it: for since we can have a
desire of nothing but of what we know; how could we desire to know such or such
a thing, unless we know both it and the knowledge of it? And for the most part
we see a horse, or man, or herb, or workmanship; and by our sense have knowledge
that such a thing it is, before we know what, or who, or how, it is; That grows
afterward, out of the diligent observation of what we see: which is that,
whereby learned men differ from the unlearned. For, what strikes the sense is
known alike by them both: but then here is the difference between them, the
latter sort sits still with those notions, that are made at first by the
beating of our sense upon us, without driving them any further; and those that
are learned resolve such compounded notions into others made by more common
beatings, and therefore more simple: and this is all the odds in regard of
knowledge, that a Scholar has of an unlettered man.

One observation more we will draw out of what we have said, and then end this
Chapter: it is, how a man oftentimes enquires among his own thoughts, and turns
up and down the images he has in his head, and beats his brains; to call such
things into his mind as are useful to him, and are for the present out of his
memory. Which as we see so necessary, that without it no matter of importance
can be performed in the way of discourse, (whereof I my self have too frequent
experience in writing this Treatise:) so, on the other side, we cannot perceive
that any creature, besides Man does it of set purpose and formally, as man does.

CHAP. IV. How a man proceeds to Action.
HAving thus taken a summary view of the principal Qualities 1. That humane
actions proceed from two several principles, Understanding and Sense.
a man is endued with, Apprehending, Judging, and Discoursing, and showed how
he is enriched in and by them, with the natures of all things in the world: it
remains for our last work in this part, to consider, in what manner he makes
use of this treasure in his ordinary Actions: which, it is evident are of two
different kinds, and consequently have two several principles Understanding and
Sense; they sway by turns, and sometimes join together, to produce a mixed
action of both.

If only Sense were the fountain from whence his actions spring, we should
observe no other strain in any of them, than merely that according to which
Beasts perform theirs: they would proceed evermore in a constant unvariable
tenor, according to the law of material things; one body working upon another,
in such sort as we have declared in the former Treatise.

On the other side, if a man were all Understanding, and had not this bright
lamp enclosed in a pitcher of clay; the beams of it would shine without any
allay of dimness, thorough all he did: and he could do nothing contrary to
reason, in pursuit of the highest end he has prefixed unto himself. For, he
neither would nor could do any thing whatever, till he had first considered all
the particular circumstances, that had relation to his action in hand; and had
then concluded, that, upon the whole matter, at this time, and in this place,
to attain this End, it is fitting and best to do thus or thus: which conclusion
could be no sooner made, but the action would, without any further disposition
on his side, immediately ensue; agreeable to the principles it spring from.
Both parts of this assertion are manifest. For the first, it is evident, that,
whenever an Agent works by knowledge, he is unresolved whether he shall work or
not work, as also of his manner of working, till his knowledge (that ought to
direct and govern his working) be perfect and complete: but that cannot be, as
long as any circumstance not-as-yet considered may make it seem fit or unfit to
proceed: and therefore, such actions, as are done without exact consideration of
every particular circumstance, do not flow from a pure understanding. From
whence it follows, that, when an understanding is not satisfied of every
particular circumstance, and consequently cannot determine what he must
immediately do; but apprehends that some of the circumstances not-as-yet
considered, may (or rather must) change some part of his action; he must of
necessity be undetermined in respect of the immediate action; and consequently,
must refrain absolutely from working. The other part is clear, to wit, that
when the understanding, upon consideration of all circumstances, knows
absolutely what is best; the action follows immediately (as far as depends of
the understanding) without any further disposition on his behalf. For since
nothing but knowledge belongs to the understanding, he who supposes all
knowledge in it allows all that is requisite or possible for it to work by: Now,
if all be put, nothing is wanting that should cause it to work: but, where no
cause is wanting, but all requisite causes actually in being, the effect must
also actually be, and follow immediately out of them: and consequently, the
action is done, (in as much as concerns the understanding, and indeed
absolutely, unless some other cause fail) as soon as the understanding knows
all the circumstances belonging to it. So as it is manifest out of this whole
discourse, that, if a man wrought only by his understanding, all his actions
would be discreet and rational, in respect of the end he has proposed to
himself; and, till he were assured what were best, he would keep himself in
suspense and do nothing; and, as soon as he were so, he would admit of no
delays, but, at the instant, proceed to action according to his knowledge: the
contrary of all which we daily see by experience in every man.

We may then safely conclude, that in humane nature there 2. How our general
and inbred maxims concur to humane action.
are two different centers, from whence cross actions flow: the one he has
common with beasts; whose principles and laws we delivered in the former
Treatise, where we discoursed of life, and the motions of life, and of
passions: the other is the subject of our present enquiry; which, in this
place, expects at our hands that we should consider how it demeans its self,
and what it does in us, when by its guidance we proceed to any action.
Experience must be our informer in general: after which, our discourse shall
anatomise what that presents us in bulk. She gives us notice of three especial
effects of our Understanding: First, that it Orders aright those conceptions
which are brought to it; Secondly, that, when they appear to be not sufficient
for the intended work, it Casts about and seeks out others: and, Thirdly, that
it strengthens those actions which spring from it, and keeps them regular, and
firm, and constant to their beginings and principles. To which last seems to
belong, that it sometimes checks its own thoughts, and brings back those it
would have, and appears to keep, as it were, a watch over its own ways.

As for the Ordering of the present notions, it is clear that it is done by a
secret dependence from the rules of discourse, and from the maxims of humane
action. I call this dependence a secret one, because a man, in his ordinary
course, makes use of those rules and maxims which serve his turn, as though
they were instilled into him by nature; without so much as ever thinking or
reflecting on them, to square out his actions by them: nay, some of them so far
out of the reach of most men, as they cannot think of them, though they would,
for they know them not. As, in particular, the rules of Discourse: the use of
which is so necessary, as without it no man can converse with another, nor do
any thing like a man, that is, reasonably. From whence then can this proceed,
that so familiarly and readily a man makes use of what he is not conscious to
himself that he has any acquaintance with? It can be nothing else, but that
the Soul, being in her own nature ordered to do the same thing, which Scholars
with much difficulty arrive to know what it is by reflection and study, and
then frame rules of that afterward to carry their discourse to a higher pitch:
she, by an in born virtue, makes a man do it orderly, constantly, and certainly.

The like may be observed in the daily use men make of the maxims of humane
actions; which are certain knowledges that 3. That the rules and maxims of
Arts, work positively in us though we think not of them.
formerly they have gotten, but usually think not of, while they work agreeably
to them: yet it seems they work by them; for if their action should jar against
any of them, they would presently reflect upon their Maxim, and by it correct
what they were about. For example, one who is skilled in the rules of Grammar,
or of accenting his speech, or has his ear used to Music, while he hears true
construction, or even verse, or consonant song, never reflects how it is made;
or at most but considers in gross, that it is right: but, if a solecism or
false quantity, or discord intervene; he presently is aware, not only that it
is amiss, but remembers the very particular precise rule, against which the
breach is made.

This at the first sight might occasion us to imagine, that the rules, by which
any composition is made, work only negatively in us, while we are busy about
it; that is, that they contribute nothing to the making of the thing, but only
hinder us from commiting errors: but, if we consider the matter well, we shall
find it impossible, but that they should work even positively in us. For, we
know that, when we first learn any of these things, we look industriously for
such a Gender, or Number, or Case, or Tense, for such a Foot or Quantity, such
a Note or Consonance; and we are sure, that use and practice of the same thing
does not change, but only facilitate the work: therefore it follows of
necessity, that we still use those very instructions; by which at first we
could but slowly creep, but now manage them with such celerity, as our fancy
cannot keep pace with what we do. And this is the reason why we do not perceive
that we think of them, but may peradventure at the same time think of a quite
different matter: as, when a Musician plays voluntary Division upon a ground he
never saw before, and yet has all the while some other thought in his head; or
when a Painter draws a Picture, and all the while discourses with a by-stander.

This truth may be convinced by another argument: as, thus, It cannot be
doubted, but that a Verse or Song is made by the power of making such
compositions: but that power is the Art of them; and that Art is nothing else
but the Rules whereby they are made. And accordingly we see, that who has not
the art, cannot make such compositions, but who has can, when he pleases; and
if any man would be able to make them, he presently studies the art: so that it
cannot be doubted, but that artificial things are always made by the use of
those rules which teach the making of them; although, for the most part, we are
not able to perceive how such rules are used. And besides this, we are sure,
that we do not only make use of those rules we learnt at first; but, when we
are arrived to Mastery in any Art, we make use of them in a quite different
manner than we did in the beginning, and than we do in any other thing, wherein
we find pain and difficulty.

In the second effect that we experience of our Understanding, 4. How the
Understanding casts about, when it wants sufficient grounds for action.
(which is, our Casting-about for new conceptions, when those it already has,
appear not sufficient to direct what it has in hand) the force and working of
it is very evident: for, this effect proceeds out of a want of satisfaction;
and this belongs properly to the Understanding. For, if evidence and
satisfaction be qualities of it, then of necessity the privation of these
qualities must likewise belong to it; as also to discern that privation, and to
use means to avoid it: and in the very casting-about, we see a choice made, and
that things are not taken promiscuously as they come of a row, but that some of
them are set aside and others advanced for use; which argues plainly the
knowledge and government of the Understanding.

But, the third operation is that which gives clearest evidence, of the
peculiar and distinct working of the Understanding. For, if 5. How Reason rules
over Sense and Passion.
we mark the contestation and strife within us, between our Sensual part, and
its antagonist which maintains the resolution set by reason; and observe how
exceedingly their courses and proceedings differ from one another: we shall
more plainly discern the nature, and power, and efficacy of both of them. We
may perceive that the motions against Reason rise up turbulently, as it were in
billows; and like a hill of boiling water, (as truly Passion is a conglobation
of spirits) put us into an unquiet and distempered heat and confusion. On the
other side, Reason endeavors to keep us in our due temper; by sometimes
commanding down this growing sea, otherwhile contenting in some measure the
desires of it, and so diverting another way its unruly force: sometimes she
terrifies it, by the proposal of offensive things joined to those it is so
earnest to enjoy; again, sometimes she prevents it, by cuting off all the causes
and helps that promote on its impotent desires, and by engaging before hand the
power of it in other things, and the like.

All which evidently convince, that, as Reason has a great strength and power
in opposition of Sense, so it must be a quite different thing and of a contrary
nature to it. We may add, that the work of Reason can never be well performed,
but in a great quiet and tranquillity; whereas the motions of Passion are always
accompanied with disorder and perturbation. So as it appears manifestly, that
the force of Reason is not purely the force of its Instruments; but the force
of its instruments as they are guided, and as the quantities of them are
proportioned by it. And this force of Reason, is different from the force of
its instruments of themselves; as the force of a Song is different from the
force of the same sounds whereof it is composed, taken without that Order which
the Musician puts in them: for otherwise, the more spirits that are raised by
any thought (which Spirits are the Instruments whereby Reason performs all her
operations in us) the more strongly reason should work; the contrary of which
is evident, for we see that too great abundance of Spirits confounds Reason.

This is as much as at present I intend to insist upon, for proof 6. How we
recall our thoughts from distractions.
that our Understanding has its proper and distinct operations; and works in a
peculiar manner, and in a quite different strain from all that is done by our
Senses. Peradventure some may conceive that the watchfulness and recalling of
our thoughts back to their enjoined work, (when they break loose and run
astray) and our not letting them range abroad at random, does also convince
this assertion: but I confess ingenuously, the testimony of it seems not clear
to me; and therefore I rank it not with those, that I would have (if it may be)
solidly weighty, and undeniable to one who shall consider maturely the bottom
and full efficaciousness of them. Of such, a few, or any one, is enough to
settle ones mind in the belief of a truth: and I hope, that this which I have
labored for in this Chapter is so sufficiently proved, as we need not make up
our evidence with number of Testimonies.

But, to show the exceptions I take against this argument, let us examine how
this act within us, which we call watchfulness, is performed. Truly, methinks
it appears to be nothing else, but the promptitude and recourse of some
spirits, that are proper for this effect; which, by a man's earnestness in his
resolution, take a strong impression, and so are still ready to knock
frequently at the door of our understanding, and thereby enable it with power to
recall our strayed thoughts. Nay, the very reflection itself, which we make upon
our thoughts, seems to me only this, that the object, beating upon the fancy,
carries back with it, at its retiring from thence, some little particle or
atome of the brain, or Septum Lucidum, against which it beats, sticking upon
it: in like manner as, upon another occasion, we instanced in a Ball rebounding
from a green Mud-wall, to which some of the matter of the wall must needs
adhere. Now, this object, together with the addition it gets by its stroke upon
the fancy, rebounding thence, and having no more to do there at present,
betakes it self to rest quietly in some Cell it is disposed into, in the brain;
as we have delivered at large in our former Treatise, where we discoursed of
Memory: but whenever it is called for again by the fancy, or upon any other
occasion returns thither it comes as it were capped with this additional piece
it acquired formerly in the fancy; and so makes a representation of its own
having been formerly there.

Yet, be these actions performed how they will, it cannot be denied, but both
of them are such as are not fit, nor would be any ways useful to creatures,
that have not the power of ordering their own thoughts and fancies; but are
governed throughout merely by an uniform course of nature. Which ordering of
thoughts, being an operation feasible only by rational creatures and none
others; these two actions (which would be in vain, where such ordering is not
used) seem to be specially ordained by nature, for the service of Reason, and
of the Understanding: although peradventure a precise proper working of the
understanding, do not clearly shine in it. Much less can we by experience find,
among all the actions we have hither to spoken of, that our Reason or
Understanding works singly and alone by it self, without the assistance and
consortship of the fancy: and as little can I tell how to go about to seek any
experience of it.

But, what Reason may do in this particular, we shall hereafter 7. How Reason
is sometimes overcome by Sense and Passion.
enquire; and end this Chapter with collecting out of what is said, how it
fares with us, when we do any thing against Reason, or against our own
knowledge. If this happen by surprise, it is plain that the watch of Reason was
not so strong as it should have been, to prevent the admittance or continuance
of those thoughts which work that transgression. Again, if it be occasioned by
Passion, it is evident that, in this case, the multitude and violence of those
spirits which Passion sends boiling up to the fancy is so great, as the other
spirits, which are in the jurisdiction and government of Reason, are not able
for the present to ballence them, and stay their impetuosity, whiles she makes
truth appear. Sometimes we may observe, that Reason has warning enough to
mustet together all her forces; to encounter, as it were in battle, the
assault of some concupiscence, that sends his unruly bands to take possession
of the fancy, and constrain it to serve their desires, and by it to bring
Reason to their bent. Now, if in this pitched field she lose the bridle, and be
carried away against her own resolutions, and forced like a captive to obey the
others laws; it is clear, that her strength was not so great as the contrary
factions.

The cause of which is evident, for, we know she can do nothing, but by the
assistance of the spirits which inhabit the brain: now then it follows that, if
she have not the command of those spirits which flock thither, she must of
necessity be carried along by the stream of the greater and stronger multitude
(which, in our case is the throng of those that are sent up into the brain by
the desired object) and they come thither so thick and so forcibly, that they
displace the others which fought under Reasons Standard. Which if they do
totally, and, excluding Reasons party, entirely possess the fancy with their
troops (as in madness and extremity of sudden passion it happens), then must
Reason wholly follow their sway, without any struggling at all against it: for,
whatever beats on the fancy occasions her to work; and therefore, when nothing
beats there but the messengers of some sensual object, she can make no
resistance to what they impose. But, if it happen that these tumultuary ones be
not the only spirits which beat there, but Reason has likewise some under her
jurisdiction, which keep possession for her, though they be too weak to turn
the others out of doors; then it is true, she can still direct fairly how in
that case a man should govern himself, but, when he comes to execute, he finds
his sinews already possessed, and swelled with the contrary spirits: and they
keeping out the smaller and weaker number, which reason has ranked in order and
would furnish those parts with, he is drawn, even against his judgment and
reason, to obey their appetites and move himself in prosecution of what they
propose; experimenting in himself what the Poet expresses in Medea, when she
complained and bemoaned her self in these words, Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor. And in this case, a man foresees his misery all the way he
rouls toward it, and leaps into the precipice with his eyes open. Which shows
that the Army of thoughts on Reason's side should be increased in number, to
have her strong enough to wage battle with the rebellious adversary: or else,
that her adversary should be so much weakened, that she, though not grown
stronger in her self, yet might, through the others enfeebling beable to make
her party good; (and hence is the use of corporeal Mortifications, to subject
our Passions to the command of Reason). Even as when we see that, when we are
in health, our arms, and legs, and all our limbs obey our will, reaching what
we command them, and carrying us whither we desire; because the spirits, which
are sent into them from our brain, are strong enough to raise and move them, as
they are directed: but, if our sinews be so steeped in some cold and watery
humor, that the spirits coming down find not means to swell and harden them;
well we may wish and strive, but all in vain, for we shall not be able to make
them perform their due functions. In like manner, if Reason send her emissaries
into the arm, or leg, or other member, and no other spirits there strive
against them; then that limb is moved and governed absolutely according to her
directions: but if, at the same time, a greater multitude of others hinder
Reasons servants from coming thither, or flocking into other sinews, carry that
limb a contrary way; in vain, Reason strives to move them to her byas, for
those obeying parts must observe the rules which the violent conqueror
prescribes.

CHAP. V. Containing proofs out of our Single Apprehensions, that our Soul is
Incorporeal.
AS in our First Treatise we dissected Nature, and showed how, 1. The
connection of the subsequent Chapters with the precedent.
out of the notion and first division of Quantity, arises that vast
multiplicity of things, which, filling this world, falls under the
consideration of our senses: so, in the beginning of this Second Treatise, we
have searched into those operations of a Man (attributed to his Soul), by which
he is conceived to excel all other living creatures; and there discovered, that
the admirable and unlimited variety of works, which is seen in men's writings
and actions, does all flow from the source of Single Apprehensions, and even
from one bare notion of Being (which is the root and principle, from whence all
others derive their origin, and into which all may be resolved; Works
proceeding from Resolutions, they from Discourses, these being composed of
Judgments, and Judgments of Single Apprehensions). This part we must now
review; and enquire what we can find in man's operation, arguing the Quality of
his Soul, whether it be corporeal or no. For, if these Single Apprehensions,
and the processes compounded of them, may be performed by the Ordering of Rare
and Dense parts (as the other works of nature are); then they will be
corporeal, and of the same kind with those which we opened in the first
Treatise: but, if we shall prove, that they cannot possibly be deduced from
Multiplicity, and Order of Quantitative parts; then we may confidently resolve
of our selves, that in the cause from which they flow there is a nature, wholly
discrepant from that which resides among bodies and corporeal things.

This we shall here labor to do; and, to that end, we will begin our work with
reflecting on what we have delivered of a Single Apprehension, in the First
Chapter of this Second Treatise: whose nature we there first explicated in
common, and thence proceeded to some particular apprehensions, and lastly,
showed the extent they comprehended. These then must be the subject of our
present speculation.

As for their nature, we may remember how we resolved three 2. The inexistence
of corporeal things in the Soul, by the power of apprehension, proves her to be
immaterial.
things: first, that, by apprehension, the very thing apprehended is by it self
in our Soul: next, that the notion of Being is the first of all notions, and
resumed in all others: and thirdly, that, what is added to the notion of Being
is but respects to other things. Now then, let us consider what kind of Engines
they must be, that may have the power to make things themselves to be in our
Soul, if they were to be there materially. How shall the place, or the time
passed, be removed and put in another place, and in another time? How shall the
quantity of the Heavens, of the whole World, nay, of Bigness exceeding all
that, by millions of proportional increases, be shut up in the little circuit
of Man's Brain? And, if we examine our selves strictly, we shall find nothing
wanting; all is there. How shall the same thing be corporeally in two, nay, in
two thousand places, at the same time? And yet, in so many is the Sun, when two
thousand men think of it at once. We must then allow, that things are there
immaterially: and consequently, that what receives them is immaterial; since
every thing is received according to the measure and nature of what receives it.

But, I easily conceive, that the strangeness and incredibility of our position
may counterballance the force of it: for, who can persuade himself, that the
very thing he apprehends is in his mind? I acknowledge that, if its being there
were to be understood corporeally, it were impossible: but on the other side,
who shall consider, that he knows the thing which he rightly apprehends, that
it works in him, and makes him work agreeable to its nature, and that all the
properties and singularities of it may be displayed by what is in him, and are
as it were unfolded in his mind; he can neither deny nor doubt, but that it is
there in an admirable and spiritual manner. If you ask me, how this comes to
pass; and, by what artifice, Bodies are thus spiritualized? I confess I shall
not be able to satisfy you; but must answer, that it is done, I know not how,
by the power of the Soul. Show me a Soul, and I will tell you, how it works:
but, as we are sure there is a Soul, (that is to say, a Principle from whence
these operations spring) though we cannot see it; so we may and do certainly
know, that this mystery is as we say, though, because we understand not the
true and complete nanature of a Soul, we can as little express the manner, how
it is done by a Soul. Yet, before we take our leave of this matter of
Apprehensions, we will, in due place, endeavor to say something toward the
clearing of this obscure point.

Our second consideration upon the nature of Apprehension was, that our primary
and main notion is of Being. This discovers 3. The notion of Being, which is
innate in the Soul, proves the same.
some little glimpse of the nature of the Soul. For, it is manifest that she
applies this notion, as well to no-parts, as to parts. Which we proved in the
first Treatise; when we showed that we have a particular notion of Substance,
distinct from the notion of Quantity; for, Quantity and Parts being the same,
it follows that if there be a notion supposed by Quantity, (as in Substance
there is) it must of necessity abstract from parts: and consequently, we may
conclude, that the notion of Being, which is indifferently applyable either to
Quantity or Substance, of its own nature wholly abstracts either from Parts, or
no-Parts. I then infer, that, since this notion of Being is the very first and
virgin notion our Soul is imbued with or capable of, and is the root of all
other notions, and into which she resolvs every other notion, (so as, when we
have sifted and searsed the essence of any notion whatever, we can discover
nothing deeper than this, or precedent to it); and that it agrees so completely
with our Soul, as she seems to be nothing else but a capacity fitted to Being:
it cannot be denied, but that our Soul must needs have a very near affinity and
resemblance of nature with it. But it is evident, that Being has not of it self
any parts in it, nor of it self is capable of division: and therefore it is as
evident, that the Soul, which is framed (as it were) by that pattern and Idea,
and fitted for Being, as for its End, must also of it self be void of parts and
incapable of division. For, how can parts be fitted to an indivisible thing?
And, how can two such different natures ever meet proportionably?

If it be objected, that the very notion of Being, from whence we estimate the
nature of the Soul is accommodable to parts: as for example, we see that
Substance is endew'd with Quantity. We answer, that even this corroborates our
proof. For, since all the substances, which our senses are acquainted with,
have parts and cannot be without parts, and yet nevertheless in our Soul, the
notion of such substance is found without parts; it is clear, that such
substance has this merely from our Soul: and, because it has this
indivisibility from our Soul, it follows that our Soul has a power and nature
to bestow indivisibility upon what comes into her. And since it cannot be
denied, but that, if any substance were once existent without parts, it could
never after have parts; it is evident that the nature of the Soul is incapable
of parts, because it is existent without parts. And, that it is in such sort
existent is clear; for, this effect, of the Souls giving indivisibility to what
she receives into her, proceeds from her, as she is existent: Now, since this
notion of Being is of all others the first and Original notion that is in the
Soul, it must needs, above all others, savor most of the proper and genuine
nature of the Soul; in and by which it is, what it is, and has its
indivisibility.

If then it be pressed, how can Substance (in reality or in things) be
accommodated to Quantity, since of it self it is indivisible? We answer, that
such Substance, as is the subject of and has Quantity, is not indivisible;
for, such Substance cannot be subsistent without Quantity: and, when we frame a
notion of it, as indivisible, it is an effect of the force of our Soul, that is,
able to draw a notion out of a thing that has parts, without drawing the
notion of the parts. Which shows manifestly, that in her there is a power above
having of parts: and this virtue in her, argues her existence to be such. 4.
The same is proved by the notion of respects


Our last consideration upon the nature of Appehension was, how all that is
added to the notion of Being is nothing else but respects of one thing to
another; and how, by these respects, all the things of the world come to be in
our Soul. The evidence we may draw from hence of our Souls immateriality will
be not a whit less, than either of the two former. For, let us cast our looks
over all that comes into our senses, and see if, from one end to another, we
can meet with such a thing as we call a respect: it has neither figure, nor
color, nor smell, nor motion, nor taste, nor touch: it has no similitude to
be drawn from by means of our senses. To be like, to be half, or be cause, or
effect, what is it? The things (indeed) that are so have their resemblances and
pictures; but which way should a Painter go about to draw a likeness, or to
paint a half, or a cause, or an effect? If we have any understanding, we cannot
choose but understand, that these notions are extremely different, from whatever
comes in to us by the mediation of our senses: and then if we reflect, how the
whole negotiation of our understanding is in and by respects; must it not
follow necessarily, that our Soul is of an extreme different nature from our
Senses and Imagination? Nay, If we look well into this argument, we shall see,
that, whereas Aristotle pretends, that Nihil est in intellectu, qu^d non prius
fuit in sensu, this Maxim is so far from true, (in rigor of the words), that
the quite contrary follows undeniably out of it; to wit, that Nihil est in
intellectu, qu^d fuit prius in sensu. Which I do not say to contradict
Aristotle) for his words are true in the meaning he spoke them); but to show,
how things are so much changed by coming into the understanding and into the
Soul, that, although, on the one side, they be the very same things, yet, on
the other side, there remains no likeness at all between them in themselves and
as they are in the understanding: which is a most evident proof, (when the
weight of it is duly considered) that the nature of our Soul is mainly
different from the nature of all corporeal things that come into our sense.

By this which we now come from declaring, the admiration, how corporeal things
can be in the Soul, and how they are spiritualized 5. That corporeal things are
spiritualized in the understanding, by means of the Souls working in and by
respects.
by being there, will in part be taken away. For reflecting that all the
notions of the Soul are nothing but the general notion of a Substance or thing
joined with some particular respect; if we consider, that the respects may be
so ordered, that one respect may be included in another, we shall see, that
there may be some one respect, which may include all those respects that
explicate the nature of some one thing: and in this case, the general notion of
a thing, coupled with this respect, will contain all whatever is in the thing;
as for example, the notion 6. That the abstracting of notions from all
particular and individual accidents: proves the immateriality of the Soul.
of a Knife: that it is a thing to cut with, includes (as we have formerly
declared) all that belongs to a Knife. And thus you see how the mystical
phrase, of corporeal things being spiritualized in the Soul, signifies no more,
but that the similitudes, which areoftthem in the Soul are Respects.

Thus having collected, out of the nature of Apprehension in common, as much as
we conceive needful in this place to prove our assertion; our next work must
be, to try if we can do the like, by reflecting on particular apprehensions. We
considered them of two sorts; calling one kind universal ones, and the other
collective ones. In the universal ones, we took notice of two conditions; the
abstraction, and the universality of them. Now truly, if we had no other
evidence, but what will rise from the first of these, that alone would convince
and carry the conclusion. For, though among corporeal things, the same may be
now in one place, now in another, or sometimes have one figure, sometimes
another, and still be the same thing (as for example, wax or water); yet, it is
impossible to imagine any bodily thing whatever to be at any time without all
kind of figure, or without any place at all, or indifferent to this or to that:
and nevertheless, all things whatever, when they are universally apprehended by
the Soul, have this condition in her; by reason of their abstraction there,
which in themselves is impossible to them. When we say, water, fire, gold,
silver, bread, etc. do we mean or express any determinate figure? If we do,
none but that precise figure will serve or content us: but it is evident, that,
of a hundred different ones, any and every one does alike entirely satisfy us.
When we call for Money, if we reflect upon our fansy, peradventure we shall find
there a purse of Crowns: nevertheless, if our messenger brings us a purse of
Pistols, we shall not except against it, as not being what we intended in our
mind, because it is not that which was painted in our fansy. It Is therefore
evident, that our meaning and our fansy were different; for otherwise, nothing
would have satisfied us, but that which was in our fansy. Likewise, in the very
word (which is the picture of our notion) we see an indifferency: for, no
Dictionary will tell us, that this word Money does not signify, as well Pistols
as Crowns; and accordingly we see, that, if our meaning had been precisely of
Crowns, we should have blamed our selves for not having named Crowns, and not
him that brought us Pistols, when we spoke to him by the name of Money. 'T^ most
clear therefore, that our understanding or meaning is (...) fixed or determined
to any one particular, but equally (...) to all: and consequently, that it
cannot be like any thing which 7 The (...) of (...) the same.
enters by the Senses; and therefore not corporeal.

The second condition of Universal Apprehensions is their universality: which
adds to their abstraction one admirable parcularity; and it is, that they
abstract in such sort, as to express at the same time even the very thing they
abstract from. How is it possible that the same thing can be, and not be, in
the same notion? Yet, let a man consider what he means when he says, every man
has two eyes; and he shall see that he expresses nothing, whereby any one man
is distinguished from another, and yet the force of this word Every expresses
that every man is distinguished from another: so that in truth, he expresses
particularity it self in common. Now, let our smartest and ingeniousest
adversary show or imagine, if he can, how this may be done in a picture, or in
a statue, or in any resemblance of a body or bodily thing: but if he cannot,
let him acknowledge an eminent and singular propriety in the Soul, that is able
to do it.

Let us reflect, that particularity in a body is a collection of diverse
qualities and circumstances; as that it is white, of such a figure, in such a
place, in such a time, and an infinitude of such like conditions conglobated
together: then if our Soul be a Body, the expression of the particularity of a
Body in the Soul must be a participation in her of such a conglobation, or of
such things conglobated. Now let us imagine, if we can, how such a
participation should be in common; and should abstract from all color, all
place, and all those things of which the conglobation consists: and yet we see,
that in the Soul this is done; and he who says, Every man, does not express
any color, place, or time, and nevertheless by saying so, he expresses that in
every man there is a conglobation of color, place, and time. For, it could not
be Every one, unless there were such conglobations to make Every one, one: and,
if any conglobation were expressed in this term Every one, it would not be
Every one, but only one alone. Now, if any coordination of parts can unfold and
lay open this riddle, I will renounce all Philosophy and Understanding.

Collective Apprehensions will afford us no meaner testimony than the other
two, for the spirituality of our Soul. For, though ^
it may seem to us, before we reflect thoroughly on the matter, that we see, or
otherwise discern by our sense, the Numbers of things; as that the men in the
next room are Three, that the Chairs there are Ten, and the like of other
things: yet, after due consideration, we shall find, that our eye or sense
tells us but singly of each one, that it is One; and so runs over every one of
them, keeping them still each by themselves, under their own several unities:
but then the Understanding comes, and joins under one notion what the Sense
kept asunder, in so many several ones as there are things. The notion of three
or ten is not in the things, but in our mind; for why three rather, than five,
or ten rather, than twelve, if the matter of which we speak were not
determined? and such determination of the matter is an effect of the
Understanding. If I had spoken of things, as I did of men or chairs, there had
been more, than three or ten: it is then evident, that what determined my
speech made the number be three or ten.

Again, we see that the notion of ten is but one notion; or as the name of ten
is but one sign, so it argues that there is but one notion, by which it is the
sign of ten things. Besides, we see that Arithmeticians find out the
proprieties and particular nature of any determinate number: and therefore we
may conclude, that every number has a definition and peculiar nature of its
own, as it is a Number. If then this definition, or nature, or notion of ten be
a corporeal one, it is a corporeal similitude of the object. But, it is like to
any one of the things, or to all the ten? If to any one, then that one will be
ten; if it be like to the whole made of ten, then that whole being but one, ten
will be just one, and not ten things.

Besides, to be ten expressly implys to be not one: how then can that be a
material thing, which, by being one, represents many; seeing that, in material
things, one, and many are opposite, and exclude one another from the same
subject? And yet, this notion could not represent many together, but by being
one.

Again, if it be a material notion or similitude, it is either in an
indivisible of the brain, or in a divisible part of it: I mean, that the whole
essence of the notion be in every part never so little of the brain, or that
one part of the essence be in one part of the brain, and another in another
part of it. If you say, that the whole essence is in every part of the brain,
though never so little; you make it impossible to be a body: for you put the
likeness of ten determinate bodies, in an indivisible manner; seeing that what
by division grows not less has the nature of an indivisible. But if you say,
that diverse parts of the (...) diverse parts of the brain; then you make it
impossible the notion of ten should be indivisible, since it self is composed
of several parts.

In a word, ten things cannot be represented materially, but by ten other
things: and there it is most evident, that the Soul, which represents ten by
one thing or notion, does not represent the ten materialy: and consequently,
that her self is immaterial.

What we have now said, will be confirmed by considering the terms, All and
whole: for it is clear, that these terms also are of the nature of numbers; but
withal express particularly that no part is wanting. If then the notion of All
or whole be said to be material or quantitative, it must be divisible: but, if
you divide it, no part remains, All or whole: it is not therefore divisible; nor
consequently material. And, as this argument is manifestly applyable to
numbers; so, if we look into the arguments concerning numbers, you will find
all them likewise apply able to these terms, All and whole.

Out of what has been hitherto discovered, we may gather this note, that it is
the nature of the Soul, to draw from divisibility 9. The operations of the
Soul, drawing always from multitude to unity, prove the same.
to indivisibility, from multitude to unity, from indeterminateness and
confusion to a clarity and determination: as appears evidently in this last
example of Collections; in which, whether we take numbers or other collective
terms we see that throughout their natures consist in such a perfect
indivisibility, as no part can be separated without destroying the essence of
the notion. Nay, things which in themselves are many and consist in parts, in
the mind get an impartible nature: for ten is no longer ten, if it be divided;
nor all is all, if any thing be taken away. In the same manner, though
Philosophy teach us, there be neither Points in Bigness, nor Instants in Motion
or Time, yet Nature makes us express all Bigness by Points, and all Time by
Instants: the Soul ever fixing it self upon indivisibility.

And this is the reason, why we attribute the nature of Substance to all our
notions. If we see a thing white, or black, or do, or suffer, or be in a place,
or in time, presently, in our apprehensi^ (...) these modifications of the
thing, like substance (...) we call them by Substantive names, Whiteness,
Action, Ubication, Duration, etc. Now, the reason of this is, because a
Substance (that is, a thing subsisting of and determined within it self) is a
fit and steady ground for the Soul to fix it self on: whereas these other
Appendixes of Substance would not afford her easy footing to build her
structures on, if ^he considered them as truly they are in themselves; and
therefore, in her notion, she gives them the qualities of Substance. But withal
it happens many times, that, by her doing thus, if she be not very wary, she is
deceived and falls into gross errors. 10. The difference betwixt the notion of
a thing in our Understanding. and the imptession that corresponds to the same
thing in our Fancy, proves the same.


One thing more we must remember to take notice of: and it is, that, if we will
compare the notions in our Understanding, with the signs, which beating in our
Fancy, beget those notions; we shall find, that these are but barely signs,
and do not in their own nature express either the notions they raise, or the
things they are signs of. This is evident in the images of the sounds we call
Words: for it is clear, they have no likeness either with the things they
signify, or with the thoughts they beget in us. And we shall find it no less
true of other images; for example, the exterior impressions of sensible
qualities, which seem by themselves to be in the understanding: for, if we
consider the matter well, we shall perceive that we understand nothing more by
them, than we do by mere Words; and that, to work or discourse out of them, we
must seek into the objects and their definitions, whereof we learn nothing by
those first impressions. For, it seems that (for example) hot, or red, or
sweet, to a man that first sees, or feels, or tastes them, signifies nothing
else, but a thing which makes such an apprehension in his Soul, or such a
phantasm in his interior sense: and nevertheless, as yet the man perhaps knows
not that he has a soul or an interior sense, nor reflects so far as to
consider, that this motion passes by his exterior sense; but his apprehension
is immediately carried to the thing without him, and he imagins that the
impression he feels is the thing he feels. And so he that should feel himself
heated by a burning glass, and were not acquainted with the virtue of such a
glass, would think the glass were hot: yet certainly, his first apprehension is
of the motion made in his fancy, (though he imagins it elsewhere), which
impression he conceivs to be the nature of the thing that makes it. And thus we
see, that the conversion of the Soul is immediately to a thing without the man:
which also is the effect of her being fixed to Existence; for by reason of that
she still apprehends every impression, as a thing.

But now, whether her apprehension includes the very impression, which is in
the sense or in the fancy, so that by its own likeness it be in the Soul; or
whether the impression in the fancy makes a change in the Soul, which we
cannot discern in it self, but conceive it to be the impression which is in the
fancy, because that impression is at the first continually present at the said
mutation: is more obscure and hard to discover. But when we reflect that, after
some time, words succeed in lie u of this impression, and perform the same
effect as the original impression; in what language soever they be uttered, so
they be understood: we may conclude out of this evident sign, that the
impression is in the understanding, not in its own likeness, but in another
shape, which we do not discover; and which is excitated, as well by the name,
as by the impression, in a man that is used to the names.

Again, in a man that learns things by himself, these impressions serve for
words, and not for things: for, such a man never looks into his fancy to
discourse on any thing, but only upon the mutation he conceivs is made in the
extern sense; out of which he gathers by little and little the nature of the
thing, whose notion was made at first in him by this impression. Whence is
manifest, that our knowledge is a different thing from the Phantasmes which beat
at the Souls door, as the thing signified is from the sound of the word, or as
the Wine in the Cellar is from the Bush: and therefore, it is impossible that the
Soul (in which that knowledge resides, and which indeed is that knowledge) should
be a corporeal thing; since, of all bodily things, the motions that are made by
the sensible qualities arrive nearest to a spiritual nature.

It remains now, that we should argue for the immateriality of the Soul, out of
the extent of our apprehension, which seems 11. The apprehension of negations
and privations prove the same
to be so excessive, as not to be comprehensible by the limitations of bodies;
and therefore cannot belong to a body: but, because all that needs to be said in
this particular follows plainly out of grounds already urged, and that this
point contains not any notable particularity deserving mention here; we will
not enlarge our selves any further upon it, but pass on to the next line of
operations proper to our mind.

Only we may not omit taking notice of the expressions which our mind makes of
Nothing, or as Logicians term it, of Negations and Privations: which argue an
admirable power in the Soul, and of a quite different strain from all corporeal
things; and evidently convince the immateriality of it. For, it cannot be
doubted, but that the Soul knows what she means, when she discourses of
Nothing. Now, if all her knowledge were nothing else but corporeal phantasms, or
pictures made by corporeal things; how should she come to have a notion of
Nothing? for, since it is most clear, that something cannot be like Nothing; and
that there cannot be a participation of what is not: how can we conceive that
there should be a similitude made of Nothing?

The way therefore that the Soul takes in this operation is, that, comparing two
things together, and finding that the one of them is not the other, she
reflects upon her own action; and dividing in it the thing said, from the
saying, she takes the thing said for a Quality, or Property, or Predicate (as
Logicians call it) of that thing which she denies to be the other thing: and
then she gives it a positive name; after she has first made a positive notion,
to which the name may agree. As for example, when the Soul considers a man that
has not the power to see; as soon as she has to her self pronounced, that he
has not such a power, she takes the not power to see for a quality of that
man, and then gives the name of blindness to that not power of seeing: which,
though of it self it be nothing, yet by being that which satisfies her act,
when she says that he has not the power of seeing, it seems to be ranked
among those things to which names are due; for it has a notion, and the having
a notion is the claim, or merit, or dignity, in virtue whereof things are
preferred to names.

Now then, let us enquire, how the power of Rarity and Density, or the
Multiplication and Order of Parts, can be raised and refined to the state of
being like nothing, or the similitude of a negation; or what Operation of
Rarity or Density can forge out this notion of blindness, which we have
explicated: and when we find it beyond their reach to compass, we must
acknowledge that the Soul is another kind of engine, than all those which are in
the storehouse of Bodies.

CHAP. VI. Containing proofs out of our Soul's operations in knowing or deeming
any thing, that she is of a spiritual nature.
OUr next consideration shall be, to see what testimony our manner of Judging
yields us of the nature of the Soul: 1. The manner of judging or deeming, by
apprehending two things to be identified, proves the Soul to be immaterial.
concerning which, three things offer themselves, worthy the reflecting on;
which are, our Manner of Thinking, the Opposition which frequently occurrs in
our Thoughts, and the Nature of Truth and of Falsehood. As for the first, we may
remember how we have showed, that all judgment or deeming is but an
apprehension of identification, or something immediately following out of it;
and that a settled judgment or assent of the mind, is, as it were, a limb, or
branch, or graft in our Soul: so that, we find our perceiving of identification
between two things, or our seeing that the one is the other, is that by which
our Soul increases. Now, because, when two things are identified, the one
reaches not further than the other; it is clear that this increase of the Soul
is not made by parts, which, being added one to another, cause it to be
greater: and therefore, since this course is the only means of increase in
bodies and quantity, it is clear that the nature of the Soul is quite different
from the nature of all corporeal or Quantitative things.

Again, it is against the nature of identification, to be of parts; and
therefore, they who take quantity to be one thing, and not many things tied
together, acknowledge that truly there are no parts in it: And this is so
rigorously true, that, although we speak of two things that in reality are
identify'd one with another; yet, if our words be such, as imply that our
understanding considers them as distinct parts, and by abstraction gives them
the nature of parts, then they are no longer identify'd, but, in good Logic,
we ought in this case to deny the one of the other. As for example: though the
hand and the foot be the same thing, (as we have declared in our first
Treatise); yet because, in the name Hand, there is a secret exclusion of any
thing that is not in the definition of a hand, it follows that in our speech we
must say, that a hand is not a foot. Likewise though it be confessed, that the
Thing which is rationality is also risibility; nevertheless, it is a solecism
in Logic, to say, that rationality is risibility: because it is the nature of
these abstracted names, to consine their significations to one definition, and
the definitions of these two terms are diverse. Out of this consideration it
follows clearly, that, seeing the nature of parts is contrary to the nature of
identity; and that the Soul in her judgments works altogether by identity: it is
impossible that her operations should consist of parts, or in any sort resemble
any proceeding of Quantitative things.

The like will be convinced out of the Oppositions we find in 2. The same is
proved by the manner of apprehending Opposition in a negative judgment.
our thoughts. In it we may consider two things: first the generation of it:
next, the incompossibility of Opposites in the Soul. To begin with the first.
We see that, in speaking, opposition is produced by the addition of this word
Not: as when we say, not a man, not a penny, not a word: and therefore it
follows, that in our Soul there is a notion of it, correspondent to the word
that expresses it. Now, seeing that a notion is a thing, and that it is the
likeness of its object, or rather the same with the object; let us cast about,
how we should, of parts and of quantity, make a nothing, or an identification
to Not: and when we find, that it is ridiculous and absurd to go about it, let
us conclude, that the manner of working, which our Soul uses, is far different
from that which is used in bodies, and among material things.

And if you object, that, not only a body, but even any other substance
whatever (suppose it as spiritual as you will) cannot be either like or
identified to nothing; and therefore this argument will as well prove that the
Soul is not a thing or substance, as that it is not a body: We answer, that it
is evident, out of what we have already said, that the Understanding is not the
Objects it understands, by way of Similitude, but by a higher means; which we
have showed to be by way of Respects. Now then, the respect which the thing
has to another thing, by not having such a respect to it, as a third thing
formerly considered has thereto, may be expressed in way of Respects, though
it cannot in way of Similitude, and so our understanding is able to express,
what neither our fancy nor any corporeal thing can arrive to the expression
of. As when first we find that one man has a respect to the wall, which we
call the power of seeing; if afterward we find that another man has a respect
to the wall, of impotence that he cannot see it: this second respect the
understanding has a power to express, as well as the first; as we have touched
above.

As for the opposition that occurrs in our thoughts, we may consider it of two
kinds. The one is of the things or objects that 3. That things in themselves
opposite to one another having no opposition in the Soul, does prove the same.
come into our thoughts or Soul; and this is not properly an opposition in the
Soul: For, though the things be opposite by their own nature in themselves, yet
they do not exercise their opposition in the Soul. Nay, though the opposition
be even in the Soul it self, if the Soul with this opposition be considered as
an object, it makes no opposition in her: for so you may consider your Soul
learned and unlearned, ignorant and knowing, good and bad, and the like; all
which are oppositions in a Soul supposed to be so qualified, but none in a Soul
that considers them. No more than fire and water, heavy things and light, white
and black, being and not being, an affirmative proposition and its negative,
and the like; all which are in themselves so contrary and opposite to one
another, that they cannot consist together in one subject: they have an
incompossibility among themselves, wherever the one of them is, by its very
entrance it drives out its opposite; and yet in the Soul they agree together
without reluctance, she knows and considers and weighs both sides of the scale
at the same time, and balances them evenly one against another. For, unless
both the opposites were in the same instant in the same comparing power, that
power could not by one act, whose beginning implys its ending, judge the
difference and opposition of them: as when we say black is contrary to white,
or darkness is the want of light, we pronounce one common Not being of both
extremes.

We may then boldly conclude, that, since no body whatever can entertain, at
the same time, and in the same place, these quarrelling Antagonists; but that,
by their conflict, they presently destroy one another, and peradventure the
body too, into which they press for entrance, and the entire possession of
which each of them strives for, (those of them I mean, that are proportioned to
the reception of bodies): and that the Soul imbibes them together without any
difficulty or contract, and preservs them always friends even in the face of
one another, and lodges them together in the same bed: and that (in a word)
there opposite things enjoy an admirable and unknown manner of Being in the
Soul, which has no parallel in bodily things: we may (I say) boldly conclude,
that the Soul it self in which all these are, is of a nature, and has a manner
of Being, altogether unlike the nature of bodies, and their manner of Being.

Out of this agreeing of all Objects in the Soul and their having 4 That the
First Truths are Identified to the Soul.
no opposition there, even whiles she knows the opposition that is between them
in themselves, there follows another consideration, of no less importance: which
is that the amplitude of our Soul, in respect of knowledge, is absolutely
infinite; that is to say, she is capable of knowing, at the same time, objects
without end or measure. For the explicating whereof, we are to consider, that
the latter conclusions, which the Soul gains knowledge of, hang to the former by
identification, or by the Soul's seeing that two notions are identified,
because they are identified to athird; as is before expressed: and the first
principles which seem to be immediately joined to the Soul, have the identity
of their terms plain and evident, even in the very terms themselves. Nay, if we
insist further, we shall find that the First Truths must have an identification
to the very Soul it self. For it being evident, that Truth or Falsehood is not
in the Soul, but so far forth as she applys her self to the external object, or
to the existence of things in themselves; and that we find that the Souls
knowing with evidence that any thing is or has being, implys her knowing that
her self is (for she cannot know that a thing seems so to her, or makes such an
impression in her, without knowing that her self is; though peradventure she
may not know what her self is, but takes her self to be no other thing, than
the body of the man in which she is): it is evident that the First Truths which
enter into the Soul, to wit, that this or that seems so or so to her, (and
these truths no Scepticks ever doubted of), are identify'd with the Soul it
self; since an object seeming to be such or such, is nothing else but the Soul
is so qualified.

And in this we find, that the certainty of the first Principles, as for
example, of this Proposition, That the whole is bigger than the Part, will
depend, in a particular Soul, of her certainty of her own Being. For, though
this Proposition would have a necessity in the very connection of the terms,
notwithstanding there were not in nature any Whole or Part; yet this necessity
would not be a necessity of Existence or Being in the object, but a necessity
of connection, as it were, of two parts of the Soul: and so, if Verity and
Falsity be not perfectly in the Soul, but in the comparison to actual
existence, the Soul would not be perfectly true, or (to say more properly)
would not have the perfection of truth in her, by having or knowing this
Proposition, unless withal she were certain, that there were existent an object
of this Proposition; of which (as we have said) she cannot be certain, without
being certain of her own Being. So that, in effect, the identification of other
things among themselves, by which such things are known, comes at last to be
retrived in the existence of the Soul it self; and to be in the Soul, by the
identification of those other things to her self.

Now then, to proceed to the proof of our proposed conclusion; 5. That the Soul
has an infinite capacity, and consequently is immaterial.
it is clear, that the adding of one thing to another does, out of the force of
this addition, perfect the thing to which the addition is made, if the
advenient thing be added in such way as the former is apt to receive it: but
it is evident, that the Soul is made fit by former Propositions, to be
identify'd to later; for we see that the former ones draw on, and infer the
later: therefore it follows, that, the more is added to the Soul, the greater is
her aptitude to have more, or to be more increased; and consequently, that the
more is added to her, the more may still be added, and the more capable and
more earnest she is to have more. Wherefore it cannot be denied, but that, since
in the nature of the objects there is no impediment to hinder their being
together in the Soul, (as we have proved a little above); and that in her, by
receiving new objects, there is a continual increase of capacity to receive
more; she has an amplitude to knowledge absolutely infinite, in such a manner
as we have above expressed.

Now, to apply to our purpose what we have gathered by this discourse: it is
clear, that these two conditions, of one thing not driving ou^ another, and
infinity of accessions, openly disclaim from Quantity, and matter; (for, we see
that what has Quantity, (...) a Body, cannot admit a new thing into it, unless
some other thing first go out, to make room for the advenient one; and as for
infinitude, it breeds a Sea of contradictions, if it be but thought of in
Quantity); and therefore we may conclude, that the Soul, to whom these two
conditions belong, is not quantitative or corporeal, but immaterial and of a
spiritual nature.

The second kind of opposition that occurrs in our thoughts 6. That the
opposition of contradictory Propositions in the Soul proves her immaterial.
or Soul, is of Contradictory Propositions. It has its origin in the
opposition of Being to not-Being; and is when a thing is identify'd to the
Soul, in such sort as we have said, that a Judgment or Deeming makes the object
become, as it were, a limb or part of the Soul. And, because the conflict of
two such Propositions, if they were together in the Soul, would make her be
something contrary to the nature of Being (if any thing can be contrary to
Being) which in the Schools they call ens and non ens; the impossibility of her
admiting into her self two such Propositions together, testifies her firm
cleaving and fixedness to Being: and so confirms and brings new evidence to
that argument for the Souls spirituality, which, in the first Chapter of this
part, we drew from the nature of Being.

As for Truth and Falsehood, they spring from the same root as the last; as
being qualities consequent to the opposition of affirmative and negative
Propositions, whereof if the one be true, the other must necessarily be false:
and therefore, we need not spend time in seting down any particular
considerations of these, since what we have said of the other is applyable to
them; but it is sufficient, that we thus note them, to give the Reader occasion
to reflect on them.

Among Propositions, there are some which Logicians term of 7. How Propositions
of eternal Truth prove the immateriality of the Soul.
eternal Truth: and, out of these, there are ingenious men, who imagine that
the immortality of the Soul may be immediately deduced. Herein they rove not
quite from the mark; though withal I must needs say, they do not directly hit
it. To understand the utmost that may be inferred out of such Propositions, we
may note two conditions in them: the first is, that generally these
Propositions are universal ones; and thereby have that force to convince the
spirituality of the Soul, which we have explicated and showed to belong to
universal terms: the second is, that in these Propositions, there is a
necessity of connection between their terms; such an one, or at least very like
thereto, as we explicated in those Propositions, which bear their evidence
plain in their very terms. And, out of this we may draw another argument for
the spirituality of the Soul. For, we see that all corporeal agents and
patients are defectible and contingent, that is to say, sometimes, or (if you
will) most times, they attain their effect, but withal, sometimes (be it never
so seldom) they miss of it; and accordingly it happens sometimes that our eyes,
our ears, our touch, and the rest of our senses are deceived, though, for the
most part, they give us true information of what they converse with: But, these
Propositions of eternal verity never fail; they have in themselves an
indefectibility insuperable: And consequently, they give evidence, that the
Souls nature is of a higher degree of constancy and certainty, than what falls
within the compass of Bodies, and is of a nobler and different strain from all
corporeal things; for, this certainty is entailed upon such Propositions by the
force of Being, which is the proper object of the Soul, and they have their
Being as limbs and parts of the Soul.

As for the term of Eternal verity, it is not to be taken positively; as if
these Propositions, or their objects, have any true eternity or perseverance,
without beginning or ending: but only negatively; that is, that there can be no
time, in which they are false: and therefore, we cannot, out of their having
such a kind of Eternity belonging to them, argue a capacity of infinite time or
duration in our Soul that comprehends them.

CHAP. VII. That our Discoursing proves our Soul to be incorporeal.
HAving thus run over those proofs, for the immateriality (...) That, in
Discoursing, the Soul contains more in it at the same time than is in the
fantasy; which proves her to be immaterial.
of our Soul, which arise out of her manner of working when she judges; in the
next place we are to enquire, what others her manner of Discoursing will afford
us. We are sure, that since our Discourse is composed of Judgments, and of
single Apprehensions; it cannot choose but furnish us with all those Pregnant
Arguments, that we drew from them. But, that will not serve our turn: we look
after new Evidence: and we shall see it will give it us with full hands. It
consists in this, that, when we Discourse, we may easily perceive there is more
at one time in our Mind, than we can discover to be in our Fantasy. For, we
find, that in our Fantasy, as one Proposition comes, another is gone: and
though they that are gone seem to be ready at a call, yet they are not in
presence; as being things which consist in motion, and that require place, and
therefore the one justles the other out of the place it possessed. But if it
fared in like manner in our inward Soul, we could never attain to knowledge.
For, it is manifest, that our Soul is not assured of a Conclusion, but by her
seeing the Premises: if then the Premises be taken away, the Conclusion that
rests upon them falls to the ground; but they are taken away, if they be out of
our mend; therefore, when our understanding yields its assent to a Conclusion,
it must of necessity have the Premises still in it.

But we must not rest here; this consideration will carry us on a wondrous
deal farther. We know, that he who goes to frame a new demonstration in any
Subject, must be certain he takes nothing contrary to what he has learned in
many Books; likewise, that he who will make a Latin Verse, or reads a Poem,
knows there is nothing in all that Poem contrary to his (...)dia: do we not
then manifestly perceive a certain remainder of all these in his Soul? The like
is in all a^: in which ^e that goes about any work, according to art, shows he
has in his head all the rules of that art, though he do not distinctly
remember or call them to mind, while he works. For, if he have them not, how
does he work by them? Since then it is clear, he thinks not of them at that
time; it is as clear, that more is in the Soul at one time, than is in his
Fantasy: or than can be there by material bodies (which, we have showed, is
the way, whereby all things come into the Fantasy); though it be the nimblest
and the subtilest Agent of all corporeal things whatever.

Another consideration, whereby to evince the immateriality of the Soul,
concerns the proceeding of Syllogisms by links, 2. That the nature of Discourse
proves the Soul to be ordered to infinite knowledge; and consequently to be
immaterial.
fast'ned to one another: whence we may take notice, that every one of them is
a step to another: and consequently, it is manifest that, according to the
nature of the Soul, they must be altogether in her; since, if any one were
absent, all the rest that followed and depended upon that one, would have no
grounding or fixedness in the Soul. Now, if to this we add, that what is to be
known is absolutely and liquidly infinite, there cannot be brought or expected
a more pregnant and home-wit ness of our Souls spirituality: it following out
of these grounds that the Soul, by its nature, is, not only capable of, but
expressly ordered to an infinite knowledge of infinite objects altogether. For,
these two, finite and infinite science, are so vastly different from one
another; that, if the same subject be capable of both, it must of necessity be
ordered to infinite; as to its chiefest act and end. And thus, out of capacity
in this subject, its being ordered is well inferred, though in other matters
peradventure the consequence may not be good. And accordingly, who looks into
Geometry, Arithmetic, Logic, or even nature it self, will evidently see, that
the objects of knowledge are every way, and in every Science, multipliable
without end.

Neither ought this to be neglected, that a great part of the 3. That the most
natural objects of the Soul are immaterial; and consequently the Soul her self
is such.
Souls objects, and indeed of those that are most natural to her, is above the
capacity, and out of the reach of material things. All Metaphysics abstract
from quantity: the investigation of God, of Angels, of the Soul it self either
concludes immateriality, or at least works about it. What shall I say of
Logical notions, those which are called the second intentions; about which
there is so much business both in the Schools and in the World? It Is
sufficient, that we have already expressed, how all our notions are respective.
But, in particular, the motives of humane actions are very abstracted
considerations: as for example, Hope of things to Come, Memory of things Past,
Virtue, Vice, Honor, Shame, and the like. To these let us add, that, when we
teach or explicate any thing to ignorant persons, we must frame our own
apprehensions to their capacity, and speak such things as they may comprehend:
which capacity or extent of comprehension we cannot see or perceive by any
sense; but judge it merely by our Reason and Understanding. Wherefore, since our
operation is mainly and chiefly on and by such motives, as are not liable to
material principles and compositions; it is evident, that the springhead, from
whence such operation flows, must also be immaterial and incorporeal.

I am not ignorant, that this Argument uses to be answered, by urging, that the
Soul likewise knows Deafness, Dumbness, Blindness, and such other notions of
Nothings, and yet is not from thence inferred to be Nothing: it conceives God
and Eternity; and yet it is neither from it self, as God is, nor eternal. In
like manner (say they) it may know incorporeal things, and yet not be therefore
it self incorporeal. To this I reply, first, wishing them not to mistake me,
but to give my argument its full force and weight: for, there is a very great
difference between the knowing of a thing, in a strained, toilsome, and
confused manner; and the having a thing for its ordinary matter and subject of
negotiation: this argues connaturality between the Soul and what it is so
conversant about; but that does not. Now, what is inferred out of whole
Sciences and Arts concerns a main stock of the Souls business; and not some
extraordinary virtue or powers she has.

But, to come up to close to the answer, I say, that if we, being thoroughly
acquainted with material things, can find that it is not in the possibility of
any such to be the likeness of an immaterial thing; and from thence infer,
that our Soul, for being fraught with immaterial notions, is not material; our
conclusion is well collected and a very good one: for, the premises out, of
which we gather it, are within our kenning; and therefore, if there were any
defect in the consequence, we should easily perceive it. Whence it appears
clearly, that there is no parity between the deduction of our conclusion, and
that other which the objection urges, that our Soul, because it can know
eternal things, is also eternal: for, Eternity is a thing beyound our
comprehension; and therefore it ought not to be expected at our hands, that we
should be able to give an account where the brack is and, to say the truth, if
knowledge be trken properly, we do not know Eternity; however by supernatural
helps we may come to know it: but in that case, the helps are likely to be
proportionable to the effect. Neither are Negations properly known; seeing
there is nothing to be known of them. And thus we see that these objections,
proceed from the equivocation of the word knowledge; sometimes used properly,
othertimes applied abusively.

CHAP VIII. Containing proofs, out of our manner of proceeding to Action, that
our Soul is incorporeal.
I Doubt not but what we have already said has sufficiently convinced our
Souls, being immaterial, to whomsoever, 1. That the Souls being a power to
order things proves it to be immaterial.
is able to penetrate the force of the arguments we have brought for proof
thereof, and will take the pains to consider them duly; (which must be done, by
serious and continued reflection, and not by cursory reading, or by interrupted
attempts): yet, since we have still a whole field of proofs untouched, and, in
so important a matter, no evidence can be too clear, nor any pains be accounted
lost, that may redouble the light, although it shine already bright enough to
discern what we seek, we will make up the concert of unanimous testimonies to
this already established truth, by adding those arguments we shall collect out
of the manner ofour Soulsproceeding to action, to the others we have drawn from
our observations upon her Apprehensions, her Judgments, and her Discourses.

Looking then into this matter the first consideration we meet with, is, that
our Understanding is, in her own nature, an orderer; and that her proper work
is to rank and to put things in order. For, if we reflect on the works and arts
of men, as, a good life, a commonwealth, an army, a house, a garden, all
artefacts; what are they, but compositions of well ordered parts? And in every
kind, we see that he is the Master, and the Architect, and is accounted the
wisest, and to have the best understanding, who can best, or most, or further,
than his fellows, set things in order. If then to this we join, that Quantity
is a thing whose nature consists in a capacity of having parts and multitude;
and consequently is the subject of ordering and ranking: does it not evidently
follow, that our Soul, compared to the whole mass of bodies, and to the very
nature of corporeity or quantity, is as a proper agent to its proper matter to
work on? Which if it be, it must necessarily be of a nobler strain, and of a
different and higher nature than it; and consequently, cannot be a body, or be
composed of Quantity: for, had matter in it self what it expects and requires
from the agent, it would not need the agents help, but of it self were fit to
be an Agent, Wherefore if the nature of corporeity, or of body, in its full
latitude, be to be ordered, it follows that the thing whose nature is to be an
orderer must, as such, be not a body, but of superior nature, and exceeding a
Body: which we express by calling it a spiritual thing. 2. That the Soul's
being able to move without being moved proves her to be immaterial.


Well then, if the Soul be an orderer, two things belong necessarily to her:
one is, that she have this order within her self; the other, that she have
power to communicate it to such things, as are to be ordered. The first she
has by Science; of which enough already has been said toward proving our
intent. Next, that her nature is communicative of this order, is evident out of
her action and manner of working: But, whether of her self she be thus
communicative, or by her conjunction to the Body she informs, appears not from
thence. But, where experience falls short, Reason supplies; and shows us, that
of her own nature she is communicative of order: For since her action is an
ordering, and in this line there are but two sorts of things in the world,
namely, such as order, and such as are to be ordered; it is manifest: that the
action must, by nature and in the universal consideration of it, begin from the
orderer, (in whom order has its life and Subsistence), and not from that which
is to receive it; then, since ordering is motion, it follows evidently, that
the Soul is a mover and begInner of motion.

But, since we may conceive two sorts of movers; the one when the agent is
moved to move, the other, when of it self it begins the motion without being
moved; we are to enquire, to which of these two the Soul belongs: But, to
apprehend the question rightly, we will illustrate it by an example. Let us
suppose that some action is fit to begin at ten of the clock. Now, we may
imagine an agent to begin this action in two different manners, one, that the
clock, striking ten, breeds or stirrs somewhat in him, from whence this action
follows: the other, that the agent may, of his own nature, have such an actual
comprehension or decurrence of time within himself, as that, without receiving
any warning from abroad, but as though he moved and ordered the clock, as well
as his own instruments, he may of himself be fit and ready, just at that hour,
to begin that action; not as if the clock told him, what hour it is, but as if
he, by governing the clock, made that hour to be, as well as he causes the
action to begin at that hour. In the first of these manners, the agent is moved
to move; but in the second, he moves of himself, without being moved by any
thing else. And in this second way, our Soul, of her own nature, communicates
her self to quantitative things, and gives them motion: which follows out of
what we have already proved, that a Soul, in her own nature, is the subject of
an infinite knowledge, and therefore capable of having such a general
comprehension, as well of time and the course of all other things, as of the
particular action she is to do; and consequently stands not in need of a
Monitor without her, to direct her when to begin.

If then it be an imprevaricable law with all bodies, that none whatever can
move, unless it be moved by another: it follows, that the Soul, which moves
without being stirred or excitated by any thing elseis of a higher race, than
they; and consequently, is immaterial and void of Quantity. But, let me not be
mistaken in what I come from saying; as though my meaning were, that the Soul
exercises this way of moving her self, and of ordering her actions, while she
is in the Body: for, how can she? seeing she is never endew'd with complete
knowledge requisite for any action, never fully comprehending all the
circumstances or it. But, what I intend is, that the nature of the Soul,
considered in it self, is such, as has a capacity and may reach to this manner
of working, (whence I infer that she is not a Body but a Spirit); without
determining, whether she work thus in the body, or out of it: that enquiry
belongs not to this place; it will follow by and by.

But, for the present, having considered to what kind of working 5. That the
Soul's proceeding to action with an Universality, and indifferency proves the
same.
the nature of the Soul in abstract is capable of attaining; we will conclude
this Chapter, with reflecting on those actions of hers, which fall daily under
our remark, as being exercised in the Body. In all of them we may observe, that
she proceeds with a certain Universalitity and indifferency; beyond the
practice of all other creatures whatever. For example, if a man be spoken to,
or asked of a hundred several things that he never thought of before in all his
life; he will immediately shape pertinent replie's to all that is said, and
return fiting answers to every question: As, Whither such a man goes? How long
this staff is? What color that man's clothes are of? etc. To all which, and to
as many things more as you will, (so they be within the compass of his
knowledge) he straight answers differently, and to the purpose. Whence it is
manifest, that his answers do not proceed upon set gimals or strings, whereof
one being struck moves the rest in a set order, (which, we have showed, is the
course in all actions done by Beasts): but, out of a principle within him,
which of it self is indifferent to all things; and therefore can readily apply
it self to the answer, according as by the question it is moved. And the like
may be observed in his actions; which he varyes, according to the occasions
presented.

I remember how Sir Phillip Sidney (the Phoenix of the age he lived in, and the
glory of our Nation; and the pattern to posterity of a complete, a Gallant and a
perfect Gentleman) aptly calls our hands, the Instruments of Instruments; from
Aristotle who terms them Organa organorum, or universal instruments, fitly
molded to be employed in any service. Nature has, to all, other Creatures,
appropriated their instruments to determinate actions; but to Man she has (in
these) given such, as might be applied to any kind of work whatever. And
accordingly we see, that the same kind of Bird still builds her nest and breeds
her young, in the same way, without any the least variation at all: but men
build their Houses as they please, sometimes upon hills, sometimes in vales,
sometimes under the earth, and sometimes upon the tops of trees; and the manners
of breeding or instructing their Children are as diverse, as the Customs of
Nations and Towns. And, in all other actions, our Masters note it for a
property peculiar to Man, that he uses to arrive to the same end by diverse
means; as, to transport our selves to some place we would go to, either by
water, or by horse; or by coach, or by litter, as we please: whereas we see no
such variety in like actions of other living creatures.

All which being so, we may conclude, that the Souls proceeding, either to
answers or to action, argues clearly that she has within her self such an
indifferency, as is joined with a means to determine this indifferency: the
contrary whereof we see in all corporeal Engines; for, they have every step, in
the whole course of their ways, chaulk'd out to them by their very framing, (as
has been amply declared in the first Treatise) and have the determination of
the work, from end to end, set down and given them by their artificer and
maker. And therefore it is most evident, that the Soul cannot he a thing composed
or framed of material and quantitative parts; seeing she has not her ways set
down to her, but frames them of her self, according to the accidents that
occurr.

The same nature of the Soul discovers it self in the quiet 4. That the quiet
proceeding of reason proves the same.
proceeding of Reason, when it works with greatest strength and vigor; as well
knowing, that its efficaciousness consists, not in the multitude of parts,
which Passion breeds, but in the well ordering of those it already has under
its command: Whereas the strength of Quantity, and the increase of its strength,
consists in the multitude of its parts; as will evidently appear to whom shall
consider this point deeply.

Thus we have, in a summary manner, gone through all the 5. A Conclusion of
what has been said hitherto in this Second Treatise.
Operations of the Soul; which, in the beginning of this latter Treatise, we
heaped together, as Materials wherewith to raise an immaterial and spiritual
building. Neither, I hope, will our Reader be offended with us, for being more
succinct and concise in all our discourse concerning our Soul; than where we
delivered the doctrine of Bodies: for, the difficultness of this subject, and
the nicety required to the expressing our conceptions concerning it, wherein (as
the proverb is) a hair is to be cloven, would not allow us that liberty of
ranging about, as when we treated of Bodies. What occurrs among them may be
illustrated by examples within our own orb, and of their own pitch: but, to
display the operations of a Soul, we can find no instances able to reach them;
they would rather embroil and darken them. For, the exact propriety of words
must be strictly and rigorously observed in them: and the Reader shall
penetrate more into the nature and depth of them, by serious meditation and
reflection upon the hints we have here given, (efficacious enough, I hope, to
excite those thoughts he should have for this purpose, and to steer them the
right way); than by much and voluminous reading, or hearing long and polished
discourses, on this subject.

For my part, if what I have here said should to any man appear not sufficient,
to convince that our Soul is of a spiritual and far different nature, from all
such things as, in our First Treatise, we have discoursed on, and taken for the
heads and most general kinds of Bodies, (to which all other particular ones and
their motions may be reduced): I shall become a suitor to him, to take This
Subject into his handling, where it begins to be unwieldy for mine; and to
declare to us, upon the principles we have settled in the first Treatise, and
upon considering the nature of a Body, (which is the first of all our notions),
how these particulars, we have reflected upon in man's actions, can be drawn out
of them. For, I can find no possible means to link them together: a vast and
impenetrable Ocean lies between the discoveries we have made on each side of
its shores, which forbids all commerce between them; at least, on the dark
Bodies side, which has not wings to soar into the region of Intellectual
light. By those principles, we have traced out the course and progress of all
operations belonging to Sense; and how Beasts do or may perform all their
actions, even to their most refined and subtilest operations: but, beyond them,
we have not been able to carry these grounds, nor they us. Let him then take
the pains to show us, by what Figures, by what First Qualities, by what Mixtion
of Rare and Dense parts, an Universal Apprehension, an evident Judgment, a
legitimate Consequence is made: and the like of a man's determination of himself
to answer pertinently any question; of his choosing this way before that, etc.
Which if he can do (as I am sure he cannot) I shall allow it to be reason, and
not obstinacy that works in his mind, and carrys him against our Doctrine. But
if he cannot, and that there is no appearance nor possibility (as indeed there
is not) that these actions can be effected by the ordering of material parts;
and yet he will be still unsatisfied, without being able to tell why, (for he
will be unwilling to acknowledge, that these abstracted Speculations do not sink
into him, and that nothing can convince him but what his Senses may be judges
of, and he may handle and turn on every side like a brick or tile) and will be
still importune with cavillous scruples and wild doubts, that, in truth and at
the bottom, signify nothing: we will leave him to meditate at his leisure
upon what we have said; while we proceed on to what follows out of this great
principle, That Our Soul is Incorporeal and Spiritual.

CHAP. IX. That our Soul is a Substance, and Immortal.
HAving concluded that our Soul is immaterial and indivisible: 1. That man's
Soul is a Substance.
(to proceed one step further) it cannot be denied, but that it is either a
Substance or an Accident. If the later, it must be of the nature of the
substance whose accident it is; for so we see all accidents are: but, in man,
when his Soul is excluded, there is no spiritual substance at all, whereof we
have any notice; and therefore, if it be an accident, it must be a corporeal
one, or some accident of a body, (as, some figure, temperature, harmony, or the
like) and consequently, divisible: but, this is contrary to what is proved in
the former Chapters: and therefore it cannot be a corporeal accident. Neither
can it be a spiritual accident; for, to what spiritual substance should it
belong, when as nothing in man can be suspected to be spiritual, but it self.
Seeing then that it can be no accident, a substance it must be; and must have
its Existence or Being in it self.

Here we have passed the Rubicon of experimental knowledge; 2. That man is
compounded of some other Substance besides his Body.
we are now out of the bounds that experience has any jurisdiction over: and
from henceforth, we must in all our searches and conclusions rely only upon the
single evidence of Reason. And even this last conclusion we have been fain to
deduce, out of the force of abstracted reasoning upon what we had gathered
before; not by immediate reflection upon some action we observe proceeding from
a man: yet, withal, nature flashes out, by a direct beam, some little
glimmering of the verity of it, to the eye of Reason within us. For as, when we
see a Clock move, or a Mill, or any thing that goes by many wheels; if we mark
that there are two contrary motions in two diverse parts of it, we cannot think
that those contrary motions belong to one and the same continued body: but
shall presently conclude, there must be in that Engine two several bodies
compacted together. So, in Man, though his Body be the first mover that appears
to us, yet seeing that, in his actions, some effects show themselves, which it is
impossible should proceed from a Body; it is evident, that in him there is some
other thing besides that one which we see. And consequently, we may conclude,
that he is composed of a Body, and somewhat else that is not-a-Body: which
somewhat else, being the spring from whence those actions flow that are of a
different strain from those derived from the body, must necessarily be a
Spiritual Substance.

But, while we are examining, how far our present considerations and short
discourses may carry us, as it were, experimentally, 3. That the Soul subsists
of it self independently of the Body.
to confirm this truth; we must not omit what Avicenna (in his Book De Anima
and Almahad) and Monsier des Carts (in his Method) press upon the same
occasion. Thus they say, or to like purpose. If I cast with my self, who I am
that walk, or speak, or think, or order any thing: my reason will answer me,
that, although my legs or tongue were gone, and that I could no longer walk or
speak, yet were not I gone; and I should know and see with my understanding,
that I were still the very same thing, the same Ego as before. The same, as of
my tongue or legs, would reason tell me of my eyes, my ears, my smelling,
tasting and feeling, either all of them together, or every one of them single;
that, were they all gone, still should I remain. As when, in a dream, (where I
use none of all these) I both am and know my self to be. Reason will tell me
also, that although I were not nourished, so I were not wasted, (which for the
dr^ft of the argument may be supposed) yet still I should continue in Being.
Whence it would appear, that my heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, stomach, mouth,
and what other parts of me soever, that serve for the nourishment of my body,
might be severed from me; and yet I remain what I am. Nay, if all the beautiful
and airy fantasms, which fly about so nimbly in our brain, be nothing else but
signs to and in our Soul, of what is without us; it is evident, that, though
peradventure she would not, without their service, exercise that which by error
we mis-name Thinking, yet, the very same Soul and Thinker might be without them
all: and consequently, without brain also; seeing that our brain is but the
playhouse and scene, where all these faery masks are acted. So that, in
conclusion, Reason assures us, that, when all Body is abstracted in us, there
still remains a Substance, a Thinker, an Ego, or I; that in it self is no whit
diminished, by being (as I may say) stripped out of the case it was enclosed in.

And now, I hope, the intelligent Reader will conceive I 4. Two other Arguments
to prove the same: on sitive, the there negt
have performed my promise, and showed the Soul of man to be an Immortal
Substance. For, since it is a Substance, it has a Being; and since it is an
immaterial Substance, it has a Being of its own force, without needing a
consort body, to help it sustain its Existence: for, to be a substance, is to
be the subject of Existence; and consequently, to be an immaterial substance is
to be a subject capable of Existence, without the help of matter or Quantity.
It cannot therefore be required of me, to use any further industry, to prove
such a Soul, immortal; but who will contradict her being so is obliged to show
that she is mortal: for it follows in reason, that she will keep her Being,
unless by some force she be bereaved of it. It being a rule, that whoever puts
a thing to be is not bound, for the continuation of that things Being, to prove
that it is not changed; but on the other side, he, tbat averrs it changed, is
bound to bring in his evidence of a sufficient cause to change it: for, to have
a thing remain is natures own dictamen, and follows out of the causes which
gave it Being; but to make an alteration supposes a change in the causes, and
therefore the obligation of proof lies on that side.

Nevertheless to give satisfaction to those, who are earnest to 5. The same is
proved, because the Soul cannot be obnoxious to the cause of immortality.
see every article positively proved; we will make that part to our Province.
Let us then remember, that Immortality signifies a negation, or not-having of
Mortality: and that a positive term is required to express a change by; since
nature teaches us, that whatever is will remain with the Being it has, unless
it be forced out of it. If then, we show, that Man's Soul has not those grounds
in her, which make all things we see to be mortal; we must be allowed to have
acquitted our selves of the charg, of proving her Immortal. For this end, let us
look round about us, and inquire of all the things we meet with, by what means
they are changed, and come to a period and are no more, The pure Elements will
tell you, that they have their change by rarefaction and condensation, and no
otherwise: Mixed bodies by alteration of their mixture: Small bodies, by the
activity of the Elements working upon them; and by the means of rarefaction and
condensation entering into their very constitution, and breeding another
temperament, by separation of some of their parts, and in their stead mingling
others. Plants, and trees and other living creatures will tell you, that their
nourishment being insinuated through their whole bodies by subtle pores and
blind passages; if they either be stopped by any accident, or else filled with
bad nourishment, the mixture of the whole fails of it self, and they come to
die. Those things which are violently destroyed, we see are made away, for the
most part, by division: so fire by division destroys all that comes in its
way; so living creatures are destroyed, by parting their blood from their
flesh, or one member from another, or by the evaporation or extinction of their
natural heat. In fine, we are sure that all things, which within our knowledge
lose their Being, do so by reason of their Quantity; which by division, or by
rarefaction and compression, gains some new temperature, that does not consist
with their former temper. After these premises, I need say no more: the
conclusion displays it self readily and plainly, without any further trouble.
For, if our labor has been hitherto, to show that our Soul is indivisible;
and that her operations are such as admit not quantitative parts in her; it is
clear, she cannot be mortal by any of those ways, whereby we see things round
about us to perish.

The like argument we may frame out of Local motion. For, seeing that all the
alterative actions we are acquainted with be performed by local motion (as is
delivered, both in gross, and by retail, in our first Treatise); and that
Aristotle and all understanding Philosophers agree, there can be no Local
motion in an indivisible thing, (the reason whereof is evident, to whomsoever
reflects upon the nature of Place, and of Local motion): it is manifest, there
can be no motion to hurt the Soul, since she is concluded to be indivisible.

The common argument likewise used in this matter amounts 6. The same is
proved, because the Soul has no contrary.
to the same effect; to wit, that, since things are destroyed only by their
contraries, that thing which has no contrary is not subject to destruction (:
which principle both Reason and Experience every where confirm:): but a humane
Soul is not subject to contrariety: therefore such an one cannot be destroyed.
The truth of the assumption may be known two ways: First, because all the
contrarieties, that are found within our cognizance, rise out of the primary
opposition of Rarity, and Density; from which the Soul being absolutely free,
she likewise is so, from all that grows out of that root: and Secondly, we may
be sure, that our Soul can receive no harm from contrariety, since all
contraries are so far from hurting her, as contrary wise, the one helps her in
the contemplation of the other: And as for contradiction in thoughts, which at
different times our Soul is capable of admitting, experience teaches us, that
such thoughts change in her, without any prejudice to her substance; they being
accidents, and having their contrariety only betwixt themselves within her, but
no opposition at all to her; which only is the contrariety that may have power
to harm her: and therefore, whethersoever of such contrary thoughts be in the
Soul, pertains no more to her subsistence, than it does to the subsistence of a
Body, whether it be here or there, on the right hand, or on the left.

And thus I conceive my task is performed; and that I am 7. The same is proved
from the end for which the Soul was created.
discharged of my undertaking, to show the Souls Immortality; which imports no
more, than to show, that the causes of other things mortality do not reach her.
Yet, being well persuaded, that my Reader will not be offended with the
addition of any new light, in this dark subject; I will strive to discover (if
it be possible) some positive proof, or guess, out of the property and nature
of the Soul it self, why she must remain, and enjoy another life after this, To
this end, let us cast our eye back, upon what has been already said,
concerning her nature. We found that Truth is the natural perfection of Man's
Soul; and that she cannot be assured of truth naturally, otherwise than by
evidence: and therefore, it is manifest, that evidence of truth is the full
complete perfection, at which the Soul does aim. We found also, that the Soul
is capable of an absolute infinity of truth or evidence. To these two, we will
ad only one thing more, which of it self is past question, and therefore needs
no proof; and then we will deduce our conclusion: and this is, that a man's Soul
is a far nobler and perfecter part of him, than his Body; and therefore, by the
rules of nature and wisdom, his Body was made for his Soul, and not his Soul
finally for his Body.

These grounds being thus laid, let us examine, whether our Soul does in this
life arrive to the end she was ordained for, or no? and if she do not, then it
must follow of necessity, that our Body was made but for a passage, by which
our Soul should be ferried over into that state, where she is to attain to that
end for which her nature is framed and fited. The great skill and artifice of
Nature showing and assuring us, that she never fails of compassing her end,
even in her meanest works: and therefore without doubt she would not break her
course in her greatest; whereof man is absolutely the head and chief, among all
those we are acquainted with. Now, what the end is, to which our Soul ayms, is
evident; since the perfection of every thing in the end for which it is made:
the perfection then, and end of the Soul being evidence, and she being capable
of infinite evidence; let us inquire, whether in this life she may compass it
or no. To determine this question, let us compare infinite evidence, to that
evidence, which the greatest and most knowing man that ever lived has acquired
by the work of nature alone; or to the evidence, which by aim we may imagine
possible ever to happen any one man should arrive to: and, balancing them well
together, let us judge whether all that any man can know here is not, in respect
of what a man's Soul is capable of, to be styled as nothing, and, deserves not
the name of evidence, nor to be accounted of that nature. And if our sentence
conclude upon this let us acknowledge that our Soul arrives not to her
perfection, nor enjoys her end in this world; and therefore, must have
infallibly an other habitation inthe next world, to which nature intends her.
Experience teaches us, that we cannot fully comprehend any one of natures
works: and those Philosophers, who in a disciplinable way search into nature,
(and therefore are called) Mathematicians,) after they have written large volums
of some very slender subject, ever find, that they have left untouched an
endless abyss of knowledge, for whomsoever shall please to build upon their
foundations; and that they can never arrive near saying all that may be said ^f
hat subject, though they have said never so much of it. We may not then make
difficulty to believe, that the wisest and learnedest men in the world have
reason to profess, with the father of Philosophers, that indeed they know
nothing. And if so, how far are they from that happiness and perfection: which
consists in knowing all things? Of which full sea, we nevertheless find, even
in this low ebb, our Soul is a chanel capable; and is framed a fit vessel and
instrument to receive it, when the tide shall come in upon it: which we are
sure it can not do till the banks of our Body, which hinder it, be broken down.

This last consideration, without doubt, has added no small 8. The same is
proved because she can move without being moved.
corroboration to our former proofs; which are so numerous and so clear, as
peradventure it may appear superfluous, to say any more to this point: since
one convinceing argument establishes the verity of a conclusion, as
efficaciously as a hundred; and therefore Mathematicians use but one single
proof in all their Propositions, after which other supernumerary ones would be
but tedious. Nevertheless, since all the several ways, by which we may look
into the nature of our Soul, (the importantest subject we can busy our
thoughts upon), cannot fail of being pleasing and delightful to us; we must not
omit to reflect a little upon that great property of our Soul, by which she is
able to move and to work, without her self being moved or touched. To which
adding, that all Life consists in motion; and that all motion of Bodies comes
from some other thing without them: we may evidently conclude, that our Soul,
who can move withot receiving her motion from abroad, has in her se lf a
spring of life; for which she is not beholding (as Bodies are) o some
extrinsecal cause of a nature like to her, but only to him, who gave her to be,
what she is. But, if she have such a spring of Life within her, it were
unreasonable to imagine, that she died upon the occasion of the death of
anohther thing, that exercises no action of life, but as it is caused by
another. 9. The same is proved from her (...) of operation which is grounded in
being.


Neither we may neglect that ordinary consideration, which takes notice, that
our Soul makes use of Propositions of eternal truth: which we have above
produced, among our proofs for her being of a spiritual nature: and shall now
employ it for the proving her Immortal; by considering, that the notion of
Being, which settles these Propositions so, as they fear no mutation or shaking
by time, is the very riot of the Soul, and that which gives her nature, and
which shows it self in all her operations. So that, if from Being arrives to
these Propositions* to fear no time, the like must of necessity betide also the
substance of the Soul. And thus we see that her nature is out of the reach of
time: that she can comprehend time, and set it limits; can think of things
beyond it, and cast about for them. All which are clear testimonies, that she
is free and secure from the all-devouring and destroying tyranny of that
Saturnial Conqueror of the whole world of matter and of Bodies, whose servant
is Death.

After all these proofs drawn from the nature of the Soul it self, every one of
them of force to convince her Immortality; I 10. Lastly, it is proved from the
Science of Morality; the principles whereof would be destroyed, if the Soul were
mortal.
must crave leave to add one consideration more, though it seems to belong to
another harvest, namely, to the Science of Morals: and it is, that the
position of mortality in the Soul takes away all morality, and changes men into
beasts; by taking away the ground of all difference in those things, which are
to govern our actions. For, supposing that the Soul dies with the Body; and
seeing that man has a comprehension or notion of time without end; it is
evident, that the spain of this life must needs appear contemptible, to him
that well considers and weighs it against the other infinite duration. And by
consequence, all the goods and evils, which are parts of this life, must needs
become as despicable and inconsiderable: so that better or worse in this life
has not any appearance of difference between them; at least, not enough to
make him labor with pa^n to compass the one, and eschew the other, and, for
that end, to cross his present inclination in any thing, and engage himself in
any the least difficult task. And so it would ensue, that if, to an
understanding man, some course or actions were proposed, as better than that he
were going about, or for the instant had a mind to; he would relish it, as a
great Merchant, or a Banquier would do, whom, dealing for Millions, one should
press with earnestness, to change his resolved course, for the gain of a
farthing more this way than the other: which being inconsiderable, he would not
trouble his head with it, nor stop at what he was in hand with. In like manner,
whoever is persuaded, that for an infinite of time he shall be nothing and
without sense of all things; he scorns, for this little twinkling of his life,
to take any present pains to be in the next moment well, or to avoid being ill:
since in this case, dying is a secure remedy to any present evil; and he is as
ready to die now, as a hundred years hence. Nor can he esteem the loss of a
hundred years to be a matter of moment; and therefore he will, without any
further guidance or discourse, betake himself to do whatever his present
inclination bears him to, with most facility: upon this resolution, that, if
any thing cross him, he will presently forgo his life, as a trifle not worth
the keeping. And thus, neither virtue, nor honor, nor more pleasure, than what
at the present tickles him, falls into his account: which is the overthrow of
the whole body of Morality, that is, of Man's Action and Nature. But, all they
who look into Sciences cross that for an erroneous and absurd position, which
takes away the Principles of any Science: and consequently, the position of the
Souls Mortality is to be esteemed such. There remains yet one consideration
more, and peradventure more important, than any we have yet mentioned, to
convince the Souls Immortality; which is, that spiritual things are in a state
of Being: But we shall not be able to declare this, till we have proceeded a
little further.

CHAP. X. Declaring what the Soul of a Man, separated from his Body, is: and of
her knowledge and manner of working.
UNhappy man! how long will thou be inquisitive and curious 1. That the Soul is
one simple knowing Act, which is a pure substance, and nothing but substance.
to thine own peril? Have thou not already paid too dear, for thy knowing more,
than thy share? Or have thou not heard, that Who will pry into Majesty, shall
be oppressed by the glory of it? Some are so curious (shall I say?) or so
ignorant, as to demand, what a humane Soul will be, after she is delivered from
her Body: and unless they may see a picture of her, and have whereby to fancy
her they will not be persuaded, but that all are dreams, which our former
discourses have concluded. As if he, who finds himself dazzled with looking upon
the Sun, had reason to complain of that glorious body; and not of his own weak
eyes, that cannot entertain so resplendent a light.

Wherefore, to frame some conceit of a separated Soul; I will endeavor, for
their satisfaction, to say somewhat of her future state. Let us then first
consider what a thought is. I do not mean that corporeal spirit, which beats at
our common sense: but that which is within, in the inward Soul; whose nature we
find by discourse and effects, though we cannot see it in it self. To this
purpose we may observe, that if we are to discourse or do any thing, we are
guided the right way, in that subject we have in hand, by a multitude of
particular thoughts, which are all of them terminated in that discourse or
action: and consequently every act of our mind is, as it were, an actual rule
or direction, some part of such discourse or action: so that we may conceive a
complete thought compounded of many particular ones) to be a thing, that orders
an entire discourse or action of our life.

A thought being thus described, let us in the next place try, if we can make
an apprehension, what a Science or an Art is: as what the Science of Astronomy,
or the Art of playing on the Organs is, when the Astronomer thinks not of the
motions of the Heavens, nor the Organist of playing on his instrument; which
science and art, nevretheless, even then, resides in the Astronomer and
Organist. And we find, that these are but the results of many former complete
thoughts: as being those very thoughts in remainder; whatever this may signify.

Lastly, Let us conceive (if we can) a power or capacity to being. To which
capacity, if any Being be brought it is unseparably glew'd and riveted to it, by
its very being a being; and if any two things be brought to it, by the virtue
of one being common to both those things that both of them, by this one being,
become one betwixt themselves and with this capacity. And that so there is no
end or period of this addition of things, by the mediation of being; but that,
by links and rings, all the things that are in the world, may hang together
betwixt themselves; and to this power: if all of them may be brought to it by
the Glue and virtue of being; in such sort as, we have formerly declared,
passes in the Soul.

Now let put this together, and make up such a thing, as grows out of the
capacity to Being thus actuated, and cleaving to all things that any way have
being: and we shall see, that it becomes a whole entire World, ordered and
clinging together with a great strength and necessity, as can proceed from the
nature of being and of contradiction. And our reason will tell us, that such a
thing, if it be active, can frame a World, such as we live in, and are a small
parcel of, if it have matter to work on: and can order whatever has Being, any
way that it is capable of being ordered; to do by it, and make of it, whatever
can be done by and made of such matter.

All these conceptions (especially by the assistance of the last) may serve a
little to shadow out a perfect Soul; which is, A knowledge, an art, a rule, a
direction of all things: and all this by being all things, in a degree and
strain proper and peculiar to it self. And, an imperfect Soul is a
participation of this Idea: that is, a knowledge, a rule, and a direction; for
as much as it is, and as it attains to. Now, as, in our thoughts, it is the
corporeal part only which makes a noise and show outwardly; but the spiritual
thought is no otherwise perceived, than in its effect, ordering the bodily
acts: so, we must not conceive this knowledge to be a motion, but merely a thing
or Being, out of which the ordering and moving of other things flows; it self
remaining fixed and immovable. And because all that is joined to it is there
riveted by Being, or identification; and that, when one thing is an other, the
other is again it; it is impossible, that one should exceed the other, and be any
thing that is not it; and therefore in the Soul there can be no parts, no
accidents, no additions, no appendences, nothing that sticks to it and is not
it; but whatever is in her, is Soul, and the Soul is all that which is within
her. So that all that is of her, and all that belongs to her, is nothing but
one pure simple Substance; peradventure Metaphysically or formally divisible,
(in such sort as we have explicated in the first Treatise, of the divisibility
between quantity and Substance) but not quantitatively, as Bodies are
divisible. In fine, Substance it is, and nothing not Substance; all that is in
it, being joined and imp'd into it, by the very nature of Being, which makes
Substance. This then, is the substantial conceit of a Humane Soul stripped of
her Body.

Now, to conceive what proprieties this Substance is furnished That (...) rated
is in n^ and ye absent any p^
with, let us reflect on the notions we frame of things, when we consider them
in Common as, when we think of a man, of bread, of some particular virtue, of a
vice, or of whatever else. And let us note how, in such, our discourse
detemines no place, nor time: nay, if it should, it would mar the discourse;
as Logicians show, when they teach us, that Scientifical Syllogisms cannot be
made without Universal propositions. So that we see, unless these things be
stripped from Place and Time, they are not according to our meaning: and yet
nevertheless, we give them both the name and nature of a Thing, or of a
Substance, or of a living Thing, or of whatsoever else may, by manner of our
conceiving or endeavors, be freed from the subjection to Time and Place. Thus
then we plainly see, that it is a very different thing, to be, and to be in a
place: and therefore, out of a Things being in no Place, it cannot be inferred,
That it is not, or is no Substance; nor contrariwise, out of its being, can it
be inferred, that it is in a Place. There is no man but of himself perceives the
false consequence of this Argument, A thing Is, therefore it is Hot, or Cold;
and the reason is, because hot and cold are particular accidents of a body; and
therefore a body can be without either of them. The like proportion is between
Being in general, and Being a Body, or, Being in a Body; for both these, are
particulars in respect of Being: but, to be in a place is nothing else, but to
be in a circumstant Body; and so, what is not in a Body is not in a Place:
therefore, as it were an absurd illation to say, it is, therefore it is in a
Body; no less is it to say, it is, therefore it is somwhere, which is equivalent
to, in some Body. And so a great Master (peradventure one of the greatest
B^e^tius.
and judiciousest that ever have been) tells us plainly, that of it self it is
evident, to those who are truly learned, that Incorporeal. Substances are not
in Place: and Aristotle teaches us, that the Universe is not in Place.

But now, to make use of this discourse, we must intimate what it is we level
at, in it. We direct it to two ends, First, to lead on our thoughts, and help
our apprehension, in framing some conception of a Spiritual Substance, without
residence in Place; and to prevent our fancies checking at such abstraction,
since we see that we use it in our ordinary speech, when we think not on it,
nor labor for it in all universal and indefinite terms: Next, to trace out an
eminent propriety of a Separated Soul; namely, that she is no where, and (yet
upon the matter) every where; that she is bound to no place, and yet remote
from none; that she is able to work upon all, without shifting from one to
another or coming near any; and that she is free from all, without removing or
parting from any one.

A second propriety, not much unlike the first, we shall discover 3. That a
Separated Soul is not in time, nor subject to it.
in a Separated Soul, if we compare her with Time. We have heretofore
explicated, how Time is the motion of the Heavens; which give us our motion,
which measures all particular motions, and which comprehends all bodies and
makes them awaite his leisure. From the large Empire of this proud Commander a
Separated Soul is free. For, though she consist with time, (that is to say, she
is, while time is;) yet is she not in time, nor in any of her actions expects
time: but she is able to frame time, to spin or weave it out of her self, and
master it.

All which will appear manifestly, if we consider what it is to be in time.
Aristotle shows us, that, to be comprehended under time, or to be in time, is,
to be one of those movables, whose being, consisting in motion, takes up but a
part of time; and has its terms, before and behind, in time, is measured by
it, and must expect the flowing of it, both for being and action. Now, all this
manifestly belongs to Bodies, whose both action and being is subject to a
perpetual local motion and alteration: and consequently a Separated Soul, who
is totally a being, and has her whole operation altogether (as being nothing
but her self, when we speak of her perfective operation,) cannot be said to be
in time, but is absolutely free from it; though time glide by her, as it does
by other things. And so, all that she knows or can do, she does and knows at
once, with one act of the understanding; or rather She is, (indeed and really)
all that: and therefore she does not require time to manage, or order her
thoughts, nor do they succeed one another, by such vicissitudes as men are
forced to think of things by, (because their fancy and the Images in it, which
beat upon the Soul to make her think whiles she is in the body, are corporal
and therefore require time to move in and give way to one another): but she
thinks of all the things in the world, and of all that she can think of,
together and at once; as hereafter we intend to show. 4. That the Soul is an
active substance and all in it is activity.


A third propriety we may conceiveto be in a Separated Soul, by apprehending
her to be an activity, which that we may rightly understand, let us compare
her, in regard of working with a Body, Reflecting then upon the nature of
Bodies, we shall find, that not any of them will do the functions they are
framed for, unless some other thing stir them up and cause them so to do. As
for example; a Knife, if it be thrust or pressed, will cut, otherwise, it will
lie still and have no effect: and as it fares with a knife, so with those
bodies, which seem most to move themselves; as, upon a little consideration,
will appear plainly. A Beast seems to move it self: but if we call to mind what
we have delivered upon this subject (in the First Treatise), we shall find
that, when ever he begins to move, he either perceivs something by his Sense,
which causes his motion, or el^e he remembers something that is in his brain,
which works the like effect. Now, if Sense presents him an object that causes
his motion, we see manifestly it is an external cause which makes him move.
But, if Memory do it, we shall find that stirred by some other part; as, by the
stomach, or the heart, which is empty, or heated, or has received some other
impression from another body; so that, sooner or later, we shall discover an
outward mover. The like is in natural motions: as, in Heavy things, their easy
following (if they be sucked) another way, than downwards testifies, that their
motion downwards has an extrinsecal motor; as is before declared. And not only
in these, but throughout, in all other corporal things. So that, in a wotd, all
Bodies are of this nature, that, unless some other thing press and alter them,
when they are quiet, they remain so, and have no activity, otherwise than from
an extrinsecal mover: but of the Soul, we have declared the contrary and that,
by its nature, motion may proceed from it, without any mutation in it, or
without its receiving any order, direction, or impulse from an extrinsecal
cause. 5. A Description of the So^l.


So that, now, suming up together all we have said upon this occasion we find a
Soul, exempted from the Body, to be, An indivisible Substance, exempted from
Place and Time, yet present to both: an actual and present knowledge of all
things that may be known: and a skill or rule, even by what it self is, to all
things whatever. This she is, if she be perfect: but if she be imperfect, then
is she all this to the proportion of her growth (if so I may say); and she is
powerful, according to the measure of her knowledge, and of her will. So that,
in fine, a Separated Soul is of a nature to have, and to know, and to govern
all things.

I may reasonably suspect, that my saying, how imperfect Souls 6. That a
Separated Soul knows all that which she knew whilst she was in her Body.
are rules to the proportion of their growth, may have occasioned great
reflection, and bred some trouble in the curious and heedful Reader. I confess
this expression was delivered by me, only to free my self for the present from
the labor of showing what knowledge every Separated Soul has: but, upon second
thoughts, I find that such sliding over this difficult point will not serve my
turn, nor save me the pains of untying this knot; for, unless I explicate what
I mean by that speech, I shall leave my Reader in great doubt and anxiety.
Which to free him from, I must wade a little further in this question, of the
extent of a separated Souls knowledge; into which I have thus, upon the by,
engaged my self. But, let him first be advertised, that I do not here meddle
with what a Separated Soul may know by Revelatation, or by Supernatural means:
but that I only track out her natural paths; and guess at what she is, or
knows, by that light which her conversation in her body affords us.

Our entrance into this matter must be, to consider what mutation, in respect
of knowledge, a Soul's first change out of her Body makes in her: for, it is not
unlikely, but nature may some way enlighten us so far, as to understand what
must follow out of the negation of the Bodies consortship, added to what we
know of her and Natures other works in this world. This then first occurrs,
that surely she cannot choose but still know, in that state, all that she knew
while she was in the Body; since we are certain, the Body has no part in that
which is true knowledge: as is above declared, when we showed, first, that all
true knowledge is respective; secondly, that the first impressions of the fansy
do not reach to the interior Soul; and lastly, that she works by much more,
than what has any actual correspondence in the fansy; and that all things are
united to her by the force of Being. From which last it follows, that all
things she knows are her self; and she is all that she knows: wherefore, if she
keeps her self and her own Being, she must needs keep the knowledge of all that
she knew in this world.

Next, she must undoubtedly know, then, somewhat more than 5. That the least
knowledge which the Soul acquires in her body, of any one thing, causes in her,
when she is separated from her body, a complete knowledge of all things whatever.
she knew in the Body. For, since, out of the things she already knows, others
will follow, by the mere ordering and connection of them; and the Souls proper
work is, to order things: we cannot doubt, but that both the things she knows
in this world must of necessity be ordered in her to the best advantage; and
likewise, that all that will be known, which wants no other cause for the
knowing of it, but the ordering of these things. For, if the nature of a thing
were Order, who can doubt, but what were put into that thing were put into
Order? Now, that the nature of the Soul is such, we collect easily. For, since
all order proceeds from her, it must be acknowledged that Order is first in
her: but, what is in her is her nature: her nature then is Order, and what is
in her is ordered. In saying of which, I do not mean that there is such an
order between the notions of a Separated Soul, as is between material things
that are ordered by the Soul while she is in the Body: for, since the Soul is
an adaequate cause of such order, (that is to say, a cause which can make any
one such, and the whole kind of it), it follows, that such order is not in her;
for, if it were, she would be cause of her self, or of her own parts. Order
therefore in her must signify a thing more eminent, than such inferior Order;
in which resides the power of making that inferior Order: and this is nothing
else, but the connection of her notions by the necessity of Being; which we have
often explicated. And, out of this eminent or superior kind of Order, our
conclusion follows no less, than if the inferior Order, which we see in our
fancies while our Soul is in our Body, did reside in our interior Soul: for,
it is the necessity of identification which does the effect, and makes the Soul
know; and the order of fantasms is but a precedent condition in the bodily
Agent, that it may work upon the Soul: and, if more fantasms than one could be
together, this order would not be necessary.

Out of this, a notable and vast conclusion manifestly follows: to wit, that if
a Soul can know any one thing more when she is out of the Body, than what she
knew while she was in the Body; without any manner of doubt, she knows all that
can be drawn and forced out of these knowledges which she had in her Body. How
much this is, and how far it will reach, I am afraid to speak. Only I entreat
Mathematicians, and such as are acquainted with the manner how Sciences
proceed, to consider how some of their Definitions are made; to wit, by
composing together sundry known terms, and giving a new name to the compound
that results out of them: Wherefore, clear it is, that, out of fewer notions had
at the first, the Soul can make many more; and, the more she has or makes, the
more she can multiply. Again, the Maxims, which are necessary to be added to
the Definitions for gaining of knowledge, we see are also compounded of ordinary
and known terms: So that a Separated Soul can want neither the Definitions, nor
the Maxims, out of which, the Books of Sciences are composed, and therefore,
neither can the Sciences themselves be wanting to her. Now, if we consider,
that, in the same fashion as Demonstrations are made, and knowledge is acquired
in one Science, by the same means there is a transcendence from Science to
Science; and that there is a connection among all the Sciences, which fall into
the consideration of man, and indeed among all (at least, corporal) things (for
of spiritual things we cannot so assuredly affirm it, though their perfection
may persuade us, that there is rather a greater connection among them, than
among corporal things): it will follow, that a Soul, which has but any
indifferent knowledge in This World, shall be replenished with all knowledge in
the Next.

But, how much is this indifferent knowledge, that for this purpose is required
in this world? Upon mature consideration of this point, it is true, I find it
absolutely necessary, that the Soul must have here so much knowledge, as to be
able to determine that some one thing, which has connection with all the rest,
is in such a time: B^t then, why, out of this very conception, she should not
be able to climb up by degrees, to the knowledge of all other things whatever
since there is a connection between that and all the rest, and (...) untransible
Gap or Chaos ^o (...) them), I pr^ess I do n^ see. Which if it be so, then the
(...) of an Abortive in his Mothers Womb (if he once arrive to have Sense and,
from it, to receive any impression in his Soul) may, for ought I know or can
suspect to the contrary, be endew'd in the next world with as much knowledge, as
the Soul of the greatest Clerk that ever lived: and, if an abortive do not
arrive so far, as to the knowledge of some one thing, I know no reason why we
should believe it arrived to the Nature of Man.

Whence it follows, that this amplitude of knowledge is common to All Humane
Souls, (of what pitch soever they seem to be here), when they are separated
from their Bodies: as also, that, if any Error have crept into a man's judgment,
during this life (whether it be of some universal conclusion, or of some
particular thing) all such will be abolished then, by the Truth appearing on
the opposite side; since two contradictory judgments cannot possess our Soul
together, as, even in this world, as well Experience as Reason teaches us.

But unawares I have engulf'd my self into a Sea of contradictions, 8. An
answer to the objections of some Peripateticks, who maintain the Soul to perish
with the Body.
from no mean Adversaries: for Alexander Aphrodiseus, Pomponatius, and the
learnedest of the Peripatetick School will all rise up in main opposition
against this doctrine of mine. Showing how, in the Body, all our Soul's
knowledge is made by the working of our fansy; and that there is no act of our
Soul without speculation of fantasms residing in our memory: therefore, since,
when our Body is gone, all those little Bodies of fantasms are gone with it;
what sign is there that any operation can remain? And hence they infer, that
since every substance has its Being for its operations sake, and by
consequence were vain and superfluous in the world, if it could not enjoy and
exercise its operation; there is no necessity or end, why the Soul of a man
should survive his Body: and consequently, there is no reason to imagine other,
than that it perishes when the man dies. This is the substance of their
Argument; which indeed is nothing else, but to guess without ground; or rather
against all ground. But however, this is my comfort, that I have to do with
Peripateticks; men that will hear and answer reason: and to such I address my
speech.

To join issue then with them, and encounter them with their own weapons; let
us call to mind, what Aristotle holds Light to be. He says, that it is A
sudden and momentary emananation of what it is, following the precedent motion
of some body, but without motion in it self. As for example: when the Sun comes
into our Horison, (says he), the illumination of the Horison is an effect in an
instant; following from the motion which the Sun had, since his setting in the
other Hemisphere, till he appear there again. So that (according to him) the
way of making this light is the Sun's local motion; but the effect, or the
being enlightened, is a thing of a very different nature, done without beginning,
and continuing till the Sun depart again from our Horison. And, he explicates
this action of illumination, in the same manner does he the actions of Sense
and of Understanding. Upon all which I urge; that no Peripatetick will deny me,
but that, as in every particular sensation or thinking, there precedes a
Corporal motion, out of which it ensues: so, this general motion, which we call
the life of man, precedes that twinkle or moment, in which his Soul becomes an
absolute spirit, or inhabitant of the next world. Wherefore it cannot be said,
that we introduce a doctrine aliene from the Peripatetical way of
Philosophising; if we put a momentary effect or motion (according to their
phrase of speaking) to follow out of the course of Man's Life: since they put
diverse such effects to follow out of particular parts of it.

Now, this momentary change, or what they please to call it, is that which
makes at one blow, all this knowledge we speak of. For, if we remember that
knowledge is not a doing or motion, but a Being, (as is agreed between the
Peripateticks and us); they cannot, for the continuing it, require in^uments
and motors: for, they are necessary only for change, not for Being. Now, all
this mighty change, which is made at the Souls delivery, we conceive follows
precisely out of the change of her Being. For, seeing it is supposed, that her
Being was before in a Body, but is now out of a Body; it must of necessity
follow, that all impediments, which grew out of her being in a Body, must be
taken away by her being freed from it. Among which impediments one is, that
Time is then required betwixt her knowledge of one thing, and her knowledge of
another thing: and so her capacity, that of it self is infinite, becomes
confined to that small multitude of objects, which the division and
straightness of time gives way to. Now, that which length of time could impart
work in the body, the same is entirely done in a moment, by the changing of her
manner of Being: for, by taking away the bonds, by which she was enthralled in
the body, kept in to apprehend but according to its measure, and constrained to
enjoy her self (as it were) but at the Bodies permission; she is put in free
possession of her self, and of all that is in her. And this is nothing else,
but to have that large knowledge, we have spoken of: for, her knowing all that
is no other thing, but her being her self perfectly. Which will appear evident,
if we consider, that her nature is to be a Knower, and that Knowledge is nothing
else but a Being of the Object in the Knower; for thence it follows, that to
know all things is naught else, but to be all things: since then we concluded
by our former discourse, that all things were to be gathered out of any one;
it is clear, that, to be perfctly her self and any one thing is, in truth, to
know all things.

And thus we see, that for the Soul's enjoying all this knowledge when she is
out of the Body, she needs no objects without her, no phantasms, no
instruments, no helps: but that all that is requisite is contained absolutely
in her being her self perfectly. And so we retort our Adversaries Objection on
themselves; by representing to them, that since, in their own Doctrine, they
require no body nor instruments, for that precise action which they call
Understanding: it is without all ground, for them to require bodies and
instruments in the next life; that the Soul may there be that, which they
acknowledge she is in her Body, without any such helps.

And as for that Axiom or Experience, that the Soul does not understand, unless
she speculate phantasms: as, on the one side, I yield to it, and confess the
experience, after the best and seriousest trial I could make of it; so, on the
other side, when I examine the matter to the bottom, I find that it comes not
home to our Adversaries intention. For as, when we look on a thing, we conceive
we work on that thing; whereas in truth we do but set our selves in such a
position, that the thing seen may work on us: in like manner, our looking on
the phantasms in our brain is not our Soul's action upon them, but our letting
them beat at our common sense; that is, our letting them work on our Soul. The
effect whereof is, that either our Soul is bettered in her self; as, when we
study and contemplate: or else, that she betters something without us; as when,
by this thinking, we order any action.

But, if they will have this Axiom avail them, they should show that the Soul
is not of her self a knowledge: which if they be able to do, even then, when, to
our thinking, she seems not so much as to think, we will yield they have
reason. But that they will find impossible: for, she is always, of her self, a
knowledge; though in the Body she never expresses so much, but when she is put
to it. Or else they should show, that this knowledge, which the Soul is of her
self, will not, by changing the manner of her Existence, become an actual
knowledge, instead of the habitual knowledge which now appears in her.

But as these Aristotelians embrace and stick to one Axiom 9. The former
Peripapeticks refuted out of Aristotle.
of their Patron; so they forego and prevaticate against another. For, as it is
Aristotle's doctrine, that a Substance is for its Operation, and were in vain
and superfluous, if it could not practice it: so likewise it is his confessed
doctrine, that Matter is for its Form, and not the Form for the Matter. And yet
these men pretend that the Soul serves for nothing, but the governing of the
body: whereas contrariwise, both all Aristotle's doctrine, and common sense,
convinces, that the Body must be for the Soul. Which if it be, nothing can be
more consentaneous to Reason, than to conceive, that the durance, which the
Soul has in the Body, is assigned her, to work and mould in her the Future
State, which she is to have after this life: and, that no more Operations are
to be expected from her after this life, but, instead of them, a settled state
of Being; seeing that, even in this life, according to Aristotle's doctrine,
the proper operations of the Soul are but certain Being. So that we may
conclude, that, if a Soul were grown to the perfection which her nature is
capable of, she would be nothing else but a constant Being, never changing from
the happiness of the best Being.

And though the Texts of Aristotle which remain to us be uncertain
(peradventure, not so much because they were originally such in themselves, as
through the mingling of some comments into the body of the text;) yet if we had
his Book, which he wrote of the Soul, upon the death of his friend Eudemus,
it is very likely we should there see his evident assertion of her Immortality;
since it had been very impertinent to take occasion upon a Friends death to
write of the Soul, if he intended to conclude, that of a dead man there were no
Soul.

Out of this discourse it appears how those Actions, which 10. The operations
of a Separated Soul compared to her operations in her Body.
we exercise in this life, are to be understood, when we hear them attributed
to the next: for, to think they are to be taken in their direct plain meaning,
and in that way in which they are performed in this world, were a great
simplicity; and were to imagine a likeness between Bodies and Spirits. We must
therefore elevate our minds, when we would penetrate into the true meaning of
such expressions; and consider how all the actions of our Soul are eminently
comprehended in the Universality of knowledge, we have already explicated. And
so, the Apprehensions, Judgments, Discourses, Reflections, Talkings-together,
and all other such actions of ours, when they are attributed to separated
Souls, are but inadaequate names and representations of their instantaneal
sight of all things. For, in that, they cannot choose but see others minds,
which is that we call talking, and likewise their own, which we call
reflection: the rest are plain parts of, and plainly contained in knowledge;
discourse being but the falling into it, judgment the principles of it, and
single apprehensions the components of judgments. Then, for such actions as are
the beginning of operation, there can be no doubt but that they are likewise to
be found, and are resumed, in the same Universality; as, love of good,
consultation, resolution, prudential election, and the first motion: for, who
knows all things cannot choose but know what is good and that good is to be
prosecuted, and, who sees completely all the means of effecting and attaining
to his intended good has already consulted and resolved of the best, and, who
understands perfectly the matter he is to work on has already made his
prudential Election; so that there remains nothing more to be done, but to give
the first impulse.

And thus you see, that this Universality of knowledge in the Soul comprehends
all, is all, performs all; and no imaginable good or happiness is out of her
reach. A noble creature, and not to be cast away upon such trash as most men
employ their thoughts in. Upon whom it is now time to reflect; and to consider,
what effects the diverse manners of living in this world work upon her in the
next: if first we acquit our selves of a promise we made at the end of the last
Chapter. For, it being now amply declared, that the state of a Soul, exempted
from her Body, is a state of pure Being; it follows manifestly, that there is
neither action nor passion in that state. Which being so, it is beyond all
opposition, that the Soul cannot dye. For, it is evident, that all corruption
must come from the action of another thing upon that which is corrupted: and
therefore, that thing must be capable of Being made better and worse. Now then,
if a Separated Soul be in a final state, where she can neither be bettered, or
worsened, (as she must be, if she be such a thing as we have declared); it
follows, that she cannot possibly lose the Being which she has. And, since her
passage out of the Body does not change her nature, but only her state; it is
clear, that she is of the same nature even in the body: though, in this her
durance, she be subject to be forged (as it were) by the hammers of corporeal
objects beating upon her; yet so, that, of her self, she still is what she is.
And therefore, as soon as she is out of the passible oore, in which she suffers
by reason of that oore, she presently becomes impassible; as being purely, of
her own nature, a fixed substance, that is, a pure Being. Both which states of
the Soul may in some sort be adumbrated, by what we see passes in the
coppelling of a fixed metal. For, as long as any lead, or dross, or allay
remains with it, it continues melted, flowing, and in motion under the muffle:
but, as soon as they are parted from it, and that it is become pure, without
any mixture, and singly it self; it contracts it self to a narrower room and,
at that very instant, ceases from all motion, grows hard, permanent, resistent
to all operations of fire, and suffers no change or diminution in its substance
by any outward violence we can use to it.

CHAP. XI Showing what effects the diverse manners of living in this world cause
in a Soul, after she is separated from her Body.
ONe thing may peradventure seem of hard digestion in 1. That a Soul in this
life is subject to mutation, and may be perfected in knowledge.
our past discourse: and it is, that, out of the grounds we have laid, it seems
to follow, that all Souls will have an equality; since we have concluded, that
the greatest shall see or know no more than the least. And indeed, there
appears no cause, why this great and noble creature should ly imprisoned in the
obscure dungeon of noisome flesh; if, in the first instant, in which it has its
first knowledge, it has then already gained whatever it is capable of gaining,
in the whole progress of a long life afterward. Truly, the Platonic
Philosophers (who are persuaded that a humane Soul does not profit in this
life, nor acquired any knowledge here, as being of her self completely perfect;
and that all our discoursings are but her remembrings of what she had
forgotten) will find themselves ill bestead, to render a Philosophical and
sufficient cause of her being locked into a Body. For, to put forgetfulness in
a pure Spirit (so palpable an effect of corporeity, and so great a corruption,
in respect of a creature whose nature is to know of it self) is an unsufferable
error. Besides, when they tell us she cannot be changed, because all change
would prejudice the spiritual nature which they attribute to her, but that well
she may be warned and excited by being in a Body; they merely trifle. For,
either there is some true mutation made in her, by that which they call a
warning; or there is not. If there be not, how becomes it a warning to her? or
what is it more to her than if a straw were waged at the Antipodes? But, if
there be some mutation (be it never so little) made in her, by a corporeal
motion: what should hinder, why she may not, by means of her Body, attain to
Science she never had; as well as by it receive any the least intrinsecal
mutation whatever? For, if once we admit any mutability in her from any
corporeal motion; it is far more conformable to reason to suppose it* in regard
of that which is her natural perfection, and of that which by her operation: we
see she has immediately after such corporeal motions, and whereof before them
there appeared in her no marks at all: than to suppose it in regard of a dark
intimation, of which we neither know it is, nor how it is performed. Surely, no
Rational Philosopher, seeing a thing, whose nature is to know, have a Being,
whereas formerly it existed not, and observing how that thing by little and
little gives sign of more and more knowledge; can doubt, but that, as she could
be changed from not Being to Being, so may she likewise be changed from less
knowing to more knowing.

This then being irrefragably settled, that in the Body she increases 2. That
the knowledges which a Soul gets in this life will make her knowledge in the
next life more perfect and firm.
in knowledge; let us come to our difficulty, and examine what this increase in
the Body avails her. Since, as soon as she parts from it, she shall, of her own
nature, enjoy and be replenished with the knowledge of all things; why should
she laboriously strive to anticipate the geting of a few drops, which but
increase her thirst and anxiety: when, having but a little patience, she shall,
at one full and everlasting draught, drink up the whole sea of it? We know that
the Soul is a thing, made proportionably to the making of its Body; seeing, it
is the Bodies compartner: and we have concluded, that, while it is in the Body,
it acquires perfection, in that way which the nature of it is capable of, that
is, in knowledge; as the Body acquires perfection in its way, which is in
strength and agility. Now then, let us compare the proceedings of the one, with
those of the other substance; and peradventure we may gain some light, to
discern what advantage it may prove to a Soul, to remain long in its Body, if
it make right use of its dwelling there. Let us consider the Body of a Man,
well and exactly shaped in all his members: yet, if he never use care nor pains
to exercise those well framed limbs of his, he will want much of those
corporeal perfections, which others will have who employ them sedulousl^.
Though his legs, arms, and hands, be of an exact symmetry; yet he will not be
able to run, to wrestle, or to throw a dart, with those who labor to perfect
themselves in such exercises. Though his fingers be never so neatly molded or
composed to all advantages of quick and smart motion; yet, if he never learned
and practiced on the Lute, he will not be able with them to make any music
upon that instrument, even after he sees plainly and comprehends fully all that
the cunning Lutenist does: neither will he be able to play as he does, with his
fingers, which of themselves are peradventure less apt to those voluble motions
than his are. That which makes a man dexterous in any of these Arts, or in any
other operations, proper to any of the parts or limbs of his body, is the often
repetitions of the same Acts; which amend and perfect those limbs in their
motions, and make them fit and ready for the actions they are designed to.

In the same manner it fares with the Soul; whose essence is that which she
knows: her several knowledges may be compared to arms, hands, fingers, legs,
thighs, etc. in a Body; and all her knowledges, taken together, compose (as I
may say) and make her up what she is. Now, those limbs of hers, though they be,
when they are at the worst, entire, and well shaped in bulk, (to use the
comparison of Bodies): yet they are susceptible of further perfection, as our
corporeal limbs are, by often and orderly usage of them. When we iterate our
acts of understanding any object, the second act is of the same nature as the
first, the third as the second; and so of the rest: every one of which perfects
the understanding of that thing, and of all that depends on the knowledge of it;
and makes it become more vigorous and strong. Even the often throwing of a Boul
at the same mark begets still more and more strength and justness in the Arm
that delivers it: for, it cannot be denied, but the same cause, which makes any
thing must of necessity perfect and strengthen it, by repeating its force and
strokes. We may then conclude, that the knowledge of our Soul (which is indeed
her self) will be, in the next life, more perfect and strong, or more slack and
weak; according as, in this life, she has often and vigorously, or faintly and
seldom, busied her self about those things which beget such knowledge.

Now, those things which men bestow their pains to know, 3 (...) the (...),
(...) men (...) they (...) a^ m^e (...) next wo^d the the So^s of unlearned men.
we see, are of two kinds: for. Some thirst after the knowledge of Nature, and
of the variety of things, which either (...) se^es, or their discourse, tell
them of; but Others look no higher, than to have an insight into humane action,
or to gain skill in some Art, whereby they may acquire means to live. These
later curiosities are but of particulars, that is, of some one or few species,
or kinds, whose common, that comprehends them, falls within the reach of every
vulgar capacity; and consequently, the things which depend on them are low,
mean and contemptible: whereas the beauty, (...), and excellency of the others
is so much beyond them, as they can be brought into no proportion to one
another. Now then, if we consider, what advantage the one sort of these men
will, in the next world, have over the other; we shall find, that they, who
spend their life here in the study and con emplation of the first noble
Objects, will, in the next, have their universal knowledge (that is, their Soul)
strong and perfect: while the others, that played away their thoughts and ^me
upon trifles, and seldom raised their minds above the pitch of sense, will be
faint through their former laziness; like Bodies benumbed with the Palsy, and
sickly through their ill 4. That those (...), which embrace V^rtue in (...)
world, will be most perfect in the next; and th^se which embrace Vi^e ^st
miserable.
diet: as when a well shaped Virgin, that, having fed upon trash instead of
nourishing meats, languishes under a wearisom burden of the Green Sickness.

To make this point yet more clear, we may consider how the things, which we
gain knowledge of, affect us, under the title of Good and Convenient, in two
several manners. One is, when the appearance of Good, in the abstracted nature
of it, and after examination of all circumstances, carries our heart to the
desire of the thing; that appears so to us: the other is, when the semblance of
good to our Own Particular persons, without casting any further, or questioning
whether any other regard may not make it prejudicial, causes in us a longing
for the thing wherein such resemblance shines. Now, for the most part, the
knowledges which spring out of the latter objects, are more cultivated by us,
than those which arise out of the other; partly by reason of their frequent
occurring, either through necessity or judgment; and partly, by the addition
which Passion gives to the impressions they make upon us. For, Passion
multiplies the thoughts of such things, more than of any others; if reason do
not cross and suppress her tumultuary motions; which, in most men, she does
not. The Souls, then, of such persons as giving way to their passion, in this
life busy themselves about such things, as appear good to their own persons,
and cast no further, must needs decede from their Bodies unequally builded, (if
that expression may be permitted me): and will be like a lame unwieldy Body, in
which the principal limbs are not able to govern and move the others; because
those principal ones are faint, through want of spirits and exercise, and the
others are overgrown with hydropical and nocive humors. The reason whereof is,
that, in such Souls, their judgments will be disproportioned to one another;
one of them being unduly stronger than the other. What effect this works, in
regard of knowledge, we have already declared: and no less will it have in
respect of actions. For, suppose two judgments to be unequal, and such, as in
the action one contradicts the other; for example, let one of my judgmens be,
that it is good for me to eat because I am an hungry, and let the other be,
that it is good for me to study, because I am shortly to give an account of my
self: if the one judgment be stronger than the other, (as, if that of eating be
stronger than that of studying, it imports not that there is more ^eason (all
circumstances considered) for studying; because, reasons move to action,
according to the measure in which the resolution taken upon them is strong or
weak, and therefore my action will follow the strongest judgment, and I shall le
ave my book to go to my dinner.

Now, to apply this to the state of a Separated Soul. We are to remember how
the spiritual judgments, which she collected in the Body, remain in her, after
she is divested of it; and likewise, we are to consider, how all her proceeding
in that state is built not upon passion, or any bodily causes or dispositions,
but merely upon the quality and force of those spiritual judgments: and then,
it evidently follows, that, if there were any such action in the next life, the
pure Soul would apply it self thereto, according to the proportion of her
judgments, and as they are graduated andtqualified. It Is true, there is no such
action remaining in the next life; yet nevertheless there remains in the Soul a
disposition and a promptitude to such action: and, if we will frame a right
apprehension of a Separated Soul, we must conceit her to be of such a nature;
for then all is nature with her, as hereafter we shall discourse). as if she
were a thing made for action, in that proportion and efficacity which the
quartering of her by this variety of judgments affords; that is, that she is so
much the more fit for one action than for another, (were she to proceed to
action), as the judgment of the goodness of one of these actions is stronger in
her, than the judgment of the others goodness, which is, in effect, by how much
the one is more cultivated than the other. And, out of this we may conclude,
that what motions follow in a man out of discourse, the like will in a
Separated Soul follow out of her spiritual judgments So that, as he is joy'd if
he possess his desired good, and discontented and displeased if he miss of it;
and seizes greedily upon it, when it is present to him, and then cleaves fast
to it, and whiles he wants it, no other good affects him, but he is still
longing after that Masterwish of his heart: the like in every regard, much more
vehemently, befalls a Separated Soul. So that, in fine, she will be happy or
miserable, according as she built up her self, by her spiritual judgments and
affections, in this life, If knowledge and intellectual objects be the goods she
thirsts after she what can be happier than she; when she possesses the fullness
of all that can be desired ^n that kind? But if, in this world, a man settles
his heart constantly upon any transitory end; as, upon wealth, corporeal
delights, honor, power, and the like, (which are too short breathed attendants
to follow him so long a journey, as into the next): then, all the powers of his
Soul, even after she has left her Body, will be still longing after that dear
Idol of her affections; and, for the want of it, she will not value the great
knowledge she shall then be endued with, nor care for any good she possesses.
Like a man who, being surrounded with a full sea and swollen tide of all specious
objects that may please and delight him, has, by unlucky chance, suffered his
violent affections and impotent desires to be entangled in some mean love, that
either neglects him, or he is hindered from enjoing: and thereby, that little
drop of gall, or rather that privation of a mean contentment (which truly in it
self is nothing) infects and poisons the whole draught of happiness, that, but
for this, would swell him up to the height of his wishes. 5. The (...) of a
(...) Soul in the next life.


But, no comparisons of sorrows, griefs, or anguishes in this life (where our
earthly dwelling does so clog, and allay, and dull the sense of our Soul, which
only feels and relishes either delight or woe) can arrive to shadow out the
misery of a Separated Soul so affected: whose strains are so excessively
vehement, and whose nature is a pure activity, and herself all sense, all
knowledge. It Is true, I confess, that in a man such motions in part proceed from
passion: and therefore, I will allow, that so much of them, as have their
origin merely and only from thence, shall dye with the Body; and not have made
any impression in the Separated Soul. But, besides the stream of passion, we
may in such motions observe also the work of reason; for she both approves and
employes her powers, to compass and gain what the other presents, and by
legitimate discourse draws consequences out of that principle or judgment,
which makes the byas it then leans to: and these are undeniable effects of a
spi^itual judgment settled in the Soul. And therefore, as far as these motions
proceed from spiritual judgments, so far, it is clear, they must remain in the
Separated Soul.

Peradventure, what I have said, may be liable to a mistake; as though I
conceived that these spiritual judgments are made in the Soul according to
right reason, and to legitimate discourse: whereas, I mean nothing less: But,
esteeming an overstrong judgment in the Separated Soul to be proportionable to
a passion in the Body; I conceit that, as passion sets reason on work to find
out means whereby she may arrive to her ends, so may this judgment set reason
on float, with those acts which follow consequently upon it (though
inconsequent to the whole body of reason): because the disorder there is in the
excess of this judgment over others, whose force (according to nature) ought to
be greater than it. So that, if we would frame a conception of a disordered
Soul, when it is out of the Body; we may imagine it correspondent to a Body,
whose one part were biger than could stand in proportion with another: as if
the hand (to use the example we brought before) were greater, than the arm
could manage, or the foot larger and heavier than the leg and thigh could
wield. To which add, that every part were active and working of it self; so as,
though it could not be governed, yet would it continually have its own
operation: which would be contrary to the operation of the arm or leg, and
consequently, it would ever be tending to imcompossible operations. And by that
means, both one member would always disagree from the other, and neither of
them attain any effect at all: not unlike the fancy of the Poets, who feigned a
monster, which the termed Scylla, whose inferior parts were a company of Dogs,
ever snarling and quarreling among themselves; and yet were unseverable from one
another, as being comparts of the same substance.

But, to declare this important doctrine more dogmatically; let us consider
that, of necessity, a disordered Soul has these following judgments settled in
her. Namely, that she is not well, that she cannot be well without her desired
good, that it is impossible for her to compass that good; and lastly, that this
state she is in, is by all means possible to be avoided; not by changing her
judgment (for that is her self,) but by procuring the satisfaction she desires;
and this with all the power and total inclination of her activity and
possibility. This then being the temper of a disordered Separated Soul, it is
easy to conceive, what a said condition such an one remains then in; which is
infinitely more, than any affliction that can happen to a man in this world:
for since even here, all our joys and griefs proceed from our Soul; we must
needs allow, that when she shall be free from the burden of her Body (which
does exceedingly impeach and limit her operations and activity), all her
actions, will be then far greater and more efficacious 6. The funda mental
reason why as well happiness as misery is so excessive in the next life.


But, because this point is of highest consequence, we may not slightsly pass
it over: but we will endeavor, if we can, to discover the wonderful efficacy
and force of a Separated Soul's operations; that from thence we may the better,
collect, how great her happiness or misery will be in the next life. Let us
then consider, how an Act or judgment of the Soul may be more forcible, either
by it self, or by the multiplication of such helps as concur with it. To begin
with considering the Act in it self; we know that the certainest way to measure
the strength of it is, to take a survey of the force, which shows it self in
its effect: for, they being relatives to one another, each of them discovers
the others nature. Now, this we will do, after our ordinary manner, by
comparing the spiritual effects issuing from a judgment in the Soul, to
material effects proceeding from the operations and motions of Bodies. In these
we may observe three things, by which we may estimate their efficaciousness:
some actions dure a longer time, others take up a greater place, and others
again work the like effect in a greater place and in a shorter time; which last
sort, of all others, proceed from the most powerful and most forcible agents.
If then, in these considerations, we compare a Separated Soul to a Body; what
an infinity of strength and efficacity will the meanest of those pure
substances have, beyond the most powerful and active Body that can be imagined
in nature? For, we have already showed how a Separated Soul comprehends at once
all place, and all times; so that, her activity requires no application to
place or time: but, she is, of her self, mistress of both; comprehending all
quantity whatever in an indivisible apprehension and ranking all the parts of
motion in their complete and knowing at once, order what is to happen in every
one of them, On the other side, an Incorporated Soul, by reason of her being
confined to the use her Senses, can look on but one single definite place or
time at once; and needs a long chain of many discourses, to comprehend all the
circumstances of any one action: and yet after all, how short is she of
comprehending all? So that, comparing one of these with the other, it is
evident, that the proportion of a Separated Soul, to one in the Body is as all
time, or all place, in respect of any one piece or least parcel of them; or, as
the entire absolute comprehender of all time and all place is, to the
discoverer of a small measure of them. For, whatever a Soul wills in that
state, she wills it for the whole extent of her duration: because she is then
out of the state or capacitity of changing, and wishes for whatever she wishes,
as for her absolute good; and therefore employs the whole force of her judgment
upon every particular wish. Likewise, the eminency which a Separated Soul has
over place is, also, then entirely employed upon every particular wish of hers:
since, in that state, there is no variety of place left her, to wish for such
good in one place, and to refuse it in another; as, while she is in the Body,
happens to every thing she desires. Wherefore, whatever she then wishes for,
she wishes for it according to her comparison to place: that is to say, that,
as such a Soul has a power to work at the same time in all places, by the
absolute comprehension which she has of place in abstract; so, every wish of
that Soul, if it were concerning a thing to be made in place, were able to make
it in all places; through the excessive force and efficacy which she employs
upon every particular wish,

The third effect, by which among bodies we gather the vigor and energy of the
cause that produces it, (to wi^, the doing of the like action; in a lesser time
and in a larger extent, is but a combination of the two former: (...) therefore
it requires no further particular insistance upon it, to show tha^, (...) this,
the proportion of a Separated to an (...) Soul must needs be the self same as
in the other; seeing, a Separated Soul's activity is upon all place is in an
Indivisible of time.

Therefore, to shut up this point; there remains only for us to consider, what
addition may be made to the efficacity of a judgment, by the concurrence of
other extrinsecal helps. We see that, when an understanding man will settle any
judgment or conclusion in his mind, he weighs thoroughly all that follows out of
such a judgment; and considers likewise all the antecedents that lead him to
i^: and if, after due reflection and examination of whatever concerns this
conclusion which he is establishing in his mind, he finds nothing to cross it,
but that every particular and circumstance goes smoothly along with and
strengthens it; he is then satisfied and quiet in his thoughts, and yields a
full assent thereto: which assent is the stronger, the more concurrent
testimonies he has for it. And, though he should have a perfect demonstration
or sight of the thing in it self; yet every one of the other extrinsecal
proofs, being, as it were; a new persuasion, has in it a further vigor to
strengthen and content his mind in the fore-had demonstration: for, if every
one of these be in it self sufficient to make the thing evident, it cannot
happen that any one of them should hinder the others; but contrariwise, every
one of them must needs concur with all the rest, to the effectual quieting of
his understanding, in its assent to that judgment. Now then, according to this
rate, let us calculate (if we can) what concurrence of proofs and witnesses a
Separated Soul will have, to settle and strengthen her in every one of her
judgments. We know, that all verities are chained and connected one to another;
and that there is no true conclusion so far remote from any other, but may, by
more or less consequences and discourses, be deduced evidently out of it: it
follows then that, in the abstracted Soul, where all such consequences are
ready drawn and seen in themselves, without extention of time or employing of
pains to collect them, every particular verity bears testimony to any other; so
that every one of them is believed and works, in the sense and virtue of all.
Out of which it is manifest, that every judgment, in such a Separated Soul,
has an infinite strength and efficacity, over any made by an embodyed one.

To sum all up in a few words. We find three roots of infinity in every action
of a Separated Soul, compared to one in the Body: First, the freedom of her
essence or substance it self: Next, that quality of hers, by which she
comprehends place and time; that is, all permanent and successive quantity: and
Lastly, the concurrence of infinite knowledges to every action of hers. Having
then this measure in our hands, let us apply it to a Well-ordered, and to a
Disordered Soul, passing out of this world: let us consider the oneset, upon
those goods, which she shall there have present, and shall fully enjoy; the
other, languishing after and pining away for those, which are impossible for
her, ever to obtain. What joy, what content, what exultation of mind, in any
living man, can be conceived so great, as to be compared with the happiness of
one of these Souls? And, what grief, what discontent, what misery can be like
the others?

These are the different effects, which the diverse manners of living in this
world cause in Souls, after they are delivered from 7. The reason why Man's
Soul requires to be in a Body, and to live for some space of time joined with
it.
their Bodies. Out of which and the discourse that has discovered these
effects to us, we see a clear resolution of that so main and agitated question
among the Philosophers, Why a rational Soul is imprisoned in a gross Body of
Flesh and Blood? In truth, the question is an illegitimate one; as supposing a
false ground: for, the Soul's being in the Body is not an imprisonment, of a
thing that was existent before the Soul and Body met together: but her being
there is the natural course of beginning that, which can no other way come into
the lists of nature. For, should a Soul, by the course of nature, obtain her
first being without a Body; either she would, in the first instant of her
being* be perfect in knowledge, or she would not: if she were, then would she be
a perfect and complete immaterial substance, not a Soul, whose nature is to be
a copartner to the Body, and to acquire her perfection by the med^ation and
service of corporeal sense^; but if she were not perfect in Science, but were
only a capacity thereto, and like white paper in which nothing were yet written,
then, unless she were (...) into a Body, she could never arrive to know any
thing, because motion and alteration are effects peculiar to Bodies. Therefore,
(...) be agreed, that she is naturally designed to be in a (...). B^t, ^er
being in a Body is her being one thing with the Body, she is sais ^o be in. And
so she is one part of a whole, which, from its weaker part, is denominated to
be a Body.

Again, since the matter of any thing is to be prepared before the end is
prepared, for which that matter is to serve; according to that Axiom Quodest
primum in intention est ultimum in executione: we may not deny, but that the
Body is in being some time before the Soul; or, at least, that it exists as
soon as she does. And therefore, it appears wholly unreasonable, to say, that
the Soul was first made out of the Body, and was afterward thrust into it;
since the Body was prepared for the Soul before, or, at least, as soon as she
had any beginning. And so we may conclude, that, of necessity, the Soul must be
begun, laid, hatched, and perfected in the Body.

And though it be true, that such Souls as are separated from their Bodies, in
the first instant of their being there, are notwithstanding imbued with the
knowledge of all things; yet is not their longer abode there in vain: not only,
because thereby the species is multiplied (for nature is not content with barely
doing that, without addition ofsome good to the Soul it self), as we for the
wonderful, and, I may say, infinite advantage, that may thereby accrue to the
Soul, if she make right use of it. For, as any act of the abstracted Soul is
infinite, in comparison of the acts which men exercise in this life, (according
to what we have already showed); so by consequence, must any increase of it be
likewise infinite. And therefore we may conclude, that a long life well spent is
the greatest and most excellent gift, which nature can bestow on a man.

The unwary reader may perhaps have difficulty, at our often 8. That the misery
ofthe Soul in the next world, proceeds out of the inequality not falsity, of
her judgments
repeating the infelicity of a miserable Soul; since we say, that it proceeds
out of the judgments, she had formerly made inthis life: which without all
doubt, were false ones; and nevertheless, it is evident, that no false
judgments can remain in a Soul, after she is separated from her Body (as we
have above determined). How then can a Soul's judgments be the cause of her
misery? But, the more heedful reader will have noted, that the misery which we
put in a Soul proceeds out of the Inequality, not out of the Falsity, of her
judgments. For, if a man be inclined to a lesser good, more than to a greater;
he will, in action, betake himself to the lessergood, and desert the greater,
(wherein, neither judgment is false, nor either inclination is naught) merely
out of the improportion of the two inclinations or judgments to the ir objects.
For, that a Soul may be duly ordered, and in a state of being well, she must
have a lesser inclination to a lesser good, and a greater inclination to a
greater good. And, in pure Spirits, these inclinations are nothing else, but
the strength of their judgments: which judgments in Soul's, while they are in
their Bodies, are made by the repetition of more acts, from stronger causes, or
in more favorable circumstances. And so it appears how, without any falsity in
any judgment, a Soul may become miserable, by her conversation in this world;
where all her inclinations generally are good, unless the disproportion of them
make them bad.

CHAP. XII. Of the perseverance of a Soul, in the state she finds her self in,
a^ her first separation from her Body.
THus we have brought Man's Soul out of the Body shelived in 1. The explication
and proof of that maxim. that, if the cause be in act, the effect must also be.
here, and by which she conversed and had commerce with the other parts of this
world; and we have assigned her her first array and stole, with which she may
be seen in the next world: so that now there remains only forus to consider,
what shallbetide her afterward, and whether any change may happen to and be
made in her, after the first instant of her being a pure Spirit, separated from
all consortship with material substances. To determine this point the more
clearly, let us call tomind an Axiom which Aristotle gives us in his Logic,
That, As it is true, if the effect be, there is a cause; so likewise it is most
true, that, if the cause be in act, or causing, the effect must also be. Which
Axiom may be understood two ways One, that, if the cause has its effect, then
the effect also is: and this is no great mystery: norfor it are any thanks due
to the teacher; itbeing but a repetition and saying-over-again of the same
thing. The other way is, that, if the cause be perfect in the nature of a
cause, then the effect is: which is as much as to say, that, if nothing be
wanting to the cause, abstracting precisely from the effect; then, neither is
the effect wanting And this is the meaning of Aristotle's Axiom: of the truth
and evidence whereof, in this sense, if any man should make the least doubt, it
were easy to evince it. As thus, If nothing be wanting but the effect, and yet
the effect does not immediately follow, it must needs be, that it cannot follow
at all: for, if it can, and does not, then something more must be done to make
it follow; which is against the supposition, that nothing was wanting; but the
effect for, that for which it is to be done, was wanting; To say, it will
follow without any change, is sensles: for, if it will follow without change,
it follows out of this which is already put: but, if it follow out of this
which is precisely put, then it follows against the supposition, which was,
that it did not follow, although this were put.

This then being evident, let us apply it to our purpose: and 2. The effects of
all such agents as work instantaneously are complete in the first instant that
the agents are put.
put three or more things, namely A. B. C. and D; whereof none can work
otherwise, than in a instant or indivisibly. And I say, that whatever these
four things are able to do, without respect to any other thing besides them, is
completely done in the first instant of their being put: and, if they remain
for all eternity, without communication or respect to any other thing, there
shall never be any innovation in any of them, or any further working among
them; but they will always remain immutable, in the same state they were in at
the very first instant of their being put. For, whatever A, can do in the first
instant, is in that first instant actually done; because he works indivisibly:
and what can be done precisely by A. and by his action joined to B. precisely
follows out of A. and his action, and out of B. and his action (if B. have any
action independent of A). And, because all these are in the same instant,
whatever follows precisely out of these and nothing else, that is in the same
instant and works indivisibly as they do, is necessarily done in that very
instant: but, all the actions of C. and D. and of whatever by reflection from
them may be done by A. and B. being all of them indivisible and following
precisely out of some of the forenamed actions, follow out of things being in
this instant; and, because they are indivisible, they may be in this instant;
therefore, all is done in this instant. Now, supposing all to be done, that can
be done by them in this instant; and that nothing can follow from them, unless
it follow precisely out of what is in this instant; and that it is all
indivisible: it follows clearly, that whatever (concerning them) is not in this
instant, can never be.

These two conclusions being thus demonstrated, let us, in 3. All pure Spirits
work instantaneously.
the next place, determine, how all actions of pure Spirits, which have no
respect to Bodies, must of necessity be indivisible; that is, must include no
continuate Succession: by which I mean such a Succession, as may be divided
into parts without end. For, if we look well into it, we shall find, that a
continuate Succession cannot be a thing, which has in it self a Being; because
the essence of such a Succession consists in having some of its parts already
past and others of them yet to come: but on the other side, it is evident, that
no such thing can be, whose essential ingredients are not it self: and therefore
it follows evidently, that such a thing, as we call Succession, can have no
being in it self; since one essential part of it never is with the other.
Therefore, such a Succession must have its being in some permanent thing, which
must be divisible; for that is essentially required in Succession: but
permanent divisibility is that which we call Bigness or Quantity; from which
pure Spirits are free: Wherefore, it is most evident, that all their actions, in
respect of themselves, are absolutely indivisible.

Now, to make use of this doctrine to our intent, we say, that, 4. That a Soul
separated from her Body cannot suffer any change, after the first instant of
her separation.
Since our Soul, when it is separated from our Body, is a pure Spirit or
Understanding; and that all her actions are indivisible; and that all actions
of other Spirits upon her must likewise be such; and by consequence, that there
can be no continuate succession of action among them: we must of necessity
conclude, that, according to the private nature of the Soul, and according to
the common notion of spiritual things, there can be no change made in her,
after the first instant of her parting from her Body; but, what happiness or
misery betides her in that instant continues with her for all eternity. Yet, it
is not my mind to say, that, by the course of the universal resolutions (from
which she is not wholly exempt) and from supernatural administration of
corporeal things, there may not result some change in her. But, the
consideration of that matter I remit to those Treatises to which it belongs; as
not depending nor ensuing from the particular nature of the Soul; and
therefore, not falling under our discussion in this place.

This same conclusion may be proved by another argument, besides this which we
have now used: and it is this; Whatever works purely by understanding or mind
cannot be changed in its operations, unless its understanding or mind be
altered: but this cannot happen, unless either it learn somewhat it knew not
before; or, forgeting a foreknown truth, it begin afterward to think a
falsity. This second part, is impossible, (as we have already showed, when we
proved that falsehood could have no admitance into a Separated Soul): and the
former is as impossible, it being likewise proved, that, at her first instant
of separation, she knows all things. Wherefore, we may hence confidently
conclude, that no change of mind, (that is no change at all) can happen to an
Abstracted Soul.

And thus, by discourse, we may arrive, to quit our selves 5 That temporal sins
are justly punished with eternal pains.
easily of that famous objection, so much pestering Christian Religion; How God
can, in justice, impose eternal pains upon a Soul, for one sin, acted in a
short space of time? For, we see, it follows by the necessary course of nature,
that, if a man die in a disorderly affection to any thing, as to his chief
good; he eternally remains, by the necessity of his own nature, in the same
affection: and there is no imparity, that, to eternal sin, there should be
imposed eternal punishment.

CONCLUSION.
ANd now, I hope, I may confidently say, I have been as good as my word: and I
doubt not, but my Reader will find it so, if he spend but half as much time in
perusing these two Treatises, as the composing them has cost me. They are too
nice (and indeed, unreasonable) who expect to attain without pains, to that,
which has cost others years of toil. Let them remember the words of holy Job.
that Wisdom is not found in the hand of those that live at their ease. Let
them cast their eyes on every side round about them; and then tell me, if they
meet with any employment, that may be compared to the attaining to these and
such like principles: whereby a man is enabled to govern himself understandingly
and knowingly, toward the happiness, both of the next life and of this; and to
comprehend the Wise-mans theme, What is good for a man in the days of his
vanity, whiles he plays the stranger under the Sun. Let us fear Gods judgments.
Let us carefully pursue the hidden bounties he has treasured up for us. Let us
thank him for the knowledge he has given us: and admire the excellency of
Christian Religion; which so plainly teaches us that, to which it is so extreme
hard to arrive by natural means. Let us bless him, that we are born to it: and
let us sing to him; that It is he who preaches his Doctrine to Jacob, and gives
his Laws to Israel. He has not done the like to all Nations; nor has he
manifested his secret Truths to them.

BUt, before I cut off this third, which has cost me so much pains to spin out
to this Length; I must crave my Readers leave, to make some use of it for my
own behoof. Hitherto my discourse has been directed to him: now I shall
entreat his patience, that I may reflect it, in a word or two, upon my self.
And as I am sure, I have profited my self not a little, by talking all this
while to him; that obliging me to polish my conceptions with more care, and to
range them into better order, than while they were but rude meditations within
my own breast: so, I hope, that a little conversation with my self upon this
important subject (which is to be studied for use and practice, not for
speculative Science) may prove advantageous to him; if his warmed thoughts have
tuned his Soul to such a key, as I am sure these considerations have wound up
mine to.

To thee then, my Soul! I now address my speech. For, since, by long debate,
and toilsome rowing against the impetuous tides of ignorance and false
apprehensions, which overflow the banks and hurry thee headlong down the
stream, while thou art imprisoned in thy clayie mansion, we have, with much
ado, arrived to aim at some little atome of thy vast greatness; and, with the
hard and tough blows of strict and wary reasoning, we have stricken out some
few sparks of that glorious light, which invirons and swells thee, or rather,
which is thee: it is high time, I should retire my self, out of the turbulent
and slippery field of eager strife and litigious disputation, to make my
accounts with thee; where no outward noise may distract, nor any thing
intermeddle between us, excepting only that Eternal Verity, which by thee
shines upon my faint and gloomy eyes, and in which I see whatever does or can
content thee in me. I have discovered that thou (my Soul) wilt survive me: and
so survive me, as thou will also survive the mortality and changes which belong
to me; and which are but accidentary to thee, merely because thou art in me.
Then shall the vicissitude of time, and the inequality of dispositions in thee,
be turned into the constancy of immortality; and into the evenness of one
being, never to end, and never to receive a change or succession to better or
worse.

When my eye of Contemplation has been fixed on this br^ght Sun, as long as it
is able to endure the radiant beams of it; whose redundant light veils the
looker on with a dark mist: let me turn it, for a little space, upon the
straight passage and narrow gullet, through which thou strivest (my Soul), with
faint and weary steps, during thy hazardous voyage upon the earth, to make thy
self away. And let me examine, what comparison there is between thy two
conditions: the present one, wherein thou now find thy self immersed in flesh
and blood; and the future state that will betide thee, when thou shall be
melted out of this gross oar, and refined from this mean alloy. Let my term of
life be of a thousand long years; longer than ever happened to our aged
forefathers: who stored the earth with their numerous progeny, by out-living
their skill to number the diffused multitudes that swarmed from their loins.
Let me, during this long space, be sole Emperor and absolute Lord of all the
huge globe of land and water, compassed with Adam's offspring. Let all my
subjects ly prostrate at my feet, with obedience and aw; distilling their
active thoughts, in studying day and night to invent new pleasures and delight
for me. Let Nature conspire with them, to give me a constant and vigorous
health; a perpetual spring of Youth, that may to the full, relish whatever
good, all they can fancy. Let gravest Prelates and greatest Princes, serve
instead of flatterers to highten my joys; and yet those joys be raised above
their power of flattery. Let the Wisdom of this vast Family (whose sentiments
are maxims and oracles, to govern the worlds beliefs and actions) esteem,
reverence, and adore me in the secretest and most recluse withdrawings of their
hearts. Let all the Wealth, which to this very day, has ever been torn out of
the bowels of the Earth, and all the Treasures, which the Sea hides from the
view of greedy men, swel round about me: whilst all the world besides, lies
gaping, to receive the crumbs, that fall neglected by me from my full laden
table. Let my imagination be as vast, as the unfathomed Universe; and my
felicity as accomplished, as my imagination can reach to: so that, wallowing in
pleasure, I be not able to think how to increase it; or what to wish for more,
than that which I possess and enjoy.

Thus, when my thoughts are at a stand, and can raise my present happiness no
higher; let me call to mind, how, this long Lease of pleasant days will in
time come to an end, this bottom of a thousand joyful years will at length be
unwound, and nothing remain of it: and then (my Soul) thy
infinitly-longer-lived Immortality will succeed, thy never ending date will
begin a new account; impossible to be sum'd up, and beyond all proportion,
infinitely exceeding the happiness we have rudely aimed to express, so that no
comparison can be admited between them. For, suppose, First, that such it were,
as the least and shortest of those manifold joys, which swel it to that height
we have fancied, were equal to all the contentment thou should enjoy in a
whole million of years: yet millions of years may be so often multiplied, as,
at length, the slender and limited contentments supposed in them may equalize
and out go the whole heap of overflowing bliss, raised so high in the large
extent of these thousand happy years. Which when they are cast into a total
sum; and I compare it with the unmeasurable Eternity, which only measures thee:
then I see, that all this huge product of Algebraical multiplication appears as
nothing, in respect of thy remaining and neverending survivance; and is less,
than the least point in regard of the immense Universe. But then, if it be true
(as it is most true) that thy least spark and moment of real happiness, in that
blessed Eternity thou hopest for, is infinitely greater and nobler, than the
whole mass of fancyed joys, of my thousand years life here on earth: how
infinitely will the value of thy duration exceed all proportion, in regard of
the felicity I had imagined my self? And, seeing there is no proportion between
them; let me sadly reflect on my own present condition: let me examine what it
is, I so busily and anxiously employ my thoughts and precious time upon: let me
consider my own courses, and whither they lead me: let me take a survey of the
lives and actions of the greatest part of the world, which make so loud a noise
about my ears. And then may I justly sigh out, from the bottom of my anguished
heart, To what purpose have I hitherto lived? To what purpose are all these
millions of toilsome Ants, that live and labor about me? To what purpose were
Caesar's and Alexander's? To what purpose Aristotle's and Archimedes's? How
miserably foolish are those conquering Tyrants, that divide the world with
their lawless Swords? What senseless Idiots those acute Philosophers, who tear
men's wits in pieces by their different ways and subtle Logic: striving to
show men Beatitudes in This World; and seeking for that, which if they had
found, were but a nothing of a nothing in respect of true Beatitude? He only is
wise, who, neglecting all that flesh and blood desires, endeavors to purchase
at any rate This Felicity, which Thy survivance promises: the least degree of
which so far surmounts all the heaps which the Giants of the earth are able to
raise; by throwing hills on hills, and striving in vain to scale and reach
those eternities, which reside above the Skies. Alas, how fondly does mankind
suffer it self to be deluded? How true it is, that the only thing necessary
proves the only that is neglected? Look up, my Soul, and fix thine eye upon
that truth, which eternal light makes so clear to thee; shining upon thy face
with so great evidence, as defies the noontide Sun, in its greatest
brightness. And this it is, that every action of thine, be it never so slight,
is mainly mischievous, or, be it never so bedeckt with those specious
considerations which the wise men of the world judge important, is foolish,
absurd, and unworthy of a man, unworthy of one that understands and
acknowledges thy dignity; if in it there be any speck, or through it there
appear any spark of those mean and flat motives, which, with a false byas, draw
any way aside, from attaining that happiness, we expect in thee. That happiness
ought to be the end and mark we level at: that, the rule and model of all our
actions: that, the measure of every circumstance, of every atome, of whatever
we bestow so precious a thing upon, as the employment of thee is.

But, we must not so slightly pass over the intenseness and vehemence of that
Felicity which thou (my Soul) shall enjoy, when thou art severed from thy
benuming compartner. I see evidently, that thou do not survive a simple and
dull essence; but art replenished with a vast and incomprehensible extent of
riches and delight within thy self. I see that golden chain, which here by long
discourses fills huge volumes of Books, and dives into the Hidden natures of
several Bodies: all in thee resumed into one circle or link, which contains in
it self the large scope of whatever screwing discourse can reach to. I see it
comprehend and master the whole world of Bodies. I see every particular nature,
as it were imbossed out to the life, in thy celestial garment. I see every
solitary substance ranked in its due place and order; not crushed or thronged
by the multitude of its fellows: but each of them in its full extent, in the
full propriety of every part and effect of it; and distinguished into more
divisions, than ever nature severed it into. In thee I see an infinite
multitude enjoy place enough. I see, that neither height, nor profundity, nor
longitude, nor latitude, are able to exempt themselves from thy defused powers:
they faddom all, they comprehend all, they master all, they enrich thee with
the stock of all; and thou thy self art all, and somewhat more than all, and yet
now but one of all. I see, that every one of this all in thee increases the
strength, by which thou know any other of the same all: and al increases the
knowledge of all, by a multiplication beyond the skill of Arithmetic; being (in
its kind) absolutely infinite, by having a nature incapable of being either
infinite or finite. I see again, that those things which have not knowledge are
situated in the lowest and meanest rank of creatures; and are in no wise
comparable to those which know. I see, there is no pleasure at all, no
happiness, no felicity, but by and in knowledge. Experience teaches me, how the
purer and nobler race of mankind adores in their hearts this idol of knowledge,
and scorns whatever else they seem to court and be fond of. And I see, that
this excess or Sea of knowledge, which is in thee, grows not by the succession
of one thought after another: but it is like a full swollen Ocean, never ebing on
any coast, but equally pushing at all its bounds, and tumbling out its flowing
waves on every side, and into every creek; so that every where it makes high
tide. Or like a pure Sun, which from all parts of it shoots its radiant beams,
with a like extremity of violence. And I see likewise, that this admirable
knowledge is not begotten and conserved in thee by the accidentary help of
defective causes, but rooted in thy self, and steeped in thy own essence; like
an unextinguishable sourse of a perpetual streaming fire, or the living head of
an everruning spring: beholding to none, out of thy self, save only to thy
Almighty Creator, and begging of none; but being in thy self all that of which
thou should beg.

This then (my Soul) being thy lot; and such a height of pleasure being
reserved for thee, such an extremity of felicity within a short space attending
thee: can any degenerate thought ever gain strength enough, to shake the
evidence which these considerations implant and rivet in thee? Can any dull
oblivion deface this so lively and so beautiful image; or any length of time
draw in thy memory a veil between it and thy present attention? Can any
perversity so distort thy straight eyes, that thou should not look always
fixed on this Mark, and level thy aim directly at this White? How is it
possible that thou can brook to live, and not expire presently; thereby to
ingulf thy self, and be thoroughly imbibed with such an overflowing bliss? Why
do thou not break the walls and chains of thy flesh and blood; and leap into
this glorious liberty? Here, Stoics, you are to use your swords. Upon these
considerations, you may justify the letting out the blood, which, by your
discourses, you seem so prodigal of. To die upon these terms is not to part
with that, which you fondly call happy life; feeding your selves, and flattering
your hearts with empty words: but rather it is, to plunge your selves into a
felicity, you were never able to imagine or frame to your misguided thoughts
any scantling of.

But, nature pulls me by the ear; and warns me from being so wrongful to her,
as to conceive that so wise a governess should, to no advantage, condemn
mankind to so long a banishment, as the ordinary extent of his dull life and
wearisom pilgrimage here under the Sun reaches to. Can we imagine, she would
allow him so much lazy time, to effect nothing in? Or can we suspect she
intends him no further advantage, than what an abortive child arrives to in his
mothers womb? For, whatever the nets and toils of discourse can circle in; all
that he, who but once knows that himself is, can attain to as fully, as he that
is enriched with the Science of all things in the world. For, the connection of
things is so linked together, that, proceeding from any one, you reach the
knowledge of many; and from many, you cannot (...) of attaining all. So that a
Separated Soul, which but knows her self, cannot choose but know her Body too;
and from her Body, she cannot miss in proceeding from the causes of them both,
as far as immediate causes proceed from others over them* and as little can she
be ignorant, of all the effects of those causes she reaches to. And thus, all
that huge mass of knowleg and happ ness, which we have considered in our last
reflection, amounts to no more, than the silliest Soul buried in warm blood can
and will infallibly attain to, when its time comes. We (...) then assure our
selves, that just nature has provided and (...) a greater measure of such
felicity for longer (...): (...) much greater, as may well be worth the pains
and (...) so miserable and tedious a passage, as here (my Soul) (...) ^gglest
through. For, certainly, if the dull percussion, which by natures institution,
hammers out a spiritual Soul from gross (...) and blood, can a^chieve so
wond^ous an effect by such (...) instruments as are used in the contriving of a
man: how can it be imagined, but that 50 or an 100 years beating upon far more
(...) elements, ^efined in so long a ^me as a child is (...) a man and arriving
to his perfect discourse, must necessarily (...) out in such a Soul a strange
and admirable excellencv, ab^ve the unlick'd form of an abortive Embryon^
Surely, those innumerable strokes (every one of which makes a strong impression
in the Soul, upon whom they beat) cannot choose but work a mighty difference in
the subject that receivs them; changing it strangely from the condition it was
in, before they begun to new mould it. What if I should say, the odds between
two such Souls may, peradventure, be not unlike the difference, between the two
wits and judgments of the subtilest Philosopher that ever was, and of the
dullest Child or Idiot living But this comparison falls too short by far: even
so much, that there is no resemblance or proportion between the things
compared. For, as the excess of great numbers one to another drowns the excess
of small ones, and makes it not considerable in respect of theirs, though they
should be in the same proportion: so, the advantages of a Soul forged to its
highest perfection in a man's Body, by its long abode there and making right use
of that precious time allowed it, must needs (in positive value, though not in
geometrical proportion) infinitely exceed, when it shall be delivered out of
prison, the advantages which the newly hatched Soul of an abortive infant shall
acquire at the breaking of its chains. In this case, I believe, no man would be
of Caesar's mind; when he wished to be rather the first man in a contemptible
poor Village, he passed through among the desert mountains, than the second man
in Rome. Let us suppose the wealth of the richest man, in that barren
habitation, to be one hundred Crowns, and that the next to him in substance had
but half so much as he; in like manner, in that opulent City, the head of the
world (where millions were as familiar as pence in other places) let the excess
of the richest man's wealth be but (as in the former) double over his that comes
next him: and there you shall find, that if the poorest of the two be worth
fifty millions, the other has fifty millions more than he: whereas the formers
petty treasure exceeds his neighbors but by fifty Crowns. What proportion is
there, in the common estimation of affairs, between that trivial sum and fifty
millions? Much less is there, between the excellency of a Separated Soul, first
perfected in its Body; and another that is let loose into complete liberty,
before its Body arrived, in a natural course, to be delivered into this world,
and by its eye to enjoy the light of it. The change of every Soul, at its
separation from the Body, to a degree of perfection, above what it enjoyed in
the Body, is in a manner infinite; and, by a like infinite proportion, every
degree of perfection it had in the Body is also then multiplied: what a vast
product, then, of infinity must necessarily be raised, by this multiplying
instant of the Souls attaining liberty, in a wellmoulded Soul; infinitely beyond
that perfection, which the Soul of an Infant, dying before it be born, arrives
to? And yet we have determined that to be, in a manner, infinite. Here our
skill of Arithmetic and proportion fails us. Here we find infinite excess,
over what we also know to be infinite. How this can be, the feeble eyes of our
limited understanding are too dull to penetrate into: but, that it is so, we
are sure; the rigor of discourse convinces and necessarily concludes it. That
assures us, that, since every impression upon the Soul, while it is in its
Body, makes a change in it; were there no others made, but merely the iterating
of those acts which brought it from ignorance to knowledge, that Soul, upon
which a hundred of those acts had wrought, must have a hundred degrees of
advantage over another, upon which only one had beaten: though, by that one, it
acquired perfect knowledge of that thing And then, in the separation, these
hundred degrees being each of them infinitely multiply'b, how infinitely must
such a Soul exceed, in that particular (though we know not how) the knowledge of
the other Soul; which, though it be perfect in its kind, yet had but one act to
forge it out? When we arrive to understand the difference of knowledge* between
the superior and inferior ranks of Intelligences; among whom, the lowest knows
as much as the highest, and yet the knowledge of the highest is infinitely more
perfect and admirable than the knowledge of his inferiors: then and not before,
we shall thoroughly comprehend this mystery. In the mean time, it is enough for
us, that we are sure thus it fares with Souls: and that, by how much the
excellency and perfection of an all-knowing and all-comprehending Soul,
delivered out of the Body of a wretched Embryon, is above the vileness of that
heavy lump of flesh, it (...) quited in its mothers womb; even by so much, and
according to the same proportion, must the excellency of a complete S^l
(completed in its Body) be in a pitch above the adorable m^esty, wisdom, and
a^gustness, of the greatest and most admired oracle in the world, living
embodyed in flesh and blood. Which as it is in a height and eminency over such
an excellent and admirable man, infinitely beyond the excess of such a man, over
that silly lump of slesh which composes the most contemp^ble Idiot or Embrvon:
so, likewise, is the excess of it, over the Soul of an abortive Embryon,
(though by the separation grown never so knowing and perfect) infinitely greater
than the dignity and wisdom of such a man is above the feebleness and misery
of a new animated child. Therefore have patience, my Soul (...) repine not at
thy longer stay here in this veil of misery, where thou art banished from those
unspeakable joys thou see at hand before thee. Thou shall have an overflowing
reward, for thy enduring and patienting in this thy darksome prison. Deprive
not thy self, through mischievous have, of the great hopes and admirable
felicity that attend thee; can thou but with due temper stay for it. Be
content to let thy stock lie out a while at interest; thy profits will come in,
in vast proportions: every year, every day, every hour, will pay thee interest
upon interest; and, the longer it runs on, the more it multiplies. And by the
account thou shall find (if thou proceedest as thou should) that one moment
oft-times brings in a greater increase to thy stock of treasure, than the many
years thou did live and trade before: and, the longer thou live, the
thicker will these moments arrive to thee. In like manner as in Arithmetical
Numeration, every addition of the least Figure multiplies the whole sum it
finds. Here thou will prove how true that rich man said, who of his gains
pronounced, that he had gotten little with great labor, and great sums with
little: So, if thou bestow'st well thy time, thy latter sums will bring thee in
huge accounts of gain, upon small expense of pains or employment; whereas thy
first beginings are toilsome and full of pain, and bring in but slender profit.

By this time, my Soul, I am sure thou art satisfied, that the excess of
knowledge and pleasure, which thou shall enjoy, is vastly beyond any thou art
capable of here. But, how may we esteem the just proportion they have to one
another? Or rather, is not the pleasure of a Separated Soul so infinitely beyond
all that can be relished by one embodied here in clay, that there is no
proportion between them? At least, though we are not able to measure the one,
let us do our best to aim and guess at the improportion between them: and
rejoice that we find it beyond our reach to conceive or imagine any thing, nigh
the truth and huge excess of thy good (my Soul) over the most I am capable of
in this world. It Is agreed, that the vehemence and intensness of any pleasure
is proportionable to the activity, power, and energy of the subject, which is
affected with such pleasure: and to the gravitation bent, and pressure such a
subject has to the object that delights it. Now, to rove at the force and
activity, wherewith a Separated Soul weighs and strives to join it self to what
its nature carries it to; let us begin with considering the proportion of
celerity and forcibleness wherwhith heavy bodies move downwards. I see, a pound
weight, in one scale of the Balance, weighs up the other empty one with great
celerity: But, if into that you imagine a million of pounds to be put; you may
well conceive, that this great excess would carry up the single pound weight
with so much violence and speed, as would hardly afford your eye liberty to
observe the velocity of the motion. Let me multiply this million of pounds by
the whole globe of the Earth; by the vast extent of the great Orb, made by the
Sun's or Earth's motion about the center of the World: by the
incomprehensibility of that immense storehouse of matter and of bodies, which
is designed in lump by the name of the Universe; of which we know no more, but
that it is beyond all hope of being known, during this mortal life. Thus when I
have heaped together a bulk of weight, equal to this unweildy machine; let me
multiply the strength of its velocity and pressure, over the least atome
imaginable in nature, as far beyond the limits of gravity, as the ingenious
skill wherwhith Archimedes numbered the least grains of sand that would fill the
world, can carry it. And when I have thus wearied my self, and exhausted the
power of Arithmetic and of A^gebra, I find there is still a proportion
betweent hat atome and this unutterable weight; I see it is all quantitative
all finite and all this excess vanishes to nothing and becomes invisible (like
twinkling Stars, at the rising of the much brighter Sun,) as soon as the lowest
and meanest Substance shines out of that orb, where they reside that scorn
divisibility, and are out of the reach of quantity and matter. How vehement
then must the activity and energy be, where with so puissant a Substance shoots
itself to its desired object? and, when it injoyes it, how violent must the
ecstasy and transport be, wherewith it is delighted? How is it possible then
form^ narrow heart, to frame an apprehension of the infinite excess of thy
pleasure (my Soul) over all the pleasure this limited world ca^ afford; which
is all measured by such petty proportions. How should I stamp a figure of thy
immense greatness, into my material imagination? Here I loose my power of
speaking, because I have too much to speak of: I must become silent and dumb,
because all the words and language I can use express not the thousandth, nor
the millionth, part, of what I evidently see to be true. All I can say is, that
whatever I think or imagine is not That: and that it is not like any of those
things; to some of which unless it be like, it is impossible for me to make any
proportion or similitude to it. What then shall I do, but lay my self down in
mine own shadow; and there rejoice that Thou art a light so great, as I am not
able to endure the dazzling splendour of thy rays: that thy pleasure is so
excessive, as no part of it can enter into my circumscribed heart; without
dilating it so wide, that it must break in sunder: and that thy happiness is so
infinite, as the highest pitch I can hope for to glut my self with, during this
dark night of my tedious pilgrimage here on earth, is to see evidently, that it
is impossible for me, in this life to frame any scantling of it; muchless, to
know how great it is. Shall I then once again presume to break out into
impatience, at my delay of so great bliss; and cry out, that I am content with
the meanest share of this exuberant felicity? I care not for the exaggerations
which a longer life may heap up to it. I am sure here is sufficient to swell my
heart beyond it self, to satisfy my thirsty Soul, to dissolve and melt all my
powers, and to transform me totally into a self-blessed creature. Away, away
all tedious hopes, not only in this life, but even of all increase in the next.
I will leap boldly into that fountain of Bliss, and cast my self headlong into
that sea of Felicity; where I can neither apprehend shallow waters, nor fear I
shall be so immersed and drowned, as to meet with any shelf or dry ground, to
moderate and stint my happiness. A self-activity, an unbounded extent, an
essence free from time and place, assure me sufficiently that I need desire no
more. Which way soever I look, I lose my sight, in seeing an infinity round
about me. Length without points: Breadth without Lines: Depth without any
surface. All content, all pleasure, all restless rest: all an unquietness and
transport of delight, all an ecstasy of fruition.

Happy forgetfulness, how deeply am I obliged to thee, for making room for this
Soul-ravishing contemplation; by removing this, while all other images of
things be far from me? I would to God thou might endure, whiles I endure;
that so I might be drowned in this present thought, and never wake again, but
into the enjoying and accompletion of my present enflamed desires. But alas,
that may not be. The eternal light, whom my Soul and I have chosen for Arbiter,
to determine to us what is most expedient for us, will not permit it. We must
return; and that into fears and miseries: For, as a good life breeds increase
of happiness, so does an evil one heap up Iliads of woe. First (my Soul), before
I venture, we should be certain, that thy parting from this life waft thee over
to assured happiness. For, thou well know, that there are noxious actions;
which deprave and infect the Soul, while it is forging and moulding here in its
Body, and tempering for its future Being: and, if thou should sally hence in
such a pervers disposition, unhappiness would betide theeinstead of thy
presumed Bliss. I see some men so ravenous after those pleasures, which cannot
be enjoyed out of the Body, that, if those impotent desires accompany their
Souls into Eternity, I cannot doubt of their enduring an eternity of Misery: I
cannot doubt of their being tormented with such a dire extremity of
unsatisfiable desire and violent grief, as were able to tear all this world
into pieces, were it converted into one heart; and to rive in sunder any thing
less than the necessity of contradiction. How high the Bliss of a well-governed
Soul is above all power of quantity, so extreme must be the ravenous inclemency
and Vulture-like cruelty of such an uncompassable desire gnawing eternally upon
the Soul; for the same reason holds in both: and, which way soever the
gravitation and desires of a Separated Soul carry it, it is hurried on with a
like impetuosity and unlimited activity. Let me then cast a heedful and wary
eye on the actions of the generality of mankind; from whence I may guess at the
weal or woe of their future state: and, if I find that the greatest number
weighs down in the scale of misery, have I not reason to fear lest my lot
should prove among theirs? For, the greatest part sweeps along with it every
particular, that has not some particular reason to exempt it from the general
law. Instead, then, of a few, that wisely settle their hearts on legitimate
desires; what multitudes of wretched men do I see: some hungry after Flesh and
Blood, others gaping after the empty wind of Honor and Vanity, others
breathing nothing but Ambitious thoughts, others grasping all and groveling
upon heaps of melted Earth? So that they put me all in a horror; and make me
fear, lest very few they be, that are exempted from the dreadful fate of this
incomprehensible misery, to which I see, and grieve to see, the whole face of
mankind desperately turned. May it not then be my sad chance, to be one of
their unhappy number? Be content then, fond man, to live. Live yet, till thou
have first secured the passage which thou art but once to venture on. Be sure,
before thou throwst thy self into it, to put thy Soul into the Scales: balance
all thy thoughts, examine all thy inclinations, put thy self to the test, try
what dross, what pure gold is in thy self; and what thou find wanting, be
sure to supply, before nature calls thee to thy dreadful account. It Is soon
done, if thou be what thy nature dictates thee to be. Follow but evident
reason and knowledge; and thy wants are supplied, thy accounts made up. The same
evershining truth, which makes thee see that two and two are four, will show
thee, without any contradiction, how all these base allurements are vain and
idle: and that there is no comparison between the highest of them, and the
meanest of what thou may hope for; have thou but strength to settle thy heart
by the steerage of this most evident Science. In this very moment thou may be
secure: But, the hazard is great, in missing to examine thy self truly and
thoroughly: And, if thou miscarry there, thou art lost for ever. Apply therefore
all thy care, all thy industry to that: Let that be thy continual study, and
thy perpetual entertainment: Think nothing else worth the knowing, nothing else
worth the doing; but screwing up thy Soul to this height, but directing it by
this level, by this rule. Then fear not, nor admit the least doubt of thy being
happy, when thy time shall come; and that time shall have no more power over
thee. In the mean season, spare no pains, forbear no diligence, employ all
exactness: burn in Summer, freeze in Winter, watch by night, and labor by day;
join months to months, entail years upon years. Think nothing sufficient to
prevent so main a hazard; and deem nothing long or tedious in this life, to
purchase so happy an Eternity. The first discoverers of the Indies cast
themselves among swarms of Man eaters; they fought and strugled with unknown
ways: so horrid ones, that often times they persuaded themselves they climbed up
mountains of waters, and straight again were precipitated headlong down between
the cloven sea, upon the foaming sand, from whence they could not hope for a
resource. Hunger was their food, Snakes, and Serpents were their dainties;
sword and fire were their daily exercise: and all this, only to be masters of a
little Gold, which after a short possession, was to quit them for ever. Our
searchers after the Northern passage have cut their way through mountains of
ice, more affrightful and horrible, than the Simplegades. They have imprisoned
themselves in half-year nights; they have chained themselves up in perpetual
stone-cleaving colds: some have been found closely embracing one another, to
conserve, as long as they were able, a little sewell in their freezing hearts;
at length petrefy'd by the hardness of that unmerciful winter. Others have been
made the prey of inhumane men more savage, than the wildest Beasts: others have
been never found nor heard of; so that surely they have proved the food of ugly
monsters of that vast icy Sea. And these have been able and understanding men.
What motives, what hopes had these daring men? What gains could they promise
themselves, to countervail their desperate attempts? They aimed not so much as
at the purchase of any treasure for themselves; but merely to second the desires
of those that set them on work, or to fill the mouths of others, from whence
some few crumes might fall to them. What is required at thy hands (my Soul)
like this? And yet the hazard thou art to avoid, and the wealth thou art to
attain, imcomparably over-sets all that they could hope for. Live then, and be
glad of long and numerous years: that, like ripe fruit, thou may drop
securely into that passage; which duly entered into, shall deliver thee into an
eternity of Bliss and unperishable happines^.

And yet (my Soul) be thou not too sore aghast, with the apprehension of the
dreadful hazard thou art in. Let not a tormenting fear of the dangers that
surround thee make thy whole life here bitter and uncomfortable unto thee. Let
the serious and due consideration of them arm thee with caution and wisdom to
prevent miscarriage by them: But, to look upon them with horror and
affrightedness would freez thy spirits, and benum thy actions; and peradventure
engulf thee, through, pusillanimity, in as great misch^iefs, as thou seek to
avoid. It Is true, the harm, which would accrue from misgoverning thy passage
out of this life, is unspeakable, is unimaginable: But, why should thou take
so deep thoughts of the hazard thou runst therein; as though the difficulty, of
avoiding it were so extreme; as might amount to an impossibility? I allow, the
thoughts, that arm thee with wise caution to secure thy self, cannot be too
deep nor too serious; but, when thou have providently stored thy self with
such, call thy spirits manfully about thee. And, to encourage thee to fight
confidently, or rather to secure thee of victory, so thouwilt not forsake thy
self, turn thine eyes round about thee; and consider how wise Nature, that has
prescribed an end and period to all her Plants, has furnished them all with
due and orderly means to artain thereto: and, though particulars sometimes
miscarry in their journey (since contingency is entayl'd to all created
things), yet in the generality, and for the most part, they all arrive to the
scope she levels them at. Why then should we imagine, that so judicious and
farlooking an Architect, whom we see so accurate in his meaner works, should
have framed this masterpiece of the world, to perish by the way: and never to
attain that great end, for which he made it; even after it is prepared and armed
with all advantageous circumstances agreeable to its nature. That Artificer, we
know, deserves the style of silly, who frames such tools, as fail in their
performance, when they are applied to the action for which they were intended.
We see all sorts of Trees, for the most part, bear their fruit, in due season;
which is the end they are designed to, and the last and highest emolument they
are made to afford us. Few Beasts, we see, there are, but contribute to our
service what we look for from them. The Swine affords good flesh, the Sheep
good wool, the Cow good milk, the Sable warm and soft fur; the Ox bends his
sturdy neck to the yoke, the spiritful Horse dutifully bears the Soldier, and
the sinewy Mule and stronger Camel Convey weighty merchandise. Why, then, shall
even the better sort of Mankind, the chief, the top, the head of all the works
of Nature* be apprehended to miscarry from his end; in so vast a proportion, as
that it should be deemed in a manner impossible, even for those few (for so
they are, in respect of the other numerous multitude of the worser sort) to
attain to that felicity which is natural to them? Thou (my Soul) art the form,
and that supreme part of me, which gives being both to me and to my body: who
then can doubt, but that all the rest of me is framed fitting and serviceable
for thee? For, what reason were there, that thou should be implanted in a
soil which cannot bear thy fruit? The form of a Hog, I see, is engrafted in a
body fit and appropriated for a Swines operations: the form of a Horse, of a
Lion, of a Wolf, all of them have their organs proportioned to the mastering
piece within them, their Soul. And is it credible that only Man should have his
inferior parts raised so highly in rebellion against his Soul, the greatest
Mistress (beyond proportion) among all forms: as that it shall be impossible
for her to suppress their mutinies, though she guide her self never so exactly
by the prescripts of that rule, which is born with her? Can it be suspected,
that his form, which is infinitely mounted above the power of Matter, should,
through the very necessity and principles of its own nature, be more liable to
contingency, than those that are engulfed and drowned in It? since, we know,
that contingency, defectibility, and change, are the chidren of gross and
misshapen matter.

Alas, it is too true, that nature is in us unhappily wrested from her original
and due course. We find by sad experience, that, although her depravation be
not so total, as to blind entirely the eye of Reason she sees by; yet it is so
great, as to carry vehemently our affections quite cross to what she proposes
us as Best. However, let the Incentives of flesh and blood be never so violent,
to tumble humane nature down the hill; yet, if a contrary force, more
efficacious, than they with all their turhulent and misty steams, impel it
another way, it must needs obey that stronger power. Let us then examine whose
motives the Soul's or the Sense's, in their own nature, work most efficaciously
in Man. We are sure, that what pleasure he receivs, he receivs by means of his
Soul; even all corporal pleasure: for, be the working object never so agreeable
and pleasing to him, he reaps thence small delight, if, in the mean time, his
Soul's attention be carried another way from it. Certainly then, those things
must affect the Soul most powerfully, which are connatural to her; and which
she seises on and relishes immediately: rather those impure ones, which come
sophisticated to her, through the muddy channels of the Senses. And
accordingly, all experience teaches us, that her pleasures, when they are fully
savored, are much stronger, than the pleasures of our Senses. Observe but the
different comportments of an Ambitious, and of a Sensual man: and you will
evidently perceive far stronger motions, and more vehement strains, in the
former, who has his desires bent to the satisfaction of his Mind; than in the
other, who ayms but at the pleasures of his Body. Let us look upon the common
face of mankind; and we shall see the most illustrious and noble part taken
with Learning* with Power, with Honor; and the other part which makes Sense
their Idol, moves in a lower and baser orb under the others, and is in a
servile degree to them. Since then humane nature is of it self more inclined to
the contentments of the active mind, than of the dull sense: who can doubt, but
that the way of those pure contentments must be far sweeter, than the gross and
troubled streams of sensual pleasures? Which if it be, certainly man, in his
own nature, is more apt to follow that; and when he chances to wander out of
that smooth and easy road, his steps are painful and wearisome ones: and, if
he do not presently perceive them such, it is, because it fares with him, as
with those that walk in their sleep, and stray into rough and stony passages,
or among thistles and briars, whiles, peradventure, some illuding dream
bewitches their fancies, and persuades them they are in some pleasant garden;
till waking, (if, at least, they wake before they fall into a deadly precipice)
they find their feet all gored, and their bodies all scratched and torn. If any
sensual man should doubt of this great truth, and find it hard to persuade
himself, that intellectual pleasures (which, to his depraved taste, seem cold
and flat ones) should be more active and intense, than those feculent ones,
which so violently transport him: let him but exercise himself a while in those
entertainments which delight the mind, taking leave, during that space, of
those unruly ones which agitate the body; and continue doing thus, till, by
long practice, he has made them easy, and babituated himself to them. And, I
will engage my word, that he will find this change so advantageous to him, even
in contentment and delight; that he will not easily be brought back to his
former course of life. Experience shows us, that whatever is long customary to
us turns into our nature: so much that even diseases and poisons, by di^turne
use, mould and temper to themselves those bodies which are habituated to them;
in such sort, that those pests of nature must be kept on foot, and fed on for
our sustenance. How much more then, must the most connatural exercise of mental
pleasure turn so substantially into our being, that, after some good practice
in it, we shall not be able, without great struggling and reluctation, to live
without it.

The violence of fruition in those foul puddles of flesh and blood presently
gluts with satiety, and is attended with annoy and dislike: and the often using
and repeating it, wears away that edg of pleasure, which only makes it sweet
and valuable, even to them that set their hearts on it; and nothing heightens
it, but an irritation by a convenient hunger and abstinence. Contrariwise, in
the Soul, the greater and more violent the pleasure is, the more intense and
vehement the fruition is: and, the oftener it is repeated, so much the greater
appetite and desire we have to return to the same; and nothing provokes us
more, than the entire and absolute fruition of it. If a sudden change, from
one extreme of flesh and blood, to the other opposite pole of spiritual
delights and entertainments, seem harsh to him, whose thoughts, by long
assuefaction, are glew'd to corporal objects; let him begin with gently
bridling in his inferior motions under a fair rule of government: If he cannot
presently suppress and totally mortify their clamorous desires* let him at
least moderate and steer them according to the bent of reason. If we will but
follow this course which nature teaches us, to heighten even our sensual
delights and pleasures, by reasonable moderation of them to their own
advantage; we shall find her so kind a mother to us, that of her self she will
a^ length quel and dis-ncumber us of all our enemies. If we but temparately
attend her work, she will quietly waft us over to our desired end, to our
beloved happiness. In a few years, by boiling away our unruly heat, she will
abate, and in the end, quite wear away the sense of those transporting
pleasures, we used to take so much delight in the fruition of. With in a while,
rheums will so clog our tongue and palates, that we shall but flatly relish the
most poinant meats. Our dul^'d ear's will no longer devour with delight the
ravishing sound of sweet harmonies. Our dim eyes will carry to our heavy fancy
but confused news of any beautiful and pleasing objects. Our stopped nosethrils
will afford no passage for spiritual perfumes, to warn and recreate our moist
and drowsy brain. In a word, nature will ere long, warn us to take a long
farewell of all those contentments and delights, which require a strong,
vigorous and athletike habit of body to enjoy. She will show us, by seting our
graves before our eyes, how vain this glitering fancy of Honor is: how
unprofitable the staff of Power, to underprop our falling being: how more
burdensome than helpful are those massy heaps of Gold and Silver, which when
we have, the greatest use we make of them is but to look on them and court them
with our dazzled eyes; while they encompass us with armies of traitors and
hungry wolves, to tear them from us, and us in pieces for their sake. Thus
will nature of her self, in a short time, dull those weapons that offend us;
and destroy the enemies of those verities that shine upon us. Courage then, my
Soul; and neither fear to live, nor yet desire to die. If thou continuest in
thy Body, it is easy for thee, and sweet and contentsome, to heap up treasures
for Eternity: And, if thou partest from it, thy hopes are great and fair, that
the journey thou art going is to a world of unknown felicity. Take heart then,
and march on with a secure diligence and expect the hand of bounteous nature,
to dispose of thee, according as she has wisely and benignly provided for
thee. And fear not but that, if thou have kept a reasonable amity with her, she
will pass thee to where thou shall never more be in danger of jaring with her;
nor of feeling within thy self the unkind blows of contrary powers fighting in
thee, whiles thou bleedest with the wounds that each side gives: nor of
changing thy once gained happiness into a contrary condition, according to the
vicissitudes of all humane affairs; But shall for ever be swelled, to the
utmost extent of thy infinite nature, with this torrent, with this abiss of
joy, pleasure, and delight.

But here (my Soul) well may thou stand amazed at this great word, For ever.
What will this be, when fleeting time shall be converted into permanent
Eternity? Sharpen thy sight to look into this vast profundity. Suppose that
half an hour were resumed into one instant or indivisible of time: what a
strange kind of durance would that be? I see, that half an hour is divisible
without end, into halfs, and halfs of halfs, and quarters of quarters; and,
after myriads of divisions, no parcel is so little, but that it has an
infinite superproportion to an indivisible instant. What a prodigious thing,
then, must it be, to have an instant equalize half an hour? Were it but some
ordinary notion or quiddity (as, of magnitude, of place, of activity, or the
like), in which this excellency, of an indivisibles equalizing a large extent,
were considered; my fantasy would offer to wrestle with it: and peradventure,
by strong abstraction, and deep retirement into the Closet of Judgment, I might
hazard to frame some likeness of it. But, that, wherein this multiplication is,
is the noblest, the highest, and the root of all other notions; it is Being and
Existence it self. I my self, while I am, have my existence determined but to
one poor instant of time; and, beyond, that I am assured of nothing. My slender
thread of Being may break, I still find it may break asunder, as near to that
instant, as I can suppose any thing to be near it: and when I shall have
supposed Here, it may break nearer and nearer; and I can never arrive to settle
the nearest point where it may snap in two. But when time shall be no more; or
at least, shall, in respect of me, be turned into Eternity: this, this frail
Existence of mine, will be stretched out beyond the extent of all-conquering
time. What stange thing, then is this admirable multiplication of Existence: or
how may I be able to comprehend it? Existence is that which comprehends all
things: and, if God be not comprehended in it, thereby it is, that he is
incomprehensible of us; and he is not comprehended in it, because himself is
it. He is existence: and, by being so, he equals, not comprehends it. From
hence, then, I may gather the excellency and vast empire of Existence, in its
own nature: and so conclude, how admirable a change and betterment that must
be, which increases and multiplies so infi^ly the existence I now enjoy. For,
be it never so specious, be it never so glorious, be it what it is, Existence,
the top, the flower, the perfection of all created things; still there is a
flaw, there is a defect, a shortness, limitation is in it. For now, my Soul,
thou art but a part of me; and do exist in such a manner by succession, that
thy security and possession of it is of less than of any thing whatever in the
world: for it is of nothing more than of an indivisible; which, being such, in
truth is nothing. But, when the walls shall be broken down, that here confine
thee to such a nothing of existence, (which yet is infinitely more noble, than
all other degrees of notions); then thou shall sum up time in formal Being, and
not be limited, as now thou art, to this so divided a succession. Thou shall be
an hour without divisibility: and, if an hour, a year; if so, an age; and, if
an age, then for ever, for all Eternity.

But whither art thou flown, my Soul? to what a daz'ling height art thou
mounted? Thou art now soared to such a lessening pitch, as my faint eyes are no
longer able to follow thy touring flight. My head grows giddy, with gazing up;
while thou look down, to see Time run an infinite distance beneath thee:
wafting the existences of all corporal things from nothing to nothing, in a
perpetual stream; and thou secure, and out of the reach of its venomous and
all-destroying tooth. Let me call to mind all the violent pleasures of my heady
youth; let me sum up their extent, according to those deceitful measures I then
rated happiness by; let me, in my fancy, chew ove^ again the excessive good, I
then fondly imagined in them and to all this let me add as much more joy and
felicity, as, in my weak thoughts, I am able to fathom or but aim at: and then
let me say (and with rigorous truth I shall say it) all this excess of Bliss
will be resumed; will be enjoyed to the full, in one indivisible moment. Let me
think with myself, if then, when pleasure was the Idol I sacrifiz'd all my
thoughts so, I might, in one quarter of an hour, have enjoyed a pleasure, or,
at least, have hoped for one that should have equalized at once all those, that
in my life I ever tasted: what would not I have been content to give, in
purchase of that single quarter of an hour? And, instead of this pleasant
dream, I now see, that one real moment will truly and solidly give thee and me
the Quintessence, the Elixir of content and happiness; not drawn out of such
forty years, as I have strug'led through the world in various fortunes; but out
of ages and ages of pleasure, greater far, than can be conceived, by a heart of
flesh, and multiplied beyond the Arithmetic of Intelligences. And this happy
moment shall not be of their sudden fleeting and expiring nature, that are
assigned to time: but shall endure beyond the extent of that time, which
surpasses all multiplication. I see plainly, that I must multiply Eternity by
Eternity; to frame a scantling of that Bliss, which a wel-passed life in this
world shall bring me to in the next. And yet it will be as far short, and as
much beneath the self-blessedness of him that gives me this; as Nothing is
short of All that is. For, my Bliss shall have a beginning; and, though it never
shall have end, yet that belongs not to it for its own sake, but proceeds
merely from the bounteous hand of the nothing annihilating Self-Essence: from
whom there is no more fear of the failing of his liberal super-effluence of
Being upon me, than there is of his own deficiency from being Self-Being. But
how can these things stand together? that indivisibly I shall possess a tenure
beyond all possible time; and nevertheless, possibly, notwithstanding my
possession, I may be bereft of what I enjoy? Who can read this Riddle? who can
dive into this Abiss? who can shoot light into this infinite pit of darkness?
It is the abundance and excess of light that here strikes us blind. Who can
strengthen our eyes, to endure Eagle-wise this glorious and resplendent S^n?
Nothing, sure, in this world; unless it be Silence and Solitude. To these
therefore let us consecrate the reverend contemplation of this awful mystery:
which is but profaned, if it be exposed to vulgar eyes, and to such night-Owls
and Bats as we are; while the troubled fantasies of reeking sense and worldly
occupations, over-cloud my airy thoughts.

Now then, if Nature, by short and thick steps at the beginning, and by large
paces in the progress, has delivered us over into a night of pure light; where
we can see nothing, because every thing is too visible: so that we are fain to
veil our eyes, and constrained to retire our selves, to medicate and arm them,
before we expose them to so strong and glorious beams. How should we dare to
look upon those admirable heights (infinitely surpassing all these) with which
the overconquering Grace has crowned and swelled up the extent of Nature? What
sight is sharp enough to penetrate into the mysterious Essence, sprouting into
different Persons? Who can look upon the self-multiply'd Unity, upon the
incomprehensible Circumincession, upon those wondrous Processions, and Idiomes
reserved for Angels eyes?

Of these (my Soul), whose shootings reach infinitely higher beyond all that we
have said, than what we have said is beyond the dull and muddy motions of this
life; thou art not capable now of receiving any instructions. Let first the
Mystagogical illuminations of the great Areopagite, and the Ascetike discipline
of the Anachoretical inhabitants of the Wilderness, purify thy eye; before
thou attemptest to speak, or to aim at the discovery of these abisming depths.
By them thou must be, first, irrigated with the sweet shours of mornings and
evenings, with the gentle dews, and manna-drops, which fall abundantly from
those bounteous favors that reside in a higher sphere than Nature; and that
pour out unknown and unconceiveable blessings upon prepared hearts: which
fructify into that true Bliss; in comparison whereof, all that we have
hitherto declared is but shadow, vanity, and nothing.

FINIS.

