A CHOICE COLLECTION OF RARE SECRETS AND EXPERIMENTS IN Philosophy.

AS ALSO Rare and unheard of Medicines, Menstruums, and Alkahests; with the
True Secret of Volatilizing the fixed Salt of TARTAR.

COLLECTED And Experimented by the Honorable and truly Learned Sir Kenelm
Digby, Knight. Chancellor to Her Majesty the Queen Mother.

Hitherto kept Secret since his Decease, but now Published for the good and
benefit of the Public,

By GEORGE HARTMAN.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by William Cooper, at the
Pelican in Little Britain; and Henry Faithorne and John Kersey, at the Rose in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT, Lord Paston, Baron of Paston, Vicount and
Earl of Yarmouth.
My Lord,
IT is not my intention, nor indeed my Talent, to Celebrate those Excellent
Virtues, which shine so eminently bright in your Lordship: For they are Themes
only fit to be treated on by the strongest Pen, and their Native Worth and
Resplendency are their own sufficient Panegyricks.

Yet such is the Veneration I have for the Excellent Qualities and Endowments
of your Noble Mind, and those Heroic inclinations, that move your Honor to
make such exact, diligent, and curious search into all the Secrets and
Mysteries of Nature, and encourage all others that Labor therein, that I
cannot forbear being so vain as to publish my resentments thereof to the World.
These Reasons, My Lord, together with the consideration of your inbred Candor
and Generosity, encouraged me to the boldness of committing this small Treatise
to your Honors Patronage and Protection: To whom I know it will be more
welcome, as containing in it the Choice Observations, both in Physic and
Chemistry, of that Famous Man, and great Privy Councellor of Nature, Sir K. D.
A Name, My Lord, that has peculiar Charms with it, to recommend all that are
under its great shadow, to the value and consideration of all the diligent, the
Learned, and the Honorable: So great a Person (may I assume the vanity to say
so) I had the Honor and Happiness for several Years to Serve, beyond the Seas,
as well as in England, and to attend on him mo^^ particularly in the Production
of many of h^^ incomparable Experiments, and so to contin^^ till his dying day;
when he left with me tho^^ Choice things contained in this little Treatise.

And since I fear they suffer diminution (...) their Worth and Beauty, by
passing through my mean Hands, and weak Managery, thought I could make no
better Atonement than by recommending them to receive R^cruits and
Reinforcements from the Splendo^^ and Eminency of your Illustrious Name. To
that end therefore I take the Boldness to prostrate them at your Honors Feet,
where a^^ in all Humility lies

Your Honors Most Obedient, and Most Devoted Servant, George Hartma^

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THIS Trea^ise contains some of the Choicest Collections of the Famous Sir
Kenelm Digby (some whereof have been wrought by his own hands, some
communicated to him by Learned Men of all Nations) in praise whereof no more
need be said, but, that they are his; either of his production, or of his
approbation. I shall therefore, omitting other Artifices and Insinuations, only
satisfy the Reader with all the clearness and ingenuity I can, how I came by
them; and thereby I question not, but I shall very successively recommend this
Collection of them to all Ingenious Lovers of Art, whose Ears the Fame of the
Worthy Author has reached.

To this End I must acquaint him, that I had the Honor several years to wait
upon Sir Kenelm, and to have several of his Manuscripts in my Custody, more
particularly this with others was committed to my Charge, when my Worthy Master
intended a Journey to France for his Healths sake, and to settle his Affairs
there: And he had Progressed in his designed Journey as far as Cittenburn, when
a violent Distemper forced him back again to his own House in Covent Garden;
and in three days after his return, left the Learned World to lament the loss
of so great a Man. And here besides his incomparable self, his Friends and
Country lost also the benefit of his Famous Library he had in France (which
for want of his being Naturalized) fell into the French King^ hands, who
bestowed it upon a Gentleman, and it was sold (as I was credibly informed) for^
ten thousand Crowns. In which no doubt were Manuscripts of his own, of very
great worth and rich value, and might have much obliged the World, had they
fallen into the hands of Generous and Communicative Men.

But it was my happiness to have, among some other Manuscripts of his, the sole
Propriety of this Choice Manual, which contains rare and profitable Secrets in
Philosophy and Chemistry, delivered with more perspicuity and plainness than is
yet to be found in any Chemical Book: Yea, such, that any understanding Reader
may with great facility be conducted as with an Ariadnean Line into the most
intricate and hitherto fatigating Arcana of Chemistry. Here are the true
Menstruums and Alkahests, and that hitherto hidden Secret of Volatilizing the
fixed Salt of Tartar without any Heterogene Substance, being the true Vegetable
Menstruum; with many other rare and unheardof Medicines, some whereof I had a
mind to reserve for my self, and not to Publish them during my Life, because of
the great Experience, and the good Success I have had with them in desperate
cases; but Impium est ta^ere, quae si promulgata essent, multorum misere
decumbentium, in levamen extarent. It Is Impious and unchristian to forbear the
Publication of those things, which being rendered Public, will effectually
redound to the Advantage and Comfort of miserable Men.

I have Translated most of these Secrets out of the Latin, French, German, and
Italian Tongues. And if I have committed any indecencies against the Idiom of
the English Speech, I hope the Candid Reader will forgive a Foreigner. As for
any Ornaments and Embellishments of Language, as the Work requires no such
Painting, so the Publishers Foreign Style and mean Talents are not able to
afford it.

I have no more to acquaint the Reader with, but that these Secrets had been
Communicated to him long before, but that have been most part of my time since
my Excellent Masters Decease, abroad: However, I hope they will be now kindly
entertained. For it is the height of my Ambition to make the Memory of my
incomparable Master to Live, who was my private, and the Worlds public
Benefactor, which can no where do so with such Advantage as in his Learned
Works, for thereby being dead he yet speaks and instructs.

And though it be no addition to his Glorious Name, yet for the Wit and
smartness of the thing, and the Readers diversion, I shall conclude here with
that Elegant Epitaph made on him by the Ingenious Dr. Farrar, which is as
follows.

AN EPITAPH UPON The Honorable and Truly Noble Sir Kenelm Digby, Knight.
Chancellor to Her MAJESTY THE Queen Mother.
UNder this Tomb the Matchless Digby lies;
Digby the Great, the Valiant, and the Wise:
This Ages Wonder for his Noble Parts,
Skilled in Six Tongues, and Learned in all the Arts.
Born on the Day He Died, The Eleventh of June,
And that Day Bravely Fought at Scandaroun^
It Is Rare, that one and the same Day should be
His Day of Birth, of Death, and Victory.
R. F.
THE INDEX.
A.
ANimation and Preparation of Common. Page 26. 83, 84, 85. Aurum Potabile, from
the Marchioness de Beck. 245. A. R. Philosophical. 94. An unheard of Arcanum.
188. An Ethereal Aurum potabile. 177. The Arcanum of Flamel, Arte^ius, and
Pontanus, etc. 117.
B.
BUtter of antimony to extract the Tincture of. 61. Butter of antimony without
Sublimate. 78. A Work with Butter of antimony. 58. A Precious Balsam. 264.
C.
CAlx of. 129. Cosmetick prepared out of. 132. Coppels how to make. 140. A Work
upon Cinaber. 52. Cray-Fishes to engender. 131. A great Corroborant and
Sudorifick. 173. Convulsion Fits to Cure. 226. Cancers to Cure. 231. A Laxative
and Emetick Cream of Tartar. 248, 249.
D.
THE Danes Work, wrought by Sir K. D. 33. Monsieur Dandre's Work with,, and
Sulphur-vive transparent, with Observations thereupon. 5. A great Diaphoretick
of antimony. 213. Decoction Sudorifick. 216. Dropsy to Cure. 200, 201, 24.
Deafness to Cure. 262.
E.
EXtraction of of antimony. 65. 72. 75. 77. 79, 80, 81. Elixir of, antimony,
and. 69. Elixir of and. 70. Elixir Album. 16. Elixir Rubrum. 71. Elixir of
Sulphur. 210. Extraction of of or. 73. Essence of Sulphur. 209. Epilepsie Cured
by Sir K. D. at Frankfort. 197, 198.
F.
FLux or Looseness to Cure. 257. Fixation of into. 116. 21. 26. 62. 65.
Monsieur R's. Fixation of by the Salt of. 103. To fix a quarter part of into.
52. Mallus his Process to fix. 63. Fixation of into with good Profit. 43
Fixation of by the Salt of, by Captain Zeigler. 49. Fixation of of antimony.
44. 46, 47. Fixation of Common Sulphur, and its Tincture. 193. Fixation of into
by the Salt of and, by Monsieur de R. 103. A great Febrifuge. 220, 230. 216.
Riverius his Febrifuge. 223. A Furnace for many Uses, etc. 138.
G.
To burn holes in Glasses. 136. Gout to Cure. 260, 261. The Eagles Gluten, or
of the Wise. 178.
L.
LApis Ignis. 242. Laudanum Germanicum. 266. Liquor Mercurial with. 229.
Lauremberg's Observation upon Angelus Sala his Synopsis of Aphorisms. 115. The
Lunar Pills against the Dropsy. 199. A Lunary Emetick. 230. Lac Sulphuris.
211.
M.
MAtthews his Work. 19. Mercurial {water}. 160. A Minera of. 41. Minera of of
antimony, ad infinitum. 74. The Menstruum C^^licum Exuberatum. By Dr. Clodius.
156. Mercury of all Metals. 16. 81. To make Metals Vegetate visibly. 130.
Concerning May Dew. 116. A great Medicine. 238. A rare Medicine for an Ague.
205. Metalline Menstruum. 178. A great Medicine, etc. 238. An Universal
Medicine of and antimony, etc. 167.
O.
OIL of Talc. 132. 135. Oil of. 126. Oil of. 231. An Operation that Monsieur de
Loberye wrote from Monsieur John's Mouth. 122. An Operation with a Martial
Regulus of antimony. 60. Observations about Snyder's Secret. 17. Operation upon
Saturn. 87. Oil of Sulphur. 207. An Operation with Spirit and Salt of Urine,,
and Precipitate, wrought by Sir Kenelm's Operator. 153. A Precious Oil of
antimony. 217. An Operation upon Jupiter. 104. Monsieur Van Outer's Secret. 8.
11. An Operation upon Regulus of antimony, by Monsieur Toysonnier. 60. An
Operation with and of antimony; wrought by Monsieur Chambulan, and given me by
him. 65. An Operation upon, sent me by Monsieur Boucaud. 87.
P.
A Short and clear Description of the Philosophers Stone. 107. The Countess of
Kents Powder after Sir K. D. Method. 125. An Excellent Panacea. 218. Sir K.
D's. Sympathetical Powder. 270. Cornachinus his Medicinal Powder. 247. Plaster
of Lead. 258.
Q.
QUintessence of, an Universal dissolvent. 88.
R.
A Reality upon. 45. A Reality from Abbot Boucaud. 101.
S.
THE Volatile Salt of Tartar. 252. Saunier's Work, wrought by Sir K. D. 31.
Snyder's Secret, as he himself gave it to Sir K. D. 16. Salt fusible. 59. 16.
The best way to make Spirit of Urine. 236. Sigillum Hermetis. 227. Scrofula's
to Cure. 232. 234. The true Sulphur of antimony. 218. Stone to Cure. 205. An
Excellent Physical Salt. 254. A white Spirit of Sulphur to dissolve and. 166.
The best and easiest way of making a Spirit of Sal armoniack. 250. The
Metalline Stone of a Spiritual Luna^y. 191. An Excellent Sudorifick. 231. Sol
and Luna out of. 105. Sulphur of. 121. A particular Spirit of Nitre. 85.
T.
TIncture of Mars. 55. Tincture of by antimony. 64. Tetters or Herps to Cure,
and c. 236. Tincture of. 65. Transmutation of into a Regulus. 128. Tincture of
fixed Sulphur. 193. A Tincture of the Flowers of antimony. 255. The true
Tincture of Coral. Ibid. Tincture of Glass of antimony. 164.
V
VOlatilized. 22. Venus into. 123. The great Work out of Virgin Earth. 37. A
Work Copied out of the Original of Monsieur de la Violette's own hand, whereof
he made great account. 13. The Secret to Volatilize the fixed Salt of Tartar.
147. 151. Monsieur Vignault his Process with and. 24. A subtle Volatile {water}
from Sulphur. 208.
W.
WAter of Paradise, etc. 179 to 186.
An Explication of the Characters which are used in this Book.
Gold. Silver. Iron. Mercury. Jupiter. Venus. Lead. antimony Antimony. {sal
ammoniac} Sal ammoniac. A. F. Aqua Fortis. A. R. Aqua Regis. S. V. Spirit of
Wine. subli Sublimate. precipi Precipitate. aaa Amalgama. {water} Water. fire
Fire.
CHEMICAL SECRETS.
How to fix into by and Precipitate.
HAving Written so many Processes, and made so many Trials, and heard so many
Discourses of Learned Men upon this Subject, I will give you an Account of an
easy Method that I have resolved upon for accomplishing this Work. Namely,
That all imperfect Metals and common may be transmuted into by one and the same
Method; to wit, by Maturation and Coction, and not by Generation; for that
which is generated, is no more that which it was before it was generated: And
that which is Corrupted, is no more that which it wa^ before it was Corrupted.

But the baser Metals, after they are transmuted into or are still Metals
nevertheless as they were before, and the transmutation of their kind is done
by changing their accidental form, not their substantial, the perfection
whereof is Maturity; for by Maturation the Metal is brought to a highe^ degree
of Perfection.

Now, imperfect Metals are Maturated by external heat, which digesteth their
cru^^ Humidity; yea, it self may be furthe^ perfected, and exalted in color,
as when the Stone is made of it, it will communicate this Maturity to imperfect
Metals.

And Common is extracted out of Metals three several ways; namely, by
C^^mentation and Digestion, by Fermentation and by Tincture. As for
Cementation, tha^ concerns only the digestion of into but not the other too
imperfect Metals, no either, which is crude, and too much ali^^ nated from the
Maturity of.

By Cementation the Humidity of (...) brought to Muturity. There are severa^
sorts of Cementation, namely, by Salts, A^^loms, Vitriols, and
Metalline-waters: Bu^ oftentimes instead of digestion, they bu^ it; so that
this way of making is with more loss than profit.

But there is no better way than and red Precipitate, which I have learned by
the aforementioned Operations.

My Process is such.
TAke ij. of, make an Amalgama of it with Mercury by A. F. as you know, wash
this Amalgama very well in several waters, then press out so much, that there
remain but iv. of it with the, which makes vj. in all. Add to it vi. of good
red Precipitate, and grind all to an impalpable Powder; which put into a
Mattress, and digest it with a gentle heat in Sand, so that the do not Sublime,
but that it may Calcine the, and leave it in Powder, for if you give too great
a heat, it will reduce the into a Body.

After three days Digestion, take out your Powder, and grind it as before, so
that if there be yet any quick, it may be mortified. Digest it again as before,
and with the same degree of heat for three days more; then take it out and
grind it again, then digest it only for two days by four degrees of heat, which
you must change every two hours, to the end, that by the last degree of heat
all the and Precipitate may precipitate the Powder of, which will begin to grow
white.

Reiterate the addition of and Precipitate in the same quantity as before.
Digest two days more by four degrees of heat, as before, and the Powder will
grow perfectly white.

Then by the same Operation reiterated it will begin to be of a Citrine color,
and fixed.

And thus by reiterating the Digestions, you may give it what degree of this
color you please; for the oftener you digest it with the said and Precipitate,
being separated from it again by the last degree of heat, the more the Powder
will be of a Citrine Color.

Then melt your Powder with Borax, and you shall have at 24 Carrats, without
diminution of the first weight of the which will be rather increased. All may
be accomplished in the space of One and Twenty days.

A Work with and that Monsieur Dandre helped to work in Piedmont, in great
quantity: Given me by him, June 1660.
MOnsieur Dandre says, he wrought thus: Make carefully an Amalgama of j. of in
Calx, with 7 or 8 of Purified, then squeeze out so much, that their remain iij.
of, and so there be iv. in the Globe: To this add j. of Sulphur-vive, which is
clear and transparent in pieces, (in Italy, where he wrought this) and grind
all very well together, (in this consists the main part of the Secret, for at
every time you are to employ three or four hours in grinding) then put the
Matter into a Mattress, and give a gentle heat, the Glass unstopped, till the
moisture and smoke is exhaled out. Then let the Fire go out, and when the
Mattress is cold, seal it Hermetically, and set it to Sublime by degrees of
Fire, till all that will, be Sublimed, which will be done in 20 or 24 hours.
Then the Vessel being cold, break it, and take out the Matter, and grind all
together a long time, both that which is Sublimed, and that which is in the
bottom, adding j. of new Sulphur-vive, then Sublime in the same Method as
before; repeat this seven times at the least, adding j. of Sulphur-vive every
time, and the matter will become a brown yellowish reddish Powder, which will
be very fusible, and even in the grinding it will relent, as though it grew
moist: You will have iv. of fixed Matter, which project (in parcels) upon x. of
in good Fustion, then put it to the Coppel, and separating {water} and you
shall have iv. of pure.

You can work but j. of in one Glass, but you may put fifty, or more Glasses in
one Sand Furnace with a large Basin of Copper in Sand.

Some Observations about the said Monsieur Dandre's Work.
THE Operation was made in an Athanor, with the Registers at the end, the hole
through which the heat was communicated, was about the bigness of a brick, the
plate which held the Sand was of Iron, and contained 32 Matrasses, sixteen on
every side: The Tower was in the middle, wherein the Coals sunk down by
degrees. They did not mix the Powder with Wax, nor any thing else in
projecting, but only wrapped up in Paper, it did enter, and disappear immediately
without smoking. The Mattress ought to have 2 third parts empty.

The Amalgama was made thus: They took ix. of and heated it in a Crucible,
until it begun to smoke, then they set it upon hot Ashes, and cast therein j.
of Ducats cut in small pieces, and made hot in a Crucible, then stirred it
until the was swallowed up by the: Then took it off, and let it cool. They did
not wash the said Amalgama: They used common only mixed with Quicklime, and
then Distilled in a Retort.

The Sulphur was transparent and yellow like Amber, in pieces, and to be had at
Carmagnole, Turin, Cony, Mondevic, Saluce, Genes: It is a Sulphur-vive, cost
four, five, or six pence a pound. The Sand they used was round River-sand, and
the Mattress was never red in the Sand: They never put above j. of in one
Mattress, nor never above x. of at every Projection.

( Hartman.) These Observations were communicated to Sir Kenelm by Abbot
Boucaud, but the Process was written by Sir Kenelm himself from Monsieur
Dandre's mouth.

Monsieur Van Outer's Secret, Physician of Brussels, with and Butter of
Antimony.
TAke equal parts of antimony Mineral, and Sublimate, and a little Sal
ammoniac, make Butter thereof: Draw the Spirit from this Butter, which rectify
again. (Note, that this Butter, being exposed to the Air, draws from the same
what it needs in an hourts time, and thereby is much increased in quantity:
That which it draws is the hidden Food of the Life of Man, and all the Beings
in the World. And this Butter is the true Magnet which draws it in its purity.)
Then put this Spirit into a Glass Cucurbite, of a convenient bigness, fit a
Head to it with Limbec and Receiver; lute well all the junctures, and put it
thus to putrify in Ashes for two Months, in which time the Matter will become
as red as Blood, and afterward very black, sticking to the sides of the Vessel
like glutinous Soot, and the Ethereal Spirit ascends and passes into the
Recipient in form of a Spirit, and in Body of fusible Salt, whereof you must
also draw the Spirit, and separate them by Distillation with a very gentle
fire, until you see a red and sparkling fire upon the Matter, which is a sign
of its Maturity, and that you have obtained the Philosophical, which is the
true Universal Dissolvent, then let it cool. That which rests in the bottom
of the Cucurbite, is the Terra damnata.

Take vj. of this Menstruum, and put it upon j. of in very thin plates, which
will speedily as dissolved, and they will unite intimately, as being of the
same Nature. You must take great care that you lose nothing of the Spirits; it
must be done in a Mattress with a Glass stopper, exactly fitted; and being well
sealed and luted, digest it with a Lamp fire, with a very gentle heat in the
beginning. After fifty days digestion, you must feed and imbibe your Matter
with the said Menstruum, whereof you must have store, for to multiply your
Work. So soon as you have put in the said Dissolvent, you must stop it again
immediately, and seal it as before, then digest fifty days more, the heat a
little increased; which time being expired, you must again feed your Matter
with the Virginal Milk a little more than the first time, continuing the
digestion, the heat a little stronger. Re^terate the Imbibition seven times,
and your Matter will become more vigorous, and will be able to bear stronger
Food from time to time, and to bear stronger heat, which nevertheless must not
be hastened, but well governed, after the Example of the Operation of the Rays
of the Sun in the Spring and Summer, for the Nourishment and Maturation of
Vegetables. But you must observe, that at the two last imbibitions, there must
be but 35 days distance from the one to the other instead of 50 before. At the
five first imbibitions you shall see from time to time the wonderful effects of
Nature, by the internal virtue of the Matter, and by all the Signs written in
Flammel, La Tourbe, Le Rosaire, or Iubilation of the Soul, and in all those
Authors that have possessed this rare Knowledge, which will appear infallibly;
to the proportion whereof you must increase the fire, and that is left to the
discretion of the Operator. You must observe, that as the Matter multiplieth in
virtue and quantity at each imbibition, and always more and more, it might
become so fusible, that at last it might penetrate the Glass; so that if you
judge convenient, you need not imbibe quite seven times, that you may run no
hazard; for you may afterward multiply the Powder in the same manner, and
carry it ad infinitum. And to perform all this, there needs no more than
about nine Months time, and without much trouble or care.

The Multiplication of the Powder.
TAke j. of the Powder to iij. of, melt them together, and leave them until all
be reduced to a Powder, which will be done in three days at the most; and thus
you may carry it ad infinitum, and that which is made thus, has the same
virtue as the first.

The Projection.
TO Project upon you must heat it in a Crucible, until it cast a black smoke,
then cast one grain of the said Powder upon ten or twelve Ounces of. And
projecting upon other Metals, they must be in fusion, and they will render in
proportion according as they abound in.

A considerable Work with and.
TAke viij. of, melt it in a Crucible with three times as much Tin-glass, mix
them well together, then cast it out, and beat it into as small pieces as you
can: Take three times the weight of your mixture of good Sublimate, which put
in the bottom of a large Cucurbite, and upon that put the said mixture; set the
Cucurbite in an Earthen Pot, which put into an Iron Pot with Sand; fit a head
with a Limbeck and Receiver to it, lute all well, and give a gentle heat at the
beginning for two hours; then increase the heat by degrees, at last a very
violent fire of reverberation, during eight hours; then let it cool, and open
the Vessel, and you shall find your Tin-glass in the Receiver in the form of
Crystals, with the Sublimate, and the will remain in the bottom of the
Cucurbite, in the form of light dry Flowers, very fair to behold, and will be
much opened and attenuated.

Dissolve this in eight parts of A. R. Distill it off, and put the same
quantity of new A. R. upon it, and Distill it off as before. Repeat this three
times, at the third time the will be so opened, that it will ascend with the
water, and stick to the sides of the head of the Alembick; so the same will
seem to be full of golden Stars.

Dissolve this again in eight parts of A. R. Dissolve also by it self twelve
Marcs of in A. F. Put these two dissolutions together, and let them stand to
settle 24 hours, the and will be precipitated indistinguishible, in the form of
a black Sponge, and will be essentially and radically United.

Distill off the water to dryness, you will find at the bottom a gray Powder,
which take out, and put it into a Mattress, and pour upon it good Oil of
Vitriol, so much as may cover it the breadth of four fingers; Seal it
herm^tically, and digest for twenty days. Then open the Mattress, and let the
humidity exhale by a strong heat in Sand: Break the Glass, and grind the Matter
with a little Borax, then melt it, and you shall have at least eleven Marcs of
(a Marc is ten Ounces.)

Monsieur Carrier gave this Work to his Uncle, Monsieur Ferrier, having had it
from an intimate Friend of his, who had arrived to great Wealth by it.

Hartman.) The said Monsieur Ferrier did communicate this Process to Sir Kenelm
at Paris, 1660. when he returned from Germany, at the time of the Kings Happy
Restoration.

A Work Copied out of the Original of Monsieur de la Violette's own Hand,
whereof he made great Account.
TAke iiij. of the purest and finest, and viij. Spanish purified with Salt and
Vinegar, make an Amalgama. Then take red Minium and Aes stum of each iiij.
Danzick Vitriol lbj. reduced to half a lb. by Calcination, grind and mix these
all well together, and put them into a Retort coated, and pour upon it one
pound and a half of the following A. F.

Take Vitriol two pound, which reduce to one lb. by Calcination, which put into
a Retort, and pour upon it a good A. F. made of Vitriol and Nitre, Distill it
S. A. and you shall have an A. F. fit for this Work, which having poured upon
the said Matter, Distill it off, and it will be very ponderous. Break the
Retort (being cold) and you will find on the sides of it, and upon the Caput
Mortuum, a very red and ponderous Sublimate, which take off.

Take the half of the Caput Mortuum, and as much of Bay Salt decrepitated,
reduce all to a fine Powder with the said Sublimate, and then put all into a
new Retort, and pour upon it the Distilled A. F. Distill it as before, and the
said A. F. will come off very red, and the Sublimate will be more red, and more
ponderous than before, and will rise very high at this time. Keep this Water
very carefully, break the Retort, and take both the Feces and Sublimate, and
reduce it to Powder, and Sublime it by it self without A. F. and the Sublimate
will mount but upon the surface of the Feces, which separate, and it will have
acquired more redness, and will be almost fixed. Put this Sublimate into the
said A. F. and it will dissolve it speedily: Distill or evaporate the A. F. in
Sand, and the Sublimate will remain in the bottom like a deep-red Oil. Put into
this Oil iij. of the fixed Sulphur of Vitriol, made according to Art; put it
into a Mattress with a short neck, and digest in Sand, until all the moisture is
exhaled.

Then take an Amalgama made with one part of and two parts of Calcined with
Salt, and four parts of Spanish (washed with Salt and Vinegar;) then squeeze
out so much as you can from the Amalgama, then wash and dry this Amalgama, and
pour upon it by little and little of the abovesaid A. F. let it stand half an
hour, then pour on more of the Water as before, and you will see the Amalgama
dissolve visibly, and will be reduced to a very red Powder.

Note, that once in half an hour you must pour on some of the said Water, and
all will be done in less than half a day. Digest it half a day longer in Sand;
then break the Vessel, take out this Precipitate, and melt it with a little
Borax, and you shall have at 24 Carats.

Note, that if you take equal parts of and to your Amalgama, you shall have
increase yet forty or fifty per Cent. more.

Snyder's Secret, as he gave it me himself the 22 of July, 1664.
TAke Nitre eight parts, Sulphur four parts, and Tartar two parts: Reduce all
into a fine Powder, and mix them well. Then melt one part of pure and three
parts of purified Regulus of Antimony, in a Crucible; than add to them three
parts or more of the said Powder, let it stand in the fire until you see a
light Skin upon it, then pour it into an Antimony-horn. Take the Regulus in the
bottom of the Horn, and melt it again, and cast more of the said Powder upon
it: Repeat this so often until all the Regulus be consumed; dissolve all the
scums of the said Regulus, and make a laver thereof, which filter, and
precipitate with an Acid, which edulcorate; edulcorate also the Feces which
remained in the filter, put these things edulcorated together, with half the
weight of Flowers of Sulphur, and calcine them well: Then draw the Salt from it
with distilled Vinegar (which will be a golden Salt) draw as much of the said
Salt from it as you can.

Take one part of this Salt, and two or three parts of good Butter of Antimony
well rectified, mix them well in a Mattress, one part filled, and the other two
parts empty: Seal it Hermetically, and digest it with a gentle heat; it will
grow black and putrify in the space of three days; continue the digestion
until the Powder be fixed.

The following Observations are from another Learned Man, with whom Sir Kenelm
did confer at his return from Bristol, concerning the said Snyder's Work. Who
says thus.
THis Operation may be abbreviated, in fermenting it with as follows: Make a
Spirituous Regulus of antimony, as you know, which is precipitated Butter of
antimony and, adding to them Soap and Salt of Tartar. Take of this Spirituous
Reg. three parts, and one part of, melt them together, and cast it by little
and little into the Sulphurous Salt Enixe, and totus solvetur, effunde, solve,
filtra, precipita totam materiam in Sulphur pulcherimum: Reverberate this
Sulphur with flowers of Sulph. or if you will, dissolve it again, and
precipitate; draw the Salt from this Sulphur with distilled Vinegar; add to
this Salt or Golden Vitriol, three times its weight of Butter of antimony;
digest them together ( donec cessent colores.) You may multiply the Work in
quality, in dissolving the Powder in Salt Enixe, and Precipitating often: And
you may multiply it in quantity, in mixing it with new Butter of antimony,
wherein you have dissolved the said Salt, or Golden Vitriol. Note, Tha^ this
Work will be more excellent if it b^ done with of antimony, and Spirituous Reg.
^ may be also abbreviated in purifying very well the Butter of antimony. Note,
That th^^ Work is a Mineral water, which is coagulated by its own Sulphur. Note
also, Tha^ if you take the Golden Sulphur without Reg^ the work will be yet
shorter: Note, The in the Multiplication, if the Powder onl^ be dissolved in
Butter of antimony, the Operation will be shorter.

A great Secret of the said Mr. Snyder's Powder.
DIssolve in Sal Enixe, and exalt (...) with Sulphur of antimony, then cast in
conu^^ in salem rubicundum; (see that no Coals fa(...) in.) Keep the Salt so
long in the fire, the it remain fusible: Grind it, and let it me^ in a Mattress;
add a grain or two of the Powder, let all melt in a strong fire twel^^ or
twenty hours, and this Powder will b^ multiplied; pour out, dissolve, and
filte^^ put therein and, they will be transm^^ted into fine.

Or, Precipitate the Liquor with Salt into a Golden Sulphur, which digest
longer with Butter of antimony. Or, preserve the Sulphur, and ferment it again
with dissolved, as is said, in Salt Enixe, and in a Mattress, that the Powder
may go ad infinitum.

Matthews his Work.
TAke Common Cinaber xij. Crystals of ij. Common Precipitate, made by A. F. and
reverberated until it be red, j. Oil of Vitriol xv. First, reduce the three
hard Ingredients into a most fine Powder; then grind it upon a Marble stone
with a little of the Oil of Vitriol, adding the said Oil by little and little,
until it become like Pap; which put into a low Cucurbite (taking care that it
do not touch the sides of the said Cucurbite, because it would endanger it to
break) and put upon it the rest of the Oil of Vitriol, and stir the Matter well
with a stick of Glass (which must be massy and not hollow) that all may be well
mixed together; digest it with a gentle heat for eight days, so that nothing
may go over through the Limbeck: Then distill as much as you can of the Oil of
Vitriol, and take the Matter out of the Cucurbite, and grind it again; put the
distilled Oil upon it again, and distill as before, without digesting it;
repeat this fourteen or sixteen times. At last, distill as much of the Oil as
possibly you can; and that the remaining Matter may be thick, and conveniently
handled, put into it v. or vj. of filings of. Then melt twenty Ounces of, and
project your Matter upon the same (being in fusion) in fifteen or twenty
parcels, staying every time, before you project until that which you projected
be well entered and incorporated with the, and that it be very clear: After all
is projected, leave it in good fusion for an hour or two; then put it to
Coppel, and afterward to Separating {water}, and you shall have about jss. of
pure.

The Crystals of are made thus:

Upon filings of put Oil of Vitriol, then pour common {water} upon it, and the
filings will dissolve; filter the dissolution, and evaporate the Liquor usque
ad pelliculam; set it in a cold place, and it will shoot into Crystals, which
require no further Purification.

The Oil of Vitriol for this Work is made thus: Take Danzick Vitriol, dissolve
it once in {water}, filter and congeal it; then Calcine it gently, until it be
white: Then distill it in Retorts S. A. forcing it very strongly at last.
Dephlegm this Oil in a low Cucurbite, and that which remains in the Cucurb.
(which will be of a dark red) must be passed through a filter of wool in a
Glass Funnel, and the wool will imbibe the unctuosity of the Oil, which if it
were not separated from it, might hinder its Operation.

To fix into.
THE 15 th. of November, 1660. Monsieur John Commandaire told me, that Signeor
Lucca (from whom he now came) had taught him a shorter, and easier way of doing
his work, thus:

Take the Mother-liquor of Saltpeter, (which is the salt {water} that
remains after as much is shot into Nitre as will shoot) and let it run once
through a filter of washed Sand to purify it; then evaporate it to dryness:
Grind the remaining Salt very fine, and set it in a Cellar, or other moist
place to dissolve into {water} by the Air; filter that by a woollen Languette,
coagulate, grind, dissolve, and filter it. Repeat this seven or eight times,
that all foulness may be severed from this fixed Salt of Saltpeter. Then it
will easily give its pure Spirits, and not before. Put this into Retorts, not
above half a pound into each Retort; distill first with very gentle fire,
increasing it by degrees, at last, strong fire, as when you distill A. F. The
distillation will be performed in twenty four hours: Then dephlegm it
carefully; when the drops come Acid, cease. In the mean time purify the fixed
Salt remaining after the distillation, by grinding it small, dissolving in
humido, filtring, and congealing. Repeat this twice or thrice; then put one
part of this fixed Salt to three parts of the Spirit, and to this Composition
put a tenth part of pure, and though it were in an Ingor, it will dissolve it
speedily. Pu^ this into an Egg, and Seal it Hermetically, and digest it, it
will putrify, and grow entirely black; then pass all the due colors, during
which time increase the heat by degrees, and when it requires strong heat, use
Coal.

An Observation about Volatilised.
MOnsieur de L'oberie, and Mons. de l^ No^e wrought the first Process upon
(which is after those upon) that is in the handgrif of Bas. Valent. which
makes the fourteenth Book of his Test. But instead of a due Calx of, they took
one made with A. F. (the ordinary made of Vitriol and Nitre) and Precipitated
it with Salted fire (Salt dissolved in Common fire) and for the rest, did as
the Process teaches; which was Reported to me thus. Put upon this Calx of
(they had iv.) (after it is well dulcified by often ablutions with fair
{water}, till no Saltness or Spirits appear to remain) so much fresh A. F. as
to swim four fingers breadth over the Calx of: Distill off the A. F. then
cohobate again; do thus four times: At the last distillation give strong fire,
you will have a gray substance like Marca^ite. Beat it to Powder, and put
distilled Vinegar upon it, to swim four fingers over it; digest two days, then
boil it three or four hours, after which, distill away all the distilled Vin.
and there should have remained blew Crystals, but they were white without
tincture: So having failed in their expectation, they would reduce their back
in a body, therefore dulcified it well with distilled Vinegar and fair {water},
and put it into a Cruc. to melt with a little Borax, and a little Nitre, and a
thick smoke flew away, and in the end there remained but ij. of.

Consider, if this course, and, if need be, digesting longer (at last) with
distilled Vinegar and Oil of Tartar, {sal ammoniac}, and Salt of Urine, etc.
Then distilling with Tartar and Calx-vive, might not make of.

A Process from Monsieur Vignault, with and, etc.
TAke j. of, aaate it with iv. of; grind this aaa, and wash it well: Then put
it into an earthe^ Pot with its cover to shut it very close, which cover must
be like a Funnel at the top^ Put it to a gentle fire in Sand for twenty four
hours, then give it a strong fire for twenty four hours more, that the Matter
may ascend and descend; then take out your Matter (loosning it from the bottom
where it sticks fast) and grind it, and aaate it again with the same, and
proceed all as before. Repeat this Work six times, always with the same, which
by degrees will become Earth, and will stick no more to the bottom; you must
leave it in Sand every time twenty four hours before you grind it again; after
the sixth time give it strong fire, so that it may be red-hot in the Sand for
forty eight hours, and it will be a red Powder, which multiply by mixing with
it its weight of, grinding and digesting it as before; and in three times
twenty four hours it will be in Powder; and if you will multiply it again,
proceed as before, with equal weight of. And to make it into a Tree, do thus:
When you have made the aaa, and ground and washed it, then put it into a
Mattress, which stop only with Paper; then digest it continually, and the said
will ascend and descend: And when you see that at last it becomes hard and
heavy, sticking to the neck of the Mattress, put it down with a Quill, and it
will become a Tree, which will be red. Note, That your must be well purified
first, and then sublimed with and, taking ij. of to one pound of, for it will
be much the better, and will be sooner done. If you mix ss. of with ss. of the
said Powder, and grind it well with ij. of revived from Cinaber, and animated
with, as is said, and digest it forty eight hours, you will do more in fifteen
days, than otherwise in two Months, and the will not stick to the bottom of the
Pot: You must continue the digestion as is said above, and at the end strong
fire. The will serve for to animate the, and to melt it, and reduce it into a
Calx, for to aaate it with animated, taking j. of to four of.

Fixation of, wrought by Father Bening de Baune, and by him communicated to me.
FIrst, he animated Common for this Work, thus:

Take iv. of Common Sulphur, melt it in an Earthen Poringer, then cast into it
by little and little lbj. of (purified with Salt and Vinegar, and squeezed
through Chambo-leather) stir it continually; then take it from the fire, and
keep it stirring until it is reduced to a black Powder, which grind, and add
to it lbj. of antimony in Powder, and lbss. of Quicklime also in Powder; mix
all together, and put it into a coated Retort, of such a bigness, that a third
part may remain empty. Distill it, and let the Nose of the Retort lie in a
Poringer full of {water}, distill by degrees of fire, as you do A. F. the will
distill into the {water}: Mix this again with new Materials, and distill as
before. Repeat this Operation with the said seven times, every time with new
Materials.

Take of this iv. aaate it with j. of; wash the aaa so often, that the {water}
come from it clear, then dry it. Put this aaa into a Mattress, and digest twenty
four hours in Ashes: Then take it out, and grind it in a Glass Mortar, and add
to it xx. of the said; grind them well together, then wash it and dry it, and
put it into a Retort, and distill over all the in Sand.

Take viij. of this, aaate it with j. of a light Spungy-calx of; wash this aaa
well with warm {water}, then dry it, and put it into a Mattress; Seal it
Hermetically, and digest it in Sand the space of twenty four hours: Then grind
it again with viij. more of, and digest as before. Repeat this Operation once
more with viij. more of, so that there be xxiv, of to one of. Put them into
three several Matrasses, which Seal Hermetically, and put them to a suppressing
heat in an Athanor, for the space of two Months: Then put all into a Retort,
and distill it in Sand, with a heat of Suppression, so that the fire above be
stronger than that below, and if any of the remain in the bottom of the Retort,
you must aaate it with twenty four parts of, and distill it as before, until
all the be distilled over. Repeat the same as before, until the has taken in
sixty parts of, and if it takes but twenty four of, the will be better, and
your will be animated.

Take j. of Calx of, and three or four of your animated, aaate them together,
wash the said aaa with warm {water}, then divide it into two parts, and put
them into two Matrasses; Seal them Hermet. and digest in an Athanor with very
gentle heat for forty or fifty days, then increase the heat for forty or
fifty days more: Then continue the digestion with the third degree of heat
(stronger yet) unto the end of eight Months, counting the time of the first and
second degree already past. Then digest a Month longer by the four degrees of
fire, which will make it nine Months in all.

The Calx of is made of equal parts of and Regulus of melted together, and
reduced to Powder. Note, that the Reg. is not to be reckoned; so that you must
take ij. of this Powder.

Observations.
THE Athanor was of a digestive Furnace, with a Tower for the Coals, and
between both, there were two Registers of heat, the one gave the heat under the
Vessels, and the other above: The Mattress stood in Sand in a Basin of Copper,
which held ten or twelve Matr. At the beginning the fire was given only below,
and so gentle, that the never Sublimed. The Basin with the Matr. was covered
with a cover like a Dome, and after that the heat was given also above, and
that stronger than before: And it ought to be always continued without
interruption. After nine M. digestion, all the will be transmuted into, and
besides that, you shall have an augmentation of a third part of.

Note, That you must not put above ij. of Matter into each Mattress.

The which he used in this Operation, was three times purified by antimony.

He told me since, that the greater proportion of Reg. you put to the, the
better your work will succeed, and you shall have the more, and the sooner.

Hartman.) The said Father B. de B. was the Apothecary in the Convent of the
Capuchins at Lions: He was an able Chemist, and had been for some Years
Operator with the Chancellor of France, in his Laboratory. When I went from
Paris to Italy, after Sir Kenelm's Death, passing through Lions, I went to see
him in the Convent of the Capuchins, where I had some Discourse with him
concerning this work; he confirmed it to me, assuring me that he had done it,
and that it was a real truth, and that is all I know of it.

A {water} which changes as red as Blood, which abides the Fire.
MAke an A. F. of equal parts of Vitriol and Nitre, which cohobate and distill
three times upon its Caput Mort.

Take of this A. F. iij. j. of, and ij. of Sulphur-vive; put all into a Retort,
let it stand twelve hours, then distill it, and cohobate so often, till you see
the as red as Blood, which will be in five or six times; then bring it into a
Powder, which imbibe with Oil of Roman Vitriol, dry and imbibe it three times:
Then divide this Powder into eight payts; then take j. of, which put to Coppel,
when it boyleth, put into it a Ducat of, then put into it one of the eight
parts. Drive it off, and you shall have j. of fine.

Hartman.) This Process was written in the French Tongue; at the bottom was
written Probatum, the 2d. of July, 1658. The Process says, it must be done on
Thursday and Friday, and at the Full of the.

Saunier's Work, as I wrought it.
Purify three times by antimony; then reduce it into a subtle Calx, by
Calcining it five times with Sulphur and: Then burn S. V. upon this Calx, and
reverberate it again, that all the extraneous Spirits may be driven away.

2. Sublim seven times with Vitriol and Salt, reviving it with filings of after
every sublimation.

3. Make an A. R. S. A. out of the fixed Salt, after the extraction of
Saltpeter, which after some days must be dephlegmed with great care, and
rectified, so that it have neither phlegm nor terrestrial feces.

Dissolve j. of your in as small a quantity of this A. R. as you can, keeping
the Vessel well Sealed (and therefore it ought to be large) in a very gentle
heat in B. M. where it must be digested (after the dissolution) for some days:
The dissolution being very clear, decant it from the white residue.

Dissolve ss. of fusible Salt in as small a quantity of the said A. R. as you
can (which is not done suddenly, but by digestion) and being clear, mix these
two dissolutions together, namely, that of the, and of the Salt, and if any
thing precipitate to the bottom, keep it in digestion with a gentle heat (the
Vessel close stopped) until all is dissolved and clear; then keep it in the
same digestion for fifteen days. Then with a very gentle heat abstract the
phlegm, until a Spirit ascend; then cease, and put into the Vessel ss. of the
sublimate before mentioned (in very subtle Powder) shut the Vessel again
immediately, and put it in digestion as before, until the sublimate is well
dissolved. Then dephlegm again the dissolution; in doing of which you ought to
attend very diligently, lest there come over some part of the and, which now
easily will be raised with the A. R. And this you may know, not only by the
drops falling yellow, but also by trying with a white woollen cloth, which the
drops will stain yellow if the ascends. Then Seal it Hermetically, and digest
in Horse-dung: After six Months we opened the Vessel, and with a gentle heat
distilled off the Liquor, and the remaining Golden Salt we projected upon
restricted, and for j. of we had seven. Another Vessel, after twelve Months
digestion, rendered x. of for one put in: And so to two and twenty for one.

I do not remember all the time precisely, but I should think, it would be
better, after sufficient digestion in Horse-dung, to coagulate the Matter in
dry heat until all be completely fixed, and then multiply the Matter by the
same Process, as you did with.

The fusible Salt is made thus: Dissolve Salt (first well purified) in the said
A. R. distill and cohobate until it is fusible.

The restriction of you will find in a Book Published by John Saunier, which he
calls, the almost fixation of, because it has the weight and sound of.

Hartman.) This Process was wrought by Sir K. D. himself, as the Title shows;
it was written in Latin in his own hand, and the words are his own.

Abbot Boucaud told me at Paris, that he knew Sir K. had wrought it.

The Danes Work.
CAlcine plats of and with Sulphur; then grind them to subtle Powder, which
boil in {water}, filter and evaporate, usque ad pelliculam, and put it to
Crystallize in a cold place: Then purify these Crystals by dissolving them in
{water}, filtring and evaporating.

Make also a Sulphur of the said Metals, by boiling Plats with Vitriol and
{water} in a Kettle, and the Sulph. will adhere to the Plats.

Purify first by Did. and then by boiling it in an Earthen Pot with Vitriol,
Ashes, and Powdered glass well mixed together, and boiled until you see the
appear upon the Surface of the Matter: Then let it co^l, and grind all well
together again, and boil it as before. Repeat this three times: Then take of
this four parts, of the Sulph. of and ana one part, grind them well together
until they be well incorporated; then sublim and grind again what is sublimed
with that which remained in the bottom, and sublim as before. Repeat this seven
times: Then is the prepared for this Work.

Distill an Oil s. a. out of the Vitriol of and joined together, which will be
Blood-red.

Make a light and Spungy Calx of, by Calcining it four or five times with
Sulphur and. Take of this Calx j. and of the prepared iv. Make an aaa, which
grind very well; then add of the Sulphur of and ana ss, grind them well
together with the aaa; then put it into a Mattress of such a bigness, that three
fourth parts may remain empty, stop it slightly with Paper, that some moisture
from the may exhale, (which otherwise might hinder the precipitation of the)
give fire by degrees, first in Ashes, and then in Sand, but so gentle, that the
may never rise, but that it may be always in a disposition to sublim, which you
may know by a little Cloud upon the sides of the glass, such as appears when
one breaths upon a Looking-glass.

The end of the digestion is, when you see the Matter converted into a very red
precipitate and glittering, which endures a very strong fire. Then take it out
(being cold) and grind it with four parts more of the said; and the same
quantity of the said Sulph. as before; digest as before, until all be converted
into a red precipitate as before, except that it will be of a darker color:
Grind this precipitate with the Oil of Vitriol beforementioned until it be like
a pap: Then put it into a Cucurbite, and digest for fifteen days, then distill
it, and the Phlegm will come over; and the Matter remaining dry in the bottom,
you must grind again with new Oil, and proceed in all as before. Repeat this so
often, till the Oil come off as sharp as it was put on, which is a sign of
Saturation: Then digest this Matter in Sand until all be resolved into a very
red Oil in appearance (which in a cold place will congeal into a hard and
brittle Matter.) At last give very strong fire for three days, in which time
the Matter will be entirely fixed, except a small quantity, which will be
exhaled.

Project this Matter upon in fusion equal parts. Thus far reaches my
Experience; but the Dane told me, that if this Matter were Amalgamated again
with new prepared, and in all things proceeded as before, taking this Matter
for the Foundation, instead of the which you took at first, it would become a
Medicine, which in Projection would convert a great quantity of into. And the
oftener you should do this, the more Power it would have in Projection.

Out of x. of this Matter, and as much, I had xvijss. of perfect.

Hartman.) Dr. Astell, an English Physician, showed me a Copy of this Process,
which Sir K. D. had given him, who had assured him that he himself had wrought
it, and that it was true: And having x. of fixed Matter, he divided it into ten
parcels, and having melted x. of, he Projected the said parcels one after
another upon the same; then left it in fusion for three hours, then cast it in
Ingot, which having weighed, he found the quantity of above mentioned.

Opus Magnum ex Virginea Terra.
TAke reddish rich Virgin Earth in, impregnate it with,, serene and dew, till
the end of May: Then imbibe sprinklingly with dew gathered in May, and dry in,
expose all Night to the and Air, securing it from Rain. Still when it is dry,
imbibe and turn the Earth often. Continue this till sublimation. The hot
(especially in the Dog Days) will make a pure Salt shoot up, which mingle back
into the Earth, by turning it all over. Then distill by graduated fire as A. F.
forcing all the Spirits over at last; you must give forty hours fire, extreme
at last. Put all the Liquor and Salt that comes over, to digest and circulate
a Month in fimo, in a great Ballon close shut. Then separate the several
substances out of this Chaos; first, comes an extreme subtle, ardent,
Ethereal Spirit, then white ones with veins like S. V, then Phlegm. Thus far in
B. in a Cucurbite, then in a Retort: Then white fumes, then red ones, and a
reddish brown Salt remains in the bottom, and a Volatile Salt will be
sublimed about the neck of the Retort, as also to the head and sides of the
Cucurbite. Then purify every substance by it self; the fixed Salt by Solutions
in the Phlegm, Filtrations, and Congelations, till it be perfect pure, clear,
and cast no more Feces: The Volatile Salt by often Sublimations: The first
Spirit by thrice distilling, and the fixed white and red Spirit likewise, both
together. Now join all the three parts, beginning with the fixed Salt, whereof
take three parts, and one of the fixed Spirit; digest eight days, distill in
Ashes, and the Liquor will come off like Phlegm. Imbibe with more fixed Spirit,
and repeat this till all of it be coagulated with the Salt. Then put one part
of this to three of the {sal ammoniac}, taking it all, and humect them with the
Volatile Spirit. Digest eight days or longer, then distill in a Cucurbite; a
stinking phlegm will rise, and a pure Salt sublim up, and if any Spirit distill
over, keep it, putting it to the rest of the Spirit. Then add more of the fixed
Salt to it which has not sublimed, making it one third to the {sal ammoniac},
which humect with Spirit as before, circulate and sublim, and the {sal
ammoniac} will be increased. Do thus till all the fixed Salt be sublimed.
Circulate the remaining Volatile Spirit with the {sal ammoniac}, till all the
Spirit be converted into {sal ammoniac}, and nothing but a stinking phlegm come
away. Then sublim this Salt by it self, till it leave no Feces, and be most
white, transparent, and pure, which will be in four or five times.

Take seven parts of this {sal ammoniac}, and one of pure in leaf, Seal it
Hermetically, and digest in B. The Matter will become a green {water}, like an
Emerauld, with an Oriental esclat: (and in a Retort will pass all over, leaving
a few grains of brownish-gray stiptick Earth, like Tobacco-pipe Earth) And
after a while black like Ink, and continue so two and forty days; when the
blackness begins to wane, put it in dry fire in an Athanor. It will pass the
colors, and become a red Elixir, and is now best for Health; but it will not
have good ingression into Metals, till it have been multiplied four or five
times with new {sal ammoniac}, taking every time after the first, only three to
one; and it will be done every time after the first in a shorter space. After
every fixation of the multiplication, and the first also, give strong fire for
three days, and a black Earth will separate from the red Powder, lying like a
Cake under it. Before you Project upon inferior Metals, ferment anew with
three parts of to one of the Elixir, giving three hours of extreme fusion, and
all will be red Powder.

You may proceed in the same manner for.

Note also, That when the Work of is at the white, it will Project upon
Inferior Metals, to make them like, but in truth white, enduring all the
trials of.

If you digest in B. V. ten parts of Pearl in Powder, with one of the perfect
{sal ammoniac}, it will become an Oriental Liquor, whereof a few drops is
admirable for Health.

If you take four parts of such {sal ammoniac}, and grind it well with pure red
Coral in Powder one part, and sublim, putting what rises upon as much of fresh
Coral, repeating this four or five times, the {sal ammoniac} will be red like a
Ruby, and an admirable Medicine. All the Corals will dissolve in a Cellar.

If you grind one part of it with ten parts of green Venice Talc, and put
distilled dew upon it, six fingers over, and digest in fimo, all the Talc will
dissolve, and a splendid Oil of rare effects swim upon it.

Hartman.) Sir Kenelm D. said, that a Person of Quality beyond the Sea (whom he
named) wrought this Process, and it happened at that time that his Wife was
dangerously Sick, and like to die; she was given over as a dead Woman by the
ablest Physicians: Upon that he opened the Vessel, and gave her one grain of
the Elixir; whereupon she Recovered. and lived many Years after it in perfect
Health.

This Process, and Saunier's Work were together in a small bundle of Papers
tied up together by it self; upon the outside of it were written the following
words, Perfumes, Curiosities, My great Arcane of this Note.

A Miniera of, wrought by a Person of Quality in Champagne.
TAke Sulphur-vive lbss. melt it in an Earthen Poringer, then squeeze into it
lbj. of; stir it continually until the appear no more in the Sulph. Then let it
cool, and grind to Powder, which digest in a Mattress for two days with a strong
fire. Then take it out, and grind it again; add to it its double weight of
filings of; mix them well together, and put them in a Retort, and distill over
all the: Mix this again with new Sulphur melted as before; digest in a Mattress
as before for two days, in the mean time grind the filing of (that you
distilled the from) and wash them well from all the foulness and blackness;
Then dry them and grind them again with the Sulphur and, and distill them in a
Retort as before. Repeat this so often, till the filing of come to be of a
yellow Golden color, which will happen at the seventh distillation: Then take
this and put it in a Retort, and distill only j. of it, and with the remaining
viij. make an aaa with j. of, digest this aaa in an Athanor for nine Months, it
will pass all the due colors, and will become a Miniera, as follows. To this
ix. of Matter put iij. of prepared as before, and digest, and in six weeks you
shall have xij. ready to melt: And to these xij. add iv. more of, and digest,
and in six weeks you shall have xvj. of Miniera, Note, that you must always use
a prepared, as was said for the multiplication of the Miniera: For if you
should take crude and unprepared, you would have but an ordinary precipitate
after one or two multiplications.

Note, That the filing of is to be changed after three times, and new to be
taken, which is to serve also three times: After which six times, you must join
both the parcels of filing, and use them both at the seventh time, and if the
sign given you (of the yellow Golden color) happen not at the seventh time,
continue and repeat your Operation, with all your filing, until it do appear.
When your Miniera is completed, it will be a deep-red Powder, very shining,
and at every time it is to become such: If you multiply it with crude, it will
lose its luster after twice, and not increase in fixed Metal.

The first time, you must put into one Glass no more than j. of, and viij. of;
But when the Miniera is made, you may work even to fifty Ounces in one Glass,
keeping always your due proportion.

Fixation of into, with good Profit.
MElt lbj. of, then put in ss. of, and some scories of, and a little, red
Arsenic; keep it in a strong fire for three or four hours or more. Then the
Cr^^ble being cold, break it, and take out the Matter, and put it in a new
Cruc. which must have a little hole in the bottom; put this Cruc. in a wind
Furnace, and melt the Matter again, putting under the Furnace a Basin with
{water} to receive the Matter as it melts and runs through the Cruc. Take
this Matter and melt it again with the same quantity of, and new scories of;
keep it in fusion as before. Reiterate this Operation ten or twelve times,
until the is very hard, being impregnated with; then put it to Coppel with j.
of to every lb. of this Mixture.

The goodness of the Operation consists in the fixation of the which is in
the by the Sulphur of: Therefore you must keep the Matter a long time in
fusion, that the Sulphur of may act strongly upon the said.

To fix of antimony, or the Common.
TAke j. of in leaf, and iv. or v. of: Make an aaa, which put in a Retort, and
digest it in Horse-dung for eight days, then distill in Sand, giving strong
fire at last, and the will go over with the, and if any of it remain in the
bottom, aaate it with the same, and digest three or four days, and then distill
as before, and all the will go over with the, and you shall have a well
animated.

Take iij. of this, aaate it with j. of; grind the aaa, and put it in a Mattress
half luted; digest for eleven days by graduated fire, and all will be a red
Powder.

Take iij. of this Powder, and project it upon j. of in fusion, and all will be
transmuted into.

Then take the remaining of Powder, and aaate it with iij. of the animated;
digest as before, and in nine days your Powder will be perfected as before.
Take these iv: of Powder, and unite it with xij. of new animated; digest
without, and you will have a perpetual Miniera; part whereof you may reduce to
a Body when you please, by projecting it upon; and the other will serve for a
Ferment, which will never fail, being it self all.

This animated may be fixed without, by a gentle heat, being it self a liquid;
but to shorten the Work, you may add.

A Reality upon.
TAke ij. of in thin Plates, and j. of small Nails, put them in a Cruc. in a
Furnace, and when they are very red, cast in some Sulphur upon them at several
times, that they may melt well; when they are like Paste, cast in some
antimony, and stir it with an Iron Rod to make them well incorporate: Leave it
in good fusion for five or six hours, stirring it sometimes. Then take out the
Cruc. and let it cool; then break it, and you shall find but a little Reg. at
the bottom, but many yellow lumps at the top, which beat to Powder. Then melt
ij. of fine, and project iij. of the Powder; stir it with an Iron Rod, keep it
in fusion for eight or ten hours. Then put it to Coppel, and separating
{water}, and you shall have fine.

Hartman.) This Process is also confirmed with a Probatum.

Fixation of the of antimony, as Monsieur de la Noue wrought it at Paris.
TAke of antimony and ana j. Oil of Vitriol vj. Distill to dryness; take what
is sublimed, and join it again to the Feces, and put the Oil upon it again that
distilled over; distill as before. Repeat this so often, till nothing more
sublim, distilling every time in a new Retort; at the twelfth or fifteenth
distillation, all the Matter will remaim in a red Powder.

Take Sulphur-vive, and Ashes of Alican ana equal parts, of which make a lixive
with common {water}; filter and evaporate, and you shall have a Sulphurious
Salt: Take of this Salt and of the said Powder ana gr. vj. of antimony j.
filings of ij. mix and grind all well together, and put them into a Matr. with
a long neck; make a fire about the middle of the neck of the Matr. in an Iron
pan with a hole in the middle through which the neck of the Matr. may pass; let
this fire be stronger than that below; continue the fire for six hours: Then
cast your fixed Matter into a Bath of.

Preparation of the Powder, with which Claudius de Montrouge, and Abbot Oberye
at Paris fixed of antimony.
THey melted iv. of Sulphur in an earthen Poringer, then they squeezed into it
through a leather j. of of antimony made of Regulus of antimony, {sal
ammoniac}, and sublimate (the of antimony without addition had been better, but
they had none) and whilst the one squeezed the into the Sulphur, the other kept
stirring continually with an Iron Spatul so long until the did no more appear
in the said Sulphur, and that all was converted into a grayish Citrine Powder
(the color is variable, according as you govern the fire, sometimes it will be
red like Cinaber.)

To this Powder they took j. of in Calx, and j. of the Salt that is found in
the Pots at the Glass-Houses, which Salt they dissolved, filtred, and
congealed: They grinded all well together, the Powder, the, and this Salt: Then
they put all into a Retort, and put upon it xxiv. of good Oil of Vitriol well
rectified; to this Retort (being put in Sand) they adapted a large
Glass-receiver, the junctures being well luted, and the lute dry, they
distilled by degrees of heat, at last gave strong fire. It was ten or twelve
hours before the Oil came over. All being cold, they broke the Retort, and took
out the Matter which remained in the bottom, which they did put into a new
Retort, pouring upon it the Liquor with the flowers of Sulphur which were in
the Recipient: Then joining again the Receiver, and luting well, and the lute
being dry, they distilled as before. They reiterated this Operation twenty
times, grinding every time the Matter, and joining it with the Liquor and
Flowers.

At the twentieth distillation, the small quantity of Liquor that came over,
was almost all phlegm; then they took out the Matter that remained in the
Retort, and put it into a Viol, which they stopped very close, and kept it in a
dry place, because that so soon as it felt the Air, it grew moist.

With this Powder they fixed the of antimony, which being mixed with the Calx
of, and held in the hand, grew so hot, that they were not able to hold it in
their hands, no more than a piece of Iron red-hot, as every one of them made
Experience, casting it into a Basin full of {water}, which they had standing by
for that purpose.

They wrought the said Fixation in an Iron barrel of a Gun, thus. They put
about sixty grains of the aforesaid only, (because they had no more) into the
said Barrel, then they gave the fire, first above for two hours, and afterward
below for one hour, keeping that above always stronger than that below; then
they heard the said begin to roar, and make a noise in the Barrel; then they
cast into it a little more than one grain of the fixative Powder, wrapped up in
paper; and then they continued the fire for seven or eight hours, after which
time they heard no more noise at all; then they judged that the Work was done,
and let the fire go out; and the Barrel being cold, they found about twenty
grains of good, which endured all the Trials of.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. himself, written in the French Tongue.

A Process to fix the Common by the Salt of; wrought by Captain Ziegler at
Ments, and sent me by him.
MElt in an Iron pan, let it be red-hot, then cast in some Salt, stir it until
it be reduced to Powder; sift this Powder finely, and that which will not go
through the size, must be Calcined as before: Then edulcorate this Powder with
warm {water}, and you shall have a Calx as white as Ceruse, which put into a
Mattress, and extract the Salt out of it with distilled Vinegar s. a. after
three or four days digestion, decant the distilled Vinegar, and put on fresh;
digest as before, shaking the Vessel often: Repeat this three or four times, or
so often, till the Sp. of V. has extracted all the Salt. Then put all your Sp.
of V. together and filter it, then distill it off in a Retort, until you see
the Salt of remain in the bottom like deepred Oil, which being cold, will be
white like Sugar Candy: Grind this Salt, and put it into a Mattress, and extract
it with Sp. of V. as before. Repeat this purification three or four times, and
you shall have a Salt of well prepared for this Work.

An A. F. to be used in this Work.
TAke Salt iv. Nitre lbj. mix them well together with lbijss. of Powder of
bricks; put all in a Retort, and distill by graduated fire, forcing over the
Spirit strongly at last: The distillation will be performed in sixteen or
eighteen hours.

Take seven parts, fine one part; make an aaa, which put into a Retort, and
pour upon it so much of the A. F. as may cover it a large fingers breadth: Let
it stand twenty four hours, then distill it in Sand; when it is cold, cohobate
the distilled A. F. upon it again, and distill as before. Repeat this three or
four times; then break the Retort, being cold, and take out the aaa, which
grind to a fine Powder, and put it in an Iron pan, and hold it over a coal
fire, stirring it continually with an Iron Rod, until it be almost red-hot, and
that it be converted into a red Powder, like red precipitate. Take of this red
Powder two parts, and of the aforesaid Salt of one part, reduce them to a fine
Powder, which put into a Mattress, and digest it in Sand for eight days: Then
put it to Coppel, and you shall have half your aaa fixed into fine.

Heart. When Sir K. D. was at Franckfort in Germany, where he lived a year and
half, in the Year 1659. he went often from Franckfort to Ments (being four
German Leagues distance) to Visit the Prince Elector there: Then he conversed
also with this Captain Ziegler, who was a famous Chemist. And when Sir K.
returned to England about the time of the Kings happy Restoration, the said
Captain sent him this Process written in the German Tongue, assuring him that
he had done it: He said, that the which he got, he put to separating {water},
and he had some out of it. He said also, that he thought this Salt of would
fix, in if the aaa were made with instead of.

A Work upon Cinaber, wrought by Monsieur Sauvage.
TAke Nitre and {sal ammoniac}, ana, which dissolve in Rain {water}; filter and
evaporate to dryness: Then grind this double Salt to subtle Powder; take a
large Crucible, in the bottom whereof put a bed of Quicklime in Powder, upon
that put a bed of this Salt, cover it with another bed of Quicklime the same
quantity as before, taking two parts of Quicklime to one of Salt. Cover the
Cruc. with another, without luting them; put this in a Bakers Oven after the
Bread is drawn, let it stand as long as there is any heat in the Oven; when the
Oven has been heated again, and the Bread drawn, set it in again; do this
three times: Then keep it in a strong fire for six hours, and being cold, take
it out, and put it into {water}, and let it boil in an earthen Pot eight or ten
walms. Then filter it hot, and evaporate to a dry Salt, which put in a strong
Bottle, and keep it close stopped in a dry place: Then take two parts of this
Salt, and of Salt of one part, mix and dissolve them in distilled Vinegar.

Then take Cinaber, pulverize it, and make a Paste thereof with the yolk of an
Egg; of this Paste make little Cakes in the shape of the heads of
Horse-shoe-nails; make them pretty thick, and put them in an earthen Pot,
pouring upon them of the aforesaid dissolution, so much as may cover them the
breadth of three or four fingers; boil this together until it come to be like
Honey: Put more distilled Vinegar upon the Cakes, and boil it as before.
Continue this for three days; then wash the Cakes in fair {water}, and you will
find them something Metallized. Filter the {water}, and evaporate to a Salt,
which will serve again for the same use, adding Salt of.

Take of the fixed Salt without Salt of, and of good Venice Ceruse ana equal
parts, grind and mix them well together; then put a bed thereof about the
thickness of a Crown, into an Iron Box, then put a bed of Plates of upon that,
and then the Powder again upon the, the same quantity as before; upon that put
a bed of your lumps of Cinaber, then Powder, then Plates of, then the Powder
again; and thus continue stratifying until your Box be full, the Powder being
the first and last: Then put on the cover of the Box, which you must fasten,
and secure, it well with Iron hooks. Then you must have another Box of Iron,
made big enough to contain the first, and that there be the space of a fingers
breadth between, at the bottom, on the sides, and at the top; the Boxes must be
square, and you must have two Iron hoops made in the shape of a Crown with
crankles; put one of them into the bigger Box, turning the teeth or crankles
downwards, upon which set the lesser Box; put some pieces of Iron on the sides,
to keep the lesser Box at an equal distance from the sides of the bigger: Then
put on the other hoop upon the lesser Box, keep it down with some heavy thing
whilst you pour in some melted into the bigger Box, so much as may cover the
lesser Box a fingers breadth. Then put on the cover of the bigger Box, and
fasten it with Iron hoops and wedges to keep it close: Then the Box being yet
hot, put it into an Athanor where the fire is kindled, let the Registers be
shut, so that there be but a very moderate heat, such as where you may endure
your hand; continue the first degree for three days, so that all that while the
may be but melted, then increase the heat for three days more; and so
increasing the heat every third day, continue in all three weeks; the last
three days the fire must be very vehement. Then let all cool, and take out your
lumps, and reverberate them with very gentle heat for twelve hours, and they
will be of a whitish-gray color. Then melt in a Cruc. and cast these lumps
into it, digest this Matter together for three days, then put it to Coppel.
Note, that if you cast this Mass into melted, and digest it three days before
you Coppel it, you shall have more profit than if you test it without digesting
it.

Note also, that if you will continue your Work, you need not use any more
Plates of, but only the Cakes as they are, and before they are reverberated,
using them instead of the, being pulverized, and they will be the more fixed,
and the profit will prove very considerable.

You must have of and Cinaber ana vj. and of the double Salt and Ceruse ana iv.

Tincture of Mars.
DIssolve filings of in A. F. made of Vitriol, Nitre, Allom, and Cinaber; then
pour upon this dissolution distilled Vinegar, double the weight of the A. F.
shake it well together, and digest in B. for three days, then decant the clear,
and filter it; evaporate it gently: Then grind it with two parts of sublimate,
Sublime the from it four times; then dissolve it again in distilled Vinegar,
and evaporate it gently; then dissolve it in distilled Rain {water}, and
congeal it gently: Repeat this last solution till it is not corrosive upon the
Tongue; then in iv. of Rectified Spirit of Vitriol dissolve j. of this Sulphur
of, and ij. of Sulphur of made the same way, except the first solution of the,
which must be an A. R. made of Salt, Nitre, and Vitriol; mix these two last
solutions together, and digest in fimo, then coagulate it gently, dissolve
again in Spirit of Vitriol, and coagulate: Repeat this seven times, and if any
feces remain at last, leave them out. Try this Medicine upon a hot Plate of, if
it penetrate and tinge it thoroughly without smoking, it is a sign of its
perfection; but if it smoke, you must dissolve it again, and gently coagulate.
Then melt j. of, and cast upon it by little and little j. of this Medicine, and
when all is enterd and incorporated with the, cast it in Ingot, and you shall
have a Matter as brittle as Glass, and transparent like a dark Granade stone,
and fusible as. Then melt fine and fine ana, and project of this Medicine upon
it, and you shall have pure.

To fix a quarter part of into.
TAke filings of j. aaamate it with iv. of, put this aaa in a Retort, and
distill off the; take the and re aaamate it with the distilled; distill as
before. Repeat this three or four times, and the will be a Powder impalpable.
Take {sal ammoniac} and Cinaber ana jss. sublimate ss. grind and mix them well
together with the: Then sublime it with gentle heat, mix what is sublimed with
that which remains in the bottom, and Sublime as before. Then take both Feces
and sublimate and mix it with Sulphur of and Crocus Martis, and of a Regulus
made of antimony,, and, ana ss. grind all together with a little {sal
ammoniac}. Then Sublime it four times with gentle heat, adding every time a
little {sal ammoniac}, because it opens the body of and, and uniteth them
with the. Then grind all well together, and digest it in the following {water}.
Take Nitre, Vitriol, ana lbj. antimony, Sulphur, Verdigrease, and Auripigmentum
ana iv. Make an A. F. of this, s. a. Or take common A. F. lbj. distill and
cohobate it three or four times upon the said Materials, giving strong fire at
last: Then put your Powder into a Retort, and pour upon it so much of the A. F.
as may cover it the breadth of three fingers, distill it off with a gentle
fire, then cohobate and distill three or four times: Then put fair {water} into
the Retort, and digest for five or six days in Sand; then evaporate to dryness:
Then take out this Matter and pulverize it, and weigh it. Then melt as much as
you have Powder, and cast your Powder upon it by parcels, melt it with a strong
fire, then let it stand in the fire until the fire go out of it self; then take
it out, and you will find a Regulus in the Cruc. which Coppel, and then put the
to separating {water}, and you shall have a fourth part of fine.

A Work with Butter of antimony.
THE Work, which Monsieur Perdussin of Lions communicated to P. A. Dieudone, is
to make a Butter of antimony with antimony Mineral, and sublimate, ana lbj, Of
this take ij. and digest it in a Mattress sealed Hermetically in an Athanor, and
it will putrify, growing as black as pitch; then pass the Colors: That done,
take one part of leaf, and three of this Powder; grind them well together, and
digest as before, it will become black as at first, and pass all the Colors.
This proportion of for ferment, you may divide into several parcels, for
several times, so each Revolution will be shorter, when the whole dose of has
fermented the first stone: This product serves for ferment to multiply in
quantity and quality. The P. wrought the first part, and had perfect
putrefaction.

An Excellent fusible Salt.
P. Benin de Beaune makes his fusible Salt thus: Decrepitate and Reverberate
Salt, then dissolve it in fair {water}, filter and congeal. Repeat all this
Work four or five times: Being perfectly pure, dissolve it in Spirit of
Vinegar, filter and congeal; repeat this with distilled Vinegar once again:
Then it is perfectly fundant.

Another fusible Salt.
DIssolve Salt in Rain {water}, filter and congeal; when the {water} is almost
evaporated, and that the Salt falls to the bottom, take it out with a wooden
Spoon by little and little, until the {water} is exhaled: Grind this Salt
(being very dry) and reverberate it in an Earthen Vessel close luted; let the
Vessel be red in the fire, but the Salt must not melt; so soon as you see the
Vessel red, let it stand until the fire is gone out: Then grind it and
reverberate it as before; dissolve and congeal as before. Repeat this until it
is perfectly fundant. Note, that you must not decrepitate your Salt.

An Operation with a Martial Regulus of antimony, wrought by Monsieur
Toysonnier.
HE made a yellow Martial Regulus thus: Ignifie iv. of Nails in a Crucible,
then put upon it viij. of good antimony, and give strong fire in a wind
Furnace, to make all melt well, which to promote, cast in some Saltpeter, then
cast it in an antimony Horn, and separate the Feces from the Reg. Ignifie ij.
of Nails more, and cast thereon the Feces (this Work must be done presently
after the first) adding Saltpeter to make all melt well and clear: Then cast
it in a Horn, and separate the scories from it, and wash it clean; it will be
first white, but after a day or two will be yellow within as well as without.

Take of this Reg. and of, ana ss. melt them well together (he poured a little
in them when they were near ready to congeal, and stirred with an Iron Rod, but
the Mass took in little above j. of.) Beat it to Powder, add to it eight or ten
parts of, and grind exceedingly till they incorporate, (which required about
twelve complete hours, often heating the Matter and Instruments.) Then squeeze
away so much, that there remain only six parts; digest it three days in Sand by
degrees, at last, very hot. Put the remaining Calx to Coppel with four charges
of, adding a little fresh to make it work better. Put the Mass, au depart, and
you shall have twenty six gr. of good.

Hartman.) The said Monsieur Toysonnier was Sir Kenelm's Operator; he was a
Frenchman, and a very able Chemist, Sir K. brought him over with him from
Paris, 1660.

Butter of antimony to Extract the Tincture of.
DIgest Butter of antimony six weeks or two Months, and then put it upon a well
opened Calx of, and digest it, and the B. will extract the Tincture of, which
digest, etc.

To fix into; given me by an Intimate Friend, who told me that he wrought it as
follows, taking his hints out of Lully's Experiments.
HE made a Mercurial {water}, as he teaches, by his Vessel with three Bouls in
three Furnaces (which Mercurial {water} will return again into running after a
little digestion) and to this he put some pure white Salt of Tartar, and some
precipitate, that had been precipitated by it self with three or four Month^
digestion, and some Calx of exceedingly well opened, and very subtle: This he
digested a good while, and drew off the {water}, and cohobated several times,
after which he did put some Tincture of unto it, and digested and cohobated
anew; and in the end he found almost all the converted into, that endures all
Trials, but it was a little pale. In Lully you may find Directions to make all
the things that were used in this Work. The Salt of Tartar, was but the fixed,
reduced to its highest purity; but it should have been Volatilised, and made to
pass over with the Mercurial {water}, to acuate and animate it. He believes
the great Work is to be made with a Mercurial {water}, animated with a Volatile
Salt of Tartar, to serve for a Menstruum or Alcahest to dissolve and. Weigh
well what Lully says of these things.

Mallus his Process to fix: Wrought by Monsieur Ferrier, and given me by him,
1660.
TAke an A. F. made of equal parts of Vitriol and Nitre, pour of it upon
Sulphur and {sal ammoniac}, ana (four parts of A. F. to one of Powder) distill
it off to dryness, and make Sublime what will. Melt iv. of, cast upon it ss of
Sublimed Salt when the is in good fusion: After it is entered cast in Ingot,
melt again; and project a new Packet of Salt, doing all as before: Do this four
times, so spending ij. of Salt upon iv. of. Then put it au depart.

To fix by a Mercurial Water.
MAke Mercurial Water by means of an Earthen Retort that has a Pipe or Spout
behind in the upper part, through which you cast in the antimony when the
Retort is red-hot. Take of this {water} (well rectified) ten parts, and one of
a well rectified Oil of Vitriol; distill them together, till they be perfectly
united: Then take of this Menstruum ten parts, and one of a well Calcined;
digest them together in a Mattress (Sealed Hermetically) until the is well
dissolved: Then take it out, and put the Matter into a low Cucurbite, and
distill until the drops come Acid. Then let it cool, and put the Matter into a
Mattress, Seal it Hermetically, and digest in an Athanor, until it be perfectly
fixed into a red Powder.

Monsieur Bertault's Tincture of by Venus.
TAke Sulphur and Borax, ana, melt them together three times, grinding the
matter every time; then melt and ana, and cast upon them of the said
Composition, until the be reduced to aes ustum; then cast in Ingot, and beat it
with a Hammer, to cause the aes ustum to scale off from the. Then melt this
again, and project as before. Repeat this three times, and you shall have a as
red as blood, and this Tincture will hold the Test.

Note, that when you beat your, if you see that the aes ustum do not all scale
off from the, you must melt it again, and project more of your Composition
until it come all off in scales, and be all separated from the, which it ought
to do at every time.

To fix into.
DIstill from sublimate a Spirit, wherein dissolve an aaa of and into a white
Powder, which digest in Ashes until it be as red as Cinaber. Then dissolve it
in A. R. into a red water, which reduce again to Powder, which project upon.

Another Tincture of.
DIssolve j. of in A. R. and iij. of in A. F. Precipitate them, and then unite
them together, and distill their Spiritual Essence, which by degrees of heat
fix into a Blood-red Powder, which tingeth into.

An Operation with and of antimony: Wrought by Monsieur Chambulan, and given me
by him.
TAke lbiij. of good Salt of Tartar, Calcine it, so that it be glowing hot for
twenty four hours, in a Pot close luted; then dissolve it in phlegm of Brandy,
filter, and evaporate; Calcine it again as before, dissolve and congeal as
before. Repeat all this Work four or five times, or until it leave no more
Feces in the filter: Then Calcint this Salt again for six hours, and then
pulverize it whilst it is yet hot, and put it in a large Cucurbite, and pour
upon it by little and little of good Nants Brandy, so much as may cover it the
breadth of four fingers, cover it with a blind head, or with another Cucurbite,
that may enter into it, lute well the junctures, and digest in warm Sand for
six days; then put on a head with a Limbeck and a Recipient, and distill over
with a gentle heat all the S. V. then let it cool, and pour on fresh Brandy,
digest, and distill as before. Repeat this Operation five or six times, or so
often till your Salt of Tartar remain in the bottom like a red and transparent
Oil, which will be very fiery and penetrating, reducing all Metals into
running, being first duly prepared; keep this Oil close stopped.

Then take lbviij. of the Ashes of burned Vines, whereof make a strong Lixivium
with lbxx. of fair {water}, then in lbxij. of this Lixivium; dissolve lbj. of
Salt of Tartar, filter this dissolution, and digest it in Sand with a strong
fire for some time; then call into it lbj. of Regulus of antimony, that has
been melted and purified six or seven times with Tartar and Saltpeter, and
then reduced to a subtle Powder: Make it boy^ for six hour, until the Lixivium
be very red and stinking; then let it settle and cool, and decant the clear,
and wash the Powder with fair {water}, then dry it, and grind it upon a stone,
imbibing it with the red Oil of Tartar beforementioned, until it be like a
Pap, then dry it, and imbibe it again, and grind as before. Repeat this so
often till the Powder has taken in double its weight of the said Oil of
Tartar: Then put this Matter in a Body with a blind head, lute well all the
junctures, and digest in fimo for twenty days; then take it out, and you will
find your Powder converted into running, which wash well with hot {water}, then
with Salt and Vinegar, and then with fair {water}, then squeeze it through
Chambo-leather. Then take x. of this of antimony, and x. of Common that has
been distilled over in a Retort with Tartar and Quicklime, and then washed
with Salt and Vinegar; mix these two Mercuries together and squeeze them
through a leather, then put them in a Cucurbite, lute another, Cucurbite upon
it, and digest in fimo for fifteen days, then put a head to it with a Limbeck,
and distill in Ashes, and all the Common will distill over drop by drop^^s
{water}, and the of antimony will remain in the bottom like a clear Oil, and
will be of a fragrant scent: Rectify the {water} in Ashes, and the Oil with a
stronger in Sand, and keep them by themselves. Then melt j. of, and j. of, then
cast in Ingot, and beat it into leaf, or reduce it into fine filings, and make
an aaa with, distill this aaa in a Retort until all the is distilled over; then
put this aaa in a Mattress, and pour upon it x. of the Mercurial Water
beforementioned: Digest it, and in a few hours all will be dissolved. Put this
dissolution in a Retort, lute a Recipient to it, and having luted well the
junctures, distill in Sand, and all will distill over except a few black Feces;
dephlegm it with a gentle heat in B. M. distilling until nothing more come
over. Take of that which remains in the bottom of the Cucurbite iv. put it in
a strong Mattress, and put to it viij. of your Oil of of antimony; Seal it well,
and digest it with a Lamp fire in Ashes, and in forty days all will be fixed
into a red stone; then take out the Mattress, and put it to a strong fire in
Sand to Sublime it for twenty four hours, and all will melt like an Oil, which
will congeal in a cold place into a red stone.

Fermentation.
TAke iv. of this red stone, pulverize it, and stratifie it with j. of in leaf
between two Crucibles well luted; put this to a Circulary fire by degrees for
six hours, then cover it with Coals, so that it may melt and unite well
together: Project j. of this Powder upon x. of boiling (well purified) and all
will be converted into a Medicine, which will project upon great quantity of,
transmuting it into fine.

Elixir of antimony,, and.
TAke good Mineral antimony, mortify it with radicated Vinegar; then separate
its Quintessence with pure S. V. With that Quintessence dissolve duplicatum of
antimony, that both become an Oil, which unite with a subtle Calx of, and bring
them to an incombustible Oil, which will transmute into.

Elixir ex and.
DIssolve O (well purified by antimony) in A. R. then reduce it into a
blood-red Oil with radicated Vinegar, and Tartarised S. V. Then with this Oil
imbibe a natural Sulphur of, and fix them by graduated fire. This is a high
Projection upon.

Elixir Album.
SUblime three times from Vitriol and Saltpeter, then in hot Sand fix it so,
that in strong heat it may not rise, which may be performed in three weeks
time: Then Calcine it in a close Reverberatory fire, and it will be ready for
solution. Then take the Water which distilled over in Subliming the, and
dissolve in it a little {sal ammoniac}, and subli mate, with this solution mix
Calcined Vitriol to the thickness of Honey, digest in fimo o^^ and twenty days:
Then distill by degrees: little at a time (for it yields a very fiery Spirit)
let the Recipient be large. When all is come over that will, rectify it; then
in this Spirit dissolve the aforesaid fixed, so is the Menstruum prepared.

Then take a white Calx of, pour upon it so much of this Menstruum as will
cover it, let it stand eight days as before^ Repeat this till the Calx will
take in no more of the said Menstruum, then let it stand till it become first
black, and then white, Subliming it self above the Caput Mortuum, from which
carefully separate the white, and that is Sulphur naturae Iovis, which put into
a little Mattress and fix it, (which may also be done by frequent sublimation)
make also Sulphur naturae in the same manner, and with the same Menstruum,
which dissolve into Oil in B. with which imbibe the said Sulphur naturae Iovis
until it be fusible, and then it will transmute into.

Elixir Rubrum.
TAke Vitriol of well purified by Solutions and Coagulations, unite it with
Liquor of sublimate and {sal ammoniac}, then distill a {water} from it in
Ashes; then having stood (cold) twenty four hours, distill more {water} from
it. Repeat this until the remaining Matter be well broken; then join all the
distilled waters to it again, and digest it in fimo for 40 days: Then distill
its Spirit, with which imbibe the remaining Earth; dry it with a gentle heat,
then imbibe again, and dry as before: Repeat this till the Earth has imbibed
all its {water}. Then distill it, and you shall have a Philosophical, and what
Sublimeth is the Sulphur, which keep apart. Repeat the imbibition and
distillation, till no more Sulphur will ascend; with this Sulphur imbibe half
its weight of the, put them into a Mattress, which Seal Hermetically, and fix
them together; and this Work must be repeated four times, every time with the
same proportion of the said Philosophical. Then fix this Matter in a Vessel
Sealed Hermetically by degrees of fire, and all the colors will appear one
after another, until it become white, and lastly, to an incombustible red.

Take one part of this red Powder, cast it upon ten parts of Sublimed, set it
to putrify for thirty days, and it will become Oil, which being Projected upon
boiling, will transmute it into pure.

The said red Powder being infused in Wine over Night, and drank in the
Morning, Cures most Diseases in Man's Body.

The best way to Extract the of.
SUblime Flowers of antimony after Glauber's way, in great quantity, in casting
the antimony in Powder upon kindled Coals in a Furnace with many Pots one upon
another, wherein the Flowers settle. The Flowers which are in the last or
highest Pots must be received into running, by distilling them in a Retort with
two parts of Soot, and one of black Soap. Those in the middle, by black Soap
and Salt of Tartar: Those that are in the lowermost Pots, by Soap only, with a
little Salt of Tartar, not much, lest it should reduce the Flowers into Regulus.

The Furnace must be round, and well made every where, then set a cover upon it
like a Funnel, and the Pots upon that; then fill the Furnace with Coals, and
let them be well kindled before you cast in the antimony, that the Flowers may
be pure and white; then cast in the antimony through a hole, which must be on
the side of the cover: And thus you shall Sublime lbj. of Flowers in an hour.
(See the first Figure.)

The Process teaches to set fifteen or sixteen Pots one upon another; but I
think five or six may do as well.

To Extract of or.
DIssolve filings of in A. F. one part, and fair {water} two parts, Precipitate
the Calx with Salt of Tartar, then add crude Tartar to this Calx, and boil them
together a long time; at last, revive it with hot {water}, and you shall have a
fluid and running. In the same manner you may proceed with.

To make a Minera of of Antimony, ad Infinitum.
TAke of the revived from the Flowers abovementioned viij. Sublime it with
Salt and Vitriol, according to Art: Then take of this Sublimate and antimony in
fine Powder, equal parts, mix them well together, and distill a Butter thereof,
giving gentle fire for four hours, then distill with a strong fire, and the
will distill in great quantity. Note, that when the Butter is come over, before
you increase the fire to drive over the, you must change the Recipient, putting
on another full of water impregnated with {sal ammoniac}. Then take the Cinaber
and mix it with black Soap and a little Salt of Tartar; then distill, and you
shall have near the whole quantity in running. That which remains in the
bottom is the true Sulphur of antimony, of which make a Lixivium with {water},
and Precipitate the Sulphur.

Another way to Extract the of Antimony by an A. R. Given me by Monsieur Carton.
TAke Saltpeter of the first boiling without refining it any more, and Vitriol
and {sal ammoniac}, whereof make A. R. after the Dutch way of making A. F.
where they put an hundred pound of Matter into a large Iron Pot with a large
earthen head, to which they join a large stone-receiver or a stone Pitcher: The
junctures all well luted with a lute made of Sand, Quicklime, and Water: They
gave fire by degrees, at last very strong; the distillation will be performed
in twelve hours. Then let all cool, and take out the A. R. Note, that in
distilling this A. R. if your Recipient be not very large, it will be needful
to keep wet Clothes doubled upon the Rec. to abate and condense the violence of
the Spirits.

Then take antimony Mineral in fine Powder, which put into large Jar-glasses,
such as they keep thin Sweetmeats in, which are as large at the top as at the
bottom: You must have many of these Glasses, but put not too much into one
Glass, pour a good quantity of the A. R. abovementioned upon this antimony;
stir and shake them well together by turning the Glass in your hands (several
times a day) for ten, twelve, or fifteen days, keeping the Glasses slightly
covered with a wooden cover: And if you put these Vessels to digest in some
gentle heat, it will be the better.

Note, that the Secret consists in well opening the body of the by the A. R.
And therefore when the time of the digestion is ended, and that you see the is
dissolved, or reduced into a white Calx at the bottom, stir it well together,
that the A. R. which is at the top, may become as white as Milk. Then pour off
this white Liquor (which contains in it the Atoms of the antimony, which are
very light, and are easily raised in the A. R. and are well opened) and let it
settle, until all the white Atoms are settled to the bottom, and that the A.
R. be clear at the top, which decant and put it back upon the antimony, where
you poured it off, which was not dissolved; stir it and digest it as before,
then decant the white Liquor as before. Repeat this until you have reduced all
the into Atoms or white Liquor:^ Then put all your white Liquors and dissolved
antimony together with the A. R. into a Retort, and distill first all the A. R.
with a gentle heat, until you see the antimony almost dry, but not hard nor
quite dry. Then change the Receiver, putting on another large Ballon of Glass
with four or five quarts of {water} impregnated with lbj. of {sal ammoniac}:
Distill by graduated firefor eight hours, then put some coals about the Retort
upon the Sand; give at last very vehement fire above and below, for four hours
more, at last, as vehement as possibly may be, and you shall see the Rec.
filled with white fumes, which will revive into running in the water in the
Recipient, and part of these white fumes will become a thicker substance, like
melted, and part like Mercurius vitae; but of what consistence soever they are,
you may easily revive them all into running, by washing them in warm water.

The of is made in the same manner, but in greater quantity, taking Oar of
instead of antimony Mineral.

To Extract the of antimony, or of. Wrought several times by Monsieur Van
Outre, Physician of Brussels.
TAke Antimony Mineral, (or a Calx of) in subtle Powder, imbibe it with Spirit
of Salt until it be like Pap: Digest it seven or eight days, or longer; then
distill to dryness: Then change the Recipient, putting on another filled with
{water}, impregnated with {sal ammoniac}. Distill it gradually s. a. and you
shall have running.

Sir Kenelm.) This Extraction is upon the same Foundation as that which
Monsieur Corton gave me, with an A. R. which he has done often.

Butter of antimony without Sublimate, to Extract of antimony.
TAke antimony one part, Salt decrepitated two parts, and Vitriol Calcined to
whiteness four parts; reduce all into a fine Powder, mix them well together,
and cast them by little and little into a Retort red-hot through a Spout in the
upper part of the Retort, as Glauber teaches; or distill it in a Glass Retort
luted, in a naked fire, and you shall have a Butter like unto that which is
made of Sublimate.

Note, that you may rectify this Butter for other Operations with Soot and
Coal-dust.

To Extract the of antimony with this Butter, proceed thus.
PRecipitate this Butter with warm {water}, then dry the Powder, and mix it
with one part of black Soap, and two parts of Soot; distill in a Retort into a
Recipient full of {water} impregnated with {sal ammoniac}, and you shall have a
running, which is the Sperma of of antimony.

Another way.
TAke the Precipitated Powder of the aforesaid Butter of antimony, and dry it
gently, then mix it with iv^ of Tartar, and viij. of Quicklime, and ij. of
{sal ammoniac}; distill this in a Retort s. a.

Note, that the Calx of, and that of may be Precipitated with Butter of
antimony, and then a running may be distilled from them.

To Extract a out of.
DIssolve in A. R. and then Precipitate it with Spirit of Urine, or with a
dissolution of {sal ammoniac} dissolved in distilled Vinegar, and it will
attract what there is of in the, and the remaining Calx of is the running,
which is transmuted into by the Sal Enixe.

Another way to Extract the of antimony.
TAke lbj. of antimony in subtle Powder, boil it in a Lixivium made of
Quicklime and Potashes, let it boil for two hours, then let it settle, and
decant the clear; then put more Lixivium upon the antimony, boil it as before.
Repeat this so often till there be no more Sulphur in the antimony, which you
may know by pouring distilled Vinegar into the decanted Lixivium, when there
Precipitates no more Sulphur, or when it changes no more. Then edulcorate well
the residue of the antimony, and dry it, then grind it with iv. of Salt of
Tartar, and as much of {sal ammoniac}, and viij. of Vitriol; put this to
Sublime with a gentle fire at first, and at last very strong fire for seven or
eight hours, and all will be Sublimed.

Make this Sublimate, and mix it with equal weight of Quicklime, distill it in
a Retort into a Recipient almost full of {water} impregnated with {sal
ammoniac}, and you shall have a running of antimony. In the same manner you may
Extract the of, taking Calx of instead of antimony.

Mercury of all Metals.
TAke Salt of Tartar, and Powder of Pebble-stones, mix them well together, and
cast them upon burning Coals, and there will ascend a Spirit, which must be
received, which has a Virtue to convert the Calx of Metals into running.

A great Secret, of antimony, and other Metals, ad infinitum.
TAke of antimony, Sublime it with Salt and Vitriol in the ordinary manner,
without Calcining the Materials. Take of this sublimate, and antimony in
Powder, ana; distill a Butter thereof: Then take the Cinaber, and grind it with
that which rests in the bottom of the Retort, and distill a thereof, which
will serve for the like Work. Let the Butter resolve in the Air into a Liquor
upon a Marble stone, or upon Glass in a moist place, then pour of this Liquor
upon antimony in a Cucurbite; digest in Sand for two days, then distill it, and
there will come over a red Oil with the phlegm, which is the Sulphur, or of
antimony, or a natural Oil of antimony: For if you leave this Menstruum with
the Oil in the open Air for two or three hours, the Oil will Precipitate to the
bottom in a red Powder, which will burn like common Sulphur. Mix this red
Powder with two parts of Soot, and one of Soap, put it in a Retort, and distill
it, and it will revive into running, which will distill into the Rec. which
must be almost full of {water} impregnated with {sal ammoniac}.

In the same manner you may also Extract out of other Metals, mixing this Oil
with their Calx, Soot and Soap. The said Menstruum will serve again, putting it
upon new antimony, Extracting new Sulphur from the same, or red Oil, which
Precipitateth into Sulphur, as was said, or into running by Revivification. And
in this manner you may make a perpetual Minera of of antimony, and of other
Metals, ad infinitum.

Note, that other Metals must be in very subtle Calx well opened, that the said
Menstruum may act the better upon them.

Note, that if the Salt of the Earth be well Extracted, and reduced to a Salt
Enixe^ wonderful Operations may be done with it; and if you take of this Salt
Enixe and of Vitriol, and make a Sublimate thereof with of antimony, and then a
Butter of this sublimate and antimony Mineral, and join this Butter with one
part of the Lunary Butter, made as was taught, and with that make a dissolution
of, you will have an Aurum potabile, and an universal Medicine; and without
doubt a Powder of Projection upon baser Metals. This Matter is an admirable
Chalybs or Magnet of the Spirit of the World, being exposed to the open Air for
some time, and then put in a Vessel, and Sealed Hermetically, and digested for
forty days (or fifty) you will see such effects, as will promise a happy
success, and yet better, if you add the Sulphur of drawn with Regulus of
antimony: But this requires the Conduct of an able Operator.

To prepare the Common, so that it will have all the Qualities and Properties
of of antimony, and will be as Powerful to Volatilize.
AMalgamate lbij. of with lbj. of, thus: Melt the in a Crucible, then take it
off from the fire, and being near ready to congeal, pour the upon it, and stir
them well together with a stick, then cast it into fair {water}. Then with
these lbiij. of aaa, grind lbiij. of filings of, and lbiij. of antimony, and
all being well mixed, put it in a Retort, and distill over all the into a
Recipient full of {water}.

Another Excellent Preparation and Animation of.
TAke of Martial Regulus of antimony iij. and j. melt them together, and make a
Regulus, which pulverize, and then grind it with common, then distill it seven
times, and you shall have a very pure, and fit for any Operation.

Another way.
AMalgamate lbss. of with lbj. of in a Crucible, and being cold, grind with it
lbss. of filings of. Then distill over the with a strong fire.

Another.
GRind with antimony, Quicklime, and Tartar, then distill it.

Another.
TAke one part, Regulus of antimony two parts, melt them together; then reduce
it into very fine Powder, which grind and aaate with, then distill seven times.

Another.
Join with Sulphur in the form of a Cinaber, then add Salt of Tartar and Soap,
to the consistence of a Paste, whereof make little Balls, which distill in a
Retort.

About a particular Spirit of Nitre.
IT is not a common Spirit of Nitre, but it is a Spirit, which by many
cohobations and distillations renders its own Body Volatile in the form of
Snow, which melts with the least heat, and is congealed by cold; and that is
that Acetum acerrimum, which dissolveth all Metals, and reduces them to their
first Matter, and perfect Metals being dissolved therein, will be coagulated,
and perfectly fixed, which will change other imperfect ones into perfect by
Projection.

Take and, q. v. aaate them together, then mix this aaa with half its weight of
sublimate, then put it in a Retort, and pour upon it of our Acid Spirit, and
the Matter being well dissolved therein, distill and cohobate upon the
remaining Body so often, till all the Matter be converted into a Volatile
Spirit, and nothing remain in the bottom; that which does not ascend, must be
made Volatile: Then dissolve that Volatile again in more of our Acid Spirit,
and distill and cohobate so often upon that which remains in the bottom until
all be fixed again, and this fixed Matter render again Volatile, and the
Volatile fix again, until it be tingent and penetrating, and be a fusible Salt
abiding in the fire.

You must have the Spirit of Natural fusible Salt, which is the Principle of
all Metals, Vegetables, and Animals; this Spirit being purified and reunited
with its Body (also purified) renders its Body Volatile, and uniteth it self
unseparably with it, and becomes a Volatile fusible Salt like Butter, which
congealeth being cold: This Butter dissolveth all Metals, as warm {water}
dissolveth Ice, and is the true Matter of the great Work, and the Philosophical.

To prepare the Universal Spirit, which is the Universal Salt, you must purify
and rectify it well, and by its means, Volatilize its fixed Body, (also
purified.) For to render the fixed Volatile, the quantity of the Volatile must
exceed the fixed; and also to fix the Volatile, the quantity of the fixed must
exceed the Volatile; but the long digestion supplies the quantity of the fixed,
because that which is naturally fixed is contained (although changed for the
present) in the Volatile: But the addition of (which it dissolveth, and uniteth
it self radically with) shortneth the time, and hastens the fixation: And then
to render it from Volatile fixed by a long digestion; when it is Volatile, it
will pass over in a Retort like Oil, which will congeal, being cold, and melt
with heat; it is the Sperma of Metals. For to fix it the better and the sooner,
you must add, and digest.

An Operation upon: Sent me by Monsieur Boucaud.
The Philosopher's Epilogue.
SOlution and Ablution are one and the same thing, for by Calcination the Body
is divided into small parts; by putrefaction it is corrupted, and when it is
distilled, it is reduced into its first Matter, and remains dissolved.

Congelation is a Fixation, Reunion, or Coagulation of the Volatile and
dissolved Body.

By Reduction and Fixation, when this Body is Sublimed, it fatneth, and
resolves, uniteth, and at last is perfectly coagulated. Thus in these two
Solutions and Coagulations, are contained Ablution, Reduction, and Fixation.

Quintessence of; the Universal Dissolvent.
DIstill fifty or sixty quarts of Vinegar, and before you distill the Vinegar
you must evaporate a fourth part of it, which is nothing but phlegm; and for to
render this distilled Vinegar more dissolving, it should be distilled once or
twice from Lees.

Take lbxij. or xv. of good English Lithargy of Silver, reduce it into fine
Powder, and put it into Matrasses of three or four quarts a piece, put lbj.
into each Mattress; then pour upon the Powder so much of the distilled Vinegar,
as may cover it the breadth of six Inches; then put them in digestion, with the
second degree of fire for two days, shaking the Mattress three or four times a
day, in which time the distilled Vinegar will be of a yellow color, and very
sweet. Then decant this distilled Vinegar impregnated with the Essence of, and
put on fresh upon the Lithargy; digest as before; then put in all the decanted
Vinegar and filter it, and distill in several Cucurbites with a gentle heat
three parts of the distilled Vinegar; put the remainder in a Cellar, and in 24
hours the greater part of it will be congealed into a substance like Ice; it
will suffice if you distill it off to a Syrup: Then upon this Syrup, pour new
distilled Vinegar, about the same quantity as before, digest twelve hours; then
distill off about the quantity you put on: Put new distilled Vinegar upon the
residue, somewhat more than the first time, digest and distill as before. Then
pour upon it about half the quantity of the said distilled Vinegar that you put
on before, digest and distill as before. Repeat this digestion for twelve
hours, and distillation so often, till you find that the distilled Vinegar come
off in the beginning of the distillation so strong as it was before, which is a
sign of a perfect attraction of the universal dissolvent made by the distilled
Vinegar.

Then put your Gums which remained in the Cucurbites into one or several large
Matrasses, which stop and lute well, that nothing may exhale; then put to
digest in B. vapor. or in fimo (which change every six days) for twenty or
thirty days, more or less; for the sign of a sufficient digestion is, when the
Matter comes to be black, and that it acquireth as it were a stinking scent,
which is a sign of its Mortification, by which it ought to acquire a new Life,
and a Spiritual vesture. Then divide this Matter or Ceruse into several parts,
which put into several Retorts, which you may do by causing the Matter to melt
with some gentle heat, and then pouring it hot into the Retorts, for it easily
congealeth by cold; and if any of it congeal about the necks of the Retorts,
make it melt, and run down; the Retorts must be of such a bigness, that at
least four parts of them may remain empty. Then distill off all the phlegm with
a very gentle heat in Sand, and so soon as you perceive any Fumes or Vapors,
cease, and let all cool; then change the Recipient, putting on a large one, and
having well luted it, and the lute dry, give the fire by degrees, at last very
strong and vehement, until you see no more fumes come over, but that an Oil or
Gum as red as Blood distill over. Take the feces remaining in the Retorts
(which will look like black Ashes) and extract the Salt out of them with
distilled Vinegar, as you did with the Lithargy, which Salt will be in long
Rocks like Rock-Salt-petre; and this Salt will be more subtle than the first:
Distill this Salt in a Retort, putting what distilleth to the first Liquor; out
of the feces extract again the Salt, of which distill also the Spirit in a
Retort. Proceed thus until the remaining earth, or Caput Mortuum gives no more
Salt. Then take all your Spirits, and mix them together, and put it in a large
and high Cucurbite, which cover with a double paper Oyled and dried; tie it
well about the neck of the Cucurbite with a packthread, then put on the head,
and lute well the junctures, put on a pretty large Recipient, with a narrow and
a short neck; distill in B. vapor. and the Ethereal Spirit will pass over
through the paper, and the phlegm will stay behind, because it cannot pass
through the Oyled paper; and if your Spirit be not subtle enough, you may
rectify it once or twice with new Oyled paper; then keep it in a Vessel close
stopped in a cold place: Then take off the Oyled paper, and distill the rest of
the Liquor to the consistence of a red Syrup; put the Cucurbite with the Syrup
in a Cellar, and in two days time there will be many little Crystals very
white, which separate, and wash them in the phlegm, and they will be white and
pure: Then put the phlegm to that which remained in the Cucurbite, and distill
to a Syrup, which put in a Cellar to Crystallize as before: Cleanse and wash
the Crystals to whiten them, then put them together upon white paper to dry
them for two days in the shadow; then put them in a Cucurbite narrow and
somewhat high, and pour upon them of the aforementioned Ethereal Spirit, so
much as may cover it the breadth of three or four fingers^ digest twenty four
hours, then distill in B. M. All the Spirit will come over, and in the bottom
will remain a clear and transparent Gum, upon which pour again the distilled
Spirit; digest and distill as before. Repeat this cohobation and distillation
four times, at the fourth time the said Gum will distill over in the form of an
Oil as white as snow, swimming upon the Spirit: This Oil is the ture and only
dissolvent of, separate it from the Spirit by a Funnel. And thus you shall have
the Philosophical Menstruum, the Vegetable, and Mineral Salt, Aurora Dianae,
and the true Philosophical, and the precious {water}, dissolving the two
Luminaries into a Physical dissolution, with which you may prepare Medicines
both for Health, and for Projection to transmute Metals, which will be both
short and easy, as follows.

It Is not enough to have the Menstruum or Philosophical {water}, for it serves
only for an Agent or a means to excite the Vegetative quality which is hidden
and buried in the occult Secrets of the Metalline Nature. And it does not
suffice only to know that makes, and,; but it cannot render them apparent,
except the said Bodies be first discontinued, that is to say, that this
Metalline form be reduced into subtle parts attenuated, for to be afterward
opened and reduced into Calx, of which this Menstruum easily draws the fixed
grain or Sperma, the Principle of Vegetation.

Prepare then a slight, spungy, well opened, and attenuated Calx of, which put
in a small Cucurbite, and pour upon it so much of the aforementioned white Oil
as will cover it a fingers breadth; digest two or three days with a gentle
heat, then distill over all the Oil, then pour the Spirit upon the Calx: Then
pour upon this Matter four or five times as much of the abovementioned Spirit;
digest twenty four hours, and the Spirit will be tincted of a pure red color,
more red than any Ruby, which decant, and dry the remaining Matter, and pour
upon it the same Oil, and digest twenty four hours, and it will be very red.
Repeat this so long till your will yield no more tincture. Then Circulate all
your Tinctures in a Pelican for thirty days, and then separate the clear from
an Hypostace which will be at the bottom, and you shall have the true Aurum
potabile, which will be of an admirable virtue, taking three or four drops of
it at a time in a little Sack, or other fit vehicle.

But for the Work, you must separate the Spirit by distillation in Balneo,
until the Tincture remain in the bottom in consistence of an Oil, upon which
cohobate the Spirit, and distill as before: Repeat this seven or eight times,
and the said Tincture will remain like an Oil that will congeal no more, which
is the Philosophical Aurum potabile, having a Vegetative virtue, being sown in
its own Earth, which is the Calx of, prepared as shall be taught hereafter.

The Philosophical Aqua Regis.
TAke Nitre and {sal ammoniac}, ana iij. reduce them to fine Powder each by it
self, then mix them well together, and put it in a Re^^^t of three or four
quarts, and distill in Sand into a very large Recipient, the junctures well
luted with paper, and paste made of Flower and {water}; for if you should take
^ stronger Lute, all would break: Give the fire by degrees, until you see
white fumes in the Recipient in half; an hours time all will come over; then
let it cool, and you will find in the Recipient about jss. and about the neck
of the Retort a Sublimed Salt, which proceeds from the {sal ammoniac}, which
will not dissolve except in hot {water}; the Retort being cold, take out the
Caput Mortuum as well as you can, and the Retort being found, put in fresh
Matter the same quantity as before; repeat this till you have {water} enough.
Then digest this {water} in Ashes in an Alembick with a gentle heat to separate
the phlegm from it, which will be insipid; then distill the rest in a Retort,
and keep it for use.

Take j. of well purified by antimony, bent it into thin Plates, cut them
small, and put them in a Crucible and ignifie them: Put vj. of in another
Crucible, heat it until it begin to smoke, then take it from the fire, and pour
it upon the, stir it well together with a stick until it be well aaamated, then
cast this aaa into a Marble Mortar, grind it well, pouring on fair {water} to
wash it from all its blackness and foulness; then squeeze out so much of this
aaa as you can: Then grind this aaa with equal weight of prepared Salt; put it
in a Retort, and distill over all the in Sand into a Recipient half full of
{water}: The being all over, increase the fire for four hours, so that the
bottom of the Retort may be always red in the Sand; then let all cool, take out
the Retort and pour hot {water} into it, and let it stand so for an hour, and
the {water} will dissolve the Salt; pour it out, and pour more hot {water} upon
the Matter; do thus three or four times? Then pour out the with the {water}
into a Poringer, which will be every subtle Powder; dry it gently, and put it
in a Mattress, and pour upon it of the abovementioned A. R. about vj. stop the
Mattress with Cotton only, and put it to digest in hot Ashes, and in a few hours
it will all be dissolved into a Liquor of an Orange color, ^leaving some
impure Earth at the bottom: Upon this dissolution pour of the which you drew
off by distillation about twice the quantity of the, digest it for two or three
days, or so long until the be all dissolved, and the {water} be clear like Rock
{water}, and the be in the form of a light Sponge in pieces, swimming in the
{water}; separate the {water}, and wash the with Salt {water} filtred, then
wash it in fair {water} so often till it be well edulcorated, then dry this
Powder of, and it is prepared. For to attenuate it further, and to render it
more Spungeous, mix it with double its weight of Sublimed {sal ammoniac}, grind
them well together, and put them in a small Cucurbite with its Head, and
Sublime in Sand all the {sal ammoniac}. Then grind this {sal ammoniac} again
with the and Sublime it once more, so will the be well attenuated and opened,
and fit to be joined with the Vegetable Salt. Then put this Powder of into a
Poringet of stone-ware, not glazed, and pour upon it some good Oil of Tartar,
dry it gently, and pour more Oil upon the Powder, and dry it as before: Repeat
this till you have employed iv. of Oil of Tartar to j. of; then put it into a
Mattress with a short neck, stop it close, and put it in an Iron Pot in Sand,
then cover the Pot with any other Pot, and give fire of reverberation, so that
the may be red in the Mattress, but not melt; continue the fire in that degree
for 48 hours. Then take out the Mattress, and wash the Matter with hot {water}
till the be well edulcorated, then dry it, and imbibe it again with fresh Oil
of Tartar; reverbera^e it as before for 48 hours. Repeat this Work twice more,
and you shall have a very light and Spungy Calx of.

Hartman.) Note, That instead of this Calx of, you may take one prepared, by
Calcining it with flowers of Sulphur, as Sir Kenelm Digby prepared it for
Saunier's Work, which see in its place.

Then imbibe it once with Oil of Tartar, and proceed in all as before.

Having reduced the into an Oil, it will be necessary to have an Earth of its
own nature, to make it grow, and produce the Fruit which we expect of it.

Now this Calx of shall serve for an Earth to receive this Seed. But since that
in all Bodies there are three things, to wit, the Soul, the Spirit, and the
Body; that which has a Body, cannot receive the Soul, except it be opened by
the Spirit: It will then be necessary to reduce the into a Spirit, which is
done by reducing it into, its first and nearest Matter; which to perform,
proceed thus:

Take j. of well purified by antimony, reduce it into thin Plates, cut them
small, and put them in a Mattress, pour upon them vj. of our Philosophical
{water}, keep it in digestion till the be all dissolved, then distill of^ the
{water}, which cohobate again, and distill as before. Repeat this three or four
times, then distill off about three parts of the {water}, expose the rest with
the Vessel to the open Air, and the will congeal into Crystals, which put in a
Glass Bottle, and stop it very close, and keep them in a dry place un^^^ they
be dry; then grind them with twice^ much {sal ammoniac} Sublimed with Salt; put
this into a large Mattress, and pour upon it by drop^ of good Oil of Tartar, the
double quantity of the, or until it be of the consistence of thin Mustard; then
Seal it Her me^cally, and keep it in digestion with a gentle heat for two and
forty days, during which time the Matter will putrify and smell ve^^ strong,
and you shall see all the Colors appear successively; take a little of it and
was^ it well with warm {water} several times, then being dry, put some of it
upon a thin Pl(...) red-hot, and if it melt without smoking, (...) is a sign
that it is all Mercurial, and well prepared; but if it smoke, you must keep it
in digestion until that sign appears: Then wash and edulcorate it well from
all Saltness, and dry it very gently; then mix it with seven parts of prepared
Salt, put it in a Cucurbite, which put in Sand, and give a gentle fire for
twelve or fourteen hours, then increase the fire, and continue that degree as
long; continue the Sublimation until all the Philosophical Calx be Sublimed:
Then gather carefully with a feather this Sublimate, and put it in a Glass
Mortar with warm {water}, grinding it with a Glass Pestle for an hour or two,
then let it settle, and pour off the {water}, put on fresh hot {water}, and
grind it until the Matter come to be of the consistence of Mustard; then add
good White Wind Vinegar, and grind it until all be converted into running.

Composition.
TAke ss. of your Calx of prepared and attenuated, as was said, put it in a
Glass Mortar, and pour upon it iij. of the S^lary; the will suddenly swallow up
its Body, as one drop of {water} mixeth it self with another; then squeeze out
so much of this aaa; that there remain but about two parts of with the. Put
this aaa in a Philosophical Egg, and pour upon it by little and little of your
Oil of beforementioned, hold it over a gentle fire, and stir the Matter with
an Iron Rod, that all may well mix and incorporate, pouring on so much of the
said Oil, that it be of the consistence of thin Mustard, and then you shall
suddenly see mavelous things, when the Soul of the said^ (which is its Oil)
enters into the Body of the, by means of the Spirit, which is the Solary, and
that by means of the said Soul, the Spirit uniteth with its Body, of three
being made one; stop the Vessel speedily, because of the fumes. The Body of the
which was dead before, being by this only and admirable means animated,
dignified, and filled with a Vegetative Life, will thereby acquire an inward
Power of Multiplication, as well as the Sperms and Seeds of all Animals and
Vegetables, and be made fit to grow and produce Fruit, (being sowed in a fit
Earth) which it could not do before, because of that default. The Vessel being
Sealed Hermetically, put it in Ashes in a brass Vessel in the shape of half a
boul; digest it with a Lamp fire. As for the time, and the colors, mark what
Trevesan says of it; for at the end of forty days you shall see the
blackness: Continue the first degree of heat to whiteness, which will appear
within four Months: then augment the fire, and continue until it come to be of
a Citrine color, and then threre will be no more danger. Increase the fire to
the fourth degree, and continue that, till your King takes his Robe, and that
the Matter suffer Ignition without smoking.

Hartman.) This Process was sent to Sir K. D. in a Letter from Paris, by Abbot
Boucaud, with the following words. Sir, I have sent you here enclosed a great
Work upon, which Monsieur de Rouviere has given me; it comes from a Man who
having been carried away, and kept close in a Castle, made at last his escape,
and was conducted to the Duke D'Elboeuf, and Monsieur de Rouviere found the
said Process under his Boulster.

The said Abbot sent to Sir K. D. also the following Process, which he says he
had from an intimate Friend, who assured him that it was a Reality.
TAke of a very good Oar of that was never wet, or instead of it, take a true
and natural Mineral Lithargy, not Artificial; pulverize it an grind it upon a
Marble stone with distilled {water}, several times distilled. Put your Oar of,
or Lithargy in one or more Cucurbites, and pour upon it of the aforesaid
distilled {water}, or distilled Dew, so much as may cover it the breadth of
seven or eight singers, cover it with a blind head, and lute well all the
junctures, and digest for forty days with a gentle heat, shaking the Vessel
often; when you perceive that the Menstruum is colored, decant the clear, and
put on fresh {water}, or take new Oar or Lithargy and extract as before; filter
the Menstruum and distill it with a very gentle heat. Take this Salt of and put
it in a Mattress, digest it with a Lamp fire with six small wicks, and it will
dissolve of it self, and there will settle to the bottom some impurity or
feces; break the Mattress (being cold) and take the pure part and put in into
another Mattress, dissolve it by digestion as at first, separate the pure from
the impure. Repeat so often till this Salt leave no more impurity. Then keep it
carefully, until you employ it in the following Work.

Take of this Salt ten parts, and one part of Mineral that has not been
melted, put them together in a Mattress, Seal it Hermetically, and digest with a
very gentle heat, and there will loosen it self from the Salt of some Spirits,
which by falling down again will dissolye the by little and little, and there
will separate it self yet some feces which are not useful for this work, which
you must separate. Take what is clear and transparent, and put it in a
Philosophical Egg, Seal it Hermetically, and digest it with a Lamp fire with a
gentle heat, continue the digestion without ever increasing the heat, etc. The
said Abbot said, that this was all he could have, or know of this Work hitherto.

The said Abbot sent also the following Process in a Letter from Paris.
MOnsieur de R's. Operation, by which he fixes into with the Salt of Saturn
and, is thus. He takes one part of, and three parts of, whereof he makes an
aaa, which he puts in a Mattress, and puts upon it Saccharum Saturni (made
the common way) about a fingers breadth over the aaa; then he Seals the
Vessel, and digesteth it with a Lamp fire with gentle heat, increasing the heat
by degrees, it passes through all the colors; and of one Marc of, and three
Marcs of, there remained xij. of fixed Matter that suffered fusion and the Test.

He says, that there should have remained one Marc of the fixed, but the
Operation was not well wrought. In another Letter he says, that there remained
iij. or iv. of fixed into, which endured fusion and the Test.

An Operation upon Jupiter.
DIstill a Menstruum out of Vitriol and {sal ammoniac}, with which make Sulphur
naturae Iovis: Make also with the same Menstruum Sulphur not., which dissolve
into Oil, and with it insere Sulphur Iovis ad fusibilitatem, and then project
upon Jupiter.

Dunston thus: Having taken our white Earth, you may putrify it by it self, or
with the Calx of other Metals, and change its color into a new white or red:
Then ferment it with the Oil of or, etc.

Riply (in his Viaticum) thus: Calcine into a most subtle Calx (for in it there
is pure, not brought to its full perfection by Nature) which is easily hardened
with the Oil of. Do your Work therefore with Tin (until you are Rich) because
so the Work is easily done, and at small charge.

Lullius (in his Magia Naturalis) thus: Make Sulphur naturae (without which
nothing can be done) and thus of any Metal (which he directs to do in a very
tedious way) then incere it with Oil of Ferment (as in his Pract. Brev. or
Sermocinal) until it be fluid; then it is a perfect Medicament.

and ex.
TAke of the filings of lbj. Saltpeter lbj. mix them, separate the Spirit from
the Anima by combustion, Subliming it in so many Pots as you know: Dissolve the
Caput Mortuum (which will be fixed as a stone, so that you may strike fire out
of it by collision) with, that there may be a Regulus made of it, which pour
out and make into Rods, and cement them with store of Calx-vive on a Circulary
fire, then Coppel them with Lead, and add to them fine, what then remains
upon the Coppel is good, and you will have considerable gain by it, and by the
separation of A. F. you will have three parts of, and one of.

But when you melt your Caput Mortuum of with antimony into a Regulus, as
before, when you have Precipitated them with Tartar, or mixed them, then put
your Regulus to Coppel, and in it you will find: See that you do not cast away
the Scoria, for you will find Silver amongst it; Coppel it therefore by it self
with the following Powder, so you will find, which separate with A. F. (the
Powder make thus.)

Take Chelamus (Bay Salt) melt, dissolve, filtre, and coagulate it; melt it
again, and do this Work thrice: Then cast in this Salt into the aforesaid
Scoria (from which you separated the Regulus) after you have put it to Coppel,
so your Work will be done and accomplished speedily, and with great fruit and
profit in the applying the fire.

Hartman.) The Famous Tachenius Relates (speaking of the malignity of Arsenick)
that there are some who can burn pure Tin into Powder, which cannot again be
reduced into Tin by Vulgar Art, as other Metals; yet with Arsenick it is made
Scoria, part of which by a singular Skill becomes pure. Sigismund Wan, a
Citizen in Voitland, knew and practiced this Art of Separation, to his great
benefit; for in the Year 1464 he Builded and Endowed a great Hospital there,
which, as Gaspar Bruschius Relates, is at this day to be seen, with the Epitaph
of the aforesaid Citizen.

Now, that may be got out of Tin with Arsenick, Clavious proves in his Apology
against Erastus Second Vol. Theatri Chym. Fol. 39.

A Worthy Gentleman lately related to me, that he knew one, who told him, that
out of lbss. of Block-Tin he got so much as he sold for 3s. 6d.

A short and clear Description of the great Philosophic Stone.
The first Operation.
TAke Salt prepared, Nitre, and Roman Vitriol, ana lbij. beat them into a small
Powder, mix them, and put them into a Pot upon a slow fire, and moving them,
cause them to melt, that they may be dried a little. Then take taken out of the
Mineral, lbj, which being put into a Linen Cloth, squeeze it and pour it upon
the hot Matter, moving it with a Rod, until the Mercury is hid in the Matter;
incorporate the Mass well when it is cooled, in a Marble Mortar; then dry it
all in a Pot very slowly, until it be so dry, that a Sword held over the Po^,
receive no moisture from it; then put it into a Sublimatory, and Sublime it
first twelve hours, afterward increase the fire, that all the Mercury may be
well Sublimed, white as snow: So the lacking nothing of its weight, will be
associated with the invisible Sulphur of Vitriol, and purged from the Earth and
its blackness; and if you will Experiment that Conjunction, you may separate
Sulphur of Vitriol from thus: Take distilled Vinegar, q. v. quench burning Iron
several times in it, let your Sublimate stand therein all Night, afterward
pass it three times through a filtre, then set it upon a slow fire; so a black
scum will swim above the Vinegar, which take off; then evaporate all the
Vinegar with a slow fire, so you will have an Excellent Sulphur of Vitriol; and
the will remain by it self in the bottom.

The Second Operation.
THis teaches to Extract the Quintessence from this Sublimate thus: Make A. F,
as follows; Take Saltpeter and Vitriol, ana lbj. beat them, then mix them
together and distill them with a slow fire in a glazen Alembick on Ashes for
eighteen hours, so that nothing more can distill (but lute all so well, that
nothing exhale;) after the abovesaid 18 hours increase the fire by degrees,
that the Water may be distilled, and then continue the same degree of heat
until it begin to cease to distill, and so proceed by degrees, until nothing
more can come from it: Let the Vessels cool of themselves, and Seal the
Recipient with gummed Wax; and when you have put your Sublimate, being well
beat, in a strong Mattress, pour upon it of this Water to the height of one or
two fingers breadth, and immediately obturate it well: Set the Mattress in Ashes
on a slow fire for the space of twenty four hours; and if it be not then
dissolved, if you pour vij. of Water upon it, add of {sal ammoniac} well beaten
j. or more; close it up presently, and set it upon Ashes, so it will be
dissolved: It is a very great Secret. Then abstract all the Water, (the
junctures of the Vessel being carefully stopped) by distillation on a slow fire
of Coals, even to dryness: Afterward taking off the Cap, cover it straight
with a glazen Operculum, lute it, and when you have increased the fire, the
Quintessence of Mercury and Vitriol will ascend at the sides of the Vessel; at
last make the fire yet stronger, that all the Quintessence may be well
Sublimed, which, when the Vessel is cooled, keep carefully: Beat the black
faeces, and Sublime it once more, if perhaps any of the Quintessence remain
still amongst it, so you shall have purged the Mercury, and imbibed more of the
Spirits of Vitriol existing in A. F. Then dissolve and Sublime the Matter (that
is Sublimed) twice more after the same manner, that no impurity may be left in
it, so it will be whiter than Snow.

The Third Operation.
Beat this Matter, and put it into an Earthen Urinal well glazed within, which
cover with an Earthen glazed head like to a Paradi, that they may be exactly
joined together; lute the junctures well, and digest it eight days or more in
an Athanor on a slow fire of Coals; for otherwise it could not be dissolved
into Water.

The Fourth Operation.
PUT your Matter so dissolved into a Mattress, close it, and dissolve it in A.
B. into Water with a continual slow heat: Distill this Water in a little
Alembick on Ashes with a slow fire of a Lamp, and Water of Paradise will be
distilled, (of which alone the stone may be made by the Method after described)
one drop of which poured upon a Plate of any red-hot Metal will thoroughly
whiten it within and without; (Note, that the like may be done with the Lunary
made of and if they be pour^d on a Plate of.) After the water is distilled,
some faeces will remain, which contain in them Earth, Air, and Fire, which you
may thus separate one from another: Beat those faeces, and digest them in an
Athanor, as you did the Quintessence before, afterward dissolve them the same
way in M. B. At last distill with a very strong fire in M. B. by an Alembick, a
white Oil, which is called Air, which when it cease to drop any more, take
off the Recipient, and close well the nose of the Alembick, and so let it cool
of it self: Then set the Alembick with a new Recipient on Ashes, and draw off
the red Oil (which is called fire) with a strong fire. Cast away the Earth that
remains.

The Fifth Operation.
IF you would make a Stone of Paradise alone, or Virgins Milk, you need not
separate the Elements; but if you have separated them, do thus: Take of fire or
red Oil part j. of Air, or white Oil parts iv. and of Virgins Milk parts viij.
Put them together in a Mattress with a short and narrow Neck; in two other
Matrasses put of Virgins Milk, q. v. Seal them all Hermetically, and so put
them in an Athanor on a slow fire of small coals burnt till they have ceased
from flaming, and so let them stand till by several colors they attain a
perfect white: Then (if you will have the Stone white) you may take out one
Mattress, leaving the other two (if you Operate with three at once:) Then
increase the fire sensibly, because your Work cannot easily be marred, and so
proceed by degrees, until the Matter is perfectly red.

The Sixth Operation.
IS Projection. Take an hundred parts of purged the common way, heat them in a
Crucible, and add to them part j. of the white or red stone, and the whole will
be a Medicine. Then take of this Medicine part j. and Project it upon another
hundred parts of, moving it with a Rod, and afterward melting it. Further,
Project of this, part j. in an hundred parts, and the whole will be or,
according as the stone is which you took: If you will Project upon other
Metals, melt them, or do them into thin Plates, and on them when they are very
hot Project part j. upon an hundred, and set the Plates in the fire for some
time. If you would augment the virtue of the Stone in infinitum, dissolve it as
often as you please in B. M. and coagulate it slowly in Ashes; let Jupiter and
Saturn be melted.

The Seventh Operation
IS the Magistery of an Athanor, which Build thus: Take of Magisterial Lute,
Potters Earth, Horse-dung, Paper carminated, Hairs cut, make them all into a
Paste with Salt water and Vinegar, and with that Paste build your Furnace; make
a round Wall four fingers breadth in height, with Chimneys, set upon that Wall
an Iron Plate which has four Supporters, by which it may stay upon the Wall,
leave some distance between the interior sides of the Wall and the exterior of
the Plate, that the heat may ascend by it; then raise the Wall to the height of
five Inches: Then make an earthen Cap, which on the one side must have a Window
and convenient Door, by which you may feel the heat, putting in your hand at
it, (which heat must be so moderate and uniform, that you may endure to hold
your hand in the Athanor as long as you please;) the Cap must be carefully
luted within and without, and set upon the Furnace and agglutinated with Clay:
Afterward, when the Furnace is sufficiently dried, set upon it Glass Goblets,
and set your Matrasses upon them. Mind well all these things, and consider the
Figures cut in the Page over against this. Now, by the holes that are made
betwixt the Plate and the Wall, you may increase or diminish the heat at your
pleasure. But note, that upon the Goblets, above the Tripus and the Plate, you
may set an earthen Trencher, and set thereon an Egg, which cover with another
Trencher, so that these two Trenchers joined together may be lifted up in the
Air, and the Egg not touch the sides of the Trenchers.

A Note from one that wrought the Stone.
I Have had certain notice of one that made the Philosophers stone with
Leaf-gold and a clear {water}, that looked like Rock {water}, but smelled
strong. He who wrought it for him (that is, attended the Lamp) said, he had
made his Liquor thrice before it would dissolve the. The last dissolved it by
little and little, it became a yellow Aureal Liquor, then thickened by little
and little, at length became a black thick broth, in the end like melted
Pitch: then changed several colors, every one sparkling like Orient precious
Stones, and sparks like fire or Stars rose in the Glass (which was a large Egg
Sealed Hermetically) then fell down again. It was digested in Ashes made of old
Bark of Oak burned (unwashed) and the Author said, no other Ashes would serve.
And the heat was never greater, than that he could endure the back of his hand
upon the Ashes, which was caused by a Lamp.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. D.

Lauremberg's Observations upon Angelus Sala his Synopsis of Aphorisms, 1624.
in Quarto, page 4.
HE says thus: I did so prepare fluid, that without the mixture of any thing
whatsoever imaginable, without any dissolving Menstruum, it did acquire the
form of a most pure and transparent Liquor; neither hitherto has it lost this
liquid form, but is so liquid, that you would imagine it had been brought from
a Fountain, and which you will more admire, being tasted, it is void of all
acrimony, and merely insipid; (I add also this) that some Months ago I reduced
English into a fluid and moist Liquor, without the least addition of Menstruum,
which humidity it not only continually keeps entirely to this day, but (so
far as I can see) will never lose it.

(Afterward in the same page, he says,)

I confess ingenuously, that not long ago, I had the happiness of seeing at a
Friends, and feeling such an unfactitious Liquor ( liquorem (...)) whereby
leaves of Gold and Silver were dissolved into a pliant and fluid Liquor,
without any noise or the least suspicion of Acrimony. This Liquor can be no
other than congealed Air, without which the Life of Animals becomes no Life;
and there is no Body under the Sun in that threefold Kingdom that is destitute
of it. I had rather search its Medicinal Power with silent speculation, than
weary People with tedious and fruitless Discourses.

Concerning May Dew.
MAY Dew is the true Minera of the dissolvent. Aug. This Liquor is such, that
if it be gathered at a certain Season, two Uses, etc. One, that hereby you may
infuse Gold in a Liquor of its proper Seed, when you begin first to dissolve
it, etc. Cosmop. But this {water} is said to be the Menstruum of the World:
Speaking of the Element of {water}, the Menstruum of the World is tripartite,
etc. the more pure resolved into Air. There is in the Air an Occult Nourishment
of Life, which we call Dew in the Night, and in the daytime {water}, rarefied,
who^e invisible congealed Spirit is of more value than the whole Earth, Idem.
The principal Matter of Metals is the Humidity of the Air (the Aerial
Substance) mixed with heat prepared aforesaid is governed by the rays of the and
prepared in the Sea; not one place or one Country will afford it you.
Experience testifies, that is not sought for save in Mountains, because it can
be seldom had in a Plain.

Flamel, Artefius, Pontanus, Zacaire, etc. Their Arcanum.
THis Stone is that about which the abovenamed Authors employed themselves: It
is composed of the Mineral Gluten, made of and antimony Mineral, by the
addition of the Solary Ferment thus: Distill the Volatile Crystals or Butter
from sublimate and antimony, equal parts: Or distill, or dissolve common in A.
F, Precipitate with Salt Water, and you shall have a very white Calx, which
dry, and join it with as much of Calx of, and distill the Volatile Crystals
thereof. These Crystals are the Magnet, by means of which the Universal form,
or Spirit of the World is attracted; which specifieth and determines it self
in this matter, by resolution in the Air in,, and. Put this Liquor in a
Cucurbite, and digest for thirty days with a very gentle heat with a Lamp, to
the end, that there may be a Natural distillation made of the attracted Spirit,
which will begin to come over invisibly the first or second day, with the Idea
of that which it draws, to wit, the antimony, and of, or with a universal
Mineral form, tending to Metallic. This Liquor will continue coming over even
unto the end of fifty days; let not the heat exceed that of ones hand. This
Ethereal {water} is the {water} of Paradise, or the Mineral astrum of Flamel's
two Dragons, the one is Volatile (which is) and the other Rampant, which is the
antimony, which do not suffer to be touched nor attacked, until their Venomous
scum (that is to say, the Butter) have produced the Spirit of the
Mercurial-wind, and the scum of the Red Sea. Note, that within fifteen days
this Sea or Butter comes to be very red, with a gentle heat of a Lamp fire in
Ashes; and this is Flamel's Red Sea. This Ethereal {water} penetrates all
Metalline Bodies, (being Luminated and made red-hot) and tingeth them into. Two
drops of this {water} being dissolved in iv. of Spirit of Wine, makes a
Virginal Milk, whereof the Dose is a spoonful: It is a very gentle Emetick,
because of its crudity, or rather Mercurial Substance, whereof the virtue
Operates upwards, because it is moist and Airy. It Cures the Epilepsie by the
Character, which is imprinted into it, by the word Fiat, and all astral
Diseases, as far as humane disposition permits. This is the Celestial {water}
which does not wet ones hands after its preparation; it is the of, the {water}
or Center of the Heart of, and the true extent of antimony, but it requires
more Work. Take this {water} (you must have a pretty great quantity of it, and
therefore you must have ten, fifteen, or twenty pound of Volatile Crystals) and
put it in a Cucurbite, and with a very gentle heat of a Lamp distill off all
the waterish moistness, which by carelessness it might have contracted from the
Air: There will remain in the bottom a Gum, a Syrup, a viscous {water}, a
Radical Mineral moisture, which is the Eagles gluten abovementioned, which did
fly the space of fifty days continually; by means of this gentle heat, the
Gluten flies no more, but is the flying Crapant and Zacair's Mercurial {water},
which is congealed by cold, and liquified by heat. The Authors before mentioned
have digested this Gluten per se in a Mattress Hermetically Sealed, without the
addition of a Solary Ferment; but afterward they have been forced to ferment
the Powder which they made of it. For to shorten the Work, take seven parts, or
nine or ten, or more of this Gluten, unto which by heat join one part of in
leaf, or Sulphur of prepared by the Salt Enixe (which is best) and digest in an
Athanor, or in Flamel's Furnace (which is very easy) until all the Matter have
passed through all the due colors, and come to be of a purple Citrine color;
then have you the Metalline Salt, the most high Tincture, a Treacle made of
Venom, a most Excellent Medicine made of the greatest Poison. This Medicine is
multiplied in quantity by new addition of the aforementioned Gluten; in
quality, by dissolving in humido into a Liquor, and purifying by digestion, and
then by fixation; Experience will teach other things far better. This Method,
although it differs much from that of the greatest Philosophers, as Lully,
Trevesan, Cosmopolite, etc. (and being but particular in comparison of that
high Generalissima) nevertheless it seems to be Universal in regard of Metals
and Minerals. Note, that you may also extract a white and red. Oil of that
which remains, as was said before, and make a new aurifique stone thereof,
which those Authors have not understood, or if they have understood it, they
have not spoken of it. Note also, that this Mineral {water} of Paradise, is the
Philosophers live, and the of the Wise, but not the Generalissima: And this
{water} will serve against all Maladies, for it drives them out, according to
the intention and inclination of Nature.

To prepare a Ferment or Sulphur of.
MAke an aaa of or, and; grind this aaa, then squeeze it through a Leather, the
Globe remaining in the Leather, you must grind again, and then put it in a
Poringer, covered with another Poringer, and lute them well together; then put
them to a gentle fire for half an hour: Then grind it again, and digest it
between the two Porringers as before. Repeat this so often till the or be in
Powder impalpable; then incorporate this Powder with fresh, grind them
together, and digest with a gentle fire, so that little or nothing may Sublime,
and if any thing Sublime, put it again to that which remains in the bottom.
Repeat this last Operation (adding new, grind and digest as before) so often,
till the whole Body of or be converted into running, and that all may be
squeezed through the Leather: Then put this animated into a Porringer, which
cover, and digest with a gentle heat, so that nothing Sublime; continue the
digestion so long, until you see a thin skin swimming upon the Matter, which
take off carefully (it will be of the color of or) put the Matter upon the
fire again, increase the heat a little, taking off the thin skin as it rises;
continuing so long until the Matter produce no more thereof: And thus you shall
have the Sulphur of or.

An Operation that Monsieur de I'Oberye wrote from Monsieur John's Mouth.
TAke the Mother-liquor of Saltpeter, let it run cold through washed Sand,
then filter it by Languetes, then through gray paper: Then evaporate with very
gentle heat, putting down the skins as they rise upon the Liquor; the remaining
Salt being dry, grind it, and put it to resolve into Liquor in a Cellar, then
filter and evaporate as before. Repeat this purification five or six times, or
so often, till it leave no more feces in the filter. If you take lbx. of this
Liquor, you shall have but lbij. viij. of purified Salt: Of this lbij. viij.
you shall have x. of Spirit, by distilling it per se in Re^orts in Sand; you
must put but lbss. of this Salt into each Retort; deflegm it in B. Take the
Caput Mortuum, and grind it, and dissolve it in a Cellar; filter, and congeal,
repeating this two or three times: Then being very dry, join iij. of it with j.
of the rectified Spirit; digest and circulate eight days with gentle heat in
Ashes, and all will be a {water} of the color of Amber. Put one part of into
ten parts of this Liquor, and it will dissolve it (cold) in less than a quarter
of an hour: Decant the dissolution when it is clear; one drop thereof taken in
a little broth, is a great Corroborant.

Put revived from Cinaber into the dissolution^ of, and it will become like a
Gum, decant the clear, and put the to dry, and it will become hard; melt it
between two beds of Calcined Egg-shells in a Crucible, and you shall have good.

Venus into: Sent me by Monsieur de Beaulieu.
TAke fixed Arsenick viij. fixed Nitre iv. Oil of Tartar prepared, as shall be
taught hereafter, xij. {sal ammoniac} fixed, xv. Let them all resolve into
Liquors in a moist place every one by it self; then take these Liquors and mix
them together, and filter them, then put to them iij. of Oil of, and viij. of
(prepared and dissolved in the Liquor of fixed {sal ammoniac} and fixed Sulphur)
mix all well together, and put it in a Mattress, and digest in fimo for forty
days, changing the dung every eight days: Then decant the clear, and the feces
remaining in the bottom, dissolve in the Liquor of fixed {sal ammoniac}, and put
it to the rest of your Liquors; filter it three or four times: Then distill it
in a Cucurbite with a gentle fire in B. M. (not boiling) distill to dryness,
and you shall have a white Matter like a stone, and clear like a Pearl: And to
know whether it be perfected, put a little of it upon a red-hot Plate of
Copper, and if it melt like Wax, and penetrate through the Plate without
smoking, leaving the said Plate white where it has touched, it is a sign of
an entire perfection; but if you find that it is not yet fusible, and that it
smoke yet, grind it upon a stone with a pint of {water} distilled from whites
of Eggs, and distilled three times upon lbj. of Quicklime, grind it with the
said {water}, until it be of the consistence of Pap; then put to it four times
its weight of Liquor of fixed {sal ammoniac}; digest in fimo for eight days
only, then congeal it as before, so is it perfect. Project j. of this Matter
upon lbv. of prepared, and sometime after cast a little piece of Wax into it,
at three or four times; then cover the Crucible, and leave it in fusion for
some hours.

The Multiplication.
DIssolve viij. of this Matter in lbj. of the {water} of whites of Eggs, then
add iv. of Liquor of fixed Arsenick, digest in fimo for fifteen days; then
distill and congeal it as before, so is it multiplied. If you reiterate this
Multiplication several times, the Matter will remain in a Liquor, which will
project upon great quantity of Venus.

To fix the {sal ammoniac} for this Work.
TAke lbj. of {sal ammoniac} in small pieces about the bigness of a Wall-nut;
make a Paste with Quicklime and whites of Eggs, with which endew the said
pieces of {sal ammoniac}, let them dry, then stratifie them in a Crucible with
Powder of Quicklime, let the beds of the Quicklime be about a fingers thick;
then put the Crucible to a Circulary fire, which increase and approach once in
a quarter of an hour, at last, cover it with Coals, and let it stand so for
half an hour: Then take out the {sal ammoniac} (the Crucible being cold) and
wipe off the Powder of Quicklime, then dissolve the {sal ammoniac} in fair
{water}, filter and congeal it; dissolve it in a Cellar into an Oil, which keep
for use.

To fix the Arsenick.
TAke equal parts of Arsenick and Nitre, grind them, then mix them together;
fill a Crucible half full with this Powder, fill it up with Salt of Tartar;
cover this Crucible with another that has a little hole in the bottom, lute
them, and set them in a Circulary fire, the fire being half a foots distance
from the Crucible; increase and approach the fire once in half an hour about
two inches, and when you perceive no more smoke come from the Matter through
the little hole, put the fire close to the Crucible, and at last cover it with
Coals, and keep it so covered for twelve hours, then let it cool, and grind it,
then dissolve it in a Cellar, and keep the Liquor in a Glass close stopped.

To fix the Sulphur for this Work.
TAke v. of Quicklime, slacken it in six quarts of fair {water}, and having
stood twenty four hours, filter it, and put it in a Kettle; then take viij. of
flowers of Sulphur, tie it up in a Linen Bag, which hang in the water in the
Kettle, make it boil for an hour, and you shall have a Sulphur incombustible.

Oil of.
TAke iv. of Sublimate in fine Powder, put it in a Crucible, and pour upon it
lbj. of fine melted, stir it well together; then being cold, put it upon a
clean Iron Plate in a Cellar, and you shall have an Oil or Liquor.

To prepare the for this Work.
TAke Arsenick one part, decrepitated Salt two parts, pulverize and mix them
together; then stratifie with this Powder some thin Plates of, cement them for
two days, then put them to a strong fire for six hours; then wash these Plates
from the Salts, and beat them to Powder, wash the Powder with Vinegar, and then
with {water} two or three times; then with Soap make a Paste thereof, which put
in a Crucible, that has a hole in the bottom, put this Crucible in another
Crucible, and so melt down the Powder of, and it will run through the hole into
the other Crucible, and you shall have a very white, and well prepared for
Projection.

To prepare the Salt of Tartar for this Work.
TAke equal parts of Tartar and Quicklime, powder them, and mix them well
together, put this in a Pot, cover it close, and put it in a Potters Oven when
he burns his Pots; then make a Lixivium of it with Rain {water}, which filter
and evaporate to dryness, mix this Salt again with the same quantity of
Quicklime, and Calcine it in a Potters Oven as before. Repeat this five or six
times; then dissolve this Salt in distilled Vinegar, distill and cohobate so
often, till it will no more congeal into a Salt, but that it remain like melted
Wax in the bottom, which pour out, and keep it for Use.

To prepare the for this Work.
DIssolve viij. of in viij. of Spirit of Nitre, then Precipitate with Salt
{water}, the Powder of being settled, and the {water} clear, decant; then
edulcorate the Powder and dry it, then dissolve it again in Spirit of Nitre as
before; Precipitate, Edulcorate, and dry the as before. Repeat once more, three
times in all, then put it in a Mattress, and digest it eight days in Sand. So is
it prepared, and fit to be further prepared, and dissolved in the Oil of fixed
{sal ammoniac}, and fixed Sulphur.

Transmutation of into a Regulus.
PRecipitate Butter of antimony with warm {water} once, without further
edulcoration; dry it gently, then add a fourth part of, and of black Soap, and
Salt of Tartar, of each as much as needs to make a Paste, whereof make little
Bullets, which put in a Retort well luted; distill in a naked fire, with a
strong sudden fire, and the Matter being melted, you shall have a Regulus as
white as, which must be melted three or four times to have it finer and whiter.

Calx of.
MOnsieur Le Febore showed me a very subtle and Spungy Calx of, he had made
thus: Purify to its greatest height, beat it very thin, and cut it into small
pieces, heat one part of them in a Crucible, and six parts of cleansed in
another: Make an aaa in due manner, stirring a while with an Iron Rod, then
throw it into cold {water}; squeeze out as much as you can through
Chamboleather: To the remaining Globe put double as much flowers of Sulphur,
grind them well together: Put this mixture into a capacious Crucible, and
gently burn away the Sulphur, and evaporate the, reverberating the Calx three
or four hours after all is gone away. Repeat all this Work twenty or thirty
times; then reverberate it under a Mussle with so gentle heat, that it melt
not, the longer the better: Then burn S. V. three or four times from it; Qu^re,
Of grinding the Calx long with pure Virgin Honey, then dissolving it in a large
quantity of pure distilled warm {water}, and letting it stand warm till all the
Calx be settled to the bottom: Also of grinding the Calx with purified Salt of
Tartar, then reverberating the Mass, and lastly, dissolving the Salts in warm
{water}, and letting the Calx settle, as with the Honey: I think it will be a
very subtle Calx, to dissolve the in A. R. of Nitre and {sal ammoniac}; then
Precipitating it with Spirit of Urine, or with a Marinated {water}, made by
dissolving the fixed Salt of Urine in pure distilled Rain or Spring water.

A pretty Curiosity, To make Metals Vegetate visibly.
CAlcine white and transparent River Pebbles, extinguish them in {water} to
have a Calx thereof, which reduce into subtle Powder with equal parts of Tartar
and Nitre (fulminated together) taking double quantity of this fusible Salt:
Dissolve this Matter upon a Marble stone or Glass in a moist place, and you
shall have a Liquor, which filter: Take about ij. of this Liquor, put it in a
Viol, and put into it about ij. (or less) of the Calx of any Metal, dissolved
in its Acid Menstruum; Then evaporate to the consistence of a Calx: Let it
stand, and so soon as it is cold you shall see the Metal Vegetate, and shoot
out into branches, which will be of different colors if you put in the Calx of
diverse Metals: This is fine and pleasant to behold. Note, that it is to be
observed in general, that the cause of Vegetation is the encountering of an Airy
Acid with a fixed Alkali; and it is thus, that Quicklime Calcined with common
Salt into an Alkali, being spread upon Barren ground, fatneth it, and makes it
fruitful, causing Vegetables to grow, by contracting the Acid of the Air and
its Volatile Salt.

To engender Cray-fishes.
IT is to be observed first, that to do this Operation well, you must do it at
the increase of the, and in the sign of Cancer, if possible, or at least in any
other Aquatick sign.

Then take a parcel of the said Cray-fishes, taken in Brooks or small Rivers,
being all alive; divide them into two parts, put one part thereof into an
earthen Pot not glazed, cover it with its cover, or with another Pot, lute them
well, and put them to Calcine for seven or eight hours with a strong fire,
until they be well Calcined, and fit to be reduced to Powder in a Marble
Mortar: Then take the other Part, (being also all alive) and boil them in River
{water}, like unto that wherein they were taken, then pour off the {water},
which being cold, put it in a wooden Vessel, or of Earth, and into about a pail
full of this {water}, put about half a handful of the Powder of the aforesaid
Calcined Cray-fishes, stir it well together with a stick, then let it stand to
settle, without stirring it at all, and within a few days you shall see as it
were many Atoms appear in the {water}, which are the breeding Cray-fishes,
moving in the {water}; when you see them as big as a small button, you must
feed them with Bullocks blood, casting a little thereof into the {water}, from
time to time, which in time will make them grow of their natural bigness. You
must observe, that before you put the {water} into the Vessel, you must first
put some Sand into it, so much that the bottom of it may be covered about a
fingers breadth.

To make Oil of Talc.
TAke one part of Venice Talc, and two parts of pure Nitre, both in subtle
Powder, put them in a Wind-Furnace to Calcine with a strong fire for seven or
eight hours: Then take out the Crucible, and beat the Matter to subtle Powder,
and wash it perfectly well with fair {water}, till you have brought away all
the Saltness of it; then dry the Talc well, and Calcine it again with two part
of new Nitre, all as you did before, and dulcifie the Salt from it. Repeat
these Calcinations, and dulcifications four times, that the Talc may be
perfectly white and well Calcined, and in exceeding subtle Powder: Then put it
into a strong Glass Bottle, half full, and stop it close, and set it in a great
quantity of Ice or Snow, that the extreme cold may penetrate into it (for
therein consists the Secret) but the Ice or Snow must not actually touch the
Bottle, but it must be set in a Box of Wicker, fit for it, made like a Cage,
that it be all open between the Bars or Osiers, and in two or three Months all
the Talk will be converted into a pure clear white Liquor, which is Excellent
for the Face and Skin, and will make Scarlet white, being dipped in it.

An Excellent Cosmetick prepared out of.
TAke refined, one part, Sal gemmae, two parts; beat the into very thin Plates,
^stratifie them with the Sal gemmae in Power in a Crucible well luted with
another upon it: Cement for twenty four hours, then open the Crucible, and if
you find the well Calcined, it is enough; if not, stratifie it with fresh Sal
gemmae, and Cement as before: Then edulcorate the with warm {water}; then grind
it into a subtle Powder, pour upon this Powder a well rectified S. V. digest
until the S. V. is tincted blew; then decant, and put on fresh S. V. Repeat
this until you have extracted all the Tincture out of the. Then evaporate the
S. V. with a very gentle heat (or rather distill it gently) and there will
remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite a Matter like Pomatum: Put upon this
Pomatum a Spirit of Wine rectified upon Salt of Tartar, and after a little
digestion, distill off the S. V. in a Retort, and part of the Tincture will
come over with the S. V. and will leave the Pomatum whiter than it was before.
Repeat this Work with new S. V. (Tartarized) so often, till the S. V. bring
over no more Tincture, and that the Pomatum remain in the bottom as white as
Snow, which is Excellent to whiten the Face.

Another way to make Oil of Talc.
REduce Talc of Venice into exceeding subtle Powder, mingle ij. thereof with
ij. of pure leaf Silver, grind them exceedingly well together, to incorporate
them perfectly well: Then reverberate them for fifteen or twenty days, after
which grind them again very subtly, and put them into a Mattress of Glass, and
set it in fimo for thirty or forty days, changing the dung every six or eight
days, that the heat may be always in a good degree: You shall find a pure clear
Oil, which will blanch Pearls, the Face and Skin in other parts, and do all the
things that are said of Oil of Talc.

Another way to make Oil of Talc.
TAke of Venice Talc in great pieces, as much as you please, make it red-hot in
the fire, then quench it by cessing it into Oil of Tartar; fire it again, and
extinguish it as before. Do thus two or three times, and it will be thoroughly
Calcined, so that you may crumble it into small Powder with your fingers; beat
it in a Mortar, and pass it through a fine searse of Silk; what passes not,
Calcine it in a Crucible, and extinguish again: It will be perfectly Calcined
by extinctions in fair {water}, but then it will require ten or twelve
Ignitions and extinctions.

Take your subtle Calx of Talc (which will be perfectly white) made either way,
and put to it some distilled Vinegar to swim two or three fingers breadth over
it, and put it to digest in very gentle heat eight or ten days, and you shall
see a beautiful Oil or Cream swim at the top of the Liquor, skim it off, and
dry it with gentle fire, and it will be a saline substance, which put into a
Bladder, and hang it in a Well near the {water}, but not to touch it, and in a
few days it will resolve into a pure Oil, which is Excellent for the Face. Or,
with long remaining in a moist place, without putting it into distilled
Vinegar, this Calx will resolve into Oil: Try to extinguish the Talc in dew,
etc. (Be sure that in all this Work you touch nothing with Iron.)

To burn holes in Glass.
WHen Mr. Gore would make a hole in the belly of a Retort or Mattress, or
Receiver of Glass, he did thus: Have some Cotton-yarn well Sulphured, lay it
round like a Snake upon the Glass, filling as much space as you would have the
capacity of the hole, make a Circle of Tin, or the like, to keep it in (but be
sure there be not the least moisture upon the Glass, nor that it be very cold,
for then it will break) set the Cotton on fire with a burning Coal laid upon
it, and so let it burn on, putting up within its compass the burning yarn (with
a Bodkin) if it chance to stretch, or swell wider than it should, make your
heat and burning gentle and moderate at first, that you may increase it by
degrees, by crumbling Sulphur in Powder upon the burning Matter, if you find it
needs.

When it has burned a while, try gently by touching it with a little stick of
Wood, whether the piece of Glass under the burning Cotton will fall in or out,
but press not too hard, for fear of cracking that which should be whole; for
when it is enough, it will fall in with the least touch, and leave a complete
hole without any cracks in the Glass besides. If you touch the heated glass
with any moisture, you not only make that which you would have separated away
to fall in, but you will crack and split what you would have remain solid. You
may put a Linen Cloth in the Glass, for the piece to fall upon, lest it
should break the Glass when it falls in.

A Description of a most convenient and very useful Furnace, which will not
only serve for many Operations, as Melting, Calcining, Vitri^ying,
Reverberating, Distilling, Subliming, Digesting, etc. But also for Coppelling,
in small and great quantity, and that with the greatest facility that can be;
so that neither Coals nor Ashes can fall into the Coppel, neither can the heat
of the fire incommodate you by reflecting in your Face and Eyes.

The Fabric of this Furnace, with its Structure see in the next Figure.

An Explanation of this Figure.
A. IS the whole Fabric, which may be Built (of good Bricks) about two foot
four inches in length; one foot six inches in breadth; and about two foot four
inches high.

B. Is the fire place, which must be round, of the best and hardest Bricks (it
may also be made of a fire stone) it must be eight inches deep, and eight
inches diameter; at the bottom of it you may lay either a close grate, or a
thick Iron Plate full of holes.

C. Is the Ash-hole and Receptacle of the blast or wind issuing from the
Bellows, which must be very close, and the stopper fit the mouth of it exactly,
to shut very close, so that the wind may find no vent any where out but upwards
through the grate; this hole needs be but four inches deep, from the grate
down to the bottom; the Ashes must be taken out of it from time to time, that
they may not stuff up the place.

D. Is the Coppelling-place, which may be about seven or eight inches in
length, and six inches wide, and about four or five inches deep.

E. Is the gap, through which the flame reverberates from the Furnace into the
Coppelling-place, it is about four inches wide, about two or three deep, and
two inches in length.

F. is the Pipe or Chimney, which draws the flame.

G. Is a hole, through which you may put Fuel into the Furnace, to avoid
uncovering of it, when it is covered, as it must be when you Coppel; you must
have a stopper exactly fitted to it.

H. Is a hollow place under the Coppelling-place, which may serve to put Coals
in.

I. Is an Iron Hoop about an inch high, such as the Refiners use to make
Coppels in, you may have them of what bigness you please; at the bottom are
fastened two flat Iron Bars, to hold the bone-ashes, having no other bottom.

To use this Furnace, you must have a pair of Smiths Bellows, of a midling
size; which (if there be not room in your Laboratory to fix them below) you may
fix above ground, and so they will not incumber your Operatory below; and for
the conducting of the Wind, you may have a square Pipe of Wood, made like an
Organ-pipe, to come down from the nose of the Bellows through the Wall of the
Furnace into the Ash-hole; and to the perch you may tie a piece of Rope with a
wooden handle at the end, to pull by in blowing the said Bellows.

In all the Operations I do in this Furnace (even when I Coppel) I use nothing
but small Sinder from the Glass-House, which are not so heady as Charcoal.

Directions how to Coppel in this Furnace; and first, how to make a Coppel.
TAke such an Iron Hoop, set it upon a sheet of brown paper to save the
bone-Ashes (that else you might scatter;) then fill it with a sufficient
quantity of bone-ashes, first moistened with {water}, so that they hold
together when you press them in your hand; stamp them well down with the end of
an Iron Pestle, and make the Coppel very close and hard every where, then make
it hollow in the middle, that it may hold the Matter you mean to Coppel without
running over; make it very smooth, then set it into the Coppelling-place, and
raise it with any sifted Ashes, or with a piece of a fire-stone, so that the
top of it may be level with the lower part of the gap. Then cover the
Coppelling-place with two bricks, (I use two bricks, because I can lift up one
of them to put the Metal into the Coppel, and leaving the other brick, the
Coppel is not all uncovered, as it would be if it were covered with one whole
stone.) Then having kindled the fire in the Furnace, cover it as before, and
blow the Bellows, and the flame finding no way out, is forced and driven into
the Coppelling-place, where it reverberates upon the Coppel, which when you see
that it is well nealed, lift up one end of the hithermost brick, and put in
the, the quantity whereof must be proportioned according to the impurity of the
Matter you mean to Coppel; if it be Sterling, you must take four parts of to
one of; if it be any other mixture of impure Metal, you must take five, six, or
seven parts of to one of the Metal, according to the impurity of it. Govern the
fire so, that the Coppel may always work and flow, and you may leave a little
space between the two bricks, through which you may look into the Coppel to see
how it works, and if you see that it requires more flame than the Sinders, or
Charcoal will afford, you may put into the Furnace a round thick piece of wood;
but you must observe, that when the Coppelling-place is come to be red-hot all
over, and the bricks also that cover it, the Coppel will then work with a very
gentle fire, so that then you must blow but gently; for if then you should give
strong fire, the Matter in the Coppel would boil too fast, and would spatter
about.

Instead of an Iron Hoop, many times I use but an earthen Porringer, to make a
Coppel, filling up the Coppelling-place with any Ashes round about the Coppel,
and find that it does altogether as well, only that it serves but for once.
Note, that whilst you Coppel, or neal the Coppel, you may make Regulus, if you
have occasion, or melt any other Metal at the same time. This Furnace does far
exceed any ordinary Wind-furnace; for I can at any time make a parcel of
Regulus, or melt any Metal before the fire would kindle in an ordinary
Wind-furnace, and that with much less charge. In this Furnace you may distill
with a luted Retort in a naked fire, by leaving two little holes in the Wall of
it to put two small Iron bars in, to set the Retort upon; you may also distill
in it, in Sand, both in a Retort and in a Cucurbite, by putting an Iron Pot
into the Furnace with Sand, and laying some Brick with Clay about the Pot, to
enclose that part of the Pot (or luted Retort) that stands out of the Furnace,
and you may give what degrees of fire you will, from the first and lowest, to
the fourth and highest degree.

The End of the First Part.
CHEMICAL SECRETS.

The Second Part.

CONTAINING Many Rare and Excellent Medicines, Choice Menstruums, and
Alkahests: The true and only way to Volatilize the fixed Salt of Tartar, and to
Corporifie Spirit of Wine, which is Aqua sicca in forma Salis, and is the true
Vegetable Menstruum.

Never before Published.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1682.

CHEMICAL SECRETS.
The Second Part.
A Real and True way to Volatilize the Salt of Tartar, and Corporifie Spirit of
Wine, as it was wrought by a Noble Person beyond Sea, and by him Communicated
unto me.
HE took but lbj. of Tartar well Calcined, and dissolved it in the Air, free
from the Sun, then filtred, and congealed in a Glass Vessel, then he Calcined
it as the Dutchman does (in the next Process) to keep it glowing hot for six
or eight hours, then dissolved it again in the Air, and filtred, congealed, and
calcined as before. He repeated this ten times, then dissolved it in distilled
Vinegar (he used Spanish and French Vinegar;) the whole Secret (as he says)
consists in well distilling of the Vinegar, which must be done in B. M. but
it must be so gentle, that you may receive the phlegm by it self; and as soon as
you perceive that the drops come Acid, change the Recipient, putting on
another, and then distill the Spirit with a stronger fire, so that you may tell
eight or nine between every drop: Continue distilling until it become like a
Syrup, then change the Recipient again, and distill with a stronger fire until
it begin to smell of the fire, and that it be almost dry. Rectify this last
and strongest part by it self, and put it to the weaker part, (keeping the
phlegm by it self for another use) and rectify it together so often until there
remain not the least spot at the bottom of the Glass after the distillations,
which must be to dryness every time, and every time in a clean Retort: This is
not a strong Spirit of Vinegar, nor needs it be, but this will do the Work.
Then take vij. or viij. of your Salt of Tartar, and dissolve it in as much of
the said Spirit, or more, as will dissolve it; let it stand, and it will settle
some black feces; then filter it, and congeal, and calcine it as before, but
not with so strong a fire; it must be scarce red-hot, and one hour will
suffice; grind it while it is hot, and dissolve it again in new distilled
Vinegar as before, let the feces settle, then filter it, congeal and calcine
again as before. Repeat this, till it leave no feces behind, which will be in
Seven or Eight times, if you have wrought well; then when it is very dry, take
j. of it to make a trial, put it into a clean Glass body, and pour upon it so
much high rectified Spirit of Wine, as will not only moisten it, but that it be
very thin; let it stand thus twenty four hours close stopped in a very gentle
heat, that it may be but Blood-warm; then distill with a gentle fire. If the
Spirit stays, and the phlegm come away, then proceed with the whole parcel; but
if not, you must continue the dissolution in distilled Vinegar, Filtration,
Coagulation, and Calcination, as before, until you find (by trying) that the
Spirit stays with the Salt, which it will do in a few times: Then proceed
with the rest of the parcel in the same manner as you did with the Ounce;
continue the imbibition and distillation with Spirit of Wine so often, till the
Spirit of Wine come away as strong as it was put on. Then here lies the
Secret, to Sublime it: Dissolve the said Salt of Tartar impregnated in the
phlegm of your distilled Vinegar, or in a very weak Spirit of Wine, using no
more of the dissolvent than will dissolve it; shake them well together, and it
will instantly dissolve all the best and finest part of the Salt of Tartar, and
leave the course part of it, for that will not so easily dissolve, Pour off the
dissolution, and filter it, then put it into a Cucurbite, and distill off the
phlegm off the Vinegar, or the weak Spirit of Wine, and then will the dry
Spirit, or Aqua Sicca ascend like the purest Isickles dry that ever you saw;
and this is the true Volatile Salt of Tartar, and Spirit of Wine, in forma
Salis, and is the Vegetable Menstruum, which will dissolve leaf into an Oylish
Substance in a very gentle heat.

The Tartar which remains in the bottom of this Sublimation you must put to
that which was left undissolved by the phlegm of Vinegar, or weak Spirit of
Wine, and Proceed to fix more Spirit of Wine upon that, being first Calcined,
but not so long, nor with so strong a fir^ as formerly; and then dissolve it
once in the Ai^^ and it will leave more feces at this time than at any time
before; then filter and congeal, and dissolve it in distilled Vinegar^ as
before. And now you shall do more in three times than you did all the times
before, for the Tartar is altered in its Nature; then proceed with it as
before, imbibing with S. V. And thus you may fix as much S. V. as you please,
and Sublime as many pure and clear Crystals as you please.

Note, That when your Spirit of Wine is fixed on the Tartar, it will be as
sweet as Sugar; but when it is separated, as abovesaid, the Tartar will be of
its old Nature, but fit to be impregnated again with much less trouble.

The Dutch-mans Process of Volatilizing Salt of Tartar, and Corporifying Spirit
of Wine, is thus:
HE dissolveth his Tartar Calcined in distilled Rain {water}, and being
settled, filters and congealeth, then Calcineth it for six or eight hours, so
that it be only glowing hot, and no more: Then Powder it, and dissolve it,
filter, congeal, and reverberate, as before; and this he does sixteen or
eighteen times, until the Tartar settle little or no feces. Then take four or
eight Ounces of it (or what you please) and put it into a Cucurbite, and pour
upon it the best rectified Spirit of Wine, so much, that it may be well
moistened, but not to swim over it. Then he digesteth it in B. M. for a day,
and then gently distills it off, but the Spirit of Wine ^scendeth, and will not
stay; when it is dry, he puts the Spirit of Wine back again upon it, and
distilleth as before; and this he does so often (twelve or fourteen times) and
then it will hold the Spirit of Wine, and the phlegm will come away: This he
does with new Spirit of Wine; and when he finds that a pretty quantity is
congealed with the Tartar, he grinds it (being very dry) and mixeth it with
three parts of good Bole-Armony, and puts it into a Retort, and distilleth a
Spirit from it by degrees of fire, forcing it strongly at last, and it will be
a yellow Spirit, which he deflegmeth once, and then dissolveth his Calx of in
this Monstruum, which by digestion extracts all the Tincture of, and leaves
the Body which, tinging it self of a pure red. Of this he gives two or three
drops in a little Sack, which does Miracles (as he says.)

He makes his red Calx of thus:
DIssolve fine past through Antimony in A. ^. then put water into it, and then
cast in, and all will become like a H^par; then wash the aaa, and grind it with
three times as much prepared Salt, and distill it in a Retort; then edulcorate
the Calx, and grind j. of it with three of Cinaber, and then reverberate it by
degrees gently: This he does twice a day, and repeateth it eleven or twelve
times, and it will be a most subtle red Calx, like Scarlet in color.

Elixir ex vino and Sole.
TAke the best Odoriferous Rhenish-wine five Gallons, separate its Spirit and
Salt, rectify the one, and purify the other; then acuate the Spirit with
another prepared ^alt, and at last join it to its own pure Crystalline Salt;
then is it a true Aqua vitae Philosophorum. This must dissolve a well prepared
Calx of, and by a continued circulation unite with it; then by Sublimation be
fixed together, and lastly, by Solution and Coagulation become incombustible
Oil, which is a great Medicine.

Monsieur Toysonnier wrought thus:
TAke fresh Urine of young Boys, fill one Pot with it, and evaporate it away,
next Morning put on fresh, and evaporate; do thus three or four days, then
evaporate to a Honey, and that you feel a Ponticifie smoke from it, then cease,
and put your Honey into an earthen Vessel, and expose it to Celifie in the Air.
As soon as it is cold, it will be hard, but the Air will resolve it: Make thus
what quantity of Honey you please: Celifie them four days, then have another
earthen Pot, covered with a reversed one that has a hole in the bottom, fasten
thereon a neck of a Cucurbite of Glass, ten or twelve inches long, upon which a
Retort, with the bottom out for a head, to which fasten a great ballon. He did
put fifteen pound of Honey into his Pot, and with a gentle fire first distilled
off the Spirit and Volatile Salt; these be put upon new Honey, and in Balneo
distilled a purer Spirit and Volatile Salt; (the phlegm that followed, if put
upon new Honey, will become pure Spirit and Salt) draw the fixed Salt out of
all the Caput Mortuums; put xij. of the Spirit upon as much pure Spirit of
Wine, and it will coagulate it all into a perfect dry Salt: Mingle these xxiv.
of Volatile Salt with vj. of Salt of Wine, iij. of Volatile Salt of Urine, and
iv. of Precipitate, and put them into a Body with Head, Limbeck, and Receiver,
and Sublime with gentle heat: Part comes over in Spirit, and part rises in
Salt. Take xiv. of Salt, and vi^. of Spirit, and ss. of Calx of, and distill
with exceeding gentle heat in a Body and Head with a Receiver, a liquid Spirit
will come over, and a white Salt Sublime into the head: Put all back upon the
Cake of, and distill as before. He has now ^^eated this Worst eleven times; at
the first, the Spirit and Salt were ten days rising from the, but afterward
seven or eight: The junctures were all perfectly shut, yet above half of the
Volatile Matter was vanished. The Salt of Wine was made thus: ( Spanish Wine
gave none, but French did pretty store.) After you have drawn off the Spirit
and the phlegm, evaporate the residue (very gently) usque ad pelliculam, then
set in a cold place, and in fifteen days there were many Crystals in it; wash
these with the phlegm of the Wine, from the blackness and foulness that is upon
them. The Precipitate was made thus: Dissolve iv. of in x. of A. F. made of two
parts of Vitriol, and one of Nitre. Extend the solution, by pouring a great
quantity (eight or ten Pints) of fair {water} upon it; then pour upon it a
Lixivium made of the fixed Salt of Wine and fair {water}. He made his Lixivium
of iv. of fixed Salt, and but one of the ^ Precipitate; wherefore he poured
upon the Liquor that he poured off from the Precipitate about half a pint of
the Spirit of Wine, and then the Precipitated all down. Take both the
Precipitates, and wash them a little from the Spirits of the A. F.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. It was done by his Operator Monsieur
Toysonnier, in his Operatory in the Piazza in Cove^t-Garden.

The Menstruum Coelicum Exuberatum, to dissolve, and all Metals, and carry them
over the Helm. Wrought by Dr. Clodius, and by him Communicated unto me.
PUT lbj. of perfectly rectified Spirit of Urine to lbiij. of a perfectly
rectified Spirit of Wine, and it will coagulate it all to a drop into a firm
Salt; Sublime and distill this, and about lbss. will Sublime up in a most pure
active dry Salt, and about two spoonfuls will come over in a fiery Liquor, and
the rest will be a stinking ^lat phlegm remaining in the Cucurbite. Add Spirit
of Wine to your two spoonfuls of Liquor, so much as to make it up lbiij. put
this to your lbss. of dry Sublimed Salt, and all will be a Coagulum, which
distill and Sublime as before, and you shall have about two spoonfulls and a
half of fiery Liquor, and about ^ij. more than before of Sublimed Salt, and in
the bottom will remain a stinking phlegm as before. He repeated this twelve
times, still with fresh Spirit of Wine, and every time the quantity of the
fiery Spirit increases (drawing still some little addition of dry Salt from
the Spirit of Wine) till at length all the dry Salt come over in liquid fiery
Spirit, which he calls Menstruum Coelicum; then it will dissolve, and all
Metals, and carry them over the Helm with it. This poured upon Salt of Tartar,
will presently dissolve it, and carry it over the helm with it: You may also
multiply it as much as you will with pure Salt or Spirit of Urine.

To add to it, do thus. Take well purified (if Spanish) shaking and washing
well with Spirit of Wine or distilled Vinegar, till it yield no more blackness,
will serve; but if other, Sublime it sometimes to perfect purity. Then he put
lb^. of it into a Retort, joining a large stone Receiver, and gave strong
sudden fire. Repeat this till you have Mercurial {water} enough, which will be
quite insipid: Put this {water} upon purified running, and digest them together
thirty days, and all will be a viscous Mucilaginous Matter: Distill off the
phlegm, and you shall have an Oil remaining; put upon this Oil your fiery Spirit
of Urine, and Spirit of Wine (twelve times repeated, as is mentioned) and the
Spirit will resolve the Oil; then distill them over together, and you have the
Menstruum Coelicum ^xu^eratum. To aate Regulus of antimony with, you must
pulverize the Regulus grossly, as Bay Salt; then strew it gently upon the in a
Mattress, and digest three or four days; then grind together, and it will aaate.
Thus you may do with and Reg. He found difficulty in doing it with and Reg. but
after digestion, he let it stand a little while with {water} and Salt upon it,
and it aaated of it self with the. If you digest eight days, the blackness you
wash away is a Combustible Sulpher, like Powder of Coal. He makes Mercurial
{water} thus: Put store of quick dry Sand upon in a Cucurbite, and distill it
in very gentle fire, and most will come over in {water}: Put this {water} upon
new, and digest, and it will bring it into an Oily substance; mingle this with
your Coagulum of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Urine ( See ^ullies eight
Experiments) and make an Alkahest of these, which will be perfect when it is
aaated with. Then proceed as Lully teaches.

The said Dr. Clodius told me also, that the great Secret of Purifying all
Salts and Vitriol, etc. consists in the purifying the Menstruum ( i. e.
{water}) for if the {water} have feces, in which you ^dissolve them, it rather
increases their foulness. He does thus.

Set Equinox Rain {water} (pure Dew were better) to putrify in Glass Vessels,
slightly covered (only to keep things from falling in) in a Cellar; in six
weeks the putrefaction will be finished, and all the feces fallen to the
bottom; filter it, set the clear to putrify again, which will require longer
time than before: If you put some quick dry Sand in i^, it will help the
putrefaction much the sooner, drawing down the foulness to it. In this purified
{water} dissolve your Salt, Vitriol, Salt of Urine, etc. And you must have a
Gallon of this water to j. of Salt; for such dilating of the Salt makes the
Menstruum lighter than the feces, and therefore they fall down. Mark the end of
Isaac Hollands Process upon Vitriol, where he directs dissolving it in fair
{water} distilled off; then filter and congeal, and this you may repeat two or
three times: Then take nine parts of this pure Salt, and put to them one part
of pure Spirit of Wine, digest them together for seven or eight days, then
distill off the Liquor very gently, and about fourteen or fifteen parts will
come off in insipid phlegm, and only one part, or a little more will remain with
the Salt in a dry substance. Repeat this nine times with fresh Spirit of Wine,
till you have employed as much Spirit of Wine as you wrought upon Salt, which
will be increased scarce one part: Put it then to Sublime, and every whit of it
will rise in a pure Sublimate, excepting a small parcel of feces that will
remain in the bottom: You may multiply this Sublimate as much as you will by
addition of Spirit of Wine to it; then distilling away the Liquor, for the {sal
ammoniac} of the Spirit of Wine will adhere to the pure Salt in a pure Saline
form, and the rest will come away in an insipid phlegm. But in the end, this
Salt will be apt to come over in an Oily Liquor, and sometimes after that, in
form of Salt again: But he cannot yet penetrate into the Causes of these Bodies
coming over sometimes liquid, sometimes dry. Incorporate some of this Salt with
pure Spirit of Wine, and it will dissolve, and all Metals.

To prepare a most Excellent Medicine with this Mercurial Water, proceed thus:
TAke of the aforesaid Mercurial {water}, and of Spirit of Wine distilled
three times upon Honey, and then rectified upon Salt of Tartar, of each equal
parts; distill them together, until they be well united: Then to six parts of
this Menstruum put one part of a Spungy Calx of, digest them together, until
the is totally dissolved, except a little white Earth, which will remain in the
bottom. Then distill in a Retort in Sand, and cohobate so often, until the come
over into the Receiver. Then separate it, by distilling in a Cucurbite, and
there will remain a red Oil like a Ruby in the bottom; whereof one drop in some
fit Vehicle, is admirable for Health. This dissolution of has a most
Odoriferous scent, better than Amber and Musk.

The Lunary {water} of Paradise, or the Celestial Eagle of the Lunar Sphere,
which is Lullys true Spiritual Lunary.
DIssolve in A. F. and precipitate it with Spirit of Salt, dry the Calx, and
mix it with equal parts of Calx of, and thence distill the volatile Crystals or
butter s. a. Expose this butter to the Air to resolve into liquor, that by that
means it may make a Dentifique attraction of the Spirit of the World, which
specifieth it self by this Magnet. Put the clean liquor into a Cucurbite, and
digest with a Lamp fire for 15 days, at the end of which time there will distill
over an Aetherial liquor, which is the Lunary; with which you may work Miracles
in Physic, especially in all diseases of the head and brain; the dose is the
same with the former, mixing it with a fit Vehicle; Note, that it turns all
liquors into milk, and is sometimes Emetick. For transmutation, deflegm this
{water} as before and you shall have the Metalline Gluten; which being digested
per se, will become a white Powder of projection; and afterward a red one: But
it will be better to add a tenth part of leaf or of the Sulphur of made by the
Sal Enix: It is multiplied by new addition of the Lunary or Gluten. Note, that
this liquor is the Sommet of the Lunary: For the Volatile Crystals of are the
simple Lunary; but this Celestial {water} is the Spiritual Lunary, or the
highest point of the Metalline Salts: Note, that you may draw the red and white
Oil of what remains, and proceed as before.

Water of Paradise of Saturn, or Jupiters Celestial Eagle.
DIssolve in common A. F. and it will precipitate into a Potential; dry it, and
mix it in great quantity with equal parts of Calx of or with antimony: Draw the
Volatile Crystals or butter from this, which resolve in the Air: Put the liquor
into a Glass Cucurbite, with its head and recipient, digest with a gentle lamp
fire the space of 15 days; nothing will come over by distillation, but only the
liquor will Maturate, and become red, and afterward within twenty, thirty, or
forty days the Idea of will rise invisibly, and distill into the Recipient,
which is the {water} of Paradise.

This {water} cures all Saturnian Maladies, and Melancholy, being mixed with S.
V. You may give it in all Inflammations both inward and outward: The Dose is
equal with the former.

To use it for Metals, put this {water} of Paradise into a small Cucurbite and
deflegm it with a Lamp fire and there will remain the Saturnean Gluten, the
Philosophers Gum, or of the wise, A Lot, etc. Digest per se, or add a tenth
part of. This Gum is the true Metalline radical Moisture.

About Vitrum Antimonii, and the Tincture of it.
MOnsieur Borel told me, that he had observed this in making the Tincture of
antimony (by distilled Vinegar upon the Glass of antimony) that when he went to
dulcifie the Salt that remains in the Tincture after the distilled Vinegar is
evaporated away (as Bas. Val. teaches) he could never perceive that the
{water} evaporating carried away the remaining Salt of the Vinegar, but still
when the {water} was gone, and left the Powder dry, it was as salt as ever
before, and was of a brown gray color. But this he observed, that after four
or five times dissolving in {water} and evaporating, the Tincture Precipitated
down very red, and the Salt of the distilled Vinegar remained dissolved in the
{water}, so that he then poured off the {water}, and dried the Powder, which
then was exceeding red, and perfectly dulcified: But after thus severing of the
Salt from it, S. V. would not touch upon it, and extract it any further:
Peradventure a Tartarized S. V. will do it.

He also told me, that in making the Vitrum Antimonii for this Work, the
Mystery to have it certain and constant, consists in this; That after you
have Calcined your antimony by long and gentle evaporation and stirring, so
that it smoke no more; and when you have put it in the Crucible to melt into
Glass, you must put to it a little piece of a Coal to burn with the antimony,
and set the Sulphur of it on fire, which will make a little Regulus fall down
to the bottom, and the Glass will be pure clear and red, whereas if no Coal
fall or be put in, it will be black and muddy: And that which makes this Work
of Vitrifying the antimony prove uncertain, is, that sometimes some Coals fall
into the Crucible (as one gives great heat) without the Artists taking notice,
and then the Work proves well, but if no wooden Coals fall in, the Glass
proves not as it should.

Monsieur le Fevre told me, that when he makes the Tincture of Vitrum
Antimoniii, be observes, as Monsieur Borel says, that if the extract of it
made by distilled Vinegar be perfectly dulcified from all saltness, the S. V.
will not touch upon it; and if it be put upon it in dry Powder, containing the
Salt of the distilled Vinegar with the Tincture of the antimony, it will draw
with the Tincture some nocuous Spirits from the Salt; therefore the does thus:
Evaporate fair {water} from it two or three times, the last time leave it very
moist; then put S. V. upon it, and it will presently impregnate it self with
the Tincture.

A white Spirit of Sulphur to dissolve and; given me by Monsieur Bugneau.
TAke the black Spirit of Sulphur, made per Campanam, put it into a Glass
Retort well luted (for fear of breaking) all but a patch at the top as big as a
Crown-piece, that you may thereby see (holding a Candle near it) in what state
the Liquor, therein contained, is^ Distill in Sand, till all the phlegm is come
over, and that it begin to drop very sharp, which happens to him after vj or
vij. are come over, of lbj. of Spirit put at first into the Retort. By this
time you shall see a little {sal ammoniac} Sublime up to the discovered place
of the Retort, and a brown Circle of earthy substance swimming upon the Liquor
about the sides of it joining to the Glass: You must now give the fire so
quick, that the Liquor boil a little, and presently you shall see it turn all
white, and the brown Corona of Earth become white: Then let the fire die, and
when the Retort is cold, pour out the Spirit, which will look like Rock
{water}, and will leave some dregs behind; you will have about ix. of this
Spirit, put it upon iv. of in leaf, and distill it gently off, and after a
while you shall see your quite dissolved into clear Liquor; let it cool, and
the will become a Cake of Crystal, and some Liquor will swim over it; pour off
this Liquor, and put ij. of fresh to it (which now may be in small grenailles)
and it will dissolve this as the former, and become a Crystal by cold: The
Liquor that you then pour off will dissolve ij. more of fresh, doing as before.
Now the Liquor that remains after this third solution of, will dissolve ij.
of running into a Crystalline substance as the former.

This Spirit of Sulphur thus rectified, being used inwardly (before it is used
with) is much stronger than when it is black, at the first drawing, and is much
gratefuller to the taste, being mingled with {water} or other Vehicle.

An Universal Medicine, from and antimony, etc.
TAke of the prepared, as shall be taught hereafter, j. of the Tincture of,
afterward set down, j. mix them well together in a Glass Mortar, then put them
into a small Mattress, and digest them with a Lamp fire with one wick only for
ten days; then digest for ten days more with two wicks, then with three, and
lastly, with four wicks, which makes forty days digestion in all, at the end
of which you shall have a red Powder as red as a Ruby.

This Powder is an Universal Medicine for the greatest and Chronick Diseases:
It Cures the Gout, Dropsy, Palsy, French Pox, Plague, Leprosy, the Evil,
Smallpox, and Measles. Its visible Operation is by Stools, by Urine, and by
Sweat: The Dose is from gr. iij. to iv. or v. in Conserve of Borrage or Violets.

To prepare the for this Work.
TAke gravelled Ashes, (or instead thereof you may take the Ashes of dried and
burnt Lees of Wine) and of Quicklime, of each equal parts, boil them togegether
in {water}, and make a Lixivium, which filter. Take iij. or iv. of vitae, put
it into a Mattress, and pour upon it of the aforesaid Lixivium, so much as may
cover it the breadth of four fingers; digest with the second degree of heat,
for three or four days, the Lixivium will extract the Tincture of the vitae;
then decant, and put on fresh Lixivium, and digest. Repeat this, till you have
extracted all the Tincture of your vitae, and the Powder be well attenuated:
Then mix this Powder with equal weight of Sublimed {sal ammoniac}, incorporate
them well together with double as much of Oil of Tartar, then set it to
putrify in fimo for thirty days, changing the Dung every sixth or seventh day.
Then put your Matter in a Marble Mortar, and grind it well, adding a little
warm {water} to it; then add a little more water, but a little hotter than the
first, and grind it well; then let it settle, and decant the {water}, and put
on fresh warm {water}, and grind as before, then let it settle, and decant the
water; and put Vinegar upon it instead of {water}, and grind it, and you will
see in a short time the Powder converted into running. Note, that if you
Sublime Regulus of antimony with four times as much {sal ammoniac}, it will
Sublime with it in very red flowers; out of which in the same manner you may
extract.

To prepare the Tincture of for this Work.
TAke fine in thin Plates, dissolve it in A. R. then pour into the dissolution
some, and a fourth part of A. F. keep it in digestion until the is all
dissolved; the dissolution of, which was of an Orange-colour before, will now
be white and clear, and the will Precipitate to the bottom in a very subtle and
spungy Calx; decant the clear, and edulcorate the Powder of, till it be freed
from all Acrimony, then dry it.

Then take fine Pumice-stone, and make it red-hot in a Crucible, then
extinguish it in Vinegar; reiterate the ignitions and extinctions five or six
times, then reduce it into subtle Powder, which ignifie again for half a
quarter of an hour, then make it as subtle as you can. Then put a bed of this
Powder into a Crucible, about a singers breadth, upon that put a Bed of your
Powder of: Continue thus stratifying until all the Powder of be in, then cover
the Crucible with another, and lute them well together, and put it into a Glass
Oven where they prepare their Matter, so that the Crucible may be always red
during twenty four hours, and that the Matter in the Crucible may not melt,
Then take out the Matter out of the Crucible, and pulverize it; then put this
Powder in a Mattress, and pour upon it of the following dissolvent, so much as
may cover it three fingers breadth, digest it in Ashes for 34 days, within a
few hours you will see the dissolution Tincted of an Orange color; after four
days digestion decant the Tincture, and pour on more of the dissolvent, digest
as before. Repeat this till you have extracted all the Tincture of your Powder;
then filter all your Extracts, and evaporate with a gentle fire to dryness, and
you will have a yellow Powder of an Orange-colour; put this Powder into a
Mattress, and pour upon it a S. V. prepared as shall be taught hereafter; digest
it, and in two days the S. V. will be Tincted as red as Blood, which decant,
and put on fresh S. V. digest and decant. Repeat this so often till you have
extracted all the Tincture out of the Powder: Then distill off the Tincted S.
V. in B. with a gentle heat to dryness; and thus is the Tincture of prepared
for this Work, to be used with the said of antimony, as is said above.

Note, That if you digest and circulate this Tincture in fimo before you
distill the S. V. from it, and then distill and cohobate two or three times,
and abstracting half the S. V. from it, you will have a kind of an Aurum
potabile, which is a very great Cor^oborant in the greatest weakness: The Dose
is five or six drops in any convenient Vehicle.

The Dissolvent.
MElt Salt in a Crucible, then take lbj. thereof and pulverize it; mix this
Powder with lbiij. of Honey, boil them together in an Iron Kettle to the
consistence of a Suppository; then cast this Matter upon a smooth stone, and
being cold, pulverize it, and put it into a Retort; pour upon it distilled
Vinegar rectified, lbiij. Digest for twenty four hours, then distill in Sand by
graduated fire, giving strong fire at last for six hours, that the Retort may
be red; then let it stand to cool the space of twelve hours: Then distill this
Vinegar in a Cucurbite in Ashes, separating the phlegm, rectify in three or
four times more, and it will be white and clear; before it was yellow.

To prepare the Spirit of Wine, fit for this Tincture of.
TAke Salt of Tartar well purified by several Dissolutions, Filtrations, and
Coagulations, and then reduced to Powder, iv. which put into a Retort, and pour
upon it lbij, of rectified Spirit of Wine, let it stand so twenty four hours,
then distill only lbj. of it in Ashes, and you shall have an excellent Spirit
of Wine, ^it to draw Tinctures. In the same manner you may extract the Tincture
of Coral, putting the Corals whole with the Pumice-stone, which by its dryness
will extract the Tincture of the Corals, leaving them as white as Starch.

In the same manner you may also extract the Tincture of, which will be blew.

Sir Kenelm D.) This Process was given to Monsieur Vrto, Physician of Burges,
by Monsieur Mayo, Sieur de Vancours. This Monsieur Mayo was a great Friend and
Confident of Monsieur de la Violette, who gave him this Operation, and they
made it together. He said, that this was the solidest and best thing that
Monsieur de la Violette had. He gave this to Monsieur Vrto in acknowledgment of
a very great good turn he had done him, and after Monsieur Vrto had refused to
receive of him a Present of great Value.

A great Corroborant and Sudorifick, wrought by Monsieur Du Closs, Physician at
Paris; given me by him the 16th. of August, 1660.
DIssolve by means of Salt, Nitre, and Allom, etc. after Zwelfer's manner; then
evaporate away the {water}, and put S. V. upon the remaining Powder, and it
will go all into a Tincture, or rather all the will dissolve in the S. V.
leaving the Salts, most of which will Precipitate in the S. V. Then he
Precipitateth the with Oil of Tartar, and washes and dries it, then
reverberateth it, and it is in a deep red Powder; and this he called Cro^us
Solis: (But it is not so, almost all the remains still in the solution (which
is yellow) and Oil of Tartar will not Precipitate it, so that it is rather the
Salts that remained in the S. V. and a little mingled with them:) But take
Spirit of Honey (the Vinegry Spirit) two parts, and one part of S. V. and pour
this upon the solution, and all the will Precipitate like a green Mud; pour off
the Liquor, and put fair {water} to the Precipitation, and some, and so you may
have all your, which when it is dry, will be a deep-red Powder, but if you
reverberate it, and aaate it with, and grind it with Sulphur, and then burn and
reverberate it, it will all fly away: And this is his best way of Calcining and
opening.

Upon this Calx of he puts his Menstruum, and in twenty four hours it will
Tinct it self as red as blood, which if you digest long, an Oil will swim upon
it; he evaporateth the Menstruum till it be thick, and digests that with a Lamp
Furnace.

His Menstruum is thus made:
TAke pure S. V. and pure Spirit of Urine, ana, put them together, and distill
off the S. V. with very gentle heat, there will remain a phlegmatic Liquor in
the bottom: Cohobate the S. V. upon it till there remain only perfect phlegm in
the bottom, and that all the Spirits and Volatile Salt of the Urine be in the
S. V. This is a great dissolvent and Alkahest; but it will be stronger if you
work it again with new Spirit of Urine, and so you may make it as strong as you
will^ But this has not the Properties of Helmont's pretended Alkahest, to come
off from the Body it has dissolved, as strong as you put it on, for it leaves
much of the Saline Spirits with the opened Body, if you distill it off: He
found some running in the filters after he had dissolved the only as far as
Zwelfer teaches; which solution opens it exceedingly, and rendereth it apt
to Mercurialization; but he uses most the following Calx of: Make an aaa of
and in due manner, which grind well with Flowers of Sulphur, and set it upon
Coals, and so make a Calx of ( ut artis est:) Repeat this Calcination two or
three times, then take the Calx of, and grind it exceeding well with twice as
much pure decrepitated Salt; put these into a Crucible, which cover well, and
set it to Cement or Reverberate during six hours (or more) in a Furnace where
the heat may be increased by degrees, so that in due time the Crucible become
red. Continue so a pretty time, but have a care the Salt melt not: When it is
cold, take out the Matter, and grind it well, and pour hot {water} upon it, to
dissolve all the Salt, and filter it off, and pour on more {water}, doing so
till you have severed all the Salt from the (as also a white Earthy substance,
that will swim upon the {water}) then dry the, which grind again with double
its quantity of prepared Salt, (the same Salt will serve again when the {water}
is distilled from it) and Cement it, and work all as before, taking care
always, that the settle well to the bottom after you have stirred it in the
{water}. Repeat this six, seven, or eight times (the more the better) till the
come to be all a gray or white Powder: Then Cement it with double its quantity
of pure Salt of Tartar, in the same manner as you did with Salt, and do always
all as before. Repeat this two, three, or four times, dulcifying it every time
very well from the Salt: Then put upon it (being very dry) the Menstruum of S.
V. and Spirit of Urine, mentioned before, and it will be Tincted Blood-red in
twenty four hours: Pour off that, and put on more, till you have drawn out all
the Tincture, which distill in a Cucurbite with very gentle fire, till it
become a Gum, of which he puts j. into a Pint of Sack, and gives a spoonful
for a Dose. It is a mighty Corroborant, as also a Sudorifick, where Nature
requires it. It will make one sweat twenty four hours.

The manner of making his Menstruum, is, to put the two Spirits into a long
Cucurbite with a narrow mouth, on which he put a Head, ^itting it in the
Orifice, but very large in the Body of it, and so distilleth off his S. V. and
Cohobateth it upon the same Spirit of Urine, till the Volatile Salt be drawn
out of it, or upon new, as you see occasion.

Quaere, Of putting this Menstruum upon a Spungy gray Calx of, made after
Vandykes way.

The Metalline Aureal {water}, or the Ethereal Aurum potabile, which is a very
great Medicine for the Gout: It is the true Hermaphroditick Bath.
DIssolve in A. F. then Precipitate it with Spirit of Salt, then edulcorate the
Powder and dry it, then mix it with its weight of antimony (or Calx of) distill
a transparent Butter thereof: Take of this Butter one part, mix it with as much
of Calx of (made by dissolving in Spirit of Salt) digest them together, until
they be reduced into a Liquor: Distill this Liquor in a Retort, the Spirit of
Salt will come over first, and then will follow a red Butter, which is the
great Chalybs, which resolves into a Liquor in the Air; put this Liquor into a
Cucurbite, join a Head and Receiver to it, and then digest with a Lamp fire for
fifteen days, then an Ethereal Liquor will begin to come over in an invisible
form, which will distill into the Recipient: Deflegm this Liquor until you come
to the Eagles Metalline Gluten; which is digested (either per se or with) into
a true Physical stone: When it is in an Ethereal Liquor you may take two drops
of it in some Cordial Spirit.

The Eagles Gluten, or of the Wise, or Metalline Menstruum; with which and
Lions Blood is made the Metalline Stone.
THE Gluten is of diverse sorts: The first is altogether Mineral, and is drawn
from and antimony: If you join Sulphur of antimony with this Gluten, you may
make a Medicinal Stone of it. The Second is Metallic, viz. Saturneal, Lunary,
and Aureal. The third is partly Mineral, and partly Metalline; as for Example,
when one draws ^ Liquor (which does not wet) from of ^ (that is to say, from
its repercuted Calx) and antimony, which is the Magnet of the Spirit o^ the
World; then draw the Gluten as you know. The Gluten is Mineral and Metalline,
and is sufficient to make the Physical Stone of it, both Mineral and Metalline.

Note, that if you digest per se, what sort of Gluten soever, you may make the
Physical Stone of it. But for to shorten the Work, you may add; for all
Metalline or Mineral Gluten contains in it self its internal Sulphur, which may
be coagulated and fixed into a true Aetherial Panacaea. But it is better to add
this Solary Ferment, as shall be said hereafter. Wonderful things may be
performed (both in Physic, and in Transmutation of Metals) with any sort of
Gluten, either Mineral or Metalline. The {water} of Paradise differs not from
the Gluten, except that it contains some parts more liquid, and is yet full
of phlegm, as shall be showed.

Water of Paradise, or of the Hermetick Eagle, whereof are made unheard of
Medicines, and Powders of Projection.
THE {water} of Paradise is a ce^tain fiery or Ethereal {water} drawn from
Celestial Bodies, chiefly from and, without the mixture of any waterish phlegm;
so that, what is attracted is the Universal Spirit, the Informing form of the
Elements, that of the World, Influence of the Stars, Soul of the World, the
vital Nutriment, latent in the Air. This {water} is most potent to drive out
all Diseases, it being altogether Astral, and needs not be taken by Drams,
Scruples, or Grains, but the twentieth part of a Grain is sufficient for a
Dose; yea, almost the Vapor only of this Gluten suffices, as you shall see:
It is attracted by several things, or (to speak plain) there are several things
which attract it from the Stars; first, by S^ndivogi^s his Magnet, or Chalybs;
but it requires a longer time to have this Gluten, or this Philosophical
{water}, which is all, to all universal; for it requires seven Months to
prepare this Universal Menstruum, after you have the Salt of Nature; which is a
thing indeterminate, and requires a Metallic Ferment, specific, for to
specify and determinate it. This most Noble way is clearly and neatly shown by
the Author: But there are other ways, which are shorter, by which this Spirit
of the World is attracted by several Magnets, whereof shall be spoken
hereafter. Note, that the Physical Stone may be made of all sorts of waters of
Paradise; for it is the Philosophical which is sufficient for himself and for
thee; for it contains in it self a pure Sulphur, which may be congealed into a
Panacea: But for to shorten the Work, the Solar or Lunar Ferment is added, to
the end that this Gluten, or fiery {water} may be sooner congealed and fixed:
So that, besides this Generalissima way, or this Universal Stone of the
Philosophers, there are five other Stones; to wit, first, the simple Mineral,
made of per se, or with and antimony, with the Sulphur of antimony. The Second
is the simple Metalline stone, made with only, with, or with and Solar Ferment.
Thirdly, there is a Stone which is Partly Metallic, and partly Mineral, made
of antimony,, and, whereof Artesius, Flamel, Pontanus, Zaichair, and others
have written. Fourthly, There is a Vegetable Stone. Fifthly, The Animal Stone.
We shall treat of all these Stones, under the name of the {water} of Paradise,
or the Hermetick Eagle, or Virgins Milk.

Water of Paradise of Common, or Hermes his Eagle, of the Terrestrial and
Celestial.
SUblime three or four times with Salt, Nitre, and Vitriol; then dissolve it in
A. F. and digest, then by distillations and cohobations, unite the Salts
Ammoniac of the A. F. to which (to have it more Powerful) you may put an eighth
part of {sal ammoniac}: Distill and cohobate so often, till the comes to be
like Wax, and that it dissolveth easily in humido. Then dissolve this matter
per deliquium, that it may attract the {water} which is contained in the Air:
Put this Liquor into a small Cucurbite, join its Head and Recipient, and digest
with very gentle fire with a Lamp. Nothing will come over during fifteen days,
but afterward, there will come over an Ethereal Liquor, which is the {water}
of Paradise: Two drops of this {water} put into iv. of S. V. is an excellent
Medicine against the Pox, for it is the Planet. The Dose is one spoonful. The
Physical Stone is made of this Virginal, or Astral Milk, to wit, distill its
phlegm, in a small Cucurbite, with the same Lamp fire, and the Gluten or Mineral
Gum will remain in the bottom; of which by digestion is made the Physical or
Medicinal Stone. But note, that if you add, the Operation is sooner
accomplished. Note also, that if you cast one drop of this {water} of Paradise
upon a thin Plate of, or of, it will penetrate and whiten it through and
through, before it is fermented with. Note also, that that which remains
after the distillation, will serve also. If you would then make a Stone,
different from that which is made with the Virginal Milk only, proceed thus:
After you have distilled the {water} of Paradise, distill over with a gentle
fire in Ashes what remains, and you shall have a white Oil; then force over
the remaining part in a Retort, and you shall have a red Oil; cast away the
remaining feces. Take one part of the red Oil, and four parts of the white Oil,
and eight parts of the {water} of Paradise, put them into a Mattress, and digest
them in an Athanor until all the colors appear one after another, and that the
Gluten be fixed into white. If then you augment the fire, it will become a red
Medicine, of which you may make Projection thus: Take an hundred parts of, heat
it in a Crucible, and cast upon it one part of this fixed Medicine, and all will
be a Medicine; whereof cast one part upon another hundred parts of, stirring it
with a stick; then melt them together. Cast one part of this Medicine upon an
hundred parts of, and all will be converted into or, according to the Tincture.
In this manner, all Metals and Minerals may be reduced into Tinctures by their
{water} of Paradise, etc. Note, That this Work may be done also with dissolved
in A. F. and Precipitated with Spirit of Salt; the Calx dried and united with
Calx of and antimony, and thence the Volatile Crystals, or^ Butter extracted,
wherewith you may proceed as was said^ Or, you may make also a {water} of
Paradise, made with per deliquium.

The Antimonial {water} of Paradise, or the Hermetick Celestial Eagle with two
Heads.
EXtract a Butter from equal parts of antimony and Sublimate: Dissolve this
Butter in the Air in,, and; put the Liquor into a Glass Cucurbite with its Head
and Recipient, lute well all the junctures; excite the Archaeus which is in
him, by a very gentle heat in Ashes, by a Lamp fire, which will maturate the
Matter in the space of fifteen or twenty days: Then drive up its Rays into the
Head, which will be seen corporal in the Recipient in the form of a clear
{water}. This {water} is all fiery, and is the Celestial Eagle with two Heads.
Put it into a Cucurbite, and deflegm it with the same Lamp fire, and there will
remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite the Mineral Gluten, or the viscous
{water}, which does not wet ones hands. You may prepare Medicines of this
Celestial Ethereal {water} thus: Put two drops of it into iv. of S. V. it
will turn as white as Milk. This Medicine Cures the Dropsy, the Epilepsie,
Madness, etc. The Dose is from ij. to ss. Now, if you would have the Powder of
Projection, you must digest the Gluten per se, as was said; or (which is
better) add a tenth part of in leaf, and digest, or draw the red and white Oil,
and proceed as in the former Process, and you shall have a Medicine both for
Man, and for Metals.

Water of Paradise of Venus and Mars, or. and Captivated, whence comes Cupid,
or the Solar Panacea.
ALthough these Metals cannot take the Mercurial {water}, nor give Volatile
Crystals, as,, and do, because they are very Mercurial, and the former almost
all Sulphurous, nevertheless you may do it thus: Dissolve and (each by it self)
in the Salt Androgine, which has but little Sulphur, to the end, that it may
dissolve more easily: Then make a Lixivium, which Precipitate with your Liquor
of; dry the Precipitated Calx, and sprinkle it with a good deal of Spirit of
Salt; then mix it with antimony, and distill Volatile Crystals thereof; with
which proceed as before. The {water} of Paradise is made of only, and is called
{water}, or his astrum.

It Cures the Pox, Gout, etc. The Gluten of these Metals is digested either per
se, or with a Solar Ferment, as before, into a Panacea, which is a wonderful
Medicine, and will Cure Maladies in Men and Metals.

The thrice Noble Water of Paradise, or Apollo Medens.
DIstill the fiery and Volatile Crystals from of, with Calx of Jupiter, which
keep. Dissolve in Spirit of Salt, which join with equal parts of your Crystals;
digest, and then distill, the Spirit of Salt will come over immediately first,
then will follow the red Crystals: Expose this Terrestrial to the Celestial,
that it may satisfy it self with its Solary Rays, and then dissolve it self
into a Liquor, which will be a Magnet and an Amaranth Ethereal and immortal.
Put this Solary and Lunary Liquor into a Glass Cucurbite, and distill with a
Lamp, fire this Noble, Metalline, Radical moisture, those invisible Rays of
the, or this {water} of Paradise, during forty or fifty days. This {water} is
{water} of Nature, an Excellent Attractive, and its Power is ineffable. This
{water} drives out all Maladies, and comforts Nature, and is a Royal Medicine;
for it is the astrum of the, or a between the Terrestrial and celestial. Of
this is Apollo furens; for its Rays, or its {water} kills, which they convert
into true, as also all other Metals. In this Liquor you may dissolve if you
will, but it will not be necessary; for when it is freed of its phlegm, the
Solary Gluten remains, which you may digest per se, until it acquire a purple
color. Thus is exalted to make a Tincture. The {water} of Paradise is the
Ethereal Aurum potabile; dissolve two drops thereof in iv. of S. V. the Dose
is ij. This is the {water} of Nature, which is multiplied ad infinitum by new
addition of the Gluten, etc. Note, That when this Panacea is fixed, it is the
Panacea of Panacea's, which Cures Maladies, both in Men and Metals.

Note, That this {water} of Paradise converts all Metals into, if you digest
their Plates in the same; yea, one drop thereof penetrates a Plate of, and
transmuteth it into most fine. There is also made another Apollo Medens, which
is joined with Spirituous Regulus of antimony, to wit, the Flowers reduced, or
fiery Regulus, and conjoined in the Sulphurous Sal Enixe, and both Precipitated
into an Aureal Antimonial Panacea. But this Panacea is not comparable to the
other. Apollo furens is the same {water} of Paradise, the which are the
invisible Solary Rays, by which the Volatility of is killed, and is converted
into; and the same it is with the Solary {water}. Apollo Moriens is the Eclipse
of the in the abovementioned fiery and Ethereal Menstruums: For in all sorts
of Menstruums it putrifies, grows black, and maturates in the space of
fifteen days: But after that, it resuscitates before the Judge Apollo
resuscitans.

An unheard of Arcanum, or new and unheard of Lunary, wherewith is made the
Elixir, or Metalline Stone.
DIssolve what quantity of you please in the Sal Androgine; in four hours time
half your will be dissolved into a very red Salt, pour it into a vessel of
Copper, then make a Lixivium, which filter, reduce into a body what remains
with, and re-dissolve it in new Sal Androgine as before. Reiterate this, till
all your go through the filter with the Lixivium, and you will be sure to have
a altogether Spirituous and Volatile, which you will find to be true to your
loss, if you Precipitate it with an Acid Liquor, and reduce it with; for it
will all fly away at the Coppel; the same will happen if it be attracted by
Plates of. These two effects have happened to me by inadvertence.

Note, That this Spirituous is a Potential and Spirituous, as you will find, if
you rejoyn it with its body at the Coppel: There is nothing to say to that.
Note, That the corporal which is added, retains all what is of the Nature of,
which renders it afterward in the separating {water}. Therefore, take all these
filtred Solutions (which are yellow if the Lavers be made with Odor of Metals)
and Precipitate them totally into a Lunary Sulphur of a Golden color, adding a
sufficient quantity of that which Precipitates it: That which Precipitates it
is of our invention, and is of the Saturnian Juice, which swims upon the of,
when its Solution is repercuted by the Salt {water}. Dry this Lunary Golden
Precipitate gently, and mix it with ana of Calx of, made per se in the {water};
or if you will, you may draw the Butter or fiery Crystals with ana of antimony;
the Crystals are resolved per se in the Air. And with this unheard of Magnet
are Miraculously attracted the Influences of the Stars, or the {water} of
Nature. This is chiefly done in the belly of that is to say, in the Month of
April and May. Note here a very great Secret, which is, that there is no phlegm
attracted by this Magnet, but only the pure Nutriment of Life, or the fiery
vi^al Viand which is hidden in the center of the Air; which you will find true,
if you put some waterish part into this Liquor; for you shall see that it will
not mix with it in any wise, but will swim upon it in an heterogene form, as
Milk: You must further separate this Liquor, which is the simple Lunary, in
which is easily dissolved: For from this corporal Lunary you must have a
Spiritual and unheard of Lunary. Put then this Liquor in a Glass Cucurbite with
its Head and Recipient, and digest in Ashes with a very gentle heat by a Lamp
the space of one Philosophical Month. Nothing will distill over during the
first fifteen days, or more; but it will become a red Sea, and the Matter will
maturate, and after that, you shall see that by this gentle heat the Metalline
Soul will mount invisibly upon the wings of the Wind, or the Spirit of the
World, and will fall into the Recipient in the form of Tears, which are the
Tears of Diana. This Liquor is much more precious than pure, and of very great
virtue. Continue the dissolution, whilst the Archaeus of Nature chaseth it,
which is done in fifteen days a^ the farthest. In this Operation is done, wha^
Hermes says, thou shall separate, the sub^^^ from the Spirit gently, and with
great dexterity. This distillation is altogether Natural, and is perfected by
the only Archaeus of Nature. This Liquor is the Spiritual Lunary, which
contains in it self Body, Spirit and Soul; it is the {water} of Paradise, the
Lunar Sphere, the Metalline Fountain, and the Universal Metalline Menstruum. It
is a most certain anti-epileptick and Cephalic: If one or two drops of it are
mixed with iv. of S. V. all will become like Milk. For it is all fire; which
changes the moist Element of the S. V. as being contrary to it, or at least not
connatural.

To make the Metalline Stone per se of this Spiritual Lunary.
TAke this Liquor, and put it into a small Glass Cucurbite; leave it uncovered,
evaporate it in Ashes with a gentle Lamp fire, to the end, that if there be any
moisture from the Air, it may exhale, and there will remain in the bottom of
the Cucurbite the Metalline Gum, the Lunary Gluten, the Azot, etc. which will
liquifie at the least heat, as Butter, and will congeal by cold. Put this Gum
into a Mattress, which Seal Hermetically, and digest per se, it will become
black, and after white, and then it is the white Stone; then by increasing the
fire, it will become of a Citrine color, and red, without a Solary Ferment:
And the King is made of the Queen, or the immersion of into a Solary Tincture.
But for to shorten the Work, add unto this Gluten a tenth part of in leaf, or
Sulphur of made Spiritual by the Sulphurous Sal Enixe, and digest as was said:
The augmentation of this Stone is by addition of new Metalline Gluten. Note,
That this Spiritual Lunary tingeth into true, if you digest it therein; also a
Plate of is perforated by putting one drop of this {water} upon it. Note also,
That when you have distilled the Lunary, that which remains is an eternal
Magnet. To that effect, resolve it again in the Air, and manage it by a Lamp as
before. Then distill an Ethereal Liquor, which is yet impregnated with a
Lunary Soul, and distilleth into the Recipient, and then goes anew into a
Gluten: And this is done ad infinitum. Note also, That that which remains, may
be distilled, and you shall have first, a white Lunary Oil (which is the
Philosophers Oil of Talc; for the true Oil of Talc is the Lunary coagulated per
se, and fixed into a white Stone, which is fixed and soft.) Secondly, you shall
have the red Oil by augmenting the fire. If you will make the Stone of these
Matters, take of the red Oil one part, and of the white Oil four parts, and
eight parts of the Lunary reduced into Gluten: Put this into a Mattress, and
digest until all be fixed into white, and after by continuing become red. This
Medicine ought not to be Fermented; for it is the true Metalline Soul, reduced
into a Tincture. This last digestion must be in an Athanor with a Charcoal fire.

Hartman.) These Waters of Paradise and Glutens, etc. were given to Sir K.
(about eight or nine Months before he died) by a French Gentleman, a great
Scholar.

Monsieur Barkly's fixation of Common Sulphur, and the Tincture thereof, which
is an Excellent Medicine in all affects of the Breast and Lungs.
TAke Flowers of Sulphur, or Sulphur pulverized very subtle; put it into a
Mattress, and pour upon it so much Spirit of Sulphur per Campanam, as may cover
it the breadth of three fingers. Lute the Mattress well, and put it in digestion
for fifteen days, or three weeks, or so long until the Flowers of Sulphur come
to be very black: Then distill off all the Spirit of Sulphur to dryness; break
the Mattress, and take out the Sulphur, which pulverize again, and put it into
another Mattress, and pour upon it the Spirit of Sulphur you distilled off, and
distill as before to dryness. Repeat this twice more, which makes three
cohobations in all without the first distillation. Then take your black and
fixed Sulphur, and reduce it to a very subtle Powder, and put it to reverberate
in a Glass Oven the space of a fortnight or three weeks, it will change its
blackness into white, and after yellow, and at last come to be of a reddish
brown color. The Tincture of this red fixed Sulphur, is extracted with Spirit
of Salt well rectified.

He made thus his Spirit of Salt for this: Take Salt lbj. dissolve it in five
quarts of fair {water}, and filter it; put it into a Cucurbite, and pour upon
it by little and little lbj. of good Oil of Vitriol, and join the Head and
Recipient; when it is all in, it will begin presently to distill over cold: Set
it in Sand, and with moderate heat drive over as much as will rise, which
rectify from the phlegm: There will remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite a
wonderful Salt, that is exceeding fusible.

After he had extracted the Tincture, (...) distilled away all the Spirit of
Salt, till the Tincture was dry: Of this he gave, three grains for a Dose, and
found it a great Disphoretick, but it was somewhat rough and sharp in the
Stomach: Whereupon he dulcified it by several ablutions in fair {water}; then
gave the same Dose, and it wrought excellently well in all Colds of the Breast
and Lungs.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. Digby.

The Countess of Kents Powder, as it was prepared by Sir Kenelm Digby's Order
in his Operatory.
TAke iv. of the black ends of the shares of Crabs, the Sun being in the Sign
of Cancer, Crab's-eyes, fine Pearls and Corals prepared, of each j. yellow Amber
ss. Roots of Contrayerva, Virginian Snake-root, an^ vj. Oriental Bezoar iij. of
the Bones that are found in the hearts of Stags iv. Reduce all into a subtle
Powder; moisten the Crabs Claws and Crab's-eyes, and the Powders of Pearls and
Corals with a little juice of Lemons, to make them ferment a little: Then the
next day mix all well together, adding j. of Tincture of Saffron, and pour upon
the Mass (when you incorporate it) three or four spoonfuls of Spirit of Honey,
or instead thereof you may take Jelly of Hartshorn, and Jelly of the Skins of
Vipers dried in the shadow. Then add to this Composition j. of Trochisque of
Vipers; grind it all well together to make it well incorporate: Then make it up
into Balls, and let them dry, and keep them for Use.

This Powder is a most Excellent Remedy in all Epidemical Distempers, all
Malignant, Spotted, and Purple Fevers; to drive out the Smallpox and Measles.
It is Sudorifick, and resists all Corruption, and is admirable in a Surfeit. It
drives the Venom from the heart, and hinders the Vapors to fly up into the
Head and Brain. It drives out by transpiration all bad Humors, corroborates
and strengthens Nature. The Dose is from six to twenty, or twenty five grains.
In an extremity of the Plague, one may take from thirty to forty grains.

Hartman.) Sir K. D. had this Powder always ready by him in his Closet; and I
remember that many Persons of Quality sent to him for some of it when any of
their Children had the Smallpox or Measles; and never any did miscarry of all
those that took it. It is also Excellent against the biting of Mad Dogs,
stinging of Vipers, and other Venemosis Beasts.

A very Efficacious Remedy against the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness,
wherewith Sir Kenelm Digby Cured a Ministers Son, named Mr. Lichtenstein, at
Francfort in Germany, in the Year 1659. to which I was an Eyewitness.
TAke of the Skull of a Man that died of a violent Death, of the parings of
nails of Man, ana ij. Reduce this to a subtle Powder, and grind it upon a
Marble stone; then take Polypody of the Oak very dry, ij. Misletoe of the Oak,
gathered in the Wain of the Moon, ss. Misletoe of the Hasle-tree, Misltoe of
the Tile-tree, of each ij. Piony-root ss. Reduce all into a subtle Powder: Then
take vj. of Sugar, boil it to the consistence of Rose-Sugar; then mix all the
Powders with it, and stir them well together over the fire that they may well
incorporate together: Then take it from the fire, and make it up into little
Tablets of about a Dram apiece; whereof give one in the Morning fasting, and
two or three hours after Dinner, and another two hours after Supper: Continue
this whilst the Tablets ^ast.

Another for the same.
SIR Kenelm Digby Relates, that in the Year 1663. the Lady Warwick told him,
that a Daughter of her Husbands elder Brother had the Falling Sickness in the
greatest Extremity, so that she fell like a log seven or eight times a day
without any motion. They had put her into the hands of the ablest Physicians in
England, who in effect could do her no good. A Gentleman, one of their
Neighbors, undertook to Cure her, and performed the Cure thus: Take true
Misletoe of the Oak, the Leaves, the Berries, and all the tender Branches; dry
it gently in an Oven after the Bread is drawn; then reduce it to a fine Powder,
of which give as much as will lie upon a shilling for one of ripe years; for
middle aged, a sixpence, for a Child, a groat: Give it Mornings and Evenings
in Cowslip-water three days before, and three days after the Full of the Moon.
Repeat this Remedy for some Months together. This Cured also my Lord Herberts
Son, and many other Persons of Quality. The best time to gather the Misletoe of
the Oak, is in the Month of September, when it bears Berries, and in the Waning
of the Moon.

The Preparation of the Silver Pills against the Dropsy, as they were prepared
by Sir Kenelm Digby's Order in his Operatory.
TAke refined j. dissolve it in iij. of the best Spirit of Nitre in a Mattress,
then evaporate away all the Spirit of Nitre to dryness in a low Cucurbite, or
in some other fit Vessel; then dissolve the matter in a sufficient quantity of
Rose Water, filter the dissolution through gray Paper, and evaporate it again
to the consistence of a dry Salt as before. Then take ij. of fine Saltpeter,
dissolve it in Rose Water, filter the dissolution, and evaporate it in a large
wide Vessel of Glass, to the consistence of a Salt. Then mix the and this Salt
together, and put them in a large Glass, pouring upon them so much Rose Water
as will dissolve them into a greenish Liquor: Then evaporate it in Sand to the
consistence of a white Salt; then take it out of the Sand, and being quite
cold, put it into a Glass or Marble Mortar, and put to it ij. of fine
Wheat Flour; grind them well together, then add so much Rose Water as will
make it a Mass fit for Pills: Then make it up into Pills of the bigness of
Pease, put them between two Papers, and let them dry in the shadow, and they
will be of a Purple color; keep them in a wooden Box.

Directions for the Use of these Silver Pills.
THey are a Specific against the Dropsy, the Patient is to take one of them
at six or seven of the Clock in the Morning, taking some Broth about two hours
after it with eight or ten drops of Spirit of Salt in it. Their Operation is by
Stools, and by Urine; you must continue it until the Cure be perfected. Note,
That if the Patient be weak, he must take the Pill but once in two days, and in
all Broaths and Drink, he ought to take some Dose of Spirit of Salt, as is said
above. If there be need of Sweating, you must use some dry Stoves, and give him
always of the following Salts: Take Salt of Urine, Salt of Wormwood, ana ij.
add half a Scruple of Oil of Amber, and as much of Spirit of Urine, with ij. of
fine Sugar; mix all well together in a Glass of Stone Mortar, whereof give iv.
for a Dose in half a Glass of White Wind when the Patient is Sweating in the
dry Stove, and not in a Bath of Water: And every third day you must repeat this
Remedy, and he will be Cured within three days. The evacuation is by abundance
of Sweat and Urine.

Hartman.) I cannot omit to relate here a Story, which I have often heard Sir
Kenelm Digby tell concerning a Famous Cure of a desperate Dropsy, done by Dr.
Farrar upon an eminent Lord, who was overgrown with the Dropsy, his Belly and
Stomach swelled to a Prodigious bigness, and was given over by the ablest
Physicians as incurable. Sir K. D. made the bargain between the Lord and the
Doctor, who was to have five hundred pounds for the Cure: But when the Lord was
Cured, he would give the Doctor no more than three hundred pounds, saying, that
five hundred pounds was too much money, and that all the Ingredients be used
could not stand him in twenty shillings. The Remedies were thus: Having first
well purged the Patien^ with some fit Purge (as of Iallap, Manna, Sena) to
carry away watery humors, he gave him the following Broth. A moderate Broth was
made of Mutton, Chickens, and Capon, or Hen, but not Veal; the Broth was not
strong of the Meat, nor too weak, but such as the Patient might drink all the
day, for he was to drink no other Liquor; they made but about a pottle of Broth
at a time, for it would not keep: And for this quantity they took a Gallon of
Water, into which the Doctor put above a handful of Garlic, and Rosemary,
Penyroyal, Thyme, Sweet-marjoram, Fennel-roots, Parsley-roots, as also Currants,
and a sufficient quantity of Salt. And after some days taking the Broth, they
put into every draught of the Broth (the Patient took) above a spoonful of the
crude juice of Garlic, stamped and pressed out. But if you cannot bear always
to drink this Broth, then use the following Decoction: Take Sarsaparilla xij.
China-roots v. Sassafras iij. Cut all these very small, and pour upon them
Spring Water, to three fingers breadth above the Ingredients, and let them
infuse over a soft fire the space of four hours; then throw away this Water,
and stamp the Ingredients in a Stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle: Then pour
upon them ten quarts of Fountain Water, and boil it in a Vessel close stopped,
till four quarts of it be consumed: Of this Decoction let the Patient drink,
without any other drink but the Garlic Broth.

Another Drink.
TAke all the aforesaid Ingredients, in the same manner prepared and stamped:
Then take a clean Vessel, and fill it with Beer, then put the Ingredients in a
bag, and hang it in the Beer; j. of the Ingredients is sufficient for a quart
of Beer. Either of these Drinks is only in case the Patient cannot bear the use
of the Garlic Broth, which alone will dispatch the Cure much the sooner; and
this course of the Garlic Broth is for all Obstructions, and superfluity of
Cold, raw Humors, clogging the Brain, or any other part, as well as for the
Dropsy. To strengthen and secure the Liver, use the following Electuary. Take
of Powder of Turmerick a sufficient quantity, make an Electuary of it with
Sugar, and to every Ounce of it add three drops of Oil of Anniseed, made by
distillation; and if you put a little Amber-grease to it, it will be the more
strengthening. Take of this Electuary two or three times a day the quantity of
a Hasle-nut; take not above j. in a day.

Besides this, to strengthen the Stomach, use the following Stomacher: Take
Wormwood, Marjoram, Rosemary, Rue, ana one handful; Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, ana
j. bruise these Spices, and mix them with the Herbs; of these make a Stomacher,
and apply it: And you may likewise anomt your Stomach, and region of the Liver
with Oil of Nutmegs and Oil of Roses.

I heard Sir K. D. say, that after twelve or thirteen days, the Patient begun
to Piss in great abundance, and so stinking, noisome, roping matter, that the
Nurse which emptied the Pots, was hardly able to endure the stink and
noisomness of it. And he continued the diet till he was perfectly Cured.

Another Experimented Remedy for the Dropsy, whereby several Persons have been
Cured, as I have been assured.
TAke the Root of Heath, scrape off the first Bark, which throw away, then peel
off the next rind, and fill a Glass or a Bottle with it loosely, then fill it
up with Whitewine, and let it stand to infuse over Night, and the next Morning
drink half a pint of Wine; and so continue until you are Cured.

Another Excellent Remedy against the Dropsy.
TAke Spiritual Oil of Salt, mix with it so much flowers of Sulphur, that it
become like Pap, which distill in a Retort in Sand, and you shall have a Liquor
as white as Milk, which is Excellent against the Dropsy.

The Copy of a Letter from Abbot Boucaud from Paris to Sir K. D. wherein he
relates in what manner he Cured himself of the Stone, and of a Quartan Ague.
SIR,
I Do not tell you that I have been Sick, (and that I am so still) to Excuse my
self for having so long de^erred an Answer unto your last two Letters, etc. It
is true nevertheless, for I have labored under diverse Distempers; but among
the rest, I have been ill of the Stone, and have had a Quartan Ague: I believe
you will not be sorry to hear how I Cured my self of both without the help of
any Physician. For the Stone I took twelve grains of the Salt made of the
Stones which were taken out of Men; I dissolved the said Salt in a little
water, and then I put all into a Glass of Whitewine, and drank it off, and
walked about my Chamber near two hours, at the end whereof I had a great need
to make water, and I voided (with violence) a large Glass full of Gravel, which
was so gross, and so rugged, that it caused me to void near a Pint of Blood;
the same thing happened to me three times, and every time I voided Blood, which
made me judge that I should have taken less of the said Salt; yet I took it but
once, but I felt a great pain and heaviness in my Reins and Kidneys. The said
Stones were Calcined in a Potters Oven, and after they were Calcined, I
extracted the Salt out of them with distilled Rainwater: The feces I Calcined
again, and extracted the Salt as before, which I repeated so often, till the
said Stones yielded no more Salt. Note, That to make this Salt for a M^n, you
must take the stones taken out of Men, and for a Woman, those that are taken
out of Women. And thus was the first Cure performed.

As for the Quartan Ague, without having been Purged, or let Blood, at the
fourth fit I took a Glass-full of the water of green Wall-nuts, which I had
distilled in their last Season: I took it as soon as I perceived the least
symptom of the Fits approaching; I went to Bed, and caused my self to be well
covered, and slept, and had no Fit at all that time, nor ever after.

The Water I distilled thus: I took green Wall-nuts and beat them in a stone
Mortar, then in a Cucurbite in B. M. I distilled the water from them, which I
cohobated twice upon fresh Wall-nuts. Then having Calcined the three Marcs or
Caput Mortuums, I extracted the Salt out of the Ashes; this Salt I put into the
distilled water. I thus, Sir, I have given you Account how I went to work.

A Process, how to make a most Excellent Oil of Sulphur in abundance; sent also
by the said Abbot Boucaud to Sir K.
TAke an Earthen Pan of Stone-ware, in the midst thereof lay a piece of Brick,
upon which set an Earth^^ Poringer full of Sulphur grossly beaten; then put fair
water into your Pan, but not so much as to touch the said Poringer: Then kindle
the Sulphur, and cover it with a Bell, so that the Bell touch the water, and
that the fumes may not come out, but may condense and run down into the water,
which afterward must be separated in B. with a moderate heat. To set the
Sulphur on fire, you may put into it a square or round piece of Iron made
red-hot in the fire.

Hartman.) In my Opinion, if the Bell touch the Water, and that it has no hole
at the top, so that the Sulphur have no Air, it will not burn; I judge the best
way to be thus: Let the Poringer stand in the Water, but not so deep, as that
the Water bear it up, and make it float; if it stands half, way in the Water,
it will do, for the weight of the Sulphur will keep it down, and the heat of
the Poringer will heat the Water, and the Vapors and steams thereof will mix
with the fumes of the Sulphur, and make them condense the better, and so
distill down together into the Water. The Bell should be such a one as is now
in use, with a long neck, and a hole at the top, which should not touch the
Water nor the Pan, but it should be suspended in such manner, that there be
some distance between the bri^ of the Bell and the sides of the Pan.

A subtle Volatile Water from Sulphur, which will Dissolve.
I AM told by one who has done it, that when you go to Sublime Flowers of
Sulphur, if you give very gentle and moderate fire, and be very attentive,
there will come over first, before any Flowers Sublime, a little very Volatile,
but altogether insipid Water, which he says, will dissolve: It is much more
Volatile than any S. V. A Glass full of it will presently vanish away, if you
hold the Glass unstopped upon your hand, by the warmth of it.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K.

If you would save this Water, you must have a Glass head upon your last
Subliming-pot, or a Ludel, wherein you Sublime your Flowers of Sulphur, and
instead of a Vessel without a bottom, as that for the Flowers of Antimony, you
must have one with a bottom, and without a hole on the side to put in your
Sulphur, and then two Aludels besides the said Vessel, and the Glass-head will
be sufficient for subliming the Flowers of Sulphur.

By means of the Glass-head you save also the Vinegar of antimony in subliming
the Flowers, which I have done several times; but I used not above three
Aludels one upon another, besides the Glass-head.

An Excellent Essence of Sulphur for the Breast, and for the Lungs.
TAke Sulphur one part, brown Sugar Candy two parts; pulverize them, and mix
them well together, then put it into a Retort of such a bigness, that two third
parts thereof may remain empty. Then distill in sand, giving very gentle fire
at first; you will have a whitish Liquor, which keep for use.

Hartman.) This was given me by a Phys^cian at Paris, who told me, that a
Catarrh ^alling upon his Lungs, which obstructed his Lungs, causing in him a
great Fever, he Cured himself with this Essence, taking this, thirty or forty
drops of it in some Broth. He told me also, that it was of great effect in
Asthma, Phthisick, old and inveterated Coughs, etc.

An Excellent Elixir of Sulphur.
TAke Juice of Licorise, Confection of Alkermes, Roots of Elecampane, ana vj.
Alipta moscata iv. Myrrh, Saffron, ana jss. Mastick, Benjamin, Cardamoms the
less, Cinnamon, ana j. Sugar Candy ij. Powder what is to be Powdered, then mix
them together, and add rectified S. V. so much as to make it into a Paste; then
put it into a Circulatory Vessel, and pour upon it so much Spirit of Sulphur,
as may cover it the breadth of four fingers: Digest it forty days, then decant
the Tincture, and pour upon the remaining Matter fresh S. V. to extract another
Tincture. Then mix these two Tinctures together, and keep them for Use.

This Tincture is a very great Pectoral, and a Precious Remedy in all affects
of the Breast and Lungs. It is Excellent against Catarrhs, old and inveterate
Coughs, the Phthisick, Asthma's; it cherishes and comforts the Heart, and is
good against fainting and swooning Fits, preserves from Putrefaction; it is
Anodyne, Cephalic, Analeptick, Alexipharmack; and, as the Author says,
preserves Health, prolongs Life, and keeps back gray Hairs, by strengthening
Natural heat. It is to be taken in some Pectoral water or Syrup; the Dose is so
much as renders the Vehicle of a grateful acidity.

Lac Sulphuris.
TAke of Sulphur in Powder on part, and of Quicklime two parts, mix them, and
put them into an Iron Pot, and pour thereon a good quantity of fair water, let
it boil until three parts of the water be consumed, and that the Liquor be as
red as Blood by the dissolution of the Sulphur; then strain it whilst it is
hot, and let the strained Liquor stand to cool: Then Precipitate with Vinegar,
then let it settle, and having poured off the clear, edulcorate the residue ten
or twelve times with warm water, the last time with Rose Water; then dry it
gently, and keep it for Use.

It is a true Remedy in all affects of the Breast and Lungs; it is given with
great success to those that are troubled with Catarrhs, Rheum in the Head,
Asthma, Phthisick, Coughs, etc. It promotes expectoration; it hinders the
defluxion to the Joints, it prevents and disperses the windiness of the Stomach
and Bowels, and Cures the Cholick. The Dose is so much as may change the
Vehicle white; the best and fittest Vehicle is the Spirit of Lignum Cassiae, or
Cinnamon; taking it twice a day, in the Morning fasting, and at Night.

You may make a very good Spirit of Lignum Cassiae thus, which is a much finer
Spirit than that of Cinnamon, and much better for this use. Take Lignum Cassiae
iv. bruise it well, then pour upon it three quarts of Malaga Sack, stop the
Vessel close, and let it stand to digest for three or four days, then distill
it in a Limbeck, or in a Glass Cucurbite, distilling it off all together, as
long as it comes with vigor, and you shall have about three pints and a half
of very good Spirit: Thus I make it. But if you will have it richer of the
Wood, put this Liquor upon fresh Cassia, and digest and distill as before.
Repeat this till it be as strong as you desire. You may if you please separate
the runnings so as to have some of such strength as you wish.

A great Diaphoretick of Antimony.
TAke good Antimony Mineral in subtle Powder lbj. mix it with lbss. of
Sublimate; put this mixture presently into a Retort, leave the Retort for some
time unstopped before you distill it, for then you shall have more Butter than
if you distill it presently. Then distill a Butter from it according to Art,
giving strong fire at last, so that the bottom of the Retort may be red-hot;
part of it will come over in Butter, and part will Sublime in Cinaber, very
hard; if you leave this Butter for some time exposed to the Air before you
rectify it, you shall have more Liquor than if you distill it presently;
rectify this Butter, then melt it again, and pour it into a clean Retort, and
pour upon it by little and little good Spirit of Nitre, continue pouring on the
Spirit of Nitre until the Ebullition cease: Then distill it with a gentle
fire in Sand, giving strong fire at last, so that the bottom of the Retort may
be red-hot; then let it cool, break the Retort, and take out your Matter, which
will be very spungy, and of a yellowish color; pulverize and edulcorate it
several times with warm water, then dry it gently; reverberate it for an hour
between two Crubles well luted together: Then grind it again to a subtle
Powder, which put into an Earthen Poringer, and pour upon it rectified S. V.
that will burn all away; fire it, and whilst it burns, stir it continually
with a silver spoon; the S. V. being burned away, the Powder will remain dry;
grind this Powder again, and mix it with vij. of Antimony Diaphoretick that
has been Calcined three times with Nitre, grind them well together, and put
them into a Retort, and pour upon them iijss. of good Spirit of Nitre; put the
Retort in Sand, and let it stand thus four and twenty hours; then distill with
a gentle fire to dryness: Break the Retort, and take out the Matter, which
grind and edulcorate with Carduus-water warmed, then spread it upon gray Paper,
and let it dry of it self: Then grind it to an impalpable Powder, which put
into a Poringer, and pour upon it S. V. so much as may cover it a fingers
breadth; let it stand thus for five or six hours, then fire the S. V. upon it,
and stir it continually with a silver spoon whilst it burns, then grind it
again, and put it into a Viol, stop it close, and keep it for Use.

The manner of using this Medicine is thus: Take fifteen grains of it for three
Mornings together, mixing with it some Conserves or Sweatmeats, and take it
upon the point of a Knife, then drink a Glassfull of the Sudorifick Decoction
after it warm. Then take twenty grains for three Mornings more; then fifteen
grains again for three Mornings more. It is an Excellent Remedy to Cure the
Gout, Dropsy, Palsy, the Venereal Disease, the Evil, Leprosy; it purifieth
the whole Mass of Blood, and is good in all Scorbutic Distempers. Note, That
before you use this Medicine, you must prepare the Body before with some fit
Purge, according to the Constitution of the Patient.

Those that are careful to preserve their Health, and to keep it in good state,
may take this Powder in the Spring, at the falling of the Leaf, having first
Purged once or twice; then take the Powder with the Sudorifick Decoction for
Nine days together, as was said, mixing the Powder with a dram of Confection of
Alkermes. It powerfully resists all Corruption, dries up all superfluous
moisture in the Body, and is a true concretive of Blood.

The Sudorifick Decoction.
TAke Lignum Guaiacum iv. Salsaparilla, Sassafras, ana j. infuse them in three
quarts of Fountain Water for twenty four hours; then let it boil gently for
three hours.

A most Excellent Medicine against all sorts of Agues and Fevers, etc.
TAke of the Starr'd Martial Regulus of Antimony lbj. Mercury Precipitate
lbjss. pulverize and mix them well together, then put them in a Retort, and
distill in Sand as you do Butter of antimony; then rectify this Oil or Butter
once or twice, casting away the Feces: Then put it into a new Retort, and pour
upon it Spirit of Metheglin; distill and cohobate four or five times to make
the Oil sweet, then pour S. V. upon it, and abstract it to the consistence of
an Oil. This is a Precious Remedy for the Cure of many Diseases: It is of great
Power and Efficacy to Cure all sorts of Agues, Quotidians, Tertians, and
chiefly Quartans. It Operates by a gentle Vomit in some Persons, and in others
it gently Purges without Vomiting, and in some it gently Operates both ways: It
has virtue to eradicate totally both Root and Seed of the Distemper. The Dose
is from six to twelve drops, in some fit Vehicle.

Note, That having separated the Spirit of Metheglin, if you acuate it with
Spirit of Vitriol, it is a great Diaphoretick, far beyond all others. Dose is
from half to one whole spoonful in some fit Vehicle.

A Precious Oil of Antimony.
TAke Antimony Calcined, as for making the Glass of antimony, lbij. xij. Sugar
lbj. Mix them well together, and put them in a Retort: Distill in sand, first,
will come a phlegm, and afterward a pure dark-red Oil, which keep for Use.

This is an admirable Remedy against the Stone and Gravel, the Dropsy,
Epilepsie, Asthma, Quartan Agues, and all sorts of Fevers, the Plague, and all
Malignant Fevers, and Epidemical Distempers, and Leprosy; and being outwardly
applied, it cures, heals, and dries up all inveterate Wounds and Ulcers.
The Dose is four drops in Wine twice a day.

A most Excellent Panacea of the true Sulphur of Antimony.
TAke Lees of Wine, which you may have of the Wine-Coopers when they have
pressed them out, break them into small pieces, let them dry, then burn them to
Ashes: Take of these Ashes, of Quicklime, and Nitre, ana; make a Lixivium
thereof with warm water, then filter it: Then take Cinaber of Antimony, which
is found in the neck of the Retort when one makes the Butter of Antimony;
pulverize it, and boil it in the aforesaid Lixivium for the space of four
hours; pour off the Lixivium from the Quicksilver into another Vessel, which
lean on the side, that the red-Sulphur may settle; then edulcorate it with hot
water, and dry it gently; so have you the true Sulphur of Antimony. Take of
this Sulphur, and of Regulus of Antimony, ana j. Oil of Sulphur per Campanam,
or rectified Oil of Vitriol iij. Mix all well together, and put it into a small
Retort, digest it in Horse-dung, or if you will, in some other gentle heat for
eight or ten days. Then distill it, and cohobate the distilled Liquor upon the
mark three or four times; then increase the fire to the highest degree, which
continue for twelve hours, to force all over, and the Matter will be fixed; then
break the Retort, and take out the Matter, which pulverize, and edulcorate it
with Rose Water; then dry it gently upon a gray Paper, then reverberate it for
four or five hours. Then take j. of this Powder, and of Salt of red Coral ij.
grind them well together to a very subtle Powder.

This is an Universal Medicine to Purify the whole Mass of Blood, and to root
out such Distempers as proceed from the corruption thereof, and are Curable by
sweat. It Cures all stubborn, Malign, and Chronick Diseases: It Cures the
Venereal Disease, the most inveterate; the Leprosy, the Evil, the Scurvy, the
Plague, and all Epidemical Diseases. The Dose is from ten to thirty grains.

The Order of using this Medicine is thus: First, Purge the Patient once or
twice with fit Purges, then rest three days, then Purge again; then begin with
ten grains of the Powder, which continue for three times, mix the Powder with
some fit Conserve, and give it upon the point of a Knife, in the Morning in his
Bed, drinking a Glass-full of a Sudorifick decoction after it, made hot; let
him keep his Bed for an hour or two, then let him be rubbed with warm Clothes,
and the sweat being quite over, let him rise, and eat of good wholesome Food,
forbearing to eat of Salt Meats, Salt-fish, Sallet, Milk, Butter, or Cheese, or
raw Fruit. Then for three Mornings more give him twenty grains, and then thirty
grains for three Mornings more; then come again to twenty grains for three
Mornings more.

A great Febrifuge.
TAke Mineral Antimony very clean, that has never been melted, vj. and as much
Saltpeter, pulverize them finely, and mix them well together; then put them
into a strong Crucible, which cover with another Crucible that has a little
hole in the bottom as big as a Pea: Then put this Crucible into your Furnace,
and let the fire kindle of it self, which increase by degrees, the Matter will
fulminate; when you see that no more smoke comes out of the little hole of the
Crucible, take it out of the fire, and take out the Matter that remained in the
Crucible, which pulverize very finely. Then take three Ducats of Gold, and six
times as much in weight of the aforesaid Powder; melt the Powder first in a
Crucible, then put into it one of the Ducats, stirring it until it be melted,
then put in another Ducat; and so continue until you have put in all your
Ducats one after another: When all is melted and well incorporated, let it
stand in good fusion for half an hour, then take it out, and let it cool: Then
break the Crucible, and take out the Matter, which pulverize subtily, and mix
it with equal weight of Sublimate, also in fine Powder; put them into a Retort
well luted, put it into a Furnace, and fit a Recipient to it full of Water, so
that the nose of the Retort may enter into the water; leave the junctures
unluted: Give a gentle fire at first, which augment by degrees; part of the
Matter will distill into the Water, but the greatest part thereof will stick to
the neck of the Retort, which you may draw out with an Iron hook into a basin
full of Water: When you see that nothing more comes over by the last degree of
fire, let it cool; then break the Retort, and take out all the Matter that is
Sublimed about the neck of the Retort, and put it into the Water in the
Recipient, as also that in the Basin; let the Water stand to settle, then
decant it, and keep it. It is Excellent to Cure all sorts of old and inveterate
Ulcers, etc. Pour fresh hot water upon the residue, and having shaken it well
together, let it settle; then decant, and put on more Water. Repeat these
solutions seven or eight times; then separate the from it with a Quill, and put
the Powder into fresh hot-water; let it stand thus until the next day, then
repeat the Edulcorations as before, which continue for six days, then
edulcorate the last time with cold Water; then dry the said Powder, and keep it
for use. The Dose is one or two grains for Children; and for Persons of riper
Years, from four to six or seven, according to their strength and Constitution,
putting the Powder overnight to infuse in two or three Ounces of White Wind;
the next Morning strain the Wine, and let the Patient drink it, and half an
hour after he may drink some warm Broth or Posset: It may also be given in
substance. It Operates by a gentle Vomit, and by Stools. It has been
Experimented, and found very successful and effectual in the Cure of all
Intermittent Fevers, and in the Gout, as also in the Venereal Disease. Out of
the Caput Mortuum you may reduce the greatest part of the Gold.

This is a Mercurius Vitae of a singular preparation; it is not white like the
common, but of a brownish gray color. It appears by this to have some of the
in it, that when you rub Gold or Copper with the Powder, it will make it white,
which common Mercurius vitae will not do.

Another great Febrifuge, which is said to be Riverius his Febrifuge.
TAke, dissolve it in A. R. and Glass of Antimony, dissolved in A. F. ana ss.
washed and purified iij. dissolve it in A. F. Then mix the three dissolutions
together, and put them into a Cucurbite, and distill in Sand, and cohobate the
distilled Liquor eleven times upon the remaining Matter, which are twelve
distillations; then pour upon the remaining Matter rectified S. V. Cohobate and
abstract it six times from the Matter; then take it out and grind it, and that
it may be the better ^ixed, Calcine it in a Crucible in a Circulary fire, until
it be almost glowing-hot. The Dose of this Powder is gr. vj. with gr. xij. of
Scammony: Let the Patient take it in the Morning, the day before the Fit.

Another Febrifuge.
TAke Cinaber of Antimony j. common Salt decrepitated ij. pulverize them, and
mix them together; put them into a Glass Cucurbite, and pour upon them Oil of
Sulphur iij. digest it for two days in a moderate heat in Ashes; then augment
the fire to evaporate away the humidity, then having edulcorated the remaining
Mass, reduce it into Powder, which mix with iij. of Flowers of Sulphur; put
this into an earthen Poringer, which put upon burning coals; let it kindle, and
stir it continually with an Iron Spatula, until all the Flowers of Sulphur be
burned away: Then pour upon the remaining Matter so much S. V. as may cover it
the breadth of two fingers, then burn away the S. V. then reduce it to Powder,
and keep it for Use.

This Powder is much recommended to Cure all sorts of Agues and Intermitting
Fevers, giving it half an hour before the Fit, from ten to fifteen or twenty
grains, in some Syrup or Cordial-water, taking some Broth two hours after it;
but the Patient should be Purged first, and let Blood before the use of this
Powder; and if the first and second dose do not carry away the Fit, it must be
repeated a third time.

Another Febrifuge, which is thought to be Riverius his true Febrifuge.
TAke of Mercury dulcis twelve times Sublimed jss. Mercurius vitae corrected as
follows, ss. mix them together. The correction of Mercurius vitae is thus:
Take of vitae, put it into a small Cucurbite, set it in Sand in a moderate
heat, let it stand until it begin to grow red; then pour upon it rectified
Spirit of Wine, which abstract, and pour on fresh S. V. Repeat this three
times, and you shall have a vitae which will not Operate upwards, but only
downwards. This vitae is to be used for delicate Persons, but for strong and
robust Persons you may use the Common vitae.

This Powder finding the Humors disposed, will Operate both upwards and
downwards if you employ the Common vitae; but if you employ the Corrected, as
was said, it will Operate only downwards. And as this Febrifuge contains in it
a reasonable Dose of vitae, the dulcis thus prepared, working for his part upon
the bad Humors, and serving also for a Corrective to the vitae, one ought to
expect good effects of it.

Riverius gave this Febrifuge to Persons of all Ages and Sexes, in the Morning
the day before the Fit. One may give six grains of it to little Children in the
pap of a roasted Apple, or in some Sweat-meats, and so increase the Dose
proportionably, according to the Age and strength of the Patient, to twenty
grains to Adults, and even to twenty four to those that are of a strong
Constitution.

Hartman.) These Febrifuges were given me by a Friend, a German; and I thought
it fit to insert them here: But whilst they were Printing, I found them in Mr.
Charras his French Dispensatory, which just at that time came to my hand.

A Certain and Experimented Remedy to Cure the Convulsion Fits in little
Children; as also for the Epilepsie, the Cholick, and for the Spleen, etc.
TAke Verdigrease, and distill a Spirit thereof, which rectify once by it
self, and it will leave some feces and Metalline terrestreity behind: Then take
one part of this Spirit, and three parts of fair water, put it upon Lithargy
finely fearsed, as much as it will dissolve: Deflegm it in Balneo, and then
distill it in Sand, and there will come over a pure and powerful Spirit without
Acrimony; it will taste a little sweetish, as in the making of Sacharum Saturni.

It is Excellent for the Convulsion of little Children, being given in some fit
Vehicle, a drop or two for Sucking Infants; but to Men you may give ten or
twenty drops.

Sigillum Hermetis, Or, a great and Experimented Medicine, which has done
great Effects in the Cure of all sorts of Agues and Fevers. It was given to Sir
Kenelm Digby by an able Physician, who had done Wonderful Cures with it.
TAke vj. dissolve it in the best A. F. you can get, using no more A. F. than
is necessary for the Solution (which will be about jss. i. e. two parts to one)
when you see that it is all perfectly dissolved (without fire) cast into the
Mattress an aaa, made (after the ordinary manner of Goldsmiths) of j. of pure,
and ij. of; you will presently see a pelagus conturbationis made. Let the
Mattress stand still upon a Table, or in some corner, till you find the Matter
at that pass as you desire: you will see many beautiful colors appear. After
forty days standing, you will see a kind of roughness appear upon the
superficies of the, which will daily grow and sprout out more. In twenty days
more (sixty in all) it will be shot out into little spears or needles and
twigs. When you see that it grows or shoots out no more, pour off all the
Liquor, and the Mercurial Matter will soon dry of it self. Then with some
little pieces of Glass break off these Excrescencies or Needles from the Mass,
(whereof you may have about j. or more) and grind them to Powder, which will be
very white.

Of this Powder give twenty four grains, or more (according to the Complexion)
in a Cherry, or yolk of an Egg, in the Morning very early, or at Night going to
Bed, or rather after the first sleep at three or four in the Morning, and in
this last case sleep after it. It is seven or eight hours before it uses to
work.

Sometimes the first Dose will not work at all, otherwise than by
strengthening, and then the Author gives a second Dose two or three days
after, which will work either by Stool or Vomit, or Sweat, as Nature shall
require, and in due proportion.

It Cures Quartans and other Agues, and works admirably in all desperate
Diseases. He uses to take it once a Month himself. When there is no peccant
Humor in the Body, it works not by evacuation, but strengthens. The
incloseth and shuts up the Metals, like a Rose of Jericho, from whence he
calls it Sigillum Hermetis. The part of the Needles next the Mass works
rougher than the ends. Out of the Mass you may draw most of the Gold and
Silver, with loss of about an eighth part of the first, and less proportion of
the last. He thinks this to be a Philosophical, and to be useful in the great
Work.

A Mercurial Liquor with Jupiter.
TAke lbj. of Jupiter, melt it in a Crucible, then pour into it lbj. of revived
from Cinaber, and made hot, make an aaa of it, which wash with warm water,
wherein you have dissolved a little Salt; wash it so often, till you have
washed away all the blackness of it, and the aaa will be as white as snow: Then
dry it, and grind it in a Marble or Stone Mortar with lbij. of Corrosive
Sublimate; then spread it upon a large dish of Glass, which set shelving in a
Cellar, putting something under it to receive the Liquor that will run from it,
you will find at last the Salts resolved into a Liquor, in which will be also
the, which will be revived; separate the Liquor from the, and keep the for
another use: Put the Liquor into a Cucurbite, and evaporate the superfluous
moisture of it in B. M. with a gentle heat: Then digest it for fifteen days
more in the same B. with a very gentle heat; then pour this Liquor into a
Retort, which put in Sand, and fit a Recipient to it; then distill by graduated
fire, giving strong fire at last of the fourth degree; you shall have a Liquor
like an Oil.

This Liquor is much esteemed to Cure the Cancer, Wolf, Fistulaes, and all
sorts of old, inveterate, Malign, and gnawing Ulcers, being applied outwardly.

Monsieur C. his Lunary Emetick and Febrifuge, etc.
DIssolve in A. F. then Precipitate it with Spirit of Salt, then dry the Calx.

Take of this Calx, and of antimony, ana, distill it as a Butter of antimony,
you shall have a Butter white and transparent, which will dissolve. If you will
make an Emetick of this Butter, Precipitate one part of it with fair water,
then edulcorate with Blood-warm water, and you will have an Emetick Remedy,
which will Purge.

It Cures all sorts of Agues and Fevers, and (...) a Catholicum for ill
Humors. The Dose is from one grain to three, in some fit thing in the Morning
fasting. It must be given with great Caution.

To make a most Excellent Sudorifick of the aforesaid Butter, that will Cure
the Leprosy, and the Venereal Disease, proceed thus:
TAke the other part of this Butter, and put it into a Retort, and pour upon it
Spirit of Nitre; distill and cohobate three or four times; then edulcorate it
with fair water, and dry it; then burn Spirit of Wine upon it, and you shall
have a Sudorifick, which will do admirable effects, taking from eight grains to
sixteen, in the Morning in Bed; drink some fit decoction after it: And after
the Sweating, the Patient must be rubbed with warm Clothes all over his whole
Body, observing a reasonable Diet, and using some fit Purge before.

An Oil of, wherewith Monsieur Belieur, a Famous Surgeon at Paris, Cured
Cancers, all old Ulcers, Cankers, and Venereal Sores, etc.
TAke Spirit of Salt two parts, Spirit of Nitre one part; in this dissolve as
much as it will dissolve: Distill off very gently the Liquor in B. M. until the
remain in a Crystalline Gum or Salt; then let it resolve to Liquor in the Air
by it self: Then distill again, and resolve. Repeat this till it congeal no
more in the Cucurbite, but remain a deep-red Liquor, like an Oil. The manner of
using this Oil is thus: Dip a Straw or a Feather in it, and touch all round
about the borders of the Sore with it.

With this he Cured a very Malignant Ulcer in a Leg (that had been there above
three Years) in the space of ten days; and also a Cancer in a Woman's Cheek in
fifteen days space, that other Surgeons (without hope of Cure) had given
over. With this he also Cured a Woman (that had seventeen Cankers in her
private parts, that had been so some Years, and without hope of Cure) in
fifteen days.

Doctor Havervelt his Remedy, wherewith he Cured the Evil or Scrofulaes,
Cancers, and Old Ulcers.
TAke Dantzick Vitriol, Calcine it till it be yellow, then grind it with Salt
or Saltpeter, the ordinary proportion: With this Sublime, which Sublime once
again by it self; then take only the Crystalline part of it, whereof take j.
grind it to a subtle Powder in a Glass Mortar, with a Glass Pestle; put this
Powder into a large Glass-bottle, and pour upon it a quart of Fountain Water,
stop the Bottle close, and let it stand thus for some days, shaking it often:
Then being well settled and stood without shaking at least twenty four hours,
pour off the clear, and filter it. Then take one spoonful of this Liquor, which
put into a Vial, and pour into it two spoonfuls of fair Fountain Water: Shake
the Vial well, then pour it out into a Glass, and let the Patient drink it in
the Morning fasting; let him keep himself very warm, and stir and walk as much
as he can; but let him neither eat nor drink till two hours after the Medicine
has Operated. It will Operate by Stools, and by a gentle Vomit. The next
Morning, if the Patient find himself strong enough, let him take the said
Medicine again, if not, he may rest a day or two between.

With this Remedy the Author abovementioned Cured all sorts of Scrofula's,
whether open or shut; the Cancer or Wolf, whether in the Breast, or any other
part of the Body; as also all sorts of Pustula's and Old Ulcers and Wounds.

The said Doctor Communicated this Remedy to Sir K. D.

Another for the same.
SIR Kenelm relates, that Dr. Farrar assured him, he had perfectly Cured a most
contumacious, foul, inveterate Evil (several times touched by the King, and
wrought upon by the best Surgeons, and given over as desperate) by the
following means:

Take Garden-Snails, that have white or gray Houses upon them, beat them in a
Mortar with a little Parsley, into the consistence of a Plaster, which apply
to the Sore or Sores, and change it every twenty four hours.

This is also good to take away the raging pain of the Gout.

A most Excellent Physical Salt, as it was prepared in Sir Kenelm's Laboratory.
TAke Nitre, Sulphur, ana lbj. Camphire ij. mingle them well together, and cast
them by little and little into an earthen Cucurbite rod-hote, which shut close
immediately with a just stopper of Brick that closes it firmly; the Cucurbite
must have two arms, unto which are fastened two Ballons of Glass (as you see by
the Figure in the next page) each Ballon containing about two quarts of Spirit
of Urine (to the quantity of Ingredients here named) which attracts unto it the
Spirits, which will ascend and pass by the two Arms on each side: When all is
cold, take out the fixed Matter that remains in the Cucurbite, and grind it
small, and dissolve it in simple Spirit of Urine, and being filtred and
congealed, dissolve it in the Acid Spirit of Urine that was in the Ballons, and
has the Spirit of Sulphur, Nitre, and Camphire in it: Distill and cohobate
this (in a Glass Cucurbite) till the Salt have retained in it all the Spirits
that were in the Urine. This Salt will be very grateful, and not taste or smell
at all of the Camphire, nor is Saturnine, or Anti-venereal in its effect. It is
very efficacious in all Fevers, either simple or Malignant any ways, or
Spotted: In the Smallpox or Measles, in all the Progress of them, from before
their coming out, till the end; and preserves the Heart from hot and putrid
Vapors and Fumes, and purifieth the Blood.

The best way to make the Spirit of Urine is thus:
LET the Urine stand eight or ten days, in which time it will putrify and
ferment; then distill very gently, and that which comes first is the Spirit.
When it begins to come weak and insipid (which you will know by tasting a
drop) then cease, for all that is good is come over. Thus you shall have near
half your quantity of Urine in good Spirit.

Sir Kenelm Digby's Excellent Remedy for Tetters, Herps, and Ring-worms, Scabby
Itches, etc. as it was prepared by his Directions for his own use for a Tetter.
DIssolve ij. of running in iv. of the best A. F. pour upon the Solution a
quart of fair water, in which is dissolved two handfuls of Salt, and then
filtred; this will Precipitate the to the bottom in a white Calx. When it is
well settled, pour off the clear water, which keep for Use. Pour the remaining
milky thick substance upon lbj. of Hog's Grease melted in an earthen Pot; the
grease must be very hot when you pour in the dissolved; but take the Pot from
the fire when you pour the to it, and stir it well all the while you are
pouring it in; and when it is all in, set the Pot upon the fire again to boil
the grease, till all the moisture of the Mercurial Substance and Solution is
evaporated away, but be sure you stir it all the while, as also after you take
it from the fire (which you must do as soon as the moisture is gone) till the
grease is cold and hardened.

The way of using this Ointment and Water, to Cure all sorts of Tetters, Herps,
or any Scabby Itches, or Inflamed red Faces or Noses, is thus:

First, if the Evil be very great, Purge and let Blood strongly; then begin
with the Water, rub the Tetters, and all about it with Linen dipped in the
Water made as hot as you can endure it; and when you have rubbed and bathed it
well, lay upon it Compresses wetted in the water. Do thus twice a day for two
or three days, or more, till you see it has drawn out the Salt Humor
abundantly, and that the part is much inflamed, and very sore, and has little
holes or Ulcers eaten in it. Presently after the first washing it will grow
very sore and Inflamed; therefore you must not afterward rub it so hard as at
first, but very gently. Some Sores will require that you use the Water five or
six days, others more, tender ones two or three days. When you judge that the
Water has drawn out sufficiently the violent Matter, then anoint with the
grease as hot as you can endure it, and lay on it a Plaster of the same
Ointment, binding it on. This Ointment will presently assuage the pain, and
take away the Inflammation. Dress it with it twice or thrice a day. Much Matter
will run from the Sore, as from an Ulcer; and by little and little it will heal
up. And that which is wonderful is, that whereas one would think that such deep
holes as the Water will have eaten, should have scars, there will not appear
the least mark of them, but a fine new tender Natural skin will come over it
all.

A great Medicine, wherewith Wonderful Cures have been performed to my
knowledge.
TAke Bezoar Mineral well prepared, and Antimony Diaphoretick also well
prepared, ana j. grind them together to a subtle Powder, and put them into a
small Retort, and pour upon them iv. of good Spirit of Nitre; distill in Sand
with a moderate fire to dryness, then cohobate and distill twice, which are
three distillations in all with the Spirit of Nitre upon the Matter. Then pour
fresh Spirit of Nitre upon it, and distill and cohobate as before. Repeat this
a third time with fresh Spirit of Nitre, the same quantity as before, which are
nine distillations (in all) with xij. of Spirit of Nitre: Then break the
Retort, and take out the Matter, which grind to Powder, and edulcorate it well
with warm Carduus-water; then dry it gently, and put it into a Poringer, and
burn rectified S. V. upon it, stirring it all the while the S. V. burns, with
a Silver spoon, until the S. V. be burned all away, and the Powder remain dry.
Then pour fresh S. V. upon it, and fire it as before: Repeat this a third time,
then grind the Powder, and keep it in a Vial close stopped.

This Powder Cures the Venereal Disease the most inveterate, with all its
Symptoms and attendencies without exception, and restores lost strength and
vigor, as Experience testifies. It Cures all Rheumatisms, the Leprosy, all
interior and exterior Ulcers; it purifieth the whole Mass of Blood, and
wonderfully fortifieth Nature, etc.

The way of using this Powder to Cure the abovementioned Diseases is thus:

First, Purge with some fit gentle Purgative Potion; then, if the Disease
requires, you may let Blood the next day, then two days after that repeat the
Purge, and two days after you may begin with the Powder; taking gr. viij. of it
for five Mornings together, the Powder being mixed with a little Conserve of
Roses, let the Patient take it upon the point of a Knife in the Morning in his
Bed, and drink after it immediately a Glass-full of the following Decoction as
hot as he can drink it; let him keep his Bed, and he will be in a gentle
breathing Sweat for an hour; which being past, let him be rubbed with warm
Clothes, his Legs, Thighs, Arms, Shoulders, and the Back; then let him keep his
Bed for an hour longer, to see if he will sweat any more: The sweat being quite
over, he may rise, and go about his business, as at other times. After those
five days the Dose of the Powder must be increased, taking twelve grains of it
for other five Mornings; and then you must come again to eight grains for five
Mornings more. When you begin with the twelve grains after the first five
Doses, you must drink a little more of the Sudorisick Decoction than before,
and taking the Powder then in a little Confection of Alkermes. You may also
increase the Dose of the Powder by degrees (as Sir K. D. observes) taking (for
example) gr. x. the sixth day, and gr. xij. the other three days following;
then gr. x. the tenth day, and so come again to gr. viij. the eleventh day. One
may take gr. xx. of it at one time without inconveniency. The first Purge the
Author gives, is a Decoction of Succory and Tamarinds, with infusion of two
Drams of Sena, and being strained, dissolveth in it j. of Syrup of
Peach-flowers. The Second is the same, adding only of Confection of Hamech, or
of Confection of Citron; or you may increase a little the Dose of Sena, and of
the Syrup, if one is not willing to take any thing where there is Scammony in.
The Sudorifick Decoction the Author makes use of with this Powder, is thus:

Take Sarsaparilla ij. China-root j. Sassafras ss. Santal Citrine ij. and a
little Licorise if you will, and a little Cinnamon for to aromatise it; let all
be infused with three quarts of water for twelve hours in warm Sand; then let
it boil gently until a third part is consumed, then strain it.

Note, That if you put a little Salt of Tartar into the water when you put the
Ingredients in, it will extract the Virtue and Tincture out of them much the
better; as also in making any Purgative Decoction, if you infuse them
overnight with a little Salt of Tartar put in the water, and then boiling it
only two or three walms the next Morning, it will be much more effectual.

Lapis ignis, for the renovation of Mankind, by the three Principles of Nature,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.
TAke antimony Mineral, pulverize it, and Calcine it in a close Reverberatory,
with sufficient, but moderate heat, so that it melt not, in twenty four hours
it will be Calcined, and will be a gray Powder. Take of this antimony Calcined,
and of raw antimony Mineral, ana lbj. melt them together in a Crucible; when
they are well melted and incorporated, pour it out into a Copper or Brass
Kettle, and it will be Glass of antimony, which needs not to be clear. If you
did not add the antimony Mineral, the Calcined antimony would not melt.
Pulverize this Glass, and grind it upon a Marble stone till it be an impalpable
Powder, which put into a Vial, and pour upon it distilled Vinegar alcalised
with its fixed Salt, digest in Sand; when you see the distilled Vinegar colored
of a Golden color, decant the clear, and put fresh distilled Vinegar upon the
Glass, and digest as before. Repeat this till you have extracted all the
Tincture out of the Glass: Then filter the Tincted distilled Vinegar, and put
it into a Recort; distill with a gentle fire in Sand until you see there remain
a Liquor like a deep-red Oil in the bottom of the Retort, and that you see some
drops appear in the neck of the Retort, which is a sign that all the distilled
Vinegar is come over. Pour upon this Oil Tartarised S. V. digest and circulate
for three or four days, or more: Then draw off the S. V. gently in B. and as
soon as you see any red drops appear, change the Recipient, putting on another;
then distill over all the remaining red Oil to dryness. This Oil will be very
red, and very precious, and is the true Oil and Sulphur of Antimony, which is a
wonderful Medicine against the Plague, and all Diseases.

To make the Salt of Antimony.
CAlcine antimony in a Glass Oven, or in a Reverberatory, until it be perfectly
white, without any addition; then sprinkle it with Dew, and dry it in the Sun;
sprinkle and dry it seven or eight times, then grind it to Powder: Take of this
Powder three parts, and one of Powder of Charcoal; mix them together, and put
them into a Crucible, which set in a Wind-furnace, and give fire by degrees, at
last strong sire to make all melt well; then take out the Crucible, and knock
it against the ground to make the Regulus fall to the bottom; break the
Crucible being cold, and separate the Salt, which you will find between the
Regulus and the Scories. So soon as you perceive that the Matter is melted, you
must be quick in making the Regulus, and take the Crucible out as soon as you
can, for fear the Salt should evaporate in the fire.

To make the of antimony for this Work.
CAlcine antimony in a close Reverberatory until it be gray, then Sublime it in
an Earthen Vessel; grind again what is Sublimed, and Sublime it as before.
Repeat this Operation three times, or until you see the antimony Sublimed hard
and ponderous, wherein is enclosed all the of antimony.

Composition of the said Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.
TAke of the said Salt j. dissolve it in as much of the Oil as will dissolve
it, and as much as the said Salt will imbibe, so that it be like an Ointment or
Paste; digest in fimo equino for ten days: Then take it out, and add jss. of
the said of antimony; and being well mixed and incorporated together, put it to
digest as before, until it be converted into a red Powder. The way of taking
this red Powder is thus:

Take gr. iv. of this Powder in a little Canary Sack in the Morning fasting in
your Bed, it will cause a gentle breathing sweat for three days together,
during which time you must keep your Bed; your Chamber must be very warm and
close, you may eat and drink moderately of good wholesome Food. The three days
being past, you may rise, and walk about your Chamber, taking good nourishing
Food, abstaining from all Labors in Body and Mind; and thus you will renew
Hair and Skin, and will be strong and vigorous.

It will not be needful to use this Remedy but once in forty Years; but you
may use of the said Oil, taking three drops of it in a little Sack in the
Morning fasting, for the Preservation of your Health. This Oil may be given in
all Distempers with great success.

This is from Abbot Boucaud.

The Marchioness de Beck, her Aurum potabile, which she much esteems.
TAke Calx of, and Regulus of antimony, ana j. Jupiter ij. melt them together,
then grind them to a subtle Powder with iv. of Sugar Candy, Oriental Bezoar,
and Sal armoniack, ana j. Mix all well together, and put them into a large
Retort, and distill in Sand with a graduate fire for six hours; let the bottom
of the Retort be red-hot at last for half an hour. You shall have an Aureal
Liquor, whereof two or three drops taken in a little Canary, or other
convenient Liquor, is a great Cordial and Restorative.

Hartman.) The said Marchioness told me at Paris (where she showed me this
Aurum potabile, and gave me the Receipt of it) that when at any time she found
her self indisposed, she presently took two or three drops of it, and
immediately she felt her self strengthened and cheerful, etc.

The Baron de Roche showed me also the Receipt of it at Paris, who also made
great esteem of it, telling me, that he esteemed it to be one of the best Aurum
potabile's that could be made, and that it was a Sovereign Cordial and
Restorative.

You may reduce two third parts of the out of the Caput Mortuum, its Tincture
only, and the subtilest part of it comes over by the distillation.

Cornachinus his Medicinal Powder, as it was Prepared by Sir K. Digby's Order
in his Laboratory.
TAke Regulus of antimony, and of pure Saltpeter, ana iv. mingle them well
together in subtle Powder, and cast them into a red-hot Crucible, and make them
burn by casting in a fiery Coal, which repeat as often as it consumes; for
without that the Saltpeter will not burn, there being no more Sulphur in the
antimony to set it on fire. Keep it thus in fusion in a reverberating heat for
at least an hour, stirring the Matter often with an Iron Rod; then let it cool.
This must not be edulcorated as common antimony Diaphoretick, but the fixed
Salt of Saltpeter must remain with it, and must by no means be separated from
the antimony, for in that Sir K. says, consists the Virtue against Fevers. Of
this we gave with the Scammony and Cream of Tartar, ana gr. x. diminishing and
increasing the Dose according to Age and strength.

Hartman.) Sir K. recommended this to me as a very good Purge, telling me, that
I might make use of it whenever I had occasion.

The best way to make the Regulus of antimony, is, to put first into the
Crucible the Saltpeter and Tartar, and when they are well melted, put in the
antimony, and proceed in the rest in the usual manner: Thus you shall shall
have six or seven pound, or more, of every pound of Antimony. Likewise to make
a Martial Regulus, put the antimony first into the Crucible; and when it is in
perfect fusion, then put in the Mars.

A Laxative and Emetick Cream of Tartar.
TAke Glass of antimony, and Cream of Tartar, ana jss. grind them to a subtle
Powder, then mix them together; put this into a Mattress, and pour upon it ij.
of Rosemary-water; digest it for some days, shaking it sometimes; then filter
it, and evaporate to dryness, and you shall have a Salt, which grind to Powder,
and keep it in a Glass close stopped. It is a safe and gentle Vomit, and
Operates also by Stools. The Dose is from gr. j. to v. or vj. in a little Sack.

Another most Excellent Laxative and Emetick Cream of Tartar.
TAke iv. of Cream of Tartar, grind it to a subtle Powder, which put into a
Mattress, and pour upon it so much Spirit of Sal ammoniac as may cover it the
breadth of two fingers; stop it close, and set it in a Cellar for twenty four
hours, then pour it into an Earthen Pot glazed, and put into it j. of Glass of
antimony in subtle Powder; set this Pot in a Furnace in Sand (or upon a gentle
Coal-fire) and pour into it a sufficient quantity of fair water; let it cool
six or eight hours, still pouring in more water as it consumes: At last,
evaporate until it come to have a thin light skin on the top; then set it in a
Cellar, and it will shoot into Crystals, which take out, and keep them for Use.

This is a most Excellent Medicine, and one of the best Emeticks that can be
prepared. The Dose is from gr. j. to vj. for Children; and for Aged Persons,
from gr. x. to xv. in a little Sack.

The best and easiest way to make a most subtle and penetrant Spirit of Sal
ammoniac, (as it was made in Sir Kenelm's Laboratory, and as I make it now) is
thus:

Take Quicklime grossly beaten, put a bed of it about two fingers thick into
the bottom of a Cucurbite; then dissolve lbj. of Sal ammoniac in as much water
as will dissolve it: Pour of this dissolution upon the Quicklime (having first
placed the Cucurbite in the Furnace in Sand) so much as may dissolve it well,
and swim half a fingers breadth over it. Then be as quick as you can in fitting
on the Head and Recipient (for it will immediately begin to distill without
fire) lute all the junctures well, and distill with a gentle fire, keeping the
subtle Spirit by it self, which comes first. If any phlegm should come over
with the second Spirit, rectify it in Balneo.

This Spirit is not only good for benumbed heads to smell to, but also to take
inwardly, for it is a most Excellent Remedy: It opens all Obstructions, it is
Sudorifick and Diuretic. It Is very good in Fevers, especially the Putrid, in
Palsies, Epilepsies, Hysterical Fits, and the Plague, resisting all Corruption,
in Lethargy, and stupification of the Spirits. The Dose is from eight to thirty
drops. It also asswages the pain of the Gout, being mixed with S. V. or Brandy,
and Linen Clothes dipped in it, and laid upon the parts afflicted.

Hartman.) In distilling of this Spirit this way, I have observed several
inconveniences; the first is, that if you use a Glass Cucurbite, it will be apt
to crack by the sudden heat of the Quicklime, caused by pouring on the
dissolution of the {sal ammoniac} (and an earthen Cucurbite will imbibe it.)
Secondly, by the same Reason you lose a great part of the subtilest Spirit,
which will ascend before you have poured in the quantity of the dissolution
abovementioned, and before you can fit on the Head and Recipient. To prevent
all these inconveniences, I make use of a Tin Cucurbite, with a Spout in the
upper part (See it in the third Figure) and having placed it in the Furnace in
Sand, I put in the Quicklime, and then I fit a Glass Head and Recipient, and
having well luted all the junctures with wet Bladders, or Paste and Paper, I
pour in the dissolution of {sal ammoniac} by a funnel through the Spout; then I
close the Spout, and distill; with a gentle fire. When the distillation is
over, take out the Caput Mortuum, and make the Cucurbite clean, and wipe it
dry, that it may not rust or canker, and it will serve for many other
Operations, and will save you the buying of many Glass Cucurbites, which by
reason of their thick and knobbed bottoms are so apt to break.

The Volatile Salt of Tartar, as I have often made it, which is an Excellent
Remedy.
TAke Lees of Wine, (which you may have from the Wine-Coopers when they have
pressed them out for making of Vinegar) break them in small pieces, and let
them dry; then being very hard and dry, bruise them grossly, and fill an Earthen
Retort with it, or a Glass one coated; distill in naked fire, fitting any
Recipient to it to receive only a sour phlegm, which will come over first; as
soon as you see any white fumes come over, (among which comes the Volatile
Salt) change the Recipient, putting on another pretty large; lute the junctures
well with Paste and Paper, then increase the fire by degrees, until you see the
Recipient filled with white fumes; continue the fire in that degree, until
those white Vapors diminish, and that the Recipient begins to grow cold:
Then augment the fire to the highest degree, to force all over at last; when
nothing more comes over, cease. The distillation will be performed in three or
four hours; you will have a whitish Liquor, which contained in it the Volatile
Salt, and part thereof will stick to the sides of the Recipient, and a reddish
foetide Oil will swim upon the Liquor. Pour out all the Liquor that is in the
Recipient, then pour a little warm water in the Recipient, and shake it to get
out all the Volatile Salt: Separate the Oil from the Liquor by a Glass funnel;
then filter the Liquor, to free it from all Oyliness: Put this Liquor into a
Mattress with a long Neck, to which fit a Head and a small Recipient; distill in
Sand with a very gentle heat, and the Volatile Salt will ascend into the Head as
white as snow; when you see that a pretty quantity is Sublimed, take off the
Head, and stop the mouth of the Mattress, if you have not another Head to put
on; be as quick as you can to gather the Volatile Salt that is in the head, and
put it into a Vial, which stop very close with a Glass stopper, for it is very
apt to resolve into Liquor when it takes Air: Then put the Head on again, and
continue the Sublimation until there Sublime no more Salt; gather this last
Salt, and put it to the rest: Then put on the Head again, and augment the fire
a little, and you shall have a fiery Liquor, which is the Volatile Spirit of
Tartar, and is also the Volatile Salt, mixed with some phlegm, which makes it
come over in a liquid form.

This Salt is much esteemed and recommended to purify the Blood by Sweat and
by Urine. It is the best of all common Remedies against Hysterical Fits and
Vapors, smelling to it, and taking it inwardly. It is Excellent against the
Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, etc. against Quartan and Tertian Agues. It opens
all Obstructions, and provokes the Terms. The Volatile Spirit has the same
Virtue as the Salt; it is good for all Obstructions, particularly of the
Spleen, and keeps the Body open; it is far beyond the common Spirit of Tartar
in Virtue. The Dose is from eight to twenty or thirty drops in some fit Vehicle.

A Physical Salt.
TAke Nitre and Oil of Sulphur, ana lbj. phlegm of Vitriol lbss. pulverize the
Nitre and put it into a Retort, and pour upon it the Oil of Sulphur and phlegm
of Vitriol; distill in Sand, and you shall have a very good Spirit of Nitre,
and a pure white Salt will remain in the bottom of the Retort. This Salt is
much esteemed in Fevers, and to quench thirst, being taken in Juleps, Ptrisans,
or Possets. The Dose is thirty or forty grains.

A Precious Tincture of the Flowers of Antimony.
TAke the dark-red Flowers of antimony, digest and circulate them with
rectified Spirit of Vitriol; when they are sufficiently united, abstract the
Spirit of Vitriol toan Oil, upon which pour S. V. digest and extract a Tincture
s. a. which abstract again to the consistence of an Oil. This Tincture
fortifieth and cherishes the Heart and Vital Spirits, strengthens the
Stomach, is good against Agues and Fevers, Hysterical Fits, Hypochondriac
Melancholy: It Cures the Iaundies, opens Obstructions, provokes the Terms. It
is good against the Gout, Scurvy, and Dropsy, Itch and Scabs: It purifieth the
Blood, and strengthens Nature. Dose from gr. j. to iij. or iv. given in a fit
Vehicle.

An Excellent and true Tincture of Coral.
TAke good red Coral iv. grind it to subtle Powder, which mingle with iv. of
Sal ammoniac that has been three times Sublimed from decrepitated Salt. Put
this mixture into a small Cucurbite, which set in a Sand Furnace; fit a Head
and Recipient to it, and having well luted the junctures, give a gentle fire at
first, which augment by degrees. There will come over first, a small quantity
of a Urinous Volatile Spirit; after that, you shall see the Flowers ascend and
stick to the Head, and upper part of the Cucurbite. These Flowers will be
tinged with diverse colors, as red, green, blew, very pleasant to behold, they
contain in them the true Tincture of Coral; for the body of the Coral which
remains in the bottom, will be as white as snow; continue a moderate fire
until no more Flowers ascend: The Operation will be performed in a few hours.
Then gather diligently all these Flowers, and put them in a Mattress, and pour
upon them rectified S. V. to the height of four fingers; digest some days in
B. the S. V. will extract a pure red Tincture out of the Flowers, which will
remain white in the bottom; filter this Tincture, and abstract from it three
fourth parts of the S. V. and a deepred Tincture will remain in the bottom,
which is the true Tincture of Coral.

This Tincture is a Sovereign Remedy to strengthen the Stomach and Bowels. It
purifieth the Blood by Sweat and Urine. It opens Obstructions, is Excellent in
all sorts of Fluxes, etc. Dose from six to twenty four drops, in some
convenient Vehicle.

The way to Sublime the Flowers of Sal ammoniac for this work, is thus:

Take common Salt decrepitated and Sal ammoniac, ana lbj. pulverize and mingle
them together, and put them in a Cucurbite, and Sublime in Sand with a gentle
fire at first, which augment by degrees; the Flowers will ascend into the Head
like Meal: Continue the fire for five or six hours; then let all cool, and
gather the Flowers, which mix with new Salt, and Sublime as before: Repeat this
three times.

An Excellent Extract of Mars, for Diarrhaea's and Fluxes.
TAke filings of Steel (which you may buy at the Needle-makers) iv. put them in
well-glazed Pipkin, and pour thereon a quart of good deep-red Wine, (that which
is used to color White Wind) let it boil until about three parts of the Wine
be consumed, stirring often with an Iron Spatula. Then strain it whilst it is
hot.

It is a great and certain Remedy for Dysenteries, Diarrhae'as, old Hepatical
Fluxes, and such like Diseases; you may give an Ounce of it in Broth fasting,
for some Mornings together. This I have sufficiently experienced with happy
success.

Sir Kenelm Digby's Remedy for the same, as it was prepared by his Order, and
much used.
TAke Rye-flower, and make a Paste thereof with Juice of Elder-berries; then
bake hard Biskets thereof, which pulverize, and make a Paste again with the
Juice of Elder-berries as before: Repeat this three times. Then reduce it to
Powder. The Dose is one Dram.

Sir Kenelm Digby, his Excellent Plaster of Lead.
TAke of the best Oil Olive lbij. iv. white-lead, red Minium, ana lbj. grind
them to Powder, and put them with the Oil into a large glazed Pot or Pipkin,
with xij. of Venice Soap shred small, which put upon a gentle Coal-fire, and
stir it well with an Iron Spatula for an hour; then increase the fire a little,
which continue until the Liquor be of the color of an Oil: Then drop some of
it upon a board, and if it sticks, or that it cleave to your fingers, it is a
sign that it is boiled enough; then roll it up, and keep it for Use.

This Plaster being applied to the Stomach, is good for the weakness and
indigestion thereof, and causes a good Appetite.

Being applied to the Belly, it Cures the Colic; and being applied to the
Back, it strengthens the Reins, Cures the Bloody Flux, the Gonorrhaea, and
tempers the excessive heat of the Liver.

It Cures all Contusions and Bruises, Swellings and Inflammations. It
maturates and draws all sorts of Apostumes, Wolfs, and Pustles, and Cures them,
without Lancing or Incision. Being applied to the Head, it strengthens the
Eyesight: To the Fundament, it Cures all accidents that may happen there, as
Piles, etc. And being applied to the Belly of a Woman, it provokes the Terms,
and disposes her for Conception.

Dr. Stephen's Plaster for the Gout.
TAke Virgins-wax lbij. Hog's Grease ss. Mutton-Suet ij. Oil of Coltsfoot,
Plantain and Rose Water, ana ij. Lavender-water ij. Dragon-water, and Water of
Borage, ana ss. two Nutmegs, two Cloves, and a little Mace, beat into Powder;
mix them all well together, and let it boil with a moderate fire unto the
consistence of an Ointment; wherewith anoint the part grieved as hot as you can
endure it, and dip Linen Clothes in it, and apply them.

A very good Ointment for the Gout; and the running Gout, Aches, Numbness, and
pain in the Joints, etc.
TAke the tender Branches of Dwarf-Elder, in the Month of March, when they
sprout out of the ground from the root, and are not above a finger long, three
handfuls; stamp them in a stone Mortar, then mix them with lbj. of Hog's Grease;
put this into a Pipkin, and let it stew upon a gentle fire for two or three
hours.

This was Communicated unto me by a worthy Gentleman, whom uch esteemed it,
because he found great benefit by it in the Gout: It takes away the raging
pain thereof, gives ease, and strengthens the parts afflicted.

In the running Gout, Numbness, and raging pain in the Joints, I have had much
Experience of the Virtue of this Ointment, after many Remedies used in vain;
the parts grieved must be anointed with it as hot as can be endured, and chafed
in before a fire.

A Certain and Infallible Remedy to prevent and Cure the Fits of the Gout.
I Knew a Gentleman in Germany, who always Cured and prevented his Fits of the
Gout (whenever he perceived the least symptom of its approaching) by the
following Remedy:

He caused a good quantity of the Herb Mullein (Verbascum in Latin) to be
gathered every Summer when it was in its Flower, which is in June, it bears
many yellow Flowers upon a long straight stalk with large leaves at the bottom,
which are hoary. Then he took a good quantity of this Herb, and cut it small,
the Stalk, Flowers, and Leaves, and caused it to be boiled in a pail-full of
Forge-water out of a Smith's trough, wherein he quenches and cools his Irons;
when this was boiled sufficiently, then there was put into it a large piece of
Chalk in Powder. In this Water he bathed his Feet, Legs, and Knees, as hot as
he could endure it, in a Tub, continuing until the Water grew cold. Then a hole
was dug in the ground in his Garden, wherein this Water was put with the
Ingredients, and then covered with Earth.

This always prevented his Fit, so that he never had any pain, lameness, or
swelling at all, to which I was an Eyewitness. And I heard him say, that if he
did not use this Remedy, he would have very shrewd and racking Fits, and keep
his Bed by it for a Month or six weeks, and that twice a Year, chiefly in the
Spring, and at the Falling of the Leaf.

Mr. Locher, an Apothecary of London, his Excellent Oil for Deafness, which he
gave to Sir K. D.
TAke Oil of bitter Almonds, Oil of Spikenard, ana vj. Juice of Onions, Juice
of Rue, ana ij. black Hellebore ss. Colloquintida ss. Oil of Exetor ij. Boil
this till the Juice be consumed; then strain it, and add two drops of Oil of
Anni^^^d, Oil of Origanum one drop. Pour a drop or two of this Oil into the
Ear, and lie upon your Bed with that Ear upwards that you intend to drop into,
lie still for a quarter of an hour after; then drop into the other, if it
require. It is to be continued a Month, or two or three, as you find benefit.
When you have dropped into the Ear, you must stop it with a little black-wool,
dipped in the Oil. Many Persons have found much benefit by the use of this Oil,
to my knowledge.

Another Experimented Remedy for the same.
TAke a good large Eel, flea it, and cut it into round pieces of the length of
a finger, stick them full with Rosemary and Sage; then take an Earthen Pan, put
two or three sticks of Wood in Cross-wise, lay your pieces of Eel upon them, so
that they may not touch the bottom of the Pan; bake it in an Oven as you do
Meat: Then take the Fat of the Eel that is in the Pan, and strain it through a
fine Linen Cloth, measure how much there is of it, and put to it as much S. V.
Then take Juice of Onions, and Juice of the white ends of Leeks, ana j. of your
first mixture ij. put them together into a Vial, stop it close, and shake it
well for an hour. It is in all things to be used as the former, except that
instead of one or two drops, you must drop in three or four.

Hartman.) This was Communicated to me by a Gentleman at Paris, who had done
Wonderful Cures with it, and among the rest, he had Cured the Governor of
Calais his Secretary with it, who had been deaf twenty Years^ his deafness
being caused by a Sickness.

A most Precious Balsam of great Virtue.
TAke Turpentine lbij. Lignum Aloes ss. Mastick, Cloves, Galingal, Cinnamon,
Zedoar, Nutmegs, Cubebs, Olibanum, ana j. Roots of Master-wort, of Angelica,
ana ss. Figs cut small six in number, Gum Tragacanth ij. Bruise all the
Ingredients, and mix them well together, then put them into a Glass Retort, and
having warmed the Turpentine to make it run, pour it upon the Ingredients, and
distill in Sand: Separate the Balsam from a little phlegm that will come over
with it.

1. This Balsam is a very great preserver of the Health of Mankind, taking
every Morning three or four drops of it in a little Beer or Wine; it
strengthens the Stomach, and causes a good Digestion, and a good Appetite.

2. It strengthens the Brain and Memory.

3. It is good against Deafness, pouring two or three drops every day into the
Ear, and stopping the Ear with a little black-wool, moistened with a little of
this Balsam.

4. It helps Rheumatick Eyes, takes away the heat and pain thereof, and
strengthens the Sight, anointing the Eyelids therewith.

5. It Cures all sorts of Scabs, Itches, and Scall'd Heads, be they never so
bad.

6. It Cures Fistulaes, the Cancer, Wolf, and all other gnawing Diseases; and
Cures all sorts of Wounds, whether old or new.

7. It Cures the Gonorrhaea, the Whites in Women, and strengthens the Reins.

8. It is good against the Biting of a Mad Dog, Vipers, and other Venomous
Beasts, being both inwardly and outwardly applied; and is a great Preservative
against the Plague.

9. It is very good against the Cramp, Numbness, aching, and pain in the Joints,
contraction and weakness of the Nerves coming from a cold Cause, as Experience
testifies.

10. It sweetens an unsavory or stinking Breath, and suffers no Worms to breed
in the Stomach and Bowels.

11. It is said, that if a dead Corpse be Embalmed with it, it will never rot
nor consume, nor any Linen about it that is imbibed with this Balsam: And that
for a trial, one should take a piece of Flesh, and warm it well against the
fire, then rub it over with this Balsam, and let it be well imbibed with it,
rubbing it with it three or four times. Then lay it away, and it will remain
sound and fresh, so that it may be eaten a twelve Month after.

Laudanum Germanicum: Being a singular Preparation of Matthew's, or Dr.
Starky's Pills:
I Thought I could not better finish this Book, than with the Receipt of these
most Excellent Pills, with the true way of Preparing them, which far exceeds
the common: The Receipt is thus:

Take Opium lbj. dissolve it in distilled Vinegar, then filter and evaporate to
the consistence of a Mass for Pills: Then take black Hellebore lbj. reduce it
to a subtle Powder, which put into a Mattress, and pour upon it so much
distilled Vinegar as will cover it the breadth of four fingers; digest for two
days, then evaporate with a gentle heat to the consistence of Pills. Then take
of the Corrector lbj. Oil of Amber that has been rectified with fair water,
ij. Licorise dried and reduced to subtle Powder, lbj. Saffron dried and
pulverized, lbss. Put all into a large Mortar (well warmed by putting Coals
kindled into it) incorporate them well together by strongly beating and mixing
them, adding by little and little (as you incorporate them) of the Oil of
Turpentine that has stood upon the Corrector, and is of a red color, iij.
Tincture of Antimony iv. Oil of Anniseed, of Juniper Berries, of Sassafras, Oil
of Vitriol, Spirit of Hartshorn, ana ij. Gum Arabic dissolved in distilled
Vinegar, ss. and if you see that the Composition is too stiff, add a little
more of the said Oil of Turpentine, and of the Tincture of Antimony: Then put
it up in a Gally-pot, and tie it up close with a Bladder and Leather.

The Composition of these Pills is of a very sine consistence, and not so
crumbly as the common, but commodious to handle, and make up in Pills like unto
warm Wax. The Dose is two small Pills about the bigness of an ordinary Pease,
or one Pill about the bigness of a gray Pease swelled, taking them at Night.

These Pills are approved of, and are prescribed, and used by the best
Physicians, in Consumptions, and in other Cases.

I thought to have reserved the Preparation of them to my self, and not to have
Published it; but thinking that it is unchristian to keep any thing from the
Public good, my Conscience would not permit me.

The Preparation of the Corrector differs not from that of Starky's; but
because this Book may come to the Hands of some Persons which do not know it, I
thought good to insert it here.

Take pure Saltpeter, and White Wind, or Rhenish-wine Tartar, ana equal parts,
pulverize them, and searse them, and mix them well together: Then take a large
Crucible, and set it in your Furnace, and being red-hot, cast in some of your
mixture by little and little with an Iron Ladle, and when the fulmination is
over, cast in more, which continue till you have put in all your mixture; then
let it flow in the Crucible, giving strong heat.

Then pour it out, and when the Crucible is cold, scrape off all the Salt that
sticks to the sides of it. Dissolve this Salt in boyling-water. Make likewise
a Lixivium of Quicklime and Water, which being settled, pour it off: Take of
this Lixivium the same quantity with that of the Salt of Tartar; mix and filter
them, then evaporate to a Salt, which will be pure, clear and white like
Crystal; grind it to Powder, and put it into a strong large Vessel, and pour
upon it immediately so much Oil of Turpentine as may cover it the breadth of
four or five fingers; stir it well together, then cover it loosely, only to
keep things from falling in, and that the Air may come to it; let it stand
thus, stirring it three or four times a day with a wooden Spatula, and as you
see the Salt imbibeth the Oil, add still more Oil, until the Salt has taken in
and absorbed three times its weight of Oil, or that it will take in no more,
and is like a Soap, and the Oil that swimmeth upon it is of a red Color.

The Tincture of Antimony is made thus, according to Basil Valentine.
TAke equal parts of Salt of Tartar and antimony, melt them together in a
Crucible, keep them in fusion for half an hour, then pour it out, and whilst it
is hot reduce it to Powder, which put into a Mattress, and pour upon it of the
best rectified Spirit of Wine so much as may cover it the breadth of three
fingers, set the Mattress in warm Sand, that the S. V. may boil a little, and
you shall have a very red Tincture, which decant, and keep for Use.

This Tincture is recommended to open all Obstructions, of all the Principal
parts, as Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Womb, Reins, and Bladder; it provokes the
Terms, Cures the Yellow Jaundise, Green Sickness, Scurvy, Dropsy, Asthma,
Pleuri^ie, Melancholy, Ulcers inward and outward, Scabs, Itch, Pox, Smallpox
and Measles. Dose gr. iv. to xij.

Postscript.
The Preparation of Sir Ken^lm Digby's Sympathetical Powder, as we prepared it
every Year in his Laboratory, and as I prepare it now, is only thus:
TAke what quantity you please of good English Vitriol, dissolve it in warm
water, but use no more water than will dissolve it, leaving some of the
impurest part at the bottom undissolved: Then filter the dissolution, and
evaporate it until you see a thin skin upon it, then put it in a cool place,
and let it stand without stirring it for two or three days, covering it ^oosely
only, to keep things from fallingin. It will shoot into fair, green, and large
Crystals, which take out, and spread them abroad in a large flat earthen Dish,
and expose them to the heat of the Sun in the Dog days, turning them often, and
the Sun will Calcine them white; when you see them all white without, beat them
grossly, and expos^ them again to the Sun, securing them from Rain; when they
are well Calcined, powder them finely, and expose this Powder again to the Sun,
turning and stirring it often. Continue this until it be reduced to a white
Powder, which put up in a Glass, and tie it up close, and keep it in a dry
place.

As for the Virtues of this Powder, I will only say, that I have seen great
Experience of it in my time, in stanching of desperate bleeding at the Nose. 2.
In stanching the Blood of a Wound. 3. In Curing with it any green Wound (where
there is no fracture of Bones) without any Plaster or Ointment, in a few days.

A Girl about twelve Years of Age bleeding desperately at the Nose for two or
three days together, her Mother having used all the means she could devise (in
vain) came to me, telling me, that she had heard I had a Powder that would
stanch Bleeding, she desired me to let her have a little of it, for she feared
her Daughter would bleed to Death: I gave her some of the Powder, and bid her
put a little of it in three or four spoonfuls of fair water, and to bath her
Nostrils with it with a clean Linen rag, putting it up into the Nostrils,
which she did, and her bleeding stopped immediately; the next day she did bleed
a little again, and then using it again, it did stanch it, and she never bled
again afterward.

I spoke with a Famous Surgeon, named Mr. Smith, in the City of Augusta in
Germany, who told me, that he had a great respect for Sir K. D. Books, and that
he made his Sympathetical Powder every Year, and did all his Chiefest Cures
with it in green wounds, with much greater ease to the Patient than if he had
used Ointments or Plasters.

If the Reader desires to know more of the Effects of this Powder, and the
Reason of it, I refer him to the Reading of Sir K. Digby's Treatise of Curing
of Wounds by way of Sympathy, where he will find entire satisfaction and full
information of the Reasons of its effects.

FINIS.

