A DIALOGUE Betwixt H. enry B rome's. GHOST, AND His Dear Author R. oge L. e-
S. trange 20. May.1681.
GHOST. BE not afraid, its kindness brings me here,
And makes me leave a while the lower Sphere;
That I in time may warn thee of the wrong,
Done by thy Scribbling Pen and Lying Tongue.
Though I indeed can tell thee now no more,
Than thy own Conscience often has told before:
Yet that thou may not thy Wicked Course still tread,
I Am come to give Thee warning from the Dead.
I cannot by Words or Gain deceived be,
For now I can through all disguises see:
Repent for thou grow'st old, must yield to Fate,
I say repent, before it be too late;
For all those Lies I ushered to the World,
Deceived by thee, now, in m face are hurled,
That witty Mal^ce I did once admire,
H^d in thy Works like Sulphur now takes Fire,
And though to you on Earth I still proved kind,
It Is from your Pamphlets I my Torment find;
For with those Sheets I Printed, now well dried,
The wicked Devils singe and scorch my Hide:
If thus to me such Punishment's assigned,
What Torment will they for the Author find?
You see therefore to warn thee I Am kind.

L. e S. trange. In the Name of the Goblin of Hobgoblins, a Dissentor, what
make thee to come to trouble me? Though I am not much afraid of Devils,
believing none, yet thou have made me start: Beshrew thee, I was afraid thou
had been come to ask me money. Prithee go and be Damned if thou will; I do
not desire thy Company, since I can make no more use of thee.


GHOST. Ungrateful Wretch, am I a trouble now?
Who to my cost, so useful was to you?
I who alive, was your ill ridden Slave,
No sooner am I dropped into the Grave,
But all is forgot, and what to me seems worse,
My very kindness now you count a Curse:
Is it because to me so much you owe,
Or else, for that I now your inside know?
Provoke me not, lest to the World I tell
Those hidden times you know I can reveal.

L. S. Dear Friend Ghost don't think to affright me with that; You may know
too, if you please, how I have Wit enough to make the World believe any thing,
and that I have Impudence enough to outface all Accusations and Oaths, That I
have Courage enough to abuse every Body, and that I have Dissimulation enough
to appear what I am not, so that say what you will, no body shall believe you.


GHOST. And such a Fool was I, whilst I did live,
Deceived by you, I did the World deceive;
But though the World will not believe my Ghost,
And that on it my Words and Truth were lost;
Yet since this Voyage was in kindness meant,
Methinks that I should move you to Repent,
And touch your hardened Soul with some remorse,
And make you leave your Wicked, Lying Course.

L. S. Good Ghost leave Preaching, and don't trouble me with thy Impertinence,
we have had so many arise from the Dead of late, that they are grown familiar,
and almost contemptible: You had therefore as good hold your Tongue, for you will
be but laughed at: And as for my self, do you think I care for your Morallity or
Divinity either; I loved you very well, while alive, but 'twas for my own ends,
and I am not a little troubled at your Death, because I shall never meet with
such another, so very useful as thou have been, and I shall be at a great loss.
I know thou have suffered upon my Account, but have not I Eternised thy Name
with my own, and over-paid thee for all? and I was thinking to have wrote thy
Elegy; had not you come thus to interrupt me, and to accuse me for doing so
much Good to my Country, and satisfying my Conscience in showing my Loyalty to
my King, and my Zeal to the Church, against these Vermin and Pests of the
Nation, that write and speak against me and Popery.


GHOST. It is a sign you fear not God, nor Hell,
Since thou to me so, reat a Lie dare tell
To me, who now all your pretenses know,
All has to me discovered been below.
To brag of Loyalty, to me refram;
Your Loyalty I understand is Gain:
Your Love to King, your County and your Friends,
Is but to serve your base and wicked Ends:
It Is Malice and Revenge, which you call Zeal,
For Holy Church, and for the Common Weal:
I know full well what I t'rest you drive on,
And whom you would Advance unto the Throne.
Death has new Senses given, new Ears and Eyes,
I was before a Fool, but now grown Wise:
For every thing, I now have seen and heard,
And how your Zeal is fired with Reward.
And prithee since here is none but I and You,
Tell me, let Conscience tell me, is'nt this true?

L. S. What a Preaching Book seller are thou become? What have thou to do with
me and Conscience? do you think I am now to be Catechized by a paltry Ghost
about Conscience? come, come, I have studied the point, and question not, of
you will furnish me with Books, as thou were wont to do, but to argue my Case
with Advantage at Lucifers Bar, and baffle all his Orators. But, tell me, how
you came to be so Poetical? do they all speak in Rhyme in the neither World?


GHOST. Use you your Drolling Prose, this fits my Mind,
Thus Oracles of Old did speak, you find:
The Crimes of Men, Satyrs do still Rehearse,
In poynant Rhyme, and in two Edged Verse.
Grave as a Church man, I your faults would tell,
To keep your Soul from being Damned in Hell:
If you at last will sober grow and wise,
Leave your black Crimes, and follow my Advice.

L. S. I warn't you will advise me turn honest, undeceive the People, Recant, ask
Forgiveness of those I have Wrong'il, do as I would be done unto, and such like
Moral Stuff: turn Honest, that is Impossible, what a shame would that ^e after
so many years Traveling in another Road? and what should I get by it? honesty
will not Cloth the Back, nor fill the Belly, as the World goes: I fancy
De-que-vedoes, Hell is a much better place than the starving Purgatory of
Honesty.And as for asking forgiveness, what a Task would that be? 'twould ask
more years than I have Weeks to live, I have wronged and abused so many, a
whole Nation at least. I am better Principl'd than so, and have seen more
leading Precedents.


GHOST. I see the Fiend that Lodges in thy Heart,
But I have done for thee a Friendly part;
I Have told thee what at last will be thy Doom,
Though thou still laugh'st at what is yet to come.
Go on, believe not what thou do not see;
Believe not living Oracles, nor me.
Thirst after Gain, Honor, and empty Fame,
And get at last for all, a Crack-fart's Name.
Fond man, do think thou can a Nation sway,
Or the grand Wheel of Fate that is turning, stay.
With thy still scribbling and defaming Pen?
Which makes thee hated of all honest men:
With Diamond Pen in Brass thy Works are wrote,
That they below may never be forgot.
They Will worser prove than your great Senates Vote,
And thine own Words will serve to cut thy Throat:
For the more stir thou with thy Pen do keep,
Though here perhaps thou may some profit reap,
Thy Crimes and Punishment do both Increase:
Thy wit is grown thy burden and Disease,
Justice below is to the Crimes made fit,
Which will condemn thy vile pernicious wit:
And what to others trouble gave above,
Below for e're shall thy own Torment prove:
There Is but one way this Justice to prevent,
Leave scribbling, ask forgiveness, and Repent.

R. S. So he is gone: I hope he will now be quiet: This is, I think, the nine and
thirtieth warning I have had; and to as little purpose, as all the rest, and so
I Will, let 'um know in my next Pamphlet, which shall out as soon as I can agree
with a Bookseller. It Is good to be true to ones Principles.

T^ Ghosts talk what they will of Hell and Pain,
From real pleasure they shall not me restrain:
The Itch of Scribbling, and the sweet of Gain.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for J. M. May 20.


