A BRIEF EXPLICATION of the First Fifty PSALMS: BY DAVID DICKSON Professor of
Divinity in the College of Edinburgh.

PSALM. 106.4. Remember me O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy
people: O visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen,
that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine
inheritance.

The second Edition corrected.

Imprimatur, EDMUND CALAMY, Nov. 15. 165^.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for THOMAS JOHNSON at the Key in Paul's Churchyard,
1655.

To the truly Honorable and Religious Ladies, my Lady Marquess of Argyle, and
my Lady Anne Campbell her eldest daughter: Grace and Peace through Jesus Christ.
IT is the good and wise way of God, in matters concerning this temporal life,
to make manifest his bounty and kindness to all men, how unkind and wicked
soever they be, and not leave himself without a witness against complainers:
But in the matters of salvation, and things which do belong to eternal life,
he uses not to extend his special love so largely; for even the external
means of saving knowledge are bestowed upon few Nations and People, in
comparison of the whole race of mankind, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word
unto Jacob, and his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt
so with any Nation, and as for his judgments they have not known them. And
though the people be few to whom the offer of salvation is made, in comparison
of the rest of the world; yet are they many in comparison of those who find
grace in the eyes of the Lord, to accept the offer of Grace tendered unto them
in Christ Jesus; for many are called, but few chosen, Mat. 22.14. And albeit it
be true, that Gods calling and election has place in all ranks and estates of
persons, higher and lower, learned or unlearned, rich and poor; yet does this
grace stretch it self to many more of the meaner sort of people then of the
wise, wealthy and honorable in the world, 1 Cor. 1.26. Ye see your calling
brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
Noble are called; but God has chosen the foolish things in the world, etc.
Therefore so much the greater is the favor of God, which your souls have
found, most honorable, that you are made some of those few, yea after so
comfortable a manner, that the daughter finding her self led by her Mothers
hand, in her tender youth unto Christ the Savior, looks on her as her mother
twice; and the Mother having power and place to draw the veil of her daughters
virginal modesty, retiredness, and prudence, which concealeth much of the
luster of accomplishments from the sight of others who stand at a greater
distance, does look upon her notable endowments, and growing graces, as more
then a recompense of all the pains sustained in bringing forth, and bestowed
upon education of such a plant so well fitted for that which is most desirable
in earth and heaven; And thus much I have reason for me to say, not only
because it is my part, as I have occasion, to stir up parents to study to have
their children timously engaged to the Lord, in hope to have the more early and
abundant comfort by them in their own time; but also because I have been
witness of the Christian behavior of both your Ladyships, in no small trial of
your faith and patience by the troubles of the times, both public and private,
for a number of years together; which experience has now good use to fit and
prepare your honors for a further exercise ^rue believers are subject unto in
this life, and for what this present time does call unto all to be prepared
for. This condition being in all ages incident to the godly, should not be
looked upon in our time as if some strange thing did befall us: for it is the
Lords ordinary way of dealing with his children, by changes of their condition
outward and inward, by vicissitudes of straits and outgates, by intercourse of
Crosses and Comforts, and by much variety of several conditions, powerfully to
train, advance, and settle their faith, and to increase the growth of all
graces accompanying salvation in them; for what we cannot conceive at one
lesson, because we are dull, he teaches us by parts, in many and sundry
instructions, all tending to bring us to a further measure of humiliation, and
self denial on the one hand, and of submission unto God, and faith in Christ on
the other hand: And this way of God is made plain by the practice of the
Saints, and laid open before us in the book of the Psalms; whereof at this time
I have only taken a third part to handle by way of Essay, thereby to find the
advice of judicious brethren, how to satisfy, and edify the Reader more in
what is behind to be handled, if God be pleased to give further employment and
assistance in this service; And this which here is offered to the edification
of the Lords people, I have put forth under your Honors Name, because of your
constant affection to the study of the Scrip^ures, and respect to all the
messengers of Truth, and to me for the Truths cause, for which I will still
remain,

Your Honors much obliged servant in the Gospel. DAVID DICKSON.

TO The READER.
CHristian Reader, In this Essay on the Psalms, as in other like pieces, on
some other Books of Scripture, sent forth to the world from me, a part of my
design is still the same, that hereby I may try, if it may be the Lords will,
to stir up some more able instruments to lay open briefly, in this mould, or
any other they please better, the chief Doctrines treasured up in the
storehouse of holy Scripture, whereby the Lords people may be solidly
informed in the knowledge, and established in the faith of true Religion, by
the most near and immediate way of drawing their light from the fountain of
the Lords own word: for this were a mean (as I humbly conceive) to cut off
many needless disputes wherewith the world is filled; a mean to refute many
errors, which the ignorance of Scripture and of the power of God has bred and
fostered in the Christian Church; a mean to prevent many mistakes whe^ein
well-meaning zeal does oft-times fall, for lack of a brief manuduction into
the true sense and intent of places mistaken. And I am not altogether out of
hope, that the Lord shall hearken to my desire, and set some of his servants on
work, ere it be long, to entertain this motion, and to take a share also in
the task. Mean time, I pray let my aim and endeavor be acceptable unto
thee, and do not take exception that so much is left unsaid upon so pregnant
passages of Scripture as I go through briefly, and that so much good matter is
hinted at, and past by so quickly; and sometimes so abruptly; nor that the
deductions of sundry doctrines from the ground pointed at in the text, are
oft-times not so convincingly cleared as you would; But take this consideration
along with thee, That any longer insisting either in explication of the grounds
of the Doctrines pointed at in the text, or in amplification of the Doctrines
deduced from the grounds, would have marred much the intended brevity of the
mould, wherewith both the learned, and such as have less leisure to read
longer discourses, possibly will be well pleased; mainly for this cause, that
they are not much taken off their studies, or from their other necessary
employments, by this manner of writing: And wherewith also charitable
censurers, will be content happily when they perceive that in this plainness and
brevity, every Reader shall quickly meet with good matter of meditation at
least, whereby the smallest grains of sound truth, sown by this means among
Readers, may by Gods blessing get root, watering, and increase in a good and
honest heart: which blessing, that it may be very large, shall be the hearty
prayer of,

Thy Servant in the work of the Gospel, DAVID DICKSON.

A BRIEF EXPOSITION Of the first Fifty PSALMS.
ALbeit the Book of the Psalms be not composed after the manner of Humane
Writings, in some such Method of Parts, as History or Art could possibly
prescribe; yet it is so digested in Divine Providence, as the Order it has, is
far better then humane Artifice could have given unto it: For the scope of
this Book being not only to teach us the Grounds of Divinity, for our
information, but also to direct us how to apply saving Doctrines practically to
our self, and to make use thereof for Reformation of our Affections, and
Actions, and to help us by the Example of the Practice and Exercise of Gods
dear Children, to go after their footsteps, being led by this Directory all
along, as by the hand unto the fruition of Felicity, in higher and higher
Degrees thereof, till we be perfectly possessed of it in Heaven. The Psalms
in relation to this scope are so placed, as the first Psalm having divided all
men in two Ranks, in order to the way of seeking Felicity, does give direction
to us to choose, not the counsel of the Wicked, but the Word of God for the Rule
whereby to walk unto true Blessedness: And the second Psalm gives us God in
Christ for a Captain and Leader to us, who is able to maintain his Church, and
all those who shall follow this Rule, against all the Opposition which can be
made against them by the Power and Multitude of the wicked, who will not be
bound by the bonds and cords (as they esteem) of this Rule of the Lords Law:
And the rest of the Psalms do hold forth the Examples of Christ and his
Followers, yoaked in Conflict with their Persecuters for Righteousness sake;
in all Assaults making use of their Covenant with God, and prevailing by his
power which upholdeth, di^ecteth, comfort them in all their Troubles, and
gives victory and deliverie unto them out of them all: to the intent that
every one who shall choose to be truly blessed in the way prescribed of God (who
only can give and maintain Felicity) may resolve and prepare themselves for
such a life as the Saints have had in all Generations before them; that is, a
life mixed with Crosses and sweet Comforts; a life wherein they shall be put to
make use of their faith in God by Prayers, and shall not want for their answer,
in due time, matter if Joy and Praises to God; a life composed of variety of
Godly Exercises, and alternating vicissitudes of Conditions, as the bulk of
this Book represents; but closing as this bundle of Psalms closes, with six
times pure praises, whereunto now and then the Lord frames the heart of the
Believer with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory: That endless and
uninterrupted Thansgiving and Praise being reserved to the General Assembly and
full meeting of Christ, and all his Redeemed ones, at the great day of our
Lords second coming.

PSALM I.
THis Psalm teaches, that no ungodly man is blessed, but the godly man only,
ver. 1, 2. Which is proved by three reasons: The first, because God does bless
the godly even in this life with grace to bring forth good works profitable to
themselves and others, in every state of life, ver. 3. But all that the wicked
do for making themselves happy, shall be blasted, and found to be mere vanity,
ver. 4. Another reason is, because after this life the wicked shall be s^cluded
from the presence of God, and society of the godly at the day of judgment, v.
5. The third reason, confirming both the former, is, because God approves the
way of the godly, and will make the end of the way of the ungodly destruction,
ver. 6.

Ver. 1. BLessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.

2. But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate
both day and night.

FRom the pronouncing of the godly man to be the blessed man, and not the
ungodly, Learn 1. Though sin and misery abound among men, yet blessedness may
be attained; for God here pronounces some to be blessed. 2. In relation to the
seeking of blessedness, all men, within and without the visible Church, are
divided into godly men, that seek to be blessed in Gods way; and ungodly men,
who seek blessedness, but not in Gods way^; for so are they here all ranked.
3. To determine the Question, who is the blessed man, is competent to God only,
in whose hand alone it is to make a man blessed; for here he takes it upon
him, to pronounce the godly man to be the blessed man. 4. The ungodly do think
themselves very wise in following the counsel of their own heart, and of
others like themselves, that they may be blessed; But this is not the way of
the blessed man, He walks not in the counsel of the ungodly. 5. The ungodly
do obstinately continue in the course of sinning, but the blessed man, if he be
overtaken in a sin, does not defend his sin, nor persist in it: He
stands not in the way of sinners. 6. The ungodly may come to that height at
length, as to mock godliness, as meet folly, and to scorn admonitions and
reproofs: But the blessed man does never harden his heart so, as to mock piety
in others, or instruction offered to himself, He sits not in the seat of
the scornful. 7. The blessed man makes the word of God in holy Scripture, to
be his Counselor concerning the remedy of sin and misery, and to be the
rule to walk by, til his blessedness be perfected; for the Scripture to him,
for the obedience of faith, is a Law, and that fenced with supreme authority:
It is the Law of the Lord. 8. In that measure that a man is godly and blessed,
he makes the word of God, which holds forth the way of reconciliation with
God, through the Messiah, Christ, the way of growing in communion with God
through him, the matter of his chief delight, and contentment; His delight is
in the Law of the Lord. 9. In that measure that a man delights in the Law of
the Lord, he verseth himself therein upon all occasions. In his Law does he
meditate day and night.

Ver. 3. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
brings forth his fruit in his season: his leaf also shall not wither, and
whatsoever he does shall prosper.

Ver. 4. The ungodly are not so: but are like the chafe which the wind drives
away.

This is the first reason proving the Godly man to be the only Blessed man,
and not the ungodly: Hence learn, 1. In that measure a man studieth holy
Communion with God, by delighting and meditating in his word, he shall be
fixed and furnished with the influence of Grace from Christ, for the
entertaining of Spiritual Life in him; He shall be like a tree planted by the
rivers of water. 2. The man that makes the word of God his delight, shall be
made fruitful in every good work, as opportunity is offered to him; He shall
be like the tree that brings forth his fruit in his season. 3. This man
shall be enabled to bear out a holy profession of his faith in, and obedience
to God, in adversity, as well as in prosperity: His leaf also shall not wither.
4. Whatsoever Duty or Service to God this man goes about, shall not want the
assistance of God, nor success, nor acceptance at his hands; Whatsoever he
does shall prosper. 5. The ungodly man (whatsoever he may seem to be before
the world) yet he is destitute of all Spiritual Life, and alien from the
fellowship of Gods grace, unfit for every good work, ready when tempted hard,
to quit his counterfeit profession of Religion, and is cursed in all that he
does; for what the blessed Godly man is here said to be, the wicked is the
contrary; The ungodly are not so. 6. Whatsoever appearance of godliness, or
temporal prosperity, or hope of happiness the ungodly man seems to have, it
shall be found but counterfeit, and shall stand him in no stead in his greatest
need* The ungodly are like the chafe which the wind blows away.

Ver. 5. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in
the congregation of the righteous. The second reason proving the Godly man to
be the Blessed man, and not the ungodly, is a consequence of the first: Whence
learn, 1. Not only shall all that the ungodly man sows to his fleshly
Felicity, prove chafe; but also for his pains he shall answer to God in the
day of judgment, and there be condemned; for it is said, Therefore the ungodly
shall not stand in the judgment. 2. Howsoever the Godly cann^^ enjoy one
another fellowship in this life, for many reasons; yet at last they shall meet
in a general Assembly of all Saints, in the full fellowship of God; for there
is a day of Judgment to be, wherein they shall stand, and not be casten or
condemned, but shall be fully absolved, and remain in the standing Congregation
of the Righteous. 3. Albeit now the ungodly and godly do live together, mixed
in one Kingdom, City, Incorporation, visible Church, Family, and Bed,
possibly, yet there shall be a perfect separation at last, of the one from the
other; for sinners (or servants of sin) shall not stand in the Congregation of
the Righteous.

Ver. 6. For the Lord knows the way of the righteous: but the way of the
ungodly shall perish. The third reason confirms the former two: Whence learn,
1. Albeit there be no man that lives and sins not, yet the godly man, being
justified by faith, and careful to bring forth the fruits of faith, is not a
sinner in Gods esteem; for he is here called Righteous. 2. However there be
many imperfections and failings of the Godly man's actions, yet the course he
keeps, and way which he endeavors to walk in, is holy and acceptable to
God; For the Lord knows, or appro^eth the way of the Righteous. 3. Let the
men of this world please themselves, and applaud one another in their Godless
carriage; yet the end of their course shall be everlasting destruction; for the
way of the ungodly shall perish.

PSALM. II.
That this Psalm does mainly, if not only, concern Christ, appears by this,
That it has not so much as David's name in the inscription, albeit he did write
it: and by Act. 4.25, 26. where it is appropriate to Christ. This Psalm has
two parts; in the former is set down the stability of Christ's Kingdom, against
all the enemies thereof, ver. 1, 2, 3. First, Because God the Father takes part
with his Son, against all his enemies, and will establish Christ's Kingdom,
maugre them all, ver. 4, 5, 6. Secondly, Because in the Covenant of Redemption,
the Father has promised to the Son enlargement of his Kingdom, and victory
over all his enemies, ver. 7, 8, 9. In the latter part of the Psalm the Prophet
delivers the use of this Doctrine in an exhortation to great and small, to
repent of their sins, and to believe in Christ, ver. 10, 11, 12.

Ver. 1. WHy do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

2 The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together,
against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying,

3 Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us*

THe Prophet shows, That in vain shall Christ's enemies oppose his Kingdom:
Whence learn, 1. Thae the ungodly world being strangers from the life of God,
are incensed in a mad mood against the Church and Kingdom of Christ in the
world, The heathen rage, says he, to wit, against the Visible Government of
Christ in his Visible Church, as appears ver. 2, 3. 2. Their Opposition is
altogether unjust, without cause, and reasonlesse; for being asked, they cannot
render a reason Why? 3. Though Christs's Enemies promise to themselves success
in their opposition to Christ, and that they shall surely overturne his
Kingdom, yet shall their imaginations prove folly; they shall not prevail, for
they imagine a vain thing, which is impossible to be effectuate. 4. The chief
Instruments that Satan stirs up against Christ, to be Heads and Leaders to
Heathen and godless people in opposing and persecuting Christ's Kingdom and
Church, are the Magistrates, Rulers, and Statesmen, that he may color his
malice with the shadow of Authority and Law; For the Kings of the earth and
Rulers set themselves, to wit, in opposition to him. 5. In this attempt the
great ones among men agree more easily together, then in any thing else; they
fix their resolutions, communicate their counsels, and conjoyne their power;
The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together. 6.
Howsoever the Persecuters of the Church conceive themselves not to oppose God,
but men only, when they trouble his people and servants for Righteousness, yet
because the Quarrel is the Lords, therefore their opposition is declared here
to be against the Lord, and his Anointed, or his Christ, who is distinguished
here from the Lord, in regard of his Incarnation, Mediation, and Offices, being
otherwise, in respect of his Godhead, one in Essence with the Father and the
Holy Spirit. 7. Though the Law and Ordinances of God be most Holy, most
Equitable, most Harmless, yea, also most profitable; yet the wicked esteem of
them, as they call them here, Bands and Cords, because they curb and cross
their carnal Wisdom and Licentiousness of life. 8. It is not enough to the
wicked to disobey and reject the Law and ordinances of Christ, for their own
part, but they will also have them abolished, that God in Christ should not have
a Church at all, at least in their bounds, or where they have power; Let us
break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

Ver. 4. He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh: the LORD shall have them
in derision.

5. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.

The first reason of the stability of Christ's Kingdom is, because God scorneth
men's opposing thereof, and will vex his enemies, and settle Christ's Kingdom in
his visible Church, in the sight of his enemies: Hence learn, 1. Though the
Church visible, and the Ordinances of Christ be among the feet of Potentates,
and Christ's subjects want wisdom and power on earth, to defend themselves, yet
their maintainer is omnipotent God, judge over all, even he that sits in
Heaven. 2. All the devices and conspiracies of men against Christ's Kingdom,
(how terrible soever to Gods people) are but ridiculous and foolish attempts in
Gods sight; The King that sits in heaven, shall laugh at them all, and
expose them to mockery before men: He shall have them in derision. 3. After
the Lord has made manifest the intent of his enemies, and brought their
foolish and mad purposes to light, he will not fail to manifest his mind, and
just indignation against them; for, then shall he speak to them in his wrath. 4.
The Lord has his appointed time wherein he will arise, and vex the enemies of
his Church, partly by disappointing them of their hopes, and partly by
inflicting sore plagues upon them; Then shall he vex them in his sore
displeasure. 5. When the Lord arises to judge the enemies of his Church, then
does he give a further manifestation of his purpose to establish his Church,
and the visible Kingdom of Christ in the World, maugre all opposition: Yet
have I s^t my King upon my holy hill of Zion* 6. Though all Kings and Kingdoms
belong unto the Lord, yet he owneth the Church (represented by the hill of
Zion* and he owneth his Son Christ the King thereof, in a special manner, as
his peculiar property, wherein he glories more then in all his works; therefore
says he, I have set my King upon my holy Hill; this is the Speech of God the
Father, speaking by his Spirit in the Prophet concerning Christ his Son.

V. 7. I will declare the Decree: the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee.

8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

The second reason of the stability of Christ's Kingdom is, the decreed
agreement between God the Father and the (...), in the Covenant of Redemption;
some Articles whereof Christ by his Prophet does here reveal; for this is the
speech of Christ the Son of God, to be incarnate, speaking by his spirit,
concerning the stability of the Church, and his Kingdom over it: Whence we
learn. 1. The faith of the Saints, in time of the persecution of the Church,
may, and should rest persuaded of the stability of the Church, and of Christ's
Kingdom in it, because it is grounded upon the mysterious and unchangeable
decree of God, which here is brought to light, I will declare the decree, says
Christ, not as yet incarnate. 2. It is Christ's office as Prophet, to reveal
the secret counsel of the Trinity, being the substantial Word of the Father;
and who before the world was created, was with God, and was God, John 1.1, 2. I
will declare the decree, says the Son of God. 3. The Son of God as he is a
person, concurring in the decree of establishing of the Church, and Kingdom of
God in it, against all opposition; So is he party contracter in the Covenant of
Redemption: And as he is the promiser, and undertaker to pay the price of the
Redemption of his people; so also is he the receiver of promises, made in
favor of his Church and Kingdom: It is he to whom the Father directs his
promise concerning his Church, first and immediately; for the Son in declaring
the decree, says, The Lord said to me. 4. It is one of the Articles of the
Covenant of Redemption, That the promised seed of the woman, the Redeemer of
his people, the promised seed of Abrah^m, the Messiah and Savior of the Elect,
the promised son of David, and true King of Israel after his incarnation, shall
not be disowned of the Father; But in and after his deepest humiliation and
sufferings, as he shall be, and remain really the very Son of God, so shall he
really at the set day, be acknowledged by the Father, to be the only begotten
Son of God; which day, is the day of Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead, as the Apostle, Romans 1.4. does teach us, saying, He was declared to be
the Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead; For the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ was a real speech, saying to Christ in the
audience of all the world, in effect as much as, I declare thee this day to be
my Son, my only begotten Son, one in substance with me eternally. 5. The
declaration of the decree of manifesting of Christ to be the Son of God, is a
sufficient demonstration of the impregnable stability of the Church, maugre all
the opposition of all the power in the world; for to this very end is the
decree of revealing Christ to be the Son of God* here declared. Thou art my Son
whom I have bogotten, is proof abundant; for this is the Rock whereupon Christ
undertaketh to build his Church, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail, Mat. 16.16.18. and who is he that overcomes the world, says John,
save he that believes that Christ is the Son of God? 1 John 5.5. 6. Another
article of the Covenant of Redemption here declared is, That after Christ's
Resurrection, and declaration of his formerly over-clouded Godhead, he should
continue in the office of his mediation, and intercession; and by virtue of his
paid ransom of Redemption, call for the enlargement of his purchased Kingdom
among the Gentiles; for this is the Fathers compact with the Son, saying, Ask
of me, and I will give thee the Heathen. 7. The opposition which the world shall
make to the Kingdom of Christ, shall not hinder the enlargement and spreading
thereof; but by the intercession of Jesus Christ, the Heathen shall be his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth his possession; not his by a
short tack, or lease for some few years, but a lasting inheritance, and
constant possession. 8. The necessity of prayer is pointed out to all the Lords
people by this, that the possession of the purchase which our Lord has made by
his precious blood, is to be drawn forth by a sort of Prayer and Intercession
suitable to Christ's person; Ask of me, says the Father, and I will give thee
the Heathen, etc.

9. Thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel. A third Article of the covenant of Redemption, is, a
promise made to Christ, of full victory over all his, and his Churches enemies,
ver. 9. Wherein observe, 1. That Christ shall not want enemies, who will not
only for their own parts, refuse salvation offered by him, and subjection to be
given to him; but also will oppose him, and make head against him, til he
destroy them; for these Kings and Rulers spoken of ver. 2, 3, will not cease,
till he break them, and dash them in pic^es; and these are here understo^^, as
repeated from ver. 1, 2, 3.

2. Though Christ's Church be weak and unable to help it self against
persecution, yet Christ will own the quarrel, and fight against all the enemies
thereof himself, whereunto he is sufficiently furnished, for he shall break
them in pieces with an Iron rod. 3. Though the enemies be numerous and strong,
being compared with the godly, whom they do persecute, yet compared with
Christ, or looked upon by him, they are but weak, brittle, and naughty things.
Thou shall dash them in pieces as a potters vessel.

Ver. 10. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed, ye Judges of the
earth.

11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

12 Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath
is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

This is the later part of the Psalm, wherein the uses of the former Doctrine
are set down. Whence learn, 1. The more clear advertisement is given concerning
the sin and danger of opposing of Christ's Kingdom, cause, work or people;
the more wary should all men be, and namely Potentates, as they love their
places or souls, to eschew this evil; for he has said, Be wise now
therefore, O ye Kings and Judges of the Earth. 2. Though it may seem wisdom
to make and execute laws in prejudice of Christ, and his cause, rather then
vent their malice without a pretense; yet it is more wisdom to cease from
opposition, and take laws from Christ; for so the Lord does reckon, saying, Be
wise now therefore, and instructed. 3. If any be guilty of this sin, and not
as yet smitten for it, the goodness of God offers to him mercy in time, and
steppeth in timously to take off the snares of flatterers, who use to harden
men, and especially great men, in this sin: Be wise now, says the Lord, O
ye Kings. 4. It is no disparagement to the greatest Monarchs (but a mean for
them to eschew the wrath of God) to be subject to Christ Jesus, to stand in awe
of him, to submit themselves to him, and promove his service to their power;
for the command to all, and to them in special, is, Serve the Lord in fear. 5.
As there is matter of fear to Christ's Subjects, lest they provoke him; for
there is matter of rejoicing for them to be under his Government, and these two
affections may well consist in his service: Rejoice in trembling: yea there is
no right rejoicing in any thing without-some mixture of fear to offend him. 6.
Because Christ Jesus the Son of God, is a lovely King, bringing
Righte^eousnesse and Eternal life to all his true subjects, he should be
submitted unto, and embraced (when he offers grace) very heartily: To this
end, Kiss the Son, or do him homage, is added; for to kiss is a sign of
religious adoration, Hos. 13.2. and a sign of homage and hearty subjection, 1 Samuel 10.1. 7. Where grace offered by Christ Jesus is refused, the refusing of
mercy shall procure more anger then all former sins; kiss the Son lest he be
angry. 8. When Christ takes a refusal of a man, to whom grace is offered,
wrathwil follow, to the cutting off of the refuser from all means of
happiness, both temporal, which he hunteth after; and eternal, which is
offered in Christ unto him, and to the bringing upon him u^ter perdition; for
it is said, Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way of all
possible salvation. 9. Unspeakable must the wrath of God ^e, when it is kindled
fully, since perdition may come upon the kindling of it but a little. 10.
Remission of sin, delivery from Wrath, communion with God, and life
everlasting, are the fruits of embracing of Christ, of closing in Covenant with
Christ, and resting on Christ; For, blessed are all they that put their trust
in him.

PSALM III. A Psalm of David when he fled from Absalom his son.
This Psalm holds forth a notable proof and benefit of faith in David's
experience; who when his own son Absalom rebelled against him, and forced him
to flee for fear of his life, did first lay before the Lord his pitiful
condition, ver. 1, 2. Secondly, He settled his faith on God, prayed, and
obtained a comfortable answer, was quiet and refreshed in soul and body, and
made confident against all fears possible, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. Thirdly, He
continues in prayer, confirming his faith from former experience, ver. 7. And
lastly, he gives forth the use of his experience to the Churches edification
in a general doctrine. ver. 8

FRom the Inscription, learn, 1. How great calamity may befall the best of Gods
children, and that from those persons, from whom they could least expect to be
troubled: for David was deserted of his own subjects, and chased from his
Palace and royal State by his own son Absalom. 2. Although the Lord do not
follow the sins of his children with vindictive justice, yet by the sharp rods
of fatherly correction* he can make his own children, and all the beholders of
their scandalous sins, see how bitter a thing it is to provoke him to wrath, as
once David did. 3. Even when sin has drawn on judgment, God must be dealt
with for relief, no less then if it had been sent for trial only; as David
does in the case of the correcting and purging of the pollution of his family,
by the insurrection of his Son against him.

Ver. 1. LOrd, how are they increased that trouble me? many are they that rise
up against me.

2. Many there be which say of my my soul* There is no help for him in God.

FRom his laying before God his pitiful condition: Learn 1. The man who
believes in God, has an advantage above whatsoever any ungodly man can have
in the time of trouble: he has the Lord to go unto for comfort and relief, of
whose kindness he may make use, as David did here, laying out his trouble
before him, and saying, Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? etc. 2.
The world counts a man's case desperate, when they see no worldly help for
him. Many say, there is no help for him in God. 3. Merciless beholders of the
corrections of Gods children for their sins, think and say also often times,
that God is following them with vindictive justice, and is destroying them both
in regard of their souls and bodies, etc. without mind of mercy to them. Many
say of my soul, there is no help for him in God. 4. Tentation to despair of
relief, does accompany unexpected and sad troubles; and this is more grievous
then the trouble it self: Therefore David presents this tentation before God
in the last room, as the heaviest part of his exercise, with a note of
uplifting the mind and voice. Selah.

Ver. 3. But thou O Lord, art a shield for me, my glory, and the lifter up of
mine head. In the second place he shows how he made use of faith in prayer;
and what fruit he received thereby: Whence learn, 1. The nature of true faith
is to draw the more near to God, the more it be driven from him, Many say, no
help in God; but thou art my shield. 2. God is a counter-comfort in all
calamity, our shield in danger, our glory in shame, the lifter up of our head
in dejection. 3. As there is relief in God out of all evil, so faith sees in
God sufficient help from all evil, and in special that the sword of the enemy
cannot be so near, but he can interpose himself, as a shield to ward off the
blow: But thou O Lord, art a shield round about me, etc. yea, faith sees in
God matter of rejoicing and gloriation in the midst of all the shame and
disgrace which men can cast upon the believer, and can make a man say to God,
Thou art my glory. In a word, faith sees goodness and power in God to raise
the believer out of the lowest condition wherein he can be: Thou art the lifter
up of my head.

Ver. 4. I* cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy
hill. Selah.

5. I laid me down and slept; I awaked, for the Lord sustained me.

6. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves
against me round about.

From the exercise of faith, and the fruits of it in these three verses: Learn,
1. The conscience of seeking God by prayer is an ease to a man, not only for
the time present, while he is in prayer pouring out his heart; but refreshful
also, when it is looked back upon: therefore by way of gratulation says David
here, I cried to the Lord. 2. Faith in a strait stirs up affection and
earnestness in prayer, and makes the whole man to be taken up about it: I
cried to the Lord with my voice, says he. 3. The prayer of faith shall not
want an answer, and the return thereof is worthy to be attended and marked,
when it is obtained; I cried, and be heard me. 4. The prayer of faith trusts
God in Christ, as the propitiatory and mercy seat, and seeks audience and
answer only for Christ's cause, whose sacrifice, and mediation, and benefits
were shadowed forth in the Tabernacle: And the ^eliev^r, as he should take heed
that his prayer go up to God through Christ, so should he observe how it is
answered and returned also through Christ, represented* by the Ark in the
Tabernacle, pitched on the holy hill of Sion: He heard me also out of his holy
Hill. 5. In the greatest extremity of danger, a believer may have his mind
quieted, and his body refreshed also, after that in faith he has had his
recourse to God, and has casten his care upon him: I laid me down and slept,
I awaked. 6. The quietness and setlednesse of a man's heart by faith in God, is
another sort of work then the natural resolution of manly courage; for it is
the gracious operation of Gods spirit upholding a man above nature, and
therefore God ought to have all the glory of it: The Lord sustained me. 7. When
the Lord will answer the believer to his comfort, he can not only satisfy him
in the particular which he prays for, but also furnish him with confidence
against whatsoever evil can be apprehended by him for time to come: I will not
be afraid of Millions of people, that have set themselves against me round
about. 8. When faith finds it self welcome to God, it is able to give a defiance
to all adversaries; more or fewer, weaker or stronger enemies, all are alike
despised: I will not be afraid of thousands of people.

Ver. 7. Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God, for thou have smitten all mine
enemies upon the cheek bone: thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. In the
third place he continues to pray against the evil, which might thereafter
follow: Whence Learn, 1. Faith in God is not a bragger, nor confident in the
man's own strength, or imagination; but humbly depends on God, and continues
in prayer, so long as the danger remains; as David does here, after delivery
received. 2. The covenant of grace, wherein the believer is entered with God,
furnishes him with confident prayer, and hope of salvation: Save me, O my God.
3. When faith is fixed upon God covenanted, then bygone experiences do come up
as pinnings in the bigging of a wall, to bolster it up, and confirm ^t; For
thou have smitten all my enemies upon the cheeke-bone, thou have broken the
teeth of the ungodly. 4. God smites the pride of persecuters with a shameful
stroke, and their beastly cruelty, with breaking their power; Thou have smitten
mine enemies on the cheek-bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly.

Verse. 8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people.
Selah. From the last part of the Psalm, wherein he gives forth from his own
experience a general Doctrine, for the comfort of all the Lords people, Learn
1. The use of the experience of the Godly, should be the confirmation of the
faith of all others, as well as of their own: as here is seen. 2. The fruit of
the Lords putting his own in straits, is to make them and all men see, that he
has ways of deliverance, more then they know of* and that he will save his
own, when men do count their case desperate: For, Salvation belongs to the
Lord. 3. Whatsoever mixture his people do find of crosses and comforts, or
vicissitude of danger and delivery, adversity or prosperity, still the course
of blessing of them stands, which now and then they are forced to acknowledge
to the Lord: Thy blessing is upon thy people.

PSALM. IV. To the chief Musician on Neginoth. A Psalm of David.
Another experience of David, as an example of a Christian sufferer, unjustly
perse^^ted and scorned for his piety by his profane enemies, such as Saul, and
his Courtiers were: wherein first he sets down his prayer, ver. 1. Then
being comforted in God, he insulteth over his enemies, and glories in Gods
favor, ver. 2, 3. Thirdly he exhorts his enemies to repentance, and faith in
God, ver. 4, 5. Fourthly, He prefers the blessedness of his estate above
whatsoever the worldly man can enjoy, ver. 6, 7, 8.

FRom the Inscription of this Psalm, which is the first wherein mention is made
of the chief Musicians, or musical instruments: Learn 1. The praise of God, and
the joy of his Spirit, allowed on his people, do surpass all expression which
the voice of words can make; for this was signified by the plurality, and
diversity of musical instruments, (some of them sounding by being beaten, some
of them by being blown,) superadded to the voice of singing in the praedagogie
of Moses. 2. Albeit the ceremonial, figurative, and religious use of musical
instruments be gone, with the rest of the Leviticall shadows, (the natural use
of them still remaining:) yet the vocal singing of Psalms in the Church is not
taken away, as the practice and doctrine of Christ and his Apostles makes
evident; and so the voice of a Musician in the public worship still is useful.
3. The Psalms are to be made use of with discretion, as the matter of the
Psalm, and edification of the worshippers does require. And in the public, it
is the called Minister of the Congregation his place, to order this part of the
worship with the rest; for this the direction of the Psalms, To the chief
Musician, gives ground.

Ver. 1. HEar me when I call, O God of my righteousness: thou have enlarged me
when I was in distress, have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer. FRom his
prayer, Learn, 1. Though there be many and diverse troubles of the godly, yet
there is but one God to give comfort and relief, and one way to draw it from
God; to wit, by prayer in faith, Hear me when I call. 2. Albeit the conscience
of much sin be opposed to the prayer of the believer, yet the everlasting
righteousness of faith, (whereof the Lord is God, Author, and maintainer for
ever) does open the way to the suppliant, specially when he comes to God in a
righteous cause, Hear me, O God of my righteousness. 3. Acknowledgment of
bypast mercies in former experience is a good preparation for a new mercy, and
a mean to strengthen our faith to receive it, Thou have enlarged me when I was
in distress, have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer. 4. Faith is a good
Orator, and a noble Disputer in a strait; it can reason from Gods readiness
to hear, Hear me when I call O God. And from the everlasting righteousness
given to the man, in the justification of his person, O God of my
righteousness: and from Gods constant justice in defending the righteousness
of his servants cause, O God of my righteousness: and from both present
distresses, and those that are bypast, wherein he has been: and from bygone
mercies received, Thou have enlarged me when I was in distress: and from Gods
grace, which is able to answer all objections from the man's unworthiness, or
ill-deserving: Have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.

Ver. 2. O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my golry into shame? how long
will ye love vanity and seek after leasing. Selah.

3. But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: the
Lord will hear when I call unto him.

In the next place, after comfort received, he triumphs in Gods good will
over all his enemies. Whence learn, 1. Though a godly man, when he is both
persecuted for righteousness, and mocked for his piety, may hang his head in
his trouble for a little, til he goes to God with his complaint; yet after that
he is comforted, he will be able to speak a word to his mockers, and holily to
insult over them, time about; as after prayer, David here turns him to speak
to the sons of men. 2. Mockers of piety, when pious men are under affliction,
do bewray themselves to be still in the state of nature, and destitute for the
present of the Spirit of regeneration: For David calls them, in relation to
their sinful condition, O ye sons of men. 3. Though faith in God, and calling
on him in trouble, and innocence of life under persecution, be the highest
commendation, and glory of a man; yet the wicked, (though often convinced of Gods
goodness to such persons) do not stand to reproach piety, as a matter of
scorn, so often as God does suffer the godly to fall in calamity. How long will
ye turn my glory into shame? 4. Mere natural men cannot be made wise, neither
by the word of God, nor by experience in their own, and others persons, to
consider that things of this earth, as temporary riches, honor, and pleasure,
are nothing but vanity, and deceiving lies, which promise something, and pay
nothing but vexation of spirit, because of guiltiness and misery following
upon the abuse of them. How long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing?
5. The most satisfactory revenge, which the godly can desire of their
persecuters and mockers, is, to have them turn converts, to have them recalled
from the vanity of their way, and brought to a right understanding of what
concerns their salvation, whereunto the godly are ready to offer themselves
admonishers of them, and instructers, as here the Prophet does, O ye Sons of
men, how long? etc. But know, etc. 6. The cause of the worlds despising of
piety in the persons of Gods afflicted children, is the gross ignorance of the
precious privil^ges of the Lords sincere servants: the world cannot think that
the godly in the midst of their calamities are Gods peculiar jewels, chosen and
called out of the world, for honoring of God; admitted to fellowship with God
in this life, and appointed to dwell with him for ever. Therefore, know, says
David, as speaking to ignorants, That God has set apart for himself, him that
is godly. 7. This is one of the privileges of the godly, that how often soever
they are put to their prayers, by ^ouble or tentation, so often they get
audience, upholding, comfort, and delivery; as their crosses do abound, so do
their consolations; as the Prophet testifies, saying, The Lord will hear me
when I call upon him. 8. The experience of one of the Saints concerning the
verity of Gods promises, of the certainty of the written privileges of the
Lords people, is a sufficient proof of the right which all his children have
unto, and ground of hope for their partaking in the same mercies in their need;
therefore David, to prove his general doctrine* set down in the first part of
the verse, he says, The Lord will hear me when I call unto him.

Ver. 4. Stand in awe and sin not, commune with our own heart upon your bed,
and be still. Selah.

5. Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord.

In the third place, he exhorts his enemies to repentance and faith God;
wherein as he laid down the course which they should keep, to wit, to have
their judgment well informed in the principles of Religion, in the former verse;
so here in this verse he will have their heart and affections reformed: and in
the following verse he will have their actions also reformed in relation to the
duties of the first and second Teble, and their actions to flow from their
faith in God. Whence learn, 1. Repentance is not real and sound, til the heart
be affected with the sense of sin bypast, and fear of sinning hereafter,
and be brought in subjection under the dreadful Majesty of God: therefore
after instruction, ver. 2, 3. He says here, Stand in awe and sin not. 2.
The mean prescribed of God for to make the heart sensible of its condition, is
the serious and daily examination of the conscience, posing it to answer all
interrogatories concerning the man's conformity to Gods law, and that in
secret, in the night, without distraction: for a man had need to have his wits
about him, when he goes to examine a deceitful thief: to this purpose says
he, Commune with your hearts on your beds. 3. The fruit of daily, serious
examination of the conscience, concerning sin committed, is, to make a man
humble, quiet, and submissive to the Lord: this he insinuates in foretelling
them that thus they shall be still, or silent, not opening the mouth to excuse
their sins, or to mock the godly. As for reformation of their lives in
relation to the law of God, ver. 5. He teaches, 1. That the formal discharge
of the external ceremonies of Religion will not prove a man to be a true
convert, or a sincere penitent; but the true sacrifice of Christ's obedience
unto the death, signified by the external sacrifices, must be looked unto; and
the sacrifice of thanksgiving and well doing, and the dedication of the whole
man to the service of God, must testify the truth of repentance. Therefore in
opposition to the external ceremonial sacrifice, he commands to offer the
sacrifices of righteousness. 2. When a penitent has for evidencing the
sincerity of his turning to God, brought forth fruit suitable to repentance,
he must not lay weight upon his works, but lay all his confidence upon Gods
free grace, who justifies the true convert by faith only: Therefore, after
commanding them to offer the scrifices of righteousness, he directs them,
saying, Put your trust in the Lord.

Ver. 6. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon us.

7. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn
and their wine increased.

8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou, Lord, only make me
dwell in safety.

In the last place he commends his own blessed estate, and to enforce the
former ehxortation, he compares the happiness which the worldling does seek
after, with the spiritual joy which is granted to the godly, and prefereth the
last far before the other. Hence learn. 1. The blind worldlings, ignorant of
what is truly good, are taken with insatiable wishing, and seeking for some
earthly thing, whereby they conceive they may be happy. Of those speaks he,
saying, There be many that say, Who will show us any good 2. The truly godly
join one with another, in seeking? their felicity in Gods favor, and in the
sense of his reconciliation, and not in seeking the worldly man's choice: for in
the opposition to the worldlings wishes, David with the rest of the godly,
faith, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. 3. The comfort
of Gods Spirit, and sense of a man's reconciliation with God in Christ, is
greater then any worldly joy can be, and is able to supply the want of riches,
honors, and pleasures worldly, and to season, yea and swallow up the sense of
poverty, disgrace, and whatsoever other evil. This David testifies by his own
experience, saying, Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time
that their corn and wine increased. 4. Faith in God, as it brings joy, so
also peace unspeakable, and passing understanding, in the midst of trouble:
This David's experience teaches also, I will both lay me down in peace and
sleep, notwithstanding of all the oppositions the sons of men made unto him. 5.
Whether God do give means of safety, or none at all which can be seen,
preservation and safety is his gift, and the making a man observe the benefit
of preservation is another gift also: wherefore, David gives the glory of both
unto God, Thou only make me dwell in safety.

PSALM. V. To the chief Musician upon Nehiloth. A Psalm of David.
David as a type of Christ, and one of the number of his afflicted followers,
set forth in his affliction, as an example of exercise to others in after ages,
does pray for himself, and against his Enemies, using sundry arguments to
strengthen himself in his hope to be heard: First, from the grace of God
bestowed on himself to use the means, ver. 1.2, 3. Secondly, From the justice
of God against his wicked enemies, ver. 4, 5, 6. Thirdly, From his own steadfast
purpose and desire to continue in Gods service, and to walk so uprightly, as
the enemy shall not have advantage of him by his miscarriage, ver. 7* 8.
Fourthly, From the ripeness of sin in his adversaries, which did prepare them
for sudden destruction, ver. 9, 10. Fifthly, From the certain hope of joy, and
defense, and spiritual Blessing to be bestowed on himself and all believers,
out of the free love and favor of God toward them, ver. 11, 12.

Ver. 1. GIve ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.

2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King and my God: for unto thee will I
pray.

3* My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

In his strengthening of his hope to be heard, from the grace of God bestowed
on him, to use the means for obtaining a good answer, Learn, 1. When the Lord
gives us a mouth to speak to him, there is ground of hope he will grant an
ear to us; for so reasons David, Give ear to my words, O Lord. 2. In time of
trouble, the heart has more to say to God, then words can utter; and what a
man cannot express, the Lord will take knowledge of it, no less then of his
words; This the prophet hops for, saying, Consider my meditation. 3. When
extremity of danger forces a way to the Lord, the believers necessity has a
voice, louder then his expressed words, and whereunto the Lord will give ear;
hearken to the voice of my cry. 4. It is a point of spiritual wisdom for the
help of our faith, to take hold of those relations we have to God, whereby we
may expect what we pray for, as David does here, when we would have protection
and delivery, saying; My King, and my God. 5. Faith knows no other to pray
unto for help, save God alone, nor any other way to be helped, save by
perseverance in prayer; For unto thee will I pray, says he. 6. Resolved
Importunity in prayer must be joined with taking hold of the first and fittest
opportunity offered for prayer: My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O
Lord, says he. 7. Calling on God in trouble, with dependence on him, does
give hope of audience, and deliverie by him, by way of a convincing Syllogism,
whereof the promise of deliverie made to such as call on the name of the Lord
in the day of trouble, is the first proposition; the conscience of resolved
calling on him makes the assumption or second proposition; and faith
concludes the expection of deliverance; for the prophets reasoning is this in
effect, whosoever they be, that pray to the Lord in their trouble, thou will
hear them: But I do pray to thee, and do resolve to continue praying:
Therefore thou O Lord wilt hear me.

V. 4. For thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness: neither shall
evil dwell with thee.

5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hate all workers of
iniquity.

6. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the
bloody and deceitful man.

In the second place, he reasons from the justice of God against his enemies:
Whence learn, 1. The worst qualities in the adversaries of the Godly, does
furnish good matter of Faith and Hope to the believer to be rid of them: for
this use does David make of the wickedness of his enemies in these three
verses. 2. Such as take pleasure in sin, God cannot take pleasure in them: Thou
art not a God, says he, that have pleasure in wickedness: And such as will not
part with sin, God shall separate them from his company; for it is said,
Neither shall evil dwell with thee. 3. Let wicked men seem never so wise
Politicians among men, yet shall they be found mad fools before God, selling
heaven for trifles of the earth, holding war with the Almighty, and running
upon their own destruction in their self-pleasing dreams, to the loss of their
life and state, temporal and eternal. For the foolish (says he) shall not
stand in thy sight. 4. Such as make iniquity their work, shall have the
effects of Gods hatred for their wages: for Thou hate all the workers of
iniquity. 5. The enemies of Gods people, whiles by slanders and lies they
murder the innocent, do draw upon themselves swift damnation from God: Thou
shall destroy them that speak leasing, says he. 6. Falsehood and cruelty which
are the characters of the foes of the godly, are abomination to the Lord, which
he cannot endure: Thou will abhor the bloody and deceitful man.

Verse. 7. But as for me, I will come into thy house, in the multitude of thy
mercies: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

8. Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, because of mine enemeis, make thy way
straight before my face.

In the third place, he resolves that what ever the enemy shall do, he will
walk as God has commanded him: with resolution to serve God in sincerity, as
also a profession of hope to enjoy the society of his Saints in Gods publicst^
Worship: and to this end he prays he may be kept straight in his walking,
that the enemy might have nothing wherewith to reproach him. Hence Learn, 1.
Though the Godly want not the conscience of their own sins, when they speak of
the sins of their enemies, yet there is a difference between them and the
wicked, in respect the Godly are humbled in the sense of their sins, are
brought to the acknowledgment of their need of mercy, and do (...) to God for
having mercy, and to the multitudes of mercies, as they see the multitude of
their sins: and therefore says he of himself, in opposition to the wicked,
But as for me, I will come into thy house, in the multude of thy mercies. 2. The
faith which the godly have in the mercies of God, does encourage them to follow
the service of God; and in some cases does give them hope to be loosed from the
restraints which do hinder them from enjoying the public Ordinances: I will
come into thy house, in the multitude of thy mercies. 3. The right temper of
the heart of a true Worshipper, is fear before God: In thy fear will I
worship. 4. Under the sense of sinfulness and unworthiness, faith must be
supported by looking toward Jesus Christ, prefigured by the Tabernacle and
Temple* In thy fear, says he, I will worship toward thy holy Temple. 5. When
the Godly are under trouble from their enemies, and under trial by other sorts
of exercise, they are no less feared for their miscarriage and offending the
Lord, then they are feared for what their enemies can do against them;
Therefore, Lead me O Lord, in thy righteousness, says he. 6. So much the
more as the godly are sensible of their own blindness, and weakness, and
readiness to go out of the right way; so much the more do they call for, and
depend upon Gods directing of them. Lead me, says he; As one that sees not,
or as one who is not able to hold a right course, without a guide. 7. If the
godly man take a sinful course, to be relieved from his trouble, the enemy is
hardened in his wicked course, by this means to blaspheme the profession of
Piety, as mere hypocrisy, and so God is provoked to let the enemy prevail,
because the miscarriage of the godly has made way to him; for avoiding of
which inconvenience, he prays: Lead me, in thy righteousness because of my
enemies. 8. The deceitfulness of sin, the ignorance of what is expedient and
lawful in a particular case, the mist of private affections, and the example of
ill counsel of the World, are ready to make a man mistake the right way, except
the Lord make clear what is his duty: Therefore says he, Make thy way straight
before my face.

Ver. 9. For there is no faithfulness in their mouth, their inward part is
very wickedness: their throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their
tongue.

10. Destroy thou them, O God, let them fall by their own counsels: cast them
out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebelled against
thee.

In the fourth place he strengthens his hope to be helped, because his
enemies sins were ripe for judgment. Whence learn, 1. Among other motives to
make the godly take heed of their carriage in time of trial, this is one, they
have to do with a false world, and hollow hearted men, who will make false
pretenses of what is not their intentions, and will make promise of what they
mind not to perform, and will give none but rotten and poisonable advice,
fairded with false flattery, and all to deceive the godly, and draw them in a
snare. This is it, he says, For there is no faithfulness in their mouth,
their inward part is very wickedness, their throat is an open sepulcher, they
flatter with their tongue: and this is the nature of all carnal men, when it
comes to the point of defending Gods cause in time of trial. 2. Though this
prayer be not to be drawn in imitation against particular persons, by us who
have not so infallible revelation of men's state before God, yet is it a
prophecy against all the irreconcilable enemies of God, and of his people,
against whom the Spirit of God makes imprecation here, saying, Destroy thou
them O God. 3. There is no need of any other means to destroy the Lords
enemies, then their own devices: The very course they take to establish
themselves, will serve for their own ruin. Let them fall, says he, by their
own counsel. 4. The certain cause of the ruin of the persecuters of Gods
people, is the ripeness and full measure of their sins. Cast them out (says
he) in the multitude of their transgressions. 5. The opppsing of truth, and of
the Ordinances of God, in the person of his servants who stand for the same, is
not simply the opposing of mortal men, but the opposing of God, whose quarrel
it is; Therefore, says he, They have rebelled against thee.

Ver. 11. But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them ever
shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy Name,
be joyful in thee.

12. For thou LORD, wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass
him, as with a shield.

In the last place, he makes prayer for all the godly, mi^itant in this
warfare with himself, that they may share together in the Lords favor. Hence
learn, 1. Persecution for righteousness is a cause common to all believers,
wherein they should all join, and pray one of them for another, and seek for a
joyful out-gate each to other in their own time. for this cause, after prayer
against enemies, he says, But let all that trust in thee rejoice. 2. The
manifested care of God for his people, in protecting and delivering them from
their enemies, is matter of exceeding joy to his people, because he is
glorified herein, and his Church is preserved: Let them ever shout f^r joy,
because thou defendest them. 3. Such believers as have gotten grace to love
Gods name, (albeit it be not yet given unto them to suffer for his Name) are
allowed to share in the joy of victorious sufferers. Let them also that love
thy Name, says he, be joyful in thee. 4. The person who is justified by
faith, and studieth unto holiness, is an heir of Gods blessing, whether he be
less or more taken notice of by the world, whether entered in the conflict with
persecuters or nor: For thou, O Lord, wilt bless the righteous. 5. The favor
and good wi^ of God toward his own, is a strong and glorious defense to them;
it is a crowning shield, a shield compassing a man round about like a glorious
Diadem, a shield very handsome and strong, which the believer ought to gripe
well, and hold fas^ and manage warily, and oppose it to every assault of the
adversary: a crowning shield, which cirkleth the man round about, and keeps
off the dint of the adversaries weapon, even when the pursued believer is not
aware: With favor will thou compass hi^ as with a shield.

PSALM VI. To the chief Musician on Neginoth upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David.
Another experience of David, useful to be known by all the children of God,
who are subject to the like exercise; wherein David being under the sense of
the Lords heavy hand, upon his body and spirit, prays for the removal of
felt wrath, ver. 1, 2, 3 Next prays for the renewed feeling and experience of
Gods mercy toward him, laying forth his lamentable condition before the
pitiful eye of God, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. After which, being heard and comforted, in
the third place, he defieth, and triumphs over all his enemies, ver. 8* 9.

Ver. 1. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

2. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

3. My soul is also sore vexed: but thou* O Lord, how long?

From his prayer for removal of wrath, Learn, 1. It is possible, that a true
believer, who has been often times refreshed with the sense of Gods favor, may
by some sad exercise have his conscience so wakened in the sense of sin, as
he can feel nothing but wrath, and fear of cutting off; as this experience of
David makes manifest. 2. There is no relief in such case, save to set faith on
work, whatsoever be felt or feared, and to seek mitigation and deliverance of
God, as the Prophet does here. 3. Even the fatherly wrath of God, and far more
the apprehension of hot displeasure of an angry Judge, is unsupportable to a
soul that knows God, and has ever tasted of his favor before: Rebuke me
not in thy wrath, says he. 4. There is as much ground of faith holden forth in
the Lords Name Jehovah, (importing his unchangeable being, and his constancy in
his promises) as to ground a prayer upon it, for obtaining the change of a man's
case to the better, in the hardest condition imaginable; O Lord, or O Jehovah,
(says he) Rebuke me not in thy wrath* 5. Though sense feel wrath, and see
nothing but hot displeasure, yet faith can pierce through cl^uds, and bespeake
mercy: Have mercy on me, O Lord, says David, in the midst of this sad
condition. 6. Though sin does provoke anger, yet the misery and inability to
subsist, presented unto God, is the object of mercy, and a motive to faith to
expect compassion: Have mercy on me, says he, for I am weak. 7. When sin
has drawn on sickness, or any other danger, let pardon of sin be first
sought, and after that, the removing of the stroke; for first, he says, have
mercy on me, and then, heal me. 8. The Lord can make the strongest and most
insensible part of a man's body, sensible of his wrath, when he pleases to
touch him; for here David's bones are vexed. 9. Anguish of Spirit and torment of
conscience, is heavier then any torture of body, as, my soul is also vexed,
does import. 10. The Lords apprehended absence in t^ouble, and delaying to
answer the supplicant, puts a load above a burden, and surpasses all
expression of words; for here his speech is cutted, But thou O Lord, how long?

Ver. 4. Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

5. For in death there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give
thee thanks?

6. I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim, I water
my couch with my tears.

7. Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxes old, because of all mine
enemies.

In the next place he prays for a renewed sensible experience of Gods mercy
to him, because of his pitiful condition. Wherein learn, 1. A renewed blenk of
the Lords countenance will satisfy a soul in greatest distress: Therefore
David craveth this for a remedy of all his sorrow, Return, O Lord. 2. If
desertion continue, fear of perishing utterly does present it self; as this
prayer insinuates, O Lord, deliver my soul. 3. The only time to spread the
praise of God, by making mention of him before them that know him not, is the
time of this life: For in death there is no remembrance of thee. 4. The
Christians love of life, should proceed from the love of honoring of God in
this life, (where it may enlarge Gods glory, before them who may be profited by
preaching of his praise) and should be preferred to our own contentment for a
time in heaven, so long as God pleases to take service of us here. For this is
the force of the Prophets reasoning, In the grave who shall give thee thanks?
Our place waits for us, and no man can take it over our head, while we on
earth are enduring toyling and trouble, to bring more to heaven with us. 5. A
true desire and purpose to glorify God in this life, to the edifying of
others, may give hope of some prolonging of life, and assurance of not
perishing for ever: for David's hope to be heard does run here upon this ground.
7. The most lasting, pressing, and piercing sorrow that ever soul felt, is from
the sense of sin, and of Gods displeasure for it, as the Prophets expression
here does give evidence. 8. The exercise of the godly under the sense of Gods
displeasure, may be very heavy, and of long continuance; The prophet is weary
with his groaning, and his eyes consumed with grief. 9. No delay of comfort, no
sense of sin, no fear of Gods utter displeasure can be a reason to the
believer to cease from prayer, and dealing with God for grace; for the Prophet
is weary, but gives not over; only his condition is the matter of fresh
mourning to him night and day, and pouring out of tears in the Lords bosom:
All the night makes he his bed to swim, and waters his couch with his
tears. 10. The insulting of enemies over the godly when the Lords hand is heavy
upon them, because it reflecteth upon Religion and upon Gods glory, is a main
ingredient in the sorrow of the godly: David's eye had waxen old and dim with
grief, because of all his enemies.

V. 8. Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity: for the Lord has heard the
voice of my weeping.

9. The Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will receive my prayer.

10. Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be
ashamed suddenly.

In the third place David defyeth all his enemies, being comforted by the light
of Gods countenance, and lifted up in his spirit. Whence Learn, 1. The Lord
can shortly change the cheer of an humble supplicant, and raise a soul
trembling for fear of wrath, to a triumphing over all sort of adversaries, and
over all tentations to sin arising from them, for the return of the Prophets
prayer makes him say, now, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. 2. The
Sacrifice of a contrite Spirit, offered by a believer, the Lord will no^
despise; For the Lord heard the voice of the Prophets weeping. 3. The hearing
of our prayer should be thankfully observed and made use of, for strengthening
our faith in prayer afterward: For after the Prophet has said, [ The Lord has
heard my supplication; he adds, The Lord will receive my prayer. 4. The
enemies of the godly shall all of them be disappointed of their hopes, and
ashamed for their attempts against them, and filled with vexation for their
pains; for this prayer furnished by the Spirit ( verse. 10) to one of the godly
against his wicked enemies, is a prophecy against all the rest of the enemies
of the godly, in all ages.

PSALM. VII. Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the
words of Cush the Benjamine.
The Prophet as a type of Christ mystical, and an example of Christians
suffering, being slandered of treason against his Prince, by one of the
courtiers, first flees to God for delivery, ver. 1, 2. Secondly, clears his
innocence, ver. 3, 4, 5. Thirdly, requesteth the Lord to judge between him and
his enemies, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. And fourthly, in prayer is made confident, that
the Lord will plead for him against his enemies, ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. and will
return their devised mischief against him, upon their own head, ver. 14, 15,
16. Whereupon in the last place he promises praise to God for his righteous
judgment, ver^ 17.

Ver. 1. O Lord, my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me:

2. Lest he tear my soul like a Lion, renting it in pieces, while there is
none to deliver.

AS to the first part, wherein he flees to God to be delivered from the
bloody tongues of calumniators; Learn, 1. It is a part of the exercise of
Christ's servants, to be slandered as Traitors to their lawful Magistrates, as
David was by Cush, a flattering courtier. 2. God who is able to clear the
innocent, and to defend them from malice, is in this case to be run unto, and
use is to be made of faith in him, and our Covenant with him, for relief from
all adversaries, as the Prophet does here. 3. If God do not interpose himself,
for defense of his unjustly slandered Servants, there is nothing to be expected
from wicked enemies enraged, but merciless beastly cruelty, as is shown in
David's experience.

Ver. 3. O Lord my God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands.

4. If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at pe^ce with me, (yea, I have
delivered him that without cause is my enemy.)

5. Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my
life upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. Selah.

In the second place, wherein he clears his own innocence, Learn 1. Though
innocence cannot exempt a man from being unjustly slandered, yet it will
furnish him with a good conscience, and much boldness in the particular,
before God; as here is seen, ver. 3, 4. 2. The more a man does render for evil
good, the more confidence shall he have, when he comes to God; for
innocence served David for this good use, That he had delivered Saul, who
without cause was his enemy, verse. 4. 3. He that is conscious of doing, or
intending injury to his neighbor, will have his own conscience against him, in
the time when he meets with a greater injury done to him, and in that case
will be forced to justify Gods righteousness against himself, as David's
conditional prayer does here imoort, ver. 5.

V. 6. Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thy self, because of the r^ge of
mine enemies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou have commanded.

7. So shall the Congregation of the people compass thee about; for their
sakes, therefore return thou on high.

8. The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.

9. Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the
just: for the righteous God tries the hearts and reins.

In the third place, he prays that God would judge between him and his
enemies: Whence learn, 1. Though the Lord for the trial and exercise of his
children, sit still as it were, for a time, when men are about to oppress
them; yet will he in due time manifest himself to be no idle spectator of
wrong, but a just defender of the oppressed, and avenger of the injurious, He
will arise in anger, and lift up himself. 2. When our enemies are desperately
malicious, and nothing can mitigate their fury; let the consideration of Gods
justice mitigate our passion: for he will arise in anger against them. 3. There
is no less just zeal in God, to defend his own oppressed people, then there
is malice in the wicked, to wrong them: For his rising in anger, is here
opposed to the rage of the enemies. 4. Albeit judgment against the oppressor
be not at the first executed, yet God in his Word has given out sentence
against them, and in his active providence, has prepared means and instruments
for execution thereof in due time; When he shall awake to execute the
judgment which he has commanded, or given order for. 5. When the Lord
arises to judge his enemies, then the Lords people will draw warmly unto him,
and as it were, compass him round about. 6. In calling for justice upon the
wicked enemies of Gods people, we should not be led with private passion, or
desire of revenge, but with desire of Gods glory, and edification of his
people: for their sakes prays he, return thou on high, or ascend to thy
Tribunal Seat. 7. Principles of Religion, whereof we may have use in our
exercises, should be solidly digested, that we may apply them readily to use,
as need requires, for strengthening of our faith, and prayer to God: for when
the Prophet has settled his faith upon the Doctrine of Gods judging and
executing justice in favors of his people, in the general, he applies it to
his own particular, saying, judge me O Lord. 8. When a man has made peace with
God about all his sins, upon the terms of grace and mercy, through the
Sacrifice of the Mediator, he may in comparison with his injurious enemies, in
a particular cause, appeal to Gods justice to decide the controversy; as here
the Prophet does, saying, Judge me according to my righteousness, O Lord, and
mine integrity that is in me. 9. When a process has been lying long before
God, and the controversy between the godly and their persecuters is not yet
decided, the godly may put in a bill for passing the decree, and executing of
the sentence, as here is done: Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an
end, etc. 10. The upright man needs not to fear that his enemies shall obtain a
decree in their favors, or suspension, or reduction of the sentence
pronounced: For the righteous God tries the heart and the reins.

Ver. 10. My defense is of God, which saves the upright in heart.

11. God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day.

12. If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he has bent his bow and made it
ready.

13. He has also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordains his
arrows against the persecuters.

14. Behold he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forth falsehood.

15. He made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.

16. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate.

In the fourth place is the answer of his prayer, viz. assurance given of
delivery to him, and of judgment on his (...): Whereupon the supplicant gives
thanks to God. Whence learn, 1. The fruit of faith joined with a good
conscience, is access to God in prayer, confidence, peace and tranquillity of
mind, mitigation of trouble, protection and deliverance, as the Prophets
experience here does prove. 2. Victory granted unto faith, after wrestling with
darkness is satisfactory to the soul of the godly, as if all that (...) did
hope for were perfected; for he is now clear to (...) My defense is of God,
etc. 3. Whatsoever we do think^ (...) the time of tentation, neither justice
against the wicked, 1. mercy toward the godly is idle; for Gods Word and Worke^
do speak mercy to the one, and wrath to the other, ever^ day; all things are
working for the ones good, and for the others damage continually; For God
judges the righteous, and is angry with the wicked every day. 4. God delayeth
the execution of his judgment on the wicked, to lead them to repentance; for
here God has whet his sword to strike, if the wicked turn not. 5. If
repentance intervene not, the destruction of the wicked is inevitable: If he
turn not, the instruments of death are prepared, and the arrows directed
toward the persecuters. 6. It is a matter of no small pains that the sinner is
put unto, to serve the Devil and his own corrupt affections, he travelleth as
with a child, he digs a pit, one of the hardest pieces of work to slaves. 7.
When once the wicked has conceived mischief, he cannot rest till he bring
his purpose to action, that his sinful thoughts may be wrought in effect: He
conceives mischief, and travelleth with iniquity. 8. The adversary of Gods
people shall have no profit of all his labor, but shall be met with
disappointment, He brings forth falsehood, and the evil which is most
contrary to his hope and intention shall befall him: He is fallen in the ditch
which he made, and his mischief shall return upon his own head, etc. as a
stone thrown up against heaven, returns upon the head of him who did throw
it.

Verse. 17. I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness: and will
sing praise to the Name of the Lord most high. In the last place he promises
praise, and closes his son^ so. Whence learn, 1. The issue of the hardest
exercise of the godly, is comfort to their souls, and praise to God, as here
(...) see. 2. When faith is sensibly satisfied, and settled in assurance of what
was promised, it will be glad and give thanks for what is to come, as if it
were in possession already: so speaks this conclusion, I will praise the
Lord, and I will sing praise to the name of the Lord. 3. Let the party opposer
of the godly be never so powerful and violent, and his place in the world never
so high, faith may set to its seal, that God shall mafest himself a righteous
Judge in power and authority above the highest oppressing powers on earth: I
will sing praise to the Name of the Lord most high.

PSALM. VIII. To the chief Musician upon Gitteth, A Psalm of David.
To the end the Prophet may commend the glory of Gods grace toward man, he
first admireth his glory in the works of Creation and Providence, which are
able to stop the mouths of all blasphemous Atheists, ver. 1, 2. In the second
place, he admireth the Lords love to man above all other, even the most
glorious creatures, ver. 3, 4. Thirdly, he sets out this grace of God to
man, in the Incarnation, humiliation, and exaltation of Christ for man's cause,
and for restoring of redeemed man in Christ, to their right unto, and over the
visible creatures. ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. and closes the Psalm, with the admiration
of Gods glory in all the Earth. ver. 9.

Ver. 1. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth! who have
set thy glory above the heavens.

2. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

From his admiration of Gods glory in the works of Creation and Providence,
learn 1. The godly are not always born down with trouble; Sometime they have
liberty to go, and delight themselves in the beholding of Gods glory and
goodness toward themselves, as the whole Psalm shows. 2. The mystery of
the glory of God, in his works of Creation and Redemption, is such, as none
save the eye spiritually illuminate by his spirit, can see it: And he that
sees it, cannot but be ravished therewith, when he does discern it; and none
can sufficiently comprehend it, or take it up fully, save God himself.
Therefore the Prophet directs his speech full of admiration, wholly to the
Lord, throughout all the Psalm. 3. The glory of the Lord is greatly sweetened
unto the godly, in the time of their praising of his Majesty, when they
consider their own Interest in him, as in their own propriety. Therefore says
he, O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name! 4. No words are sufficient to
set out the glory of the Lord, not only as it is in it self, but even as it is
discovered to a spiritual understanding; Therefore by way of admiration, must
he cry out, How excellent is thy Name! 5. The heavens and celestial lights
shining from above, do speak much of Gods glory; but in effect his glory is
greater then they can hold forth; for his glory is set above the heavens. 6.
Albeit the glory of the Lord does fill the world, yet has he enemies of his
glory, to wit, profane and godless persons, Athiests, Epicures, and
persecuters of his people and truth; For here are enemies spoken of, and
avengers, opening blasphemous mouths against him, and his people, as if God,
and his people, had injured them. 7. Not only the providence of God in newborn babes, framing them in the belly, providing nourishment unto them when
they are borne, and making them to suck the breasts; but also the giving of
saving knowledge to some of them, in their tender years, is able to refute all
Atheists and profane despisers of the glory of the Lord; for out of the mouth
of babes and sucklings he has ordained strength, or strong conviction, to
still the enemy and the avenger, and put him to silence. Matthew 21.26.

Ver. 3. When I consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon and
the Stars which thou have ordained;

4. What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him?

From his admiration in Gods respect, and love to man above all other
creatures, Learn, 1. The weakness and unworthiness of man, considered both
in himself, and compared with his glorious creatures made for his use, do
commend the bounty of God to man, and make it a matter of great admiration. For
when the prophet considers the glorious heavens etc. he asks, What is man?
etc. 2. Man of all the creatures is most esteemed and taken care of by God. For
he is mindful of man, and daily visits him.

Ver. 5. For thou have made him a little lower then the Angels, and have
crowned him with glory and honor.

8. Thou made him to have dominion over all the works of thy hand; Thou have
put all things under his feet.

7. All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field.

8. The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through
the paths of the seas.

In the third place, he looks on man considered in his Creation before the
fall, and as he is in his head Christ (who is God incarnate, humbled and
exalted for man's cause after the fall) restored to what he lost by the fall.
Whence learn, 1. Look unto man in his creation, and God has given him the
place, in order of dignity, above all the creatures visible, next unto heavenly
Angels: Thou have made him a little lower then the Angels. 2. Look unto man
after his fall, restored by Christ unto his place, and in this respect he is
established in that dignity to be next unto the glorious Angels: Thou have made
him a little lower then the Angels. 3. Look unto man in our Head Christ Jesus,
God incarnate, and there man is wonderfully exalted in regard that for respect
and love to man, the Man Christ being very God, is humbled unto the death of
the cross. And in this sense does the Apostle, Heb. 2.7, 9. take this place,
Thou made him a little lower then the Angels, for the suffering of death. 4.
Look unto man in Christ Jesus, after his resurrection, and in his
glorification; God has crowned him with glory and Majesty. 5. It is no small
point of dignifying man, that all believers have by Christ this title of
Heirship, with lawful use and possession of the creatures recovered and
restored unto him: Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thine
hands. 6. As there is nothing which may do man good service, which God has
not granted man dominion over in and through Christ, so there is nothing can
harm him, but he has put under Christ's feet, and under believers feet in and
through Christ, to wit, sin and Satan, and all our enemies, and Death the
last enemy; He has put all things under his feet, as the Apostle gathers,
1 Cor. 15.26. 7. Christ shall not lay down his kingdom which he has in his
Church, and over all her enemies, till he has put down all rule and
authority, and power against him and his Church, and have subdued all enemies
under himself. For he must reign till he has put all things under his
feet, as the Apostle collecteth, 1 Cor. 15.25. 8. Nothing is excepted or
exeemed from being subject to Christ, as man, no not the holy Angels (who are
made ministering Spirits, to serve believers) but only God, essentially
considered, he only is excepted. For he has put all things under his feet; but
when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted
who did put all things under him, as the Apostle proves from this place, 1
Cor. 15.27.

Ver. 9* O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth! He
closes the Psalm as he began it with admiration: Whence learn, 1. The
praises of our Lord, and the excellency of our covenant right, and Interest in
him, are worthy again and again to be considered, and that God should be
proclaimed Lord of us whom he has l^fted up to so high a Dominion. Therefore
is this verse repeated again. 2. When a man has begun to declare some reason
of his wondering at the glory of God, manifested in the whole world, and
specially in his Church, he must give over the full explication of this glory,
and close as he begun, with wondering still as here the same exclamation of
wondering at the excellency of Gods glory concludes the Psalm, as it did begin
it, O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth!

PSALM. IX. To the chief Musician upon Muth-Labben. A Psalm of David.
Here is David's song of praise to God, first, for his own exeperience of Gods
goodness toward himself, and Gods righteous Judgment against his enemies,
ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Secondly, for the Lords readiness to do the like work* in
favors of all the godly, ver. 5* 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Thirdly, he exhorts the
godly to praise God with him, ver. 11, 12. Fourthly, he prays for his own
deliverie out of his present distress, ver. 13, 14. Fifthly, he has assurance
of the overthrow of all his enemies, ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. And last of all, for
the execution of this overthrow, he heartily prays, ver. 19, 20.

Ver. 1. I Will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will show forth all
thy mavelous works.

2. I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy name, O thou
most high.

3. When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy
presence.

4. For thou have maintained my right and my cause, thou satest in thy throne
judging right.

FRom the first part of this song of praise, Learn, 1. The exercise of the
Saints in variety of troubles does occasion the setting forth of the glory of
God in all his attributes, as in this Psalm is shown* 2. When the heart is
enlarged with the sense of Gods goodness, the work of praising God will ^e
more heartily undertaken, and a large heart will make a loosed tongue and an
open mouth, to set forth his glory. David will now praise the Lord with his
whole heart. 3. One work of Gods wonderful goodness uses to call for
another* that they may go forth together in each others hands to set forth his
excellency; as here David will show forth all his wonderful works. 4. A lover
of the glory of God, cannot rest til he communicate with others what he knows
of the Lords wonders: he will show forth (for others upstirring) all the Lords
mavelous works. 5. Not any benefit or gift received of God, but God himself,
and his free favor is the matter of the believers joy: David will be glad and
rejoice in God himself. 6. It is not enough to have joy in our heart in the
Lord, but it is his glory, that the joy which we have in him, be openly known
as occasion offers: therefore will David sing praises to the name of the Lord
most high. 7. The way of giving God the glory in every action, and in special
of our victories over our enemies, is to acknowledge him to be the chief
worker thereof, and the creatures to be but instruments by whom he turns the
enemy back: for the enemy falls and perishes at his presence. 8. As for
time bygone God should have the glory of what is done* so must we consecrate
the glory of what shall be done, and of what we would have done altogether to
the Lord; therefore also for time to come David speaks, When mine enemies are
turned back, (to wit, by thy power) they shall fall at thy presence. 9. Were a
cause never so right and just, it requires Gods power for keeping it on foot:
the justness of the cause must not be relied on, but God must have the trust
of the cause, and the glory of maintaining of it: David acknowledges God the
maintainer of his right and cause. 10. What Judge soever shall condemn us
unrighteously, there is a higher Judge to judge the cause over again, and the
parties also: who when he shows himself, should be glorified in his justice
by us; Thou ^^^test in the throne judging right, says David, after he was
condemned of the Judges of the Land.

Ver. 5. Thou have rebuked the Heathen, thou have destroyed the wicked; thou
have put out their name for ever and ever.

6. O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou have
destroyed Cities, their memorial is perished with them.

7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he has prepared his throne for judgment.

8 And he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister
judgment to the people in uprightness.

9 The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of
trouble.

10 And they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord,
have not forsaken them that seek thee.

In the second place, he foreseeth in the spirit what shall become of all Gods
enemies, and adversaries of his people, and prophesies concerning them, to the
praise of God, and comfort of the godly, who were to live after his time:
Whence learn, 1. Although the conscience of the persecuters of Gods people be
silent in their securi^y, yet shall Gods judgment against them (...) their
conscience ^e last, whether they be enemies without the Church, or (...) the
Lord shall destroy them: For thou, O Lords, have (...)* the heathen* thou have
destroyed the wicked (...) Although the enemies have a great name in the (...)
their glory be blasted, and their (...) never been heard of (...) name for ever
and ever. 3. The (...) people, and of their dwellings (...) be charged upon
their enemies (...) executed and brought their (...) enemies themselves know
and think they (...) purpose: their intended (...). 4. The time shall come,
when (...) godly (...) over all their oppressors* yea, in the midst of the
enimie^ insolences, the godly, by faith may (...) say as here, O thou enemy,
destructions are come to a (...) end. 5. As the enemies of Gods Church have
destroyed the earthly dwellings of the Lords people; (...) has destroyed, and
will destroy their cities and their dwellings, and make their memorial cease
with them. 6. The reign of the wicked adversaries of Gods people is very
short, and in a few days they are cut off, but the Lord shall endure for ever,
to defend his people from age to age. 7. Courts of Justice among men are not
always ready to hear plaintiffs; but the Lord holds Court continually, the
taking in of no man's complaint is delayed so much as one hour, though
thousands should come at once, all of them with sundry Petitions: He has
prepared his throne for Judgment. 8. Albeit in the Courts of men justice be not
always found, and very rarely in any matter concerning Christ; yet the Lord
shall judge the world in righteousness, and minister judgment to the people in
uprightness: the injuries done to his people shall be all of them righted by
him. 9. Although the Lords children have no residence, but be chased from place
to place, and know not whither to go in the earth, yet there is an open City
of refuge unto them, where they shall find shelter: For the Lord also will be a
refuge to the oppressed. 10. The Lords relief which he gives to his people,
is reserved, til other inferior reliefs do fa^l, til the godly man be
humbled and emptied, and then will he help: Unto the oppressed he will be a
refuge in time of trouble. 11. The way of the Lords helping and comforting his
own people, is by lifting up the believer above any thing which can overtake
him; above the reach of all creatures; The Lord will be an high tower, an high
place, as the word imports, whence the believer may look down and despise
wha^ flesh can do unto him. 12. The ignorance of the Lords goodness, mercy,
truth, and other his attributes, is the cause of making so little use of God in
prosperity, and so little believing in him in the time of trouble. For, they
who know his name, will trust in him. 13. They to whom the spiritual knowledge
of God is revealed, will certainly trust in him: and they that trust in him will
seek him: and they that seek him, will find him to be what he is called: for the
man knowing God, trusting in God, and seeking God, is the same here. 14. The
Lord may for a time hide himself, or delay to manifest himself to a believer
that seeks him (which he does sometimes for the believers trial, exercise,
and profiting) yet no age can give an instance of his rejecting such a
supplicant: for thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee. 15. As many
experiences as are past of Gods grace to believing supplicants before this day,
as many confirmations of Faith are given, and as many encouragemints to all
believers to seek his face in Christ: For he never forsook them that sought
him.

Ver. 11. Sing praise to the Lord, which dwells in Zion: declare among the
people his doings.

12. When he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers them: he forgets
not the cry of the humble.

In the third place, he exhorts the rest of the godly to praise God with him.
Whence learn, 1. It is the duty of all believers to join themselves cheerfully
in the setting forth the Lords care over them, and whatsoever may make his
lovely Majesty known to the world: for so requires the present precept and
example, Sing praises to the Lord. 2. The only true God, and the right object
of our joy and praises, is he who did manifest himself to the Church of the
Jews of old; who gave his Scriptures and his Ordinances to them; and among
whom he took up his residence in Jerusalem, in Sion, in the Temple, in the
Mercy seat, betwixt the Cherubims, (which was a figure of the Incarnation of
the Son of God; in whom, as the only Mediator, is the trysting place between
God and Believers, for accepting their persons and worship) for so does the
description of the true God here teach us: Sing praises to the Lord, who
dwells in Sion. 3. The acts of the Lord for his people are so stamped with
the impression of his divinity, that they are able to purchase glory to God
even among the Nations that are without the Church, and to draw them to him:
and so it is not a needless, fruitless or hopeless work, to declare his
doings among the Nations. 4. If the Lord be pleased to honor himself with the
martyrdom of any of his servants, it is not for disrespect to their persons,
for they remain, even when dead, honorable in his estimation, and high in his
affection; for he remembereth them in a special manner. 5. There is a time
appointed of God for bringing to judgment every sin, and especially murder;
and of all murders, to avenge most severely the slaughter of his servants,
concerning whom it is here said, When he makes inquisition for blood, he
remembers them: Precious in his eyes is the death of his Saints: 6. There is
not a lost word in the earnest prayers of the humble believer, poured forth in
the day of his necessity: every petition shall have a full answer, partly in this
life, and partly in the life to come: For God forgets not the cry of the
humble.

Ver. 13. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble which I suffer of
them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death.

14 That I may show forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Sion:
I will rejoice in thy salvation.

In the fourth place, he comes to his own particular and present case, and
prays for a new experience of the truth formerly set down, believed and
sealed by him. Whence learn, 1. When new troubles befall experienced believers,
they must betake them to their old refuge, and to the formerly blessed means of
prayer; as here David does: Have mercy, O Lord, upon me. 2. Never a word of
merit should be in the mouth of a true believer; For, Have mercy on me, O
Lord, is David's only plea; any good in us, is but a sandy ground to build on.
3. It suffices a believer acquainted with God, to present before God the
trouble he suffers unjustly from his enemies, and to expect deliverance from
the Lords grace toward himself, and from his justice in relation to the
adversary: for this is the argument here used, Consider my trouble which I
suffer of them that hate me. 4. Extreme danger of present death, should not
dash nor discourage the believer to pray for deliverance, because experience
has proven, that the Lord can lift a believer up from the gates of death. 5.
Life should not be loved so much for it self, as that we may glorify God in
our life; and edify others in the knowledge of God; For deliverance from death
is here asked of God, that he may set forth all the praises of God in the
gates and most open places of the daughter of Sion: that is, in the audience of
the people of God. 6. He gets a satisfactory Answer: which teaches us, That in
a moment the Lord can persuade the supplicant of the grant of his prayer, and
fill him with joy; as here in one breath, ere the prophet could close his
prayer, he is made to joy in the salvation or deliverance which he was
persuaded God was to give to him: I will rejoice in thy salvation.

Ver. 15. The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which
they hid, is their own foot taken.

16 The Lord is known by the judgments which he executes: the wicked is
snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion, Selah.

17 The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God.

18 For the needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor
shall not perish for ever.

In the fifth place is set down, how with confidence of his own delivery, he
is made sure of the overthrow of the enemy: Whence learn, 1. Ordinarily, the
delivery of the persecuted people of God is joined with the overthrow of their
oppressors: And ceatainly, the wicked cannot take a readier way to ruin
themselves, then to seek the overthrow of the Lords Church and people: For
here, The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made; and their crafty
counsel against the godly, is the trap to take themselves into: In the net
which they hid, their own feet are taken. 2. None of Gods judgments, and
specially none of those Judgments whereby he pleads the cause of his Church
against her enemies, should be lightly looked upon: For the Lord is known by
the judgments which he executes: His judgments bear the impression of his
wisdom and justice; so as the sin may be read written on the rod. 3. Amongst
other manifestations of Gods wisdom and justice in punishing his adversaries,
this is one. The Lord makes the works of the wicked, and specially what they
do against his people, to be the very means to undo them: The wicked is
snared in the work of his own hands. 4. As the devices of the wicked do come
from hell, so do they return thither, and draw the devisers with them: Though
they cry, Peace, peace, and put the fear of hell far from them, yet all the
wicked shall be turned into hell. 5. As they who give themselves to sin, and
specially enemies to peace, do cast away the knowledge of God out of their
mind and affections; so shall God cast them away far from his presence: All the
nations that forget God, shall be turned into hell. 6. Albeit the Lord do not
presently execute judgment on the godless oppressors of his people, yet for
respect the Lord does bear to his people, their destruction shall certainly
come: They shall go down to bell; for the needy shall not always be
forgotten. The cry of the needy and oppressed shall bring judgment upon the
oppressors. 7. The Lords people are an humbled people, afflicted, emptied,
sensible of their need, driven to a daily attendance on God, daily begging of
him, and living only upon the hope of what is promised: for so are they here
described needy, poor, supplicants, and expectants of the performance of what
is promised. 8. Albeit the Lord seem to lay aside the prayers of the oppressed
godly, and forget them: and albeit the godly man's hope does seem for a time
vain, yet shall he not always be forgotten, nor his expectation perish for
ever, and specially the expectation he has of things everlasting, shall not be
disappointed, but shall be satisfied for ever.

Ver. 19. Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged in thy
sight.

20 Put them in fear, O Lord: that the nations may know themselves to be but
men. Selah.

In the last place he follows his condemnatory sentence of the wicked with
prayer, that the Lord would put it in execution, even in his own time. Whence
learn, 1. The Lord does not so delay to execute judgment on the oppressors of
his people, but he may be entreated to make speedy dispatch, and as need
requires to arise and fall to work. 2. The time of Gods arising is, when the
cause of God which the godly do maitaine is like to be lost. Arise, O Lord, let
not man prevail. There is his reason, why he would have God to arise. 3. When
God arises for the godly, he makes it appear, that they are his people, and
that their adversaries are in effect before him but heathen and strangers from
the inward covenant, and commonwealth of his people, whether they be within the
visible Church or not; for he prays, Let the heathen be judged in thy sight.
4. So long as the Lord ^oth spare his adversaries, they do mis-know themselves,
and God also. Sin does so besot ignorant and graceless people, that they
forget that they are mortal, and that God is their judge. Therefore David
desires, that the nations may know themselves to be but men. 5. Where there is
any hope or possibility of the salvation of enemies, the godly man's desire is
they should be brought in subjection to God* and humbled before him; and that
judgments might be so tempered as the enemy might profit thereby, and God be
glorified: Put them in fear, that they may know themselves to be ^ut men.

PSALM. X.
This Psalm wants an inscription, and that in Gods wisdom, that being less
restricted to a particular man's case, it may be of more general use, whenever
the godly find themselves in a condition whereunto this prayer may be suitable:
and specially in time of general persecution. The prophet here complains to
God and craveth justice against the persecuters of his people, because of the
intolerable wickedness of the oppressor, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. Secondly, he prays for hastening of the deliverie of the Lords people, and
for hastening of judgment upon the persecuters, for vindication of the glory of
Gods justice against his enemies, and of his mercy to his people. Ver. 12, 13,
14, 15. Thirdly, he professes his confidence that he shall be heard, and so
glorifieth God, Ver. 16, 17, 18.

Ver. 1. WHy stand thou a far off, O Lord? why hidest thou thy self in time
of trouble?

2. The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor: let them be taken in the
devices that they have imagined.

3. For the wicked boasts of his hearts desire: and blesses the covetous,
whom the Lord abhors.

4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God:
God is not in all his thoughts.

5. His ways are always grievous, thy judgments are far above out of his
sight: as for all his enemies, he ^uffeth at them.

6. He has said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in
adversity.

7. His mouth is full of cursing, and deceit, and fraud: under his tongue is
mischief and vanity.

8. He sitteh in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret places does
he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against the poor.

9. He lies in wait secretly as a lion in his den, he lies in wait to catch
the poor: he does catch the poor when he draws him into his net.

10. He croucheth, and humbles himself, that the poor may fall by his strong
ones.

11. He has said in his heart, God has forgotten: he hides his face, he will
never see it.

In this complaint he speaks to God after the manner of men, in the terms of
sense, and as matters did seem to him in outward appearance. Whence learn, 1.
How far contrary to the word of promise, may Gods word and dispensation seem
to speak: the word says, He will ever be with his own, and not forsake them;
and here his dealing with them seems to say, That he stands afar off, and
hides himself in time of trouble. Sense may sometime speak contrary to faith.
2. In this case the speech of sense is not to be subscribed, but the truth of
the word should be relied upon; and the objection made by sense, or suggestion
against the word, is to be brought before the Lord in Prayer, that it may be
discussed: as here the Prophet does. Why stand thou afar off, etc? 3.
Observe how homely an humbled soul may (...) God, and how far the Lord will be
from mistaking of his people, when faith does borrow senses tongue; The Lord
will suffer such speeches and not take them in ill part, knowing that they
proceed from faith and love, wrestling with sense; yea, and he will suffer
them to be registered in his Book, as here we see, for prudent use making of
them, though they appear to challenge him, for standing al^ofe, and hiding
himself. 4. Often times it comes to pass, that the godly are in a mean
condition in the world, when their adversaries are in high places and power,
and so be able to oppress them as their underlings. The wicked in his pride
does persecute the poor. 5. In respect that pride disdaineth what is
apparently good in a mean person, and overvalueth its own worth, therefore
pride is easily coupled with oppression and pride is able to raise persecution.
The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor. 6. What persecuters do devise
against Gods people, may with good grounds be expected shall turn to be a snare
unto themselves. Let them be taken in the devices they have imagined. 7. All
the Politicians on earth cannot describe the vileness of the wicked, so well as
the Spirit of the Lord does point it out, for he sets him forth. 1. He is
an arrogant, self-confident man, threatening to bring to pass what he would
have done, as if he were able in despite of God to effectuate it: He boasts
of his hearts desire. 2. He accounts of no man, but such a one, as by hook and
crook is able to inhance honor and riches; He blesses the covetous man. 3.
He valueth not what God judges of a man, whether he be a man whom God loves,
and respects, or not; he sets his opinion in opposition to Gods judgment of
men, He blesses the man whom God abhors. 4. The wicked man has such a
conceit of his own ability and perfection, as his countenance and carriage does
testify that he scorneth to employ God by prayer for any thing: Through the
pride of his countenance he will not seek God. 5. For the rule of his life,
he consulteth not what may please or displease God, what may honor, or
dishonor God. He troubles not himself with such thoughts. God is not in all
his thoughts. That is, as the Hebrew phrase does mean, all his thoughts are,
that there is no God: or none of his thoughts are upon God. 6. His ways are
ever noisome, ^ending especially to hurt the godly; His ways are always
grievous; or as his ways prosper, they do vex others. 7. He fears not Gods
judgments, he believes not that they shall ever come; he puts them far
(...) in his conceit: yea; and what the Lord has set down in his word, as his
judgment, he apprehends it not; he is not capable of spiritual wisdom. The
Lords ^udgments are far above out of his sight. 8. He neither fears God nor
man, All his enemies he puffs at them; as disdaining what they can do against
him. 9. The wicked do promise to themselves perpetuity of prosperity, and do
not fear evil, to see a change to the worse, He assures himself never to be
moved, nor to be in adversity. 10. For his words, he stands not to blaspheme
God, to lie, swear, and curse, if it may purchase him credit, and may help him
to deceive others. His mouth is full of cursing. 11. His fair promises are but
vanity; and when he minds a mischief, he hides it with pretenses of best
intentions, under his tongue is mischief and vanity.. 12. As thieves and
cutthroats lie in wait about villages, to catch the straggling passengers,
where there are few to help them, so do the wicked watch where they may
oppress those who have few to do for them: He sits in the lurking places
of the villages, in secret places does he murder the innocent. 23. As an
Archer in the hunting of his prey, so does the wicked mark and spy out a poor
man, to make advantage of him: His eyes are privily set against the poor. 14.
As a Lion in his den, or some lurking place, lies still til the prey come by,
and then he leapeth out upon it, when he is able to take it: so does the wicked
dissemble his malice, till he be Master over a man, and then does what he can
against him. He lies secretly in wait as a Lion. 15. As a crafty hunter
spreads his net for a prey, and miskenneth it, til the prey be entangled, so
does the wicked lay some device to catch the poor, and takes him. He does
catch the poor when he draws him in his net. 16. As the Lion lies low in the
dust, as if he minded to do no harm at all; so do the wicked men pretend
themselves the most reasonable men that can be, and most observant of Law and
equity till by their power they may have their intent of the poor. He crou^heth
and humbles himself, that the poor may fall by him, or his associates. 17.
Present prosperity joined with impurity makes him persuade himself that God
will never take notice of him hereafter, or call him to account, or punish him.
He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will
never see it.

Ver. 12. Arise O Lord, O God, lift up thine hand^ forget not the humble.

13. Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? he has (...) in his heart, Thou will not require it.

14. Thou have seen it, for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it
with thy hand: the poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of
the fatherless.

15. Break thou the arm of the wicked, and the evil man: seek out his
wickedness til thou find none.

Thus he has given the character of the enemies of Gods people, and so made a
Dittay for them. Now in the second place, he prays against them, that their
Doom may be given out, and may be executed. Whence learn, 1. The more we see
Atheism in the wicked, the more we should draw near to God: and albeit the
godly conceive God to lie off, and sit still from executing of justice; the
godly being tempted with the tentations which overcome the wicked, yet they
must not yield to the tentation, but pray against it, as here is done, Arise, O
Lord, lift up thy hand. 2. The merciful respect and love which the Lord has to
his afflicted people, will not suffer his justice against these persecuters, to
be long quiet, For he will not forget the humble. 3. As the Interest which God
has in his own people, does engage him to fall on their enemies; so the
vindication also of his own glory from the contempt which they do to his Name,
does engage him against them; for wherefore does the wicked contemn God, etc?
4. The godless enemies of Gods people do deny Gods providence, and deny Gods
justice, yet his people are comforted under their saddest sufferings by the
Lords seeing and marking thereof; for the godly say here, Thou have seen it,
and beholdest mischief. 5. Gods judgments on the wicked shall really refute
the Atheism of the wicked, and requite their opposition made to the godly. He
beholds mischief and spite to requite it with his hand. 6. When a man has
laid forth his desires, and poured out his heart before God, he should quiet
himself, and cast himself with his burden upon the Lord; for here the poor
commits himself to God. And when an humble believer has casten his burden
on the Lord, the Lord will not fail to take care of what he is trusted with,
it is an engaging of God, that the poor has committed himself to him. 7. As
the Lords Office, Custom, and Nature is, so is his real work to do for them
who employ him, and are not able to do for themselves; He is the helper of the
fatherless. 8. The power of persecuters cannot be so great, but God shall
weaken and break it, so as they shall not be able to trouble his people. Break
thou the arm of the wicked. 9. Though the Lord reckons not with his enemies
for their sins at first, yet he reckons for all at last; for less and for
greater, for one and for all, and does not pass a farthing of the debt of
punishment un-exacted: But seeks out their sins till he find none. O how
fearful a reckoning must it be, which the Lord makes with the impenitent, who
die unpardoned, and unreconciled with God, through the Mediator Christ Jesus!

Ver. 16. The Lord is King for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of
his land.

17 Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble: thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

18 To judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth may
no more oppress.

In the last place, the answer of the petition follows, in a comfortable
persuasion of the supplicant, concerning the grant thereof: Whence learn, 1.
That the prayer of the persecuted shall not be rejected, because the kingdom
of Christ in his Church is perpetual: earthly Kings cannot live still to help
their friends, followers, or flatterers, or to persecute and molest Gods
Church: But Christ is the Lord and King for ever and ever, to defend his
people, and punish his foes. 2. The wicked within the visible Church, howsoever
they have the external privileges of Gods people, yet if they continue
unreconciled, and do oppose piety, they shall be in Gods estimation, and in the
day of his judging of them, counted, as they are here called, heathen, and shall
be separate from the fellowship of God and Gods people, The heathen shall
perish out of his land. 3. Its the Lords way to exercise his children with
trouble, till he humble them, and make them sensible of the need of his help,
til he turn their sense of need, into a desire of his relief, and their desire
into a prayer, and then he will in due time give answer: Lord, thou have heard
the desire of the humble. 4. Grace to pray, and the fixing of the heart in
prayer on the Lord, is his gift, no less then the answer of the prayer: and
where the Lord does give the one grace, he will also give the other: Thou will
prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear. 5. When God begins
to show his respect to the prayers of his people against their oppressors, then
the helpless and weak servants of God shall have deliverance from the power of
oppressors, and their oppressors shall not be able to do any more harm, when
the Lord causes his ear to hear their prayer: the fatherless shall be judged,
yea declared righteous, absolved and delivered; and the oppressor shall no
more oppress. 6. If there were no more comfort to the godly opressed, yet this
may suffice, that their life, inheritance, and happiness is in heaven; and
that their oppressors, in opposition to them are declared here, to be but men
of this earth, whose portion is no better, then what they have here in this
World.

PSALM. XI. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
David, as an example of a Christian under the trial of his faith in time of
trouble, and tempted to desperation, resisted the temptation, how desperate
soever his condition seemed: ver. 1, 2. and disputes for the confirmation of
his own faith. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Ver. 1. IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to
your mountain?

2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the
string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.

BEfore the Prophet dispute, and produce his reasons against the tentations
unto unbelief, he asserteth and avoweth his faith, and presents the danger
he is in, before God. Whence learn, 1. Its the surest method in our spiritual
combat against Satan, and his fiery darts, to hold up the shield of faith,
and to fix our self in resolution never to loose our gripes off the Lord; As
David does here, In the Lord put I my trust. 2. Having once fixed our foot on
the rock, we may the more effectually rebuke our adversaries, for mocking of
our confidence: As David does here, saying, How say you to my soul, Flee? 3.
God is a strong refuge to his own, whereunto they should fly like birds,
chased to their strength, in all necessities, for he is our rock or mountain.
4. The wicked world do scorn the godly man's confidence, and the avowing of
his faith in God, when they see no visible help for him on earth. Take up your
faith now (say they) when they see the man beset by apparently inextricable
troubles, as here they say to David, flee now as a bird to thy mountain. 5.
The believer is not stupid in time of danger, nor senseless of difficulties,
when he asserteth his faith: For lo (says he) the wicked bend their bow,
they have me as it were under the visie of their shot. 6. The Lord for the
exercise of the faith of his own, and for discovery of the plots of the wicked
against them, and for showing of his own glory in protecting them more clearly,
does suffer the wicked to make all ready, even unto present execution of their
cruelty, as here, they make ready their arrow upon the string to shoot, etc.

Ver. 3. If the foundation be destroyed, what can the righteous do?

4. The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes
behold, his eye lids try the children of men.

5. The Lord tries the righteous: but the wicked and him that loves violence,
his soul hates.

6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.

7. For the righteous Lord loves righteousness: his countenance does behold
the upright.

In the next place, he disputes for the confirmation of his own faith by
sundry reasons or several considerations. The first reason to confirm his
faith, is from the absurdity of the tentation, tending to the overturning of
the very foundation of religion, whereunto, if the believer should yield, he is
lost and gone. Whence learn, 1. Faith in God, and flying to him in all straits
for relief, is the foundation of all religious and righteous persons, whereupon
they build their hope and happiness solidly; for David had laid it for a
foundation, that God was a Rock, or mountain of refuge for men to flee unto in
straits. 2. A tentation to mistrust God, and not to flee to him in all hazards,
is most dangerous, and destructive of all true Religion, for it is the
destroying of the very foundations of righteousness and happiness; and the
resisting of this tentation is so necessary, as in what measure it is yielded
unto, in that measure the righteous man is put to a stand, and to a
comfortless perplexity, and should despair certainly if he went from it. For
if the foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous man do? If it be in
vain to fly to God, righteous men are lost men, which is absurd.

The next reason to confirm his faith is the establishment of a Mediator, set
forth in the Word of God, and other holy ordinances, concerning the covenant of
grace, and the benefits of it, and duties required in it, all to be found in
the Lords holy temple, or Tabernacle, representing Christ Jesus and his Church,
and the mutual relations between God and his people. Whence learn, 3. The way
to refresh and strengthen faith, is to look to God in Christ the Mediator,
reconciling the World to himself, according as he was shadowed forth in the
Temple of Jerusalem, and as he is still holden forth in the Church, in his word
and other ordinances. First and last Christ is the trysting place, where God is
constantly to be found on his mercy seat; for the Lord in his holy Temple, did
speak so much to the Church in typical terms.

4. The third reason is, because God is a perfect judge to take order in due
time, both with them who oppose his work and people, and with those who will
not make use of his mercy. The Lords throne is in heaven. 5. The Lords
knowledge of all men's carriage is perfect: His eyes behold. 6. When the Lord
does not make manifest by his work that he sees men's carriage, but seems, as
it were, to wink and close his eyes, he is then about to try the hearts of men,
and to bring their thoughts to light. His eyelids (when eyes seem closed) do
try the children of men. 7. The troubles whereunto the Lord does put his
children in times of tentation, are not to be exponed as acts of displeasure,
or mere justice, but as acts of wisdom and love, to try, exercise, and frame
them to obedience. The Lord tries the righteous; at such times as he sends
trouble specially. 8. However he gives the wicked and violent persecuter to
have a seeming prosperity, while the godly are in trouble, yet that is no act
of love to them: for the wicked, and him that loves violence, his soul hates.
9. All the seeming advantages which the wicked have in their own prosperity,
are but means of hardening of them in their ill course, and holding them fast
in the bonds of their own iniquities, till God execute judgment on them. Upon
the wicked he shall rain snares. 10. Whatsoever be the condition of the wicked
for a time, yet at length sudden, terrible, irresistible, and remediless
destruction they shall not escape: fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest
is the portion of their cup.

The 4. reason for confirmation of his faith is from the Lords love, settled
upon his upright servants, in the midst of their troubles, while they suffer
for righteousness sake. Whence learn, 11. The respect that the Lord has to
the cause for which his servants do suffer, ^hasteneth on, and fastneth wrath
upon their adversaries. For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, is given
as a reason of the sentence in the preceding verse. 12. Though clouds do
sometime hide the expressions of the Lords respect and love toward his people,
yet still his love is set upon them; for continually his countenance does behold
the upright.

PSALM. XII. To the chief Musician upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David.
The Prophet having observed, as is set down, ver. 8 how wickedness lifts up
the head in all the Land, when the places of power and trust do come in the
hands of naughty and vile men, does give direction by his own example unto the
godly; first, to have their recourse to God by prayer, while they are born down
by the wicked in such an ill time, ver. 1, 2. and next how to comfort
themselves by the word of God, pronouncing the sentence of justice upon all
loose-tongued men, ver. 3, 4. And promising delivery to the oppressed godly,
and preservation of his Church in all generations, ver. 5, 6, 7. Howsoever he
suffer wicked men to bear rule sometimes, and wickedness to abound by that
means, ver. 8.

Ver. 1. HElp Lord, for the godly man cease: for the faithful fail from among
the children of men.

2. They speak vanity every one with his neighbor with flattering lips, and
with a double heart do they speak.

David finding no friend at Court, nor any place or power, who either would
speak a word in his favors, or give him any friendly counsel, turns himself
to God. Whence learn, 1. The face of the visible Church may sometime be so far
defaced, that there cannot be a man found to show himself openly, for a good
cause, as here is noted. The godly man cease, the faithful fail from among
the children of men. 2. In such a case God can and will supply the in-lack of
friends and counselors to his own, when they seek to him, Help Lord: the Lord
will help. 3. At such a time, a godly person may not think upon seditious
practices against those that are in lawful authority, but take himself to
prayer; for David who had a fairer pretense for such a practice then any
private man or men can have, because he was designed successor to the kingdom,
he goes to God in this case, and cries, Help Lord.

He proves the in-lack of godliness and faithfulness, because there was no
upright, nor honest dealing among the people, but falsehood and flattery.
Whence learn, 4. Where true godliness is out of request, the common bonds of
neighborhood, (including bonds of blood, alliance, and acquaintance) will fail
also, and every one will go about to deceive his neighbor; so that a man
cannot trust what another says: for They speak vanity every one with his
neighbor. 5. When ungodly men intend most to deceive, then they are sure to
speak fairest, giving pleasant words, with insinuation of respects in abundant
complements. They speak vanity to their neighbor with flattering lips. 6. Vain
talk, cousening speeches, flattering words, are unbeseeming honest men, and do
argue in so far as men affect them, ungodliness, unfaithfulness, and
deceitfulness in a man; for when with flattering lips they speak, with a
double heart they speak.

Ver. 3 The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

4 Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own: who is
Lord over us?

He sets down in the next place the comforts of the godly, which are three.
The first is from Gods justice in punishing calumniators of the godly, and
proud boasters. Whence learn, 5. Although pick-thankes, and flatterers of
great men, in prejudice of the godly, do hope to stand by their flattery, yet
the Lord shall cut off all flattering lips. 2. Albeit men in power and place do
threaten to bring about great things against Gods people, yet they shall not
be able to do what they have said, for God shall cut off also the tongue that
speaks proud things. 3. Wicked men are confident, and do assure themselves to
double out their course by their falsehood, flattery, and calumnies against the
godly; They have said, With our tongue will we prevail. 4. Wicked men make no
conscience to use well the gifts which they have gotten of God; such as are
wit, or language, or any other thing; for they say, Our lips are our own. 5.
Wicked men stand not in awe of God; they fear not punishment from him, for in
effect they say; Who is Lord over us? But we must learn from their faults three
contrary lessons; to wit, 1. That nothing which we have is our own. But 2.
Whatsoever is given to us of God is for service to be done to him. 3. That
whatsoever we do, or say, we have a Lord over us, to whom we must be
answerable, when he calls us to accounts.

Ver. 5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will
I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him.

6. The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of
earth, purified seven times.

7. Thou shall keep them (O Lord) thou shall preserve them from this generation
for ever.

The second comfort of the godly in an ill time, is from the promise of God, to
deliver the godly out of the hand of the wicked. Whence learn, 1. When the Lord
has exercised the Godly for a while, with the oppression of the wicked, he
will not fail to make manifest, that he has heard their sad supplications, and
seen their oppression; for the oppression of the poor, for the fighting of the
needy, now will I arise, says the Lord. 2. The proud persecuter does think
little of the Godly, or any power that can defend him, but does mock the hope
he has to be helped; yet God will set the godly in safety from him that
puffs at him.

This promise the Prophet commends to the Church, as a precious truth, which
will be found forthcoming to the full, in experience. Whence learn, 3. To the
end that the word of promise may be comfortable to us, till new experience
comes, we must consider whose word it is, and that there is no vanity in
promises, but all contained in them, shall be found very solid, like the
refined silver, or gold, which is purged from all dross, and the oftener it is
put in the fire, it is the more fair, and of greater value: for the words are
the Lords words, and pure words, tried, true his experience, as silver tried in
a furnace of earth seven times, and clear from all dross.

The third comfort of the godly is from assurance given of the perpetuation of
the Church, and custody of it by God, in all ages. Whence learn. 4. Let men
persecute the godly, as much as God pleases to suffer them, yet shall God
preserve a Church of godly persons at all times to the end of the world: For
God shall preserve the godly from this generation for ever. 5. Albeit the
discomforted godly, under persecuters, are not always able to draw presently
comfort from this promise, yet it is a truth which God will own, which God will
keep in his hand to us, when we come to him, and which every believer must own,
though no man should take it off his hand. Therefore does David turn himself
to God, in delivering this Charter of the Churches safety* Thou, says he,
shall keep them.

Ver. 8. The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. In the
close of the Psalm, upon his own experience; he draws up a general
observation of what may be expected, when the most wicked are most advanced.
Whence learn, 1. God sometimes so disposes in his Wisdom and Justice, for
punishing of wicked people, and exercising of the godly, that the places of
government in a Kingdom, are filled not with the best men, but with the vilest
of the sons of men; For in David's experience it was so, and he presupposes it
might fall to be so, that the vilest of men should be exalted. 2. The
wickedness of the ungodly does in this case break forth most, and spread it
self among the Subjects, being heartned thereunto by the Rulers toleration,
connivance, or instigation, or example, and countenance; For when the vilest
men are exalted, then the wicked walk on every side. Turn you where you will,
you shall meet with them, at such a time as the vilest are exalted.

PSALM. XIII. To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David.
Another Christian experience, wherein David un^der the sense of desertion,
lays forth his lamentable case before the Lord, ver. 1, 2. prays for releif
ver. 3.4. and by faith is refreshed and comforted, ver. 5, 6.

v. 1 HOw long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever? how long will thou hide
thy face from me?

2. How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily?
how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?

In laying forth his grief, he begins at his apparent desertion; then
speaks of the perplexity of mind, arising herefrom; and last of all he
mentions the continuance of his outward trouble from his enemies. Whence
learn, 1. Trouble outward and inward, of body and spirit, fightings without,
and terrors within, vexations from heaven and earth, from God deserting, and
men pursuing, may fall upon a child of God at one time, and continue for a time
long enough, as here; How long will thou forget me, how long shall mine enemy
be exalted over me? 2. When trouble is continued, and appearance of means of
delivery is not, and God both withholdeth inward and outward help, sense
calls this the Lords forgetting and hiding of his face. How long will thou
forget me, and hide thy face? 3. The Lords children in their resolution for
faith and patience, do set to themselves a shorter period usually then the Lord
does, for making them have their perfect work; therefore when their hope is
deferred, it makes their heart sick, and to cry out, How long? how long? 4.
When comfort trysteth not with our time, fear of eternal off-casting may
readily slide in: and this fear, a soul acquainted with God, or that loves him
in any measure, cannot endure. Will thou forget me for ever? says he. 5.
Whatsoever sense do speak, or suggested tentations do speak, faith will relate
the business to the Lord, and expect a better speech from him: For in this
condition the Prophet goes to God, saying, How long, O Lord? 6. A soul finding
desertion, multiplyeth consultations, falls in perplexity, changes
conclusions, as a sick man does his bed, falls in grief, and cannot endure to
live by its own finding, but runs upon God for direction, as here we see it;
How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? 7.
The enemies taking advantage, (by the continuance of trouble upon the Godly,)
against his cause and religion, and against God, does augment both the grief
and temptation of the godly, How long shall mine enemies be exalted over me?

Verse. 3. Consider and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep
the sleep of death.

4. Lest mine enemies say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble
me, rejoice when I am moved.

Now follows his prayer for some comfortable answer, lest both he should
perish, and God be dishonored: Whence learn, 1. The edge of tentations is
blunted, and grief assuaged, when the swelling of the soul does vent it self
to God: and certainly complaints are then best eased, when they are dissolved
in humble supplications, as here, Consider and hear me, O Lord my God. 2.
Albeit faith believes that God considers and hears always, yet it cannot
rest till it feel by some effect that he does hear and consider, by his giving
some real support, or help in need, according to covenant; This is imported in
his praying, and words of prayer, consider, hear me. 3. If the Lord think it
not good to give an outward delivery, faith will be content of a blenk of Gods
countenance for the present, lighten mine eyes, says he; that is, let me have
some immediate comfort to uphold me in the hope of my delivery. 4. Its a death
to the godly man who has seen him that is invisible, to be long without the
sense of Gods love; sense of succumbing and perishing in trouble, does in this
case usually set upon the Godly, as here, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the
sleep of death. 5. The enemies of the godly do feed themselves with the trouble
of the godly, and rejoice the more they see them in distress, and
discouragement; which two inconveniences, the Lord uses to prevent, for he
cannot endure long to see the pride and rejoicing of the enemy to feed it self
on the miseries of his children; and this the Prophet insinuates, when he
seeks relief, lest the enemy glory that he has prevailed, etc.

Verse. 5. But I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy
salvation.

6. I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with me.

Here the Prophet is raised up unto comfort by degrees: first he setleth
himself upon the tried grounds of faith, then promises to himself deliverance,
and thirdly finds comfort: Whence learn, 1. Albeit we find not present
relief, or comfort when we pray, yet we must resolve to adhere to God by
faith: when we have powered out our soul in his bosom by prayer, we must
resolve to settle our feet on the ground of faith, before we can expect to be
comforted: For here David relied on Gods mercy, and ratifieth his former
resolution and practice of resting on his mercy, I have trusted on thy mercy.
2. So soon as faith is fixed, and resolute to adhere to covenanted mercy, hope
does lift up the head, and this anchor of the tossed ship stays the soul from
being driven; The believer looks out for Gods salvation, by some way of
delivery, which God thinks good to give, and assures himself it shall come,
and that he shall find joy in Gods way of deliverance, My heart (says he)
shall rejoice in thy salvation. 3. When the believer is resolved to rest on
Gods mercy by faith, then follows peace at least, and readily more comfort of
Gods Spirit, then for the present he expected to have, yea as much as shall
satisfy him, and make him count himself richly dealt with, as here David
acknowledges, saying, He has dealt bountifully with me. 4. Fresh experience
of favor from God, in the renewed sense of his good will to a soul, is a
matter of great joy, in the midst of trouble; and the right fruit of it, is a
renewed resolution cheerfully to praise God, as here we have the example, I
will sing unto to the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with me.

PSALM. XIV. To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
David looking on the constitution of the visible Church, and seeing the great
body of the people lying in their natural state, working iniquity, and hating
the truly Godly amongst them, even to the death, verse. 1, 2, 3. comfort the
Godly, first by the care the Lord has of them, in pleading their cause against
the ungodly; verse. 4, 5, 6. and next by giving hope of better days for the
godly, when after sore plagues come on that people, Christ should manifest
himself unto them, verse. 7.

Verse. 1. THE fool has said in his heart, There is no God: they are corrupt,
they have done abominable works, there is none that does good.

2. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men; to see if there
were any that did understand, and seek God.

3. They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there is none
that does good, no not one.

The Prophet divides all these who were in the visible Church, into
un-regenerate men on the one hand, and Gods true people converted inwardly unto
him on the other hand; and does argue all the un-regenerate to be practically
Atheists, without God in the World, by the same proof whereby the Apostle
convinces all men in nature, to be in the state of sin, Romans 3.13. Whence
learn, 1. Every man so long as he lies unrenewed, and unreconciled unto God
(how wise so ever, or of how great parts so ever he may seem to be to himself
or the world) is nothing in effect but a mad man, running to his own
destruction in losing his soul and eternal life, when he seems most to gain
the world, therefore he is called the fool. 2. It is not heeded by God what a
man's mouth says of God, or of himself, but what his heart says. The fool has
said in his heart, there is no God. 3. It is not the word, or outward
profession, which truly does expone the heart, but the current of a man's life
and actions; for here it is proved, that the heart is full of Atheism, by
this, that they are corrupt in their conversation, and do abominable works. 4.
God is only the right Judge of regeneration and unregeneration, and the only
true searcher of the heart: Its he who looks down from heaven, to see if any
of the sons of men, or any in the state of nature, have any wisdom in them, or
affection after God: if any of them have understanding, or do seek after God:
For he that does not seek God, has no understanding, nor principle of
Spiritual life in him. 5. Whatsoever may be the odds among unrenewed men, some
more, some less gross in their out-breaking, yet God pronounces of them all,
that they are all of them gone out of the way, to wit, of holiness and
happiness, they are altogether become filthy; that is, all their actions
flowing forth from their corrupt hearts are vile and loathsome in Gods sight,
and they are all in one rank in this, there is none of them that does good,
none of them, being unreconciled to God, do or can do any thing at all
commanded of God, as commanded, from right principles, and for right ends.

Verse. 4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as
they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.

5. There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the
righteous.

6. You have shamed the counsel of the poor; because the Lord is his refuge.

In the next place he comfort the people of God, living in society of the
visible Church, with the unrenewed multitude. First, by this, that the Lord
does plead their cause against the ungodly. Whence learn, 1. That the nature of
all unrenewed men, is to bear deadly enmity against those that are really Gods
people, and delight to undo the godly, as contemners of all that live not as
they do. They eat up my people as they do bread, says the Lord. 2. The Lord
owns the quarrel, and wrongs done to the godly, as done to him, in whomsoever
his image is hated or persecuted. They eat up my people, says he. 3. The
causeless hatred of the godly is a most unreasonable thing, and argues
admirable stupidity in wicked men, who malign the innocent, by whose life they
are admonished of their duty, and taught the way to felicity. Have all the
workers of iniquity no knowledge? 4. The mis-kenning of God, and working of
iniquity, and persecuting of the godly, are three conjunct properties of a man
in nature, not reconciled to God, For to be workers of iniquity, and eaters up
of Gods people as bread, and not calling on God, are put for the marks and
properties of the same sort of ungodly men.

Upon the challenge of the ungodly, the Prophet infers the consequence of
certain and sad judgments to follow on the wicked, because God is nearly
concerned in the quarrel of his people. Whence learn, 5. The persecution of
piety in the godly, provokes God to inflict the most fearful, and most
sudden judgments. For therein specially were the ungodly put to fear, where
they had no fear at all. 6. The near conjunction which God has with the godly,
is the reason of the greatness of the sin of persecution of them for
godliness: for here it is given for a reason, why there they were in fear, why
they were to tremble when God came to avenge the oppression of the godly, which
the wicked feared never to be questioned; Because God is in the generation of
the righteous. 7. Persecuting of a man for piety, were it but in jesting at a
man, or mocking of him for piety, is the turning of piety, which is a man's
glory, into a matter of reproach to him; and ^ means to drive him and others
from seeking of God, You have shamed the counsel, or resolution of the poor,
when you scorn, because he has made God his refuge.

Ver. 7. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when the Lord
brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad. The next comfort of the godly, is from the hope of Christ's
coming, in whom the redressing of this evil, and of all other, is to be found,
for whose coming he wishes. It is true, the sending of deliverance unto the
distressed people of God in Saul's time, by bringing David to the Kingdom, was
worthy to be wished for: but this could not fill up the measure of the wish
here stirred up by the Spirit. Therefore we must look to the substance in
Christ, in whom this wish and prayer has full accomplishment, which in effect
is, O that Christ the Savior of Israel were come out of Sion. And this same
wish closes the fifty third Psalm also; where salvations of Israel in the
plural number is set down, to note the perfection of salvation which comes
only by Christ, at whom the very form of the ^ebrew wishing does look, as
pointing at the person which shall give all sort of salvation to Israel, Who
shall give; Now there was a coming of Christ in the flesh unto Sion, foretold by
the Spirit, Zech. 9.9. and this is presupposed in this wish; for Christ must be
in Sion before he come out of it. But not by this coming were so many
Israelites saved as here is wished for: not by this coming was the body of
Israel brought back from captivity here prophesied. There is also Isai. 2.3. a
coming of Christ out of Sion to the Gentiles; and this coming is presupposed
here, before that Isreal's captivity be loosed. There is Isai. 59.20. compared
with Romans 11.26. a coming out of Sion for the bringing salvation to be body of
the now mis-believing Nation of the captive Israelites, lying in captivity,
scattered among the Gentiles, and this is directly prayed for, and longed after
in this place. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion, even the
time when the Lord shall bring back the captivity of his people. Paul, Romans
11.26. calls this the Redeemers coming out of Sion, in regard of the time
when, and the condition wherein Christ is to find the Israelites, to wit, out
of Sion, out among the Gentiles, scattered among the Gentiles, to whom Christ
came when he left Judea. And, Isaiah calls it a coming to Sion, in respect
of the benefit to be given to the Jews, who are designed often by Sion. Whence
learn, 1. Christ is the salvation of Sion, both figuratively and properly
called so, as well before he came, as after; for here he is looked on as the
Salvation of Israel, in whom all our salvation, Jews or Gentiles, is founded.
2. Whosoever sees him, (from how far off soever) he cannot choose but long for
a further manifestation of him, for perfecting of the blessedness of his
people: O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! 3. It was
revealed to the Prophets, that Christ was to come to the Church of the Jews,
and from thence to manifest himself to the Gentiles, casting off the
Israelites for a time, scattering them among the Gentiles, and then to come
about again toward the Jews in their scattering and captivity, without casting
off of the Gentiles; and this last turn is in the Prophets eye, and aimed at by
the Spirit, when he wishes that the salvation of Israel were come out of
Sion. 4. It was revealed also to the Prophets, and to David, that before the
constitution of the Church of Israel should be freed from the persecution of
domestic enemies, vexing the hearts of the godly, or delivered from such men's
power, as are described, ver. 1, 2, 3. that sore plagues were to be poured out
upon that people, and that the Israelites were to be driven out of their own
Land, and led in captivities, as the words here, and Psalm 53.6. do import; for
they who were to be brought back from captivity after Christ's coming out of
Sion unto the Gentiles, are presupposed to be in captivity, when Christ comes
to give salvation unto them. 5. Because of the large pouring out of the Spirit
upon the body of the converted Jews or Israelites, when the time shall come of
their turning Christians, prophesied of here, and Isai. 59.20. and Romans 11.25,
26. as their mourning in repentance for the injuries done by them and their
progenitors, to Jesus Christ, shall be as the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the
valley of Megiddon, Zech. 12.10, 11. So here, joy in Jesus Christ reconciled
unto them, shall be greate^ then any that ever that Nation saw, whether in
David's time, or Solomon's: for then the Lord shall bring back the captivity of
his people, here prophesied of, to be under the time of the Gospel, (whether by
loosing their captivity bodily as well as spiritual, whether they shall return
to their own Land or not, or what the Scripture does speak to this purpose,
this place is not for the determining of it.) Then Jacob shall rejoice, and
Israel shall be glad, when the Savior of Israel shall come out of Sion to them.

PSALM. XV. A Psalm of David.
The Prophet for distinguishing of the true members of the Church from those
who were only outwardly professors, asks of the Lord, how the one may be
known from the other? ver. 1. and receives answer to the question, ver. 2, 3,
4, 5.

Ver. 1. LOrd, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy
hill? THe question is proponed about the marks of the sincere believers, the
true Covenanters with God, the true Professors of true religion, who they are
who shall not be cast out from the society of Gods true Church. Whence learn,
1. The Tabernacle pitched by Moses, and the hill of Sion, where the Tabernacle
and the Temple wat at last settled, was a Type of the true Church, and of
Communion with God in Christ the Mediator, a type of God incarnate, dwelling,
and exercising all his offices in his Church, and of the heavenly condition of
his people called out of the world, and lifted up toward him, designed under
the name of Gods Tabernacle, and Gods holy hill. 2. Some of those who profess
to be of this fellowship may be thrust out from it again, and debarred from all
communion with God, when other some shall remain in this state, and not be
removed. For the question is moved, What are the marks of the members of the
Church invisible? and who they are who shall abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell
in his holy hill? 3. Only the Lord who searches the heart, can put the
difference between the true and the false; for this cause the question is
proponed to God, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle?

Ver. 2 He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the
truth in his heart.

3. He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
takes up a reproach against his neighbor.

4. In whose eyes the vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear
the LORD: he that swears to his own hurt and changes ^^t.

5. He that puts not out his money to usury, nor takes reward against the
innocent. He that does these things, shall ^ever be moved.

The Lord answers in the rest of the Psalm, by showing the fruits of faith
manifested in obedience to Gods commands, both moral and judicial, in the sight
of all men: The sincerity of which faith and truth was to be certainly known
to God only, and to the conscience of every man's self; which was sufficient to
satisfy the question, quieting and comforting of the upright ones. Whence
learn, 1. That sincere endeavor of universal obedience in a man's
conversation, is a fruit and evidence of true faith, and a mark of a true
member of the Church invisible, He walks uprightly, and does righteousness.
2. Another fruit of true faith, is conscience-making of what a man speaks,
ruling his tongue so, as his heart and his tongue do agree in the truth: he
speaks the truth from the heart. 3. A third fruit of unfeigned faith, is
making conscience in all his dealings, that he harm not his neighbor, neither
in his name, nor in his person, nor his goods, and making conscience not to
receive readily a false report of his neighbor, when it is devised by another,
He backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes
up a reproach against his neighbor. 4. A fourth fruit of sound faith, is the
low estimation of any wordly excellency wherewith a wicked man can be busked;
to whom, although the godly, according to duty, will give civil honor, as his
place requires, yet he counts him a poor miserable man for all his honor
and wealth, because he walks in a godless way: but where he sees one that
fears God, he esteems highly of him in his heart, whatsoever external
expressions thereof he find fit to give, because of the honorable way of
holiness, wherein the godly walks; for in his eyes a vile person is
contemned, but he honors him that fears the Lord. 5. A fifth fruit of
sound faith, is tender respect to the Name of God, and care to keep lawful
promises, covenants, and oaths, whatsoever civil inconveniences may follow
upon the strict keeping of them; Though he swear to his own damage, he
changes not. 6. A sixth fruit and evidence of faith, is dispensing with
commodity, when God by a special reason calls for so doing, albeit other
ways a man might take reasonably more gain. Many of such sort of cases do
occur in merchandise, and (...) exacting of rents and debts, as circumstances
may teach, when, and where God calls for most moderation; such was the
judicial dispensing with commodity, put upon the Jews for loosing the yoke of
a bought servant, being a Jew, at the end of six years; and quitting of houses
and lands bought from a Jew at the year of Iubile, how dear soever it cost
the buyer; and not taking usury of a Jew; wherein the Jew was privileged above
men of another Country: for in all these three particulars, it was lawful for
the Jew to do otherwise with other countrymen, to wit, in buying a servant
from a stranger, and not (...) all his days, and buying land from a stranger
of another country, and transmitting it to his own posterity, and taking usury
of a stranger, according to the rate which was acknowledged on all hands to
stand with equity; which commodity if an Israelite did not dispense with toward
an Israelite, it made him short of this com^endation of the true Israelite, who
puts not his money to usurie. 7. The seventh fruit and evidence of faith, is
freedom from briberie, with love of justice, which the believer will not
pervert, to the detriment of the man who has a good cause, for whatsoever bud
or reward man can give him. This is the upright man's last property, He takes
not a reward against the innocent.

Having numbered out the evidences of a sound convert and true believer, who
shall never be thrust out of Gods fellowship, he concludes, That whosoever does
these things, or studieth to do them, shall never be moved. That is, he that
shall evidence his faith in God, by a sincere endeavor to do the duties of the
first and second table of Gods Law, shall not be removed from Gods house, but
shall abide in his Tabernacle, and dwell in Sion, in the fellowship of God and
his Saints for ever.

PSALM. XVI. Michtam of David.
David in this Psalm, finding himself in the state of grace, prays for
preservation in general, in relation unto all dangers, and evils of body and
soul, and whatsoever other evil, from which a godly man, with allowance of
Gods word might pray to be preserved. His only reason to assure himself to be
heard, is because he had gotten grace to trust in God. The sincerity of which
faith in God, he proves by sundry evidences, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. In the second
place he climbeth up to the comfort and joy of believing; And all the grounds
of joy whereupon he goes, do serve both to confirm his faith, and to give him
assurance of the granting of his prayer, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Ver. 1. PReserve me, O GOD: for in thee do I put my trust. HE finds himself
in a good condition, and all the prayers he prays, is in one word, for
preservation. Whence learn, 1. As our being, living, and moving natural, and
our bringing into the spiritual and blessed estate of grace, is of the Lord, so
is our keeping therein of the Lord also, and our duty is to acknowledge God in
both, and to live unto, and pray for his upholding of us, and not to lean upon
our own wisdom, strength, or holiness; For David teaches so to do.
Preserve me, O God. 2. The grace of God having granted to us lively faith,
settled on God, is a sufficient ground of our hope, and assurance to persevere,
and to be still preserved, for this is the reason whereby David confirms his
prayer, For in thee do I put my trust.

Ver. 2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my
goodness extends not to thee:

3. But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is
all my delight.

Because he has made his faith in God, the reason of his hope of perseverance,
and of his having his prayer granted, he proves the sincerity of his faith by
five Evidences or fruits thereof. Whence learn, 1. The first solid evidence of
the sincerity of saving Faith, is the testimony of the conscience, bearing
witness to a man, that he has laid hold on the covenant of grace, and has
chosen God for his protector, and master, and that he is resolved to depend
upon God, and to serve him, as David did, saying, O my soul, thou have said
unto the Lord, thou art my Lord. 2. Another evidence of the sincerity of faith,
is renunciation of all confidence in a man's own works, and the rejecting of
all conceit of any possibility of merit at Gods hand, who cannot be profited by
our goodness; for we have what we have of him, and can never put an obligation
on him by any thing which we can do. My goodness does not extend to thee. 3.
A third fruit and evidence of faith, is love and kindness to the godly, and
bestowing of our own goods for supplying their need, joined with a high
estimation of their preciousnesse, above the godless world, and with pleasure
taking in their fellowship: so reckons the prophet, saying, My goodness
extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are on the earth, and to the
excellent, in whom is all my delight: where, by the way, let us observe, He
knew no saints to whom he could be profitable, save only the Saints who are
upon the earth.

Ver. 4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that hasten after another god:
their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into
my lips. A fourth fruit and evidence of faith, is, the hating of false
religion, and counting all followers of idolatry, or worship of another god,
then the true God, to be accursed; such a hating of false religion as is
accompanied with the discountenancing, open discrediting, and abhorring of all
idol service, as David expresses here in the whole verse. Whence learn, 1.
Men as they are naturally averse from following the true God, and the true
religion; so are they naturally bent to all idolatry, and zealous in following
idols, and any false religion. They hasten after another god.. 2. The more men
do hasten after felicity, in the way of idolatry, they have the worse speed.
For their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God. 3. The
more madly the world run after idolatry, the more should the faithful man
testify his abominating thereof, as David does. Their drink offerings of blood
will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips. He cannot speak of them
without disdain.

Ver. 5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou
maintainest my lot. A fifth fruit and evidence of faith in God, is delight, and
satisfaction in, and resting on God, as all-sufficient for the believers
complete happiness, as the whole verse holds forth. Whence learn, 1. The
believer has as sure right unto God, as any man has to the patrimony
whereunto he is born; or any Tribe ever had to his share in the Land of Canaan.
T^^ Lord is the portion of his inheritance. 2. The Lord is the believers lot
and share* when the world are seeking, some one, some another temporal good;
The Lord, and the light of his countenance, is the believers complete good;
whatsoever measure of earthly things is given to the godly beside, Levi's
portion is his portion. The Lord is the portion of his inheritance. 3. The Lord
is the believers livelihood, and the furnisher of his daily bread, He is the
portion of his cup. 4. The Lord gives himself to the believer for his
felicity, as he also maintains the believer in the right unto, and possession
of himself: He maintains his lot: and so, as the believer comes to his
right he has unto God, not by his own purchase, but by spiritual
birthright, as a child of Christ by faith, or by free donation of this
inheritance, received of God by faith; so he may claim to God, and enjoy the
possession of God, as firmly as his inheritance; as fully as if God were his
particular property and portion; as sweetly as his daily food, and the portion
of his domestic cup: and with as great quietness and security, as the
immediate vassal of the mightiest Monarch, being willing, able, and engaged
most deeply to maintain his lot.

Ver. 6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have goodly
heritage. In the second place he climbeth up to the joy of faith, arising from
the certain persuasion, and present sense of his being in the state of grace;
The reasons or grounds of his joy are six, The first reason of his joy, is
founded upon the properties and self-sufficiency of God, compared to a goodly
and pleasant heritage, which wants no commodity within it self. Whence learn,
1. Pleasure and profit, and all commodities of life are abundantly to be found
in God; and whatsoever can be represented by any goodly heritage, lying in most
pleasant places, is but a shadow of what is to be found in him, as the
comparison taken from lower things here imports. 2. The more the believer
considers what the Lord is, and what are his perfections, and what is the
believers own interest in God, the more is he satisfied, and ravished in the
beholding of God, and his own felicity in him. No wonder therefore if David
say, for the measuring out of this share to him, that his lines are fallen out
to him in pleasant places, etc. 3. The believer has liberty to appropriate God
in a manner to himself, and in comparison with the share of the worldlings, to
prefer his own portion above all ot^^rs: This does David, when he calls God
his own pleasant places, and his own heritage.

Ver. 7. I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel: my reins also
instruct me in the night season. The second reason and ground of joy, is
because God has persuaded him to believe in the Messiah, or Christ to come, as
is clear by the next verse, and that God has taken the directing of him* Whence
learn, 1. As it is the work of God only, to give effectual counsel to any man
to believe in Christ; So also the way of persuasion of a soul to trust in God,
is a way of working, proper only to God; for it makes the man so free an
agent, in the act of believing, as if Gods work were counsel only, and the work
of active persuasion so invincible, as the work is effectually wrought, and
infallibly: for he calls the bestowing of saving faith, or grace to consent
to the covenant of grace, a giving counsel: He has given me counsel. 2. The
glory of trusting in God, is not a matter of gloriation of the believer, in his
own disposing of himself, but a matter of thanksgiving to God, and glorifying
of him, who gives the counsel to believe, and makes the counsel to him
effectual: For David says, I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel,
to wit, effectually; for faith is not of our self, it is the gift of God,
wherein flexanimous power and voluntary consent are sweetly joined together. 3.
This mercy of powerfully persuading a soul to make choice of God, to close in
covenant with him, and to trust in him, does put a perpetual obligation of
thanksgiving unto God upon the believer, to make him say in all time coming and
for ever, I will bless the Lord, who has given me counsel. 4. With the gift
of saving faith, or persuasive counsel to believe in God, is joined the sweet
guiding and directing of the Lords Spirit, how to order the ways of the
believer: For here instruction of him in the night season, is joined with the
former mercy, and is made a reason of thanksgiving, and blessing of God. For he
adds, My reins also shall instruct me in the night season. 5. The framing of
the will, desire, appetite, affections, inclinations, thoughts, and secret
meditations, is so inward, secret and deep a work, as the Spirit of God thinks
good to express this his giving discretion secretly to David, in the terms of
the teaching of the reins, because they are the hiddest parts of the body, and
nearest to the back of any of the inward noble parts; and because of the nature
of the reins, which have much affinity with the affections, and have for their
office the discretive purging of the blood, the natural furniture of life, My
reins also instruct me in the night season.

Ver. 8. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand,
I shall not be moved. The third reason, and ground of joy, is the gift of the
grace of God, making him always keep his eye (for getting assistance,
direction, and comfort) to good purpose, upon Jesus Christ, the Lord, of whom
this place is exponed Act. 2.25. Whence learn, 1. The duty of the believer, and
the way for him to have and retain joy in the Lord, is to fix the eye of faith
always, in all estates, on the Mediator, the promised Messiah, the Lord Jesus,
for direction, assistance, comfort, and delivery. For this was David's way, I
have set the Lord always before my face. 2. Such as implore Jesus Christ for all
things in all estates, shall be sure to have his effectual presence near hand
to help him in time of need. For he is at such a man's right hand, at all times.
3. Faith, kept in exercise by employing of Jesus Christ, may have assurance of
perseverance, and enjoying constantly the state of grace: whatever
alterations, and commotions come, their state shall stand fixed; they shall
stand in grace; for upon this ground the Prophet says, I shall never be moved.

Ver. 9. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices; my flesh also
shall rest in hope. A fourth reason of joy abounding in his heart, and breaking
forth in his words, is his victory over death, and the grave, by faith in Jesus
Christ. Whence learn, 1. Faith in Christ is able not only to give peace that
passes understanding, but also to fill the heart with joy, and to make the
tongue, which is a man's glory, above all other creatures, sometime to break
forth in expressions of joy; for therefore says he, my heart is glad, and my
glory rejoices. 2. So great victory over death and the grave, is gotten by
faith in Jesus Christ, that a believer can lay down his body in the grave, as
in a bed, to rest it there, in hope of the resurrection; and here an instance
and example for it. My flesh also shall rest in hope.

Ver. 10. For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer
thine holy One to see corruption. The first reason of his joy, is the assurance
of the resurrection of Jesus Christ his head, through whom he hops to be
raised in his own order and time. Whence learn, 1. A believer is so nearly
joined with Christ, that he may give to him the styles of what is nearest and
dearest to him, and call him his very life and soul, as here David says of
Christ, who behoved to rise again, Act. 2.25. Thou will not leave my soul, or
my life in grave: and by this means he also is assured of his own resurrection
in due time; for our life and soul is bound up in Christ: Our life is hid with
God in Christ, specially in respect of that wherein he stands in our room,
such as his suffering, rising, reigning as our Surety and Attorney. 3. The body
of Christ not only was to rise from the dead, but also could not so much as
putrify in the grave: For of Christ he says, Thou will not suffer thy holy
One to see corruption.

V. 11. Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence there is life, at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. The last ground and reason of
his joy, is the assurance he has of blessedness and of eternal life: Whence
learn, 1. The believer who is fixed by faith on Christ, may be assured of his
perseverance in the way leading to life: Thou will show me the way to life:
that is, thou will point out the way that I should walk in, thou will go
along with me, and make me effectually find thy help, to walk in it. 2. The
fruition of Gods immediate presence is not like the joys of this world, which
neither do feed nor fill a man: but when we shall enjoy Gods presence fully, we
shall have full contentment, and complete felicity: For in his presence is
fullness of joy. And the felicity of believers is not like the pleasures of
this world, which pass away suddenly as a dream: but it endures for ever: At
his right hand are pleasures for evermore.

PSALM. XVII. A Prayer of David.
This Psalm, according to the Inscription thereof, is a Prayer of David, mixed
with sundry reasons for helping: wherein first, he craveth in general justice
in the controversy between him and his oppressors. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Secondly,
more specially, he requesteth for a wise carriage of himself under this
exercise, ver. 5.6. Thirdly, prays for protection and preservation from his
enemies, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Fourthly, for disappointment to his enemies,
and for delivery of himself from them, ver. 13.14. and closes comfortably in
confidence of a good answer, and hope of satisfactory happiness, ver. 15.

Ver. 1. HEar the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer
that goes not out of feigned lips.

2. Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: let thine eyes behold the
things that are equal.

3. Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night, thou have
tried me and shall find nothing; I am purposed that my mouth shall not
transgress.

4. Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me from
the paths of the Destroyer.

The first part of the prayer is unto God, as a righteous Judge, to hear his
plaint, and to decide in his favor, according to his just cause, and righteous
carriage in relation to his enemies: Whence learn, 1. As righteous men are
subject unto injuries and oppressions, as well as others are, and are driven by
trouble to seek relief of God, as, in this case; it is a special comfort, to
have God a righteous judge to hear them, and a righteous cause to bring before
him, that the man may say, Hear the right, O Lord. 2. The conscience of earnest
and honest dealing with God, in the singleness of our heart in prayer, is a
good reason to help our faith in prayer, when we may say, We cry, and pray,
not with feigned lips. 3. When we are unjustly condemned by men, we may
appeal to God, and call the appellation, and seek and expect a more just
sentence pronounced and executed by God. We may say, Let my sentence come forth
from thy presence. 4 Although men cast out our true defenses, which we make
against false Libels, and do not respect equity; yet God will take notice of
the whole process his eyes will behold things that are equal. 2. Sincerity of
heart gives boldness to a man to present himself to God, to be examined,
after that the conscience in its private trial of the man's carriage toward the
adversary, has in the sight of God absolved him; as here the Prophet, in
relation to his carriage toward the oppressor, does speak to God, ^hou have
tried me in the night, and have found nothing. 6. Sincerity of carriage for
time bypast, must be joined with a purpose of sincerity in time coming, that
he may say with David, in relation to his part, I am purposed that my mouth
shall not transgress; that is, not to speak a wrong word against him. 7.
Natural men's manner of dealing, when they are injured, is to recompense evil
for evil. For the works of men are to follow the paths of the destroyer. 8.
There is no way to keep the children of God from these paths of the destroyer,
when they are provoked to injuries, except in the fear of God, they look to
what Gods word directs them to do. Thus did David escape an ill course, when
his nature might have tempted him to it. By the words of thy lips have I kept
me from the paths of the destroyer.

Ver. 5. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

6. I have called upon thee, for thou will hear me, O God: incline thine ear
unto me, and hear my speech.

The second part of the prayer, wherein he requesteth for grace to be kept
still in a righteous and holy way; Whence learn, 1. The most holy man, though
he have stood fast formerly, is most feared to offend, and most suspicious of
himself, and most earnest with God to be holden up, that he fall not in time
to come; and gives all the glory of his standing in a good cause, unto God, as
is evidently holden forth in this petition of David, Hold up my goings in thy
paths, that my footsteps slip not. 2. The best way to have deliverance from,
and victory over adversaries, is to keep a straight course of carriage in the
fear of God, Going in Gods paths, that is, as God has prescribed our way in
his word. 3. Our prayer should be such, and so put up, as we may be sure to be
heard; and when we have prayed unto God, according to his will, we may be
confident of a good answer with David, That he will incline his ear, and hear
our speech. 4. Confidence to be heard, (...) our hands in prayer, but hearten
us to p^ay, as this example ^eache^^ us.

Ver. 7. Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right
hand, them which put their trust in thee, from those that rise up against them.

8. Keep me as the Apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

The third part of his prayer, is, for a merciful protection, and preservation
from his enemies. Whence learn, 1. The Believer must hold his eye in time of
dangers and straits, especially upon Gods good will and kindness, as a
counter-balance of all the malice of men: and here, though his straits were
never so great, he shall read a possibility of wonders for his delivery, as
here is seen; Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O Lord. Beside common
favors, God has other mercies in keeping for his own, and those are marked
even with some wonderfulnesse, either in the time, or manner, or measure, or
mean, or some other respect. 2. The Lords power and his office of Saviorship,
and his constant manner of dealing for believers, are the pillars of the
persuasion of help to be had in God. So reasons David, saying, O thou that
savest with thy right hand them which put their trust in thee: for Gods Nature,
Christ's Office, and his manner of dealing, are equivalent to promises, when
they are looked unto by a believer. 3. Such as trouble unjustly them, of whom
the Lord has taken the maintenance, do in a sort engage God to be their,
party, and to defend his servants, for they rise up against not only Gods
servants, but against God, who saves by his right hand. 4. The care God has
of his poor children, that depend upon him, is unspeakable; and the tender love
he bears unto them, no one similitude can express, as plurality of
similitudes joined here, do give evidence; for Gods care of them is comparable
to man's care of the apple of his eye; Gods love to them is comparable to the
love of the Bird-mother toward her young ones, whom she warmeth, and hides
under the shadow of her wings. O wonderful goodness, and wisdom of God, who
admits himself to be compared to such low similitudes, that he might lift
up our faith above all objections of mis-belief.

Ver. 9. From the wicked that oppress me, from my daily enemies, who compass
me about.

10. They are enclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak proudly.

11. They have now compassed us in our steps, they have set their eyes bowing
down to the earth.

12. Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young Lion
lurking in secret places.

The reason of his prayer, is taken from the deadly malice of his enemies, v.
9. from their pride, v. 10. from their confidence, v. 11. from their beastly
cruelty, v. 12. Whence learn, 1. The enemies of Gods people are ordinarily
wicked, oppressors, deadly enemies to them, proud of their wealth and power,
boasters, crafty Foxes, cruel Lions: and the more of these evils do break
forth against Gods people, the more should the dangers be laid before God; not
for information of him, but for the exoneration of our griefs, tentations,
fears and dangers before God, and laying of our care upon him: and so much the
more also is vengeance on the enemy, and the delivery of the godly near hand;
and hopes of answering the prayers put up against them, are the more made
certain, as the use of the wickedness of the enemy made by the Prophet here
does teach.

Ver. 13. Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from
the wicked which is thy Sword:

14 From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men of the world, which have
their portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure:
they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.

The Fourth part of the prayer is, for frustrating the intention of the enemy,
and setting the supplicant free from the danger. Whence learn, 1. When danger
is most nigh, God is more nigh, and he can shortly interpose himself, to the
overturning of the design of the enemy, and to the ruin of the enemy
himself: he can quickly arise, and disappoint him, and cast him down. 2. The
power of the enemy stands in the Lords employing of him; he cannot strike,
except God strike by him; therefore he is called Gods sword. 3. The shortest
way to be safe from what the wicked can do, is prayer to God, to overruled
him. Therefore says David, Deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy
sword. 4. The Lord ordinarily for execution of wrath, and for hard trials, and
troubles of the godly, does in his providence make use of the wicked; Deliver
me, says he, from men which are thy hand. 5. The wicked neither have, nor do
seek any felicity, but what may be had in this life, they are men of this
world, and have their portion in this life, they need look for no more good
then they find in the world, and that is, a poor, and sorry happiness. 6. The
belly full of sensual lust, and rarest dishes, and best meats which Gods
storehouse can afford, is the height of the happiness of a poor rich
worlding. In his own person, it is all that God gives him for his portion, and
which the Fool has chosen, even the filling of his belly with Gods hid
treasure, or of some rare meat, which meaner people cannot have, and therefore
it is called Gods hid treasure. 7. All the felicity which the worldling can
have, in the point of honor and riches to himself, and his posterity, is
worldly wealth while he lives, and a number of children to enjoy his wealth
after him; whether they shall live and inherit it, whether they shall prove
wise men or fools, he knows not; this is his all; for in Gods favor he has
no interest; heaven he has nothing to do with; and at the best, They are full
of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.

Ver. 15. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness. He closes his prayer comfortably,
with the hope of true felicity in fellowship with God. Whence learn, 1. In the
midst of whatsoever worldly trouble ^^e godly can be in, his hope is far better
then the worldly man's possession; and the Prophet here, for this cause does
prefer his present condition, being in danger daily of his life, to all his
enemies prosperity, saying, by way of opposition, As for me, I will behold thy
face. 2. The enjoying of the presence, and sense of the loving kindness of the
Lord, is the felicity of the godly, in that measure they attain it; the hope
whereof upholds the believers heart in the darkest times of trouble. As for me,
says he, I will behold thy face. 3. The enjoying of God is proper only unto
the man justified by Faith, and endeavoring to live righteously; and it is
righteousness with God, that such a man be brought to the enjoying of his
hope. I will behold thy face in righteousness, says he. 4. There is a sleep
of deadness of spirit, out of which the shining of Gods loving countenance
does awake a believer, and revive the spirit of the contrite ones; and there is
a sleep of death bodily, out of which the loving kindness of the Lord shall
awake all his own, in the day of the resurrection, when he shall so change them
into the similitude of his own holiness and glorious felicity, as they shall
be fully contented for ever* and this first and second delivery out of all
trouble, may every believer expect and promise to himself. I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.

PSALM. XVIII. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord,
who spoke unto the Lord the words of this song, in the day that the Lord
delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul. And
he said.
David in this Psalm, as a Type of Christ, and fellow partaker of the
sufferings of Christ in his mistical members, and of deliveries and victories
over his and their enemies, being now settled in the Kingdom, praises God for
his mavelous mercies; and as a Type of Christ, he prophesies of the
enlargement, and stability of his own Kingdom, and of Christ's Kingdom,
represented thereby; and first obliges himself thankfully to depend upon God,
whatsoever enemies he shall have to deal with, ver. 1, 2, 3. Secondly he gives
a reason of his resolution, from the experience of the Lords delivering of him
out of his deepest distresses, ver. 4, 5. to ver. 19. Thirdly, He amplifieth
this mercy, acknowledging that this was a fruit of his faith, and righteous
dealing with his party adversary; the like whereof every believer might expect,
as well as he for time coming, by reason of this his by-gon large experience,
from ver. 20. to v. 30. Fourthly he praises God in particular, for the
experience he has had in time by-gon in warfare, and victories in battle, to
ver. 43. Fifthly, As a Type of Christ, he promises to himself the enlargement
of his own Kingdom, and prophesies of the enlargment of Christ's Kingdom among
the Gentiles, for which he praises God unto the end of the Psalm, ver 43, 44,
45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50.

In the inscription, he tells the time, and occasion of his writing of this
Song, Whence learn, 1. That after long trouble, the Lord will give his children
rest at last, one way or other, and delivery from all their enemies, as here is
given to David from Saul and all his enemies. 2. When the Believer gets
relaxation from trouble, he should set himself to glorify God for his
delivery, and give evidence of his thankfulness, as David does in penning of
this Song, when God delivered him. 3. It is a greater honor to be a real
servant of the Lord in any calling, then to have the honor of being a King,
not being his servant: so esteemed David when he made this Inscription, A Psalm
of David, the servant of the Lord.

Ver. 1. I Will love thee, O Lord, my strength.

2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my
strength, in whom I will trust, my buckler* and the horn of my salvation, and my
high tower.

3. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved
from mine enemies.

IN the first part of the Psalm, he setleth his resolution yet more to love
God, to believe in him, and to worship him still in all difficulties, knowing
by experience, this to be the way to be saved from all his enemies. Whence
learn, 1. The chief fruit of faith* and end of Gods mercies to us, is to grow
in estimation of, and affection toward God: for so does David, saying, I will
love thee, O Lord. 2. Whatsoever a believer has ^eede of that will the Lord
supply; that will the Lord be himself unto him according to his need, as here
he is David's strength in weakness; his rock of refuge, when he is pursued; his
fortress, when besieged; and his deliverer when in extreme danger. 3.
Experience of the Lords faithfulness, and kindness to us, should confirm us
in the covenant of grace, and strengthen our resolution to believe in him: for
upon this account David calls the Lord, My God, my strength, in whom I will
trust. 4. When the believer is yoaked in fight with whatsoever adversary, he
shall be sure to have defense in it, delivery out of it, and preservation after
it. Therefore does David glory in God, as a Buckler to be opposed to all
blows, and throws of darts from adversaries, as the horn of his salvation,
powerfully fighting for his delivery and victory: And as his high Tower, whence
he might look down, and despise all the wit, malice, and power of his enemies.
5. Prayer and invocation of God, should be always joined with praises and
thanksgiving, and used as a means, whereby faith may extract the good which it
knows is in God, and of which he has made promise, I will call upon the Lord
who is worthy to be praised. 6. Delivery, safety, and peace may the believer
expect, as the answer of his invocation upon God. So shall I be safe from mine
enemy.

Ver. 4. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made
me afra^^*

5. The sorrows of hell compass^^^ about: the snares of death prevented me.

In the second part, he brings forth his experience, whereby he was
encouraged unto the foresaid duties. Whence learn, 1. Although the word of God
be infinitely sure, and true in it self, yet experience of the truth thereof,
helps much to strengthen our griping thereof, and to cherish hope, as here is
declared. 2. The believer in his exercise, may be put hard to it, and brought
in sight of apparent perishing of soul and body; while men seek his life, God
for a time hides his face: for David felt deadly fears, and extreme torment of
soul, even the sorrows of death, the sorrows of hell, and the snares of death
preventing him, that he could not get free from them.

Ver. 6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he
heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his
ears* He has set down the strait he was in, now he sets down the mean he
used to be relieved, to wit, prayer to God, as in covenant with him; and how he
was mercifully heard through Christ. Whence learn, 1. No strait is such, but
God can ^eliver out of it, no case is so desperate, as to make prayer needless
or useless: for David says in his deepest distress, I called on the Lord. 2.
It is necessary not to give over, when help is delayed; yea, it is necessary to
grow more fervent, and for this end to lay hold on the covenant of
reconciliation, and upon God in covenant with us: for he adds, I cried to my
God. 3. By virtue of Christ's sacrifice, and his intercession, notice is taken
of prayer graciously, and answer comes to the believer; for he adds, He
heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even unto his
ears; He points at the Temple, in regard of the Ark, and other figures
representing Christ in his intercession for us in heaven.

Ver 7. Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills
moved and were shaken, because he was wroth.

8. There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
devoured, coals were kindled by it.

9. He (...) the heavens also, and came down: and darkness was under his feet.

10. And he rode upon a cherub, and di^ fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings
of the wind

11. He made darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about him, were
dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies.

12. At the brightness that was before him, his thick clouds passed,
hailstones and coals of fire.

13. The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice,
hailstones and coals of fire.

14. Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them, and he shot out
lightnings, and discomfited them.

15. Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world
were discovered: at thy rebuke O LORD, at the blast of the breath of thy
nostrils.

The manner of his delivery is set down in comparative speeches, alluding to
the most glorious manifestations which eve^ God gave of himself, in Mount
Sinai, or in the days of Joshua, or in the days of the Judges, or Samuel, all
which glorious manifestations of God to his people, David esteems to be
re-acted in the wonderfulnesse of his delivery; so as he thinks he may justly
compare the wonders shown in his preservation from his enemies, to any of, or
to all Gods former wonders, in saving his people. Whence learn, 1. Although
our natural stupidity, unbelief, and enmity against God, do extenuate the
works of Gods providence about his children; yet the believer should look upon
them with a spiritual, and discerning eye, and should so set them forth to
others, as David does here. 2. The most sensible mutations in heaven and earth,
are not so observed by the blind world, as a soul illuminate with spiritual
light will observe Gods spiritual providence in his works toward his people,
and toward himself, as here David's example does show. 3. The history of the
Lords redeeming of his Church, set down in Scripture, and by David alluded
unto, may be seen in Gods particular dealing with his children, as very like to
the same, and as appendicles of the same work repeated. This is imported in
David's re-calling to memory what is said, Exodus 9.23, 24. and 9.18. Josh.
10.11. Judge. 5.4. 1 Samuel 12.18. concerning the Lords manifesting of himself.
4. The terriblenesse of God coming to judge his enemies, is a matter of
consolation to the believer, and of praise to God: as here is set down.

Ver. 16. He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.

17. He del^vered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for
they were too strong for me.

18. They prevented me in the day of my calamnity: but the Lord was my stay.

19. He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he
delighted in me.

Now he draws forth his delivery in lower comparisons, and more proper words,
for the more clear capacity of the Church; to wit, that God delivered him as
one in peril of drowning, ver. 16. As helping a weak man from a strong party,
ver. 17. As upholding a man circumvented, and ready to fall and fail, ver. 18.
And setting a man free from all danger, ver. 19. Whence learn, 1. Our weakness
in the time of our delivery, commends Gods power, as David's delivery is
magnified, because it was as a drawing of him out of many waters, where he was
like to drown. 2. Whether God use means or not in our deliveries, the work must
ever be ascribed to him alone. He sent from above, and took me out. 3. Power of
adversaries will not hinder Gods helping hand; he can, and does usually deliver
his own from them that are too strong for them. 4. A soul sensible of Gods
merciful work, cannot satisfy it self with expressions about it. And as many
new considerations as a believer has of the circumstances of a mercy, as many
new mercies does he see; therefore is it that David repeateth the same work of
deliverance in more and more new expressions, and cannot express himself in one
word, with satisfaction to himself. 5. When a man is enclosed, and prevented
from escaping out of trouble, faith would fail, and then despair should
follow, if God did not interpose himself, and did not furnish strength in this
difficulty. David being thus circumvented, says, But the Lord was my stay. 6.
The Lord does not leave his work about his own, til he perfect it, but he
compleateth their delivery ere he cease, and does crown his mercy with joy: To
express this, David says, He brought me forth also into a large place

Ver. 19 He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because
he delighted in me.

20. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to the
cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me.

21 For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from
my God.

22 For all his judgments were before me: and I did not put away his Statutes
from me.

23. I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity.

24. Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness,
according to the righteousness of my hands in his eye sight.

The third part of the Psalm, wherein he goes on to amplify mercy sundry
ways, and first from the cause of it, which is the mere good will and love of
God. Whence learn, 1. That the cause of any mercy shown to us, is not to be
found in us, but in Gods free love, He delivered me, because he delighted in
me. 2. The belief of Gods love sweetneth and commends the mercy exceedingly:
The delivery here is great, but this word, because he delighted in me, is far
more sweet, verse 20. There is another point of amplifying the mercy of his
preservation and delivery, in the clearing of his innocence* and freeing of
'him from the slanders of ungratitude, rebellion, treachery against his Father
in law, and his Prince, which was the fruit of another grace of God, given unto
him, to wit, righteousness and innocence, in relation to his enemies, ver. 20.
and a study to keep Gods commands, ver. 21. and the fear of God fastening him
to Gods Statutes, ver. 22. and sincere and tender walking with God, and
watching over the sin which did most beset him, ver. 23. where his delivery
from his enemies, and clearing his innocence from calumnies, was a gracious
reward, ver. 24. Whence learn, 1. In a good cause, it is necessary we have a
good carriage, lest we mar our cause, and our comfort also: For David studied
righteousness and cleanness of hands, in relation to his enemies, when he was
most unjustly persecuted. 2. A godly behavior in a good cause shall not want
the fruit: For the free love of God rewarded David according to his
righteousness. 3. The conscience of a godly behavior in time of persecution,
is twice profitable: once under the trial and trouble, it does support: again,
after the delivery, the looking back upon it, does comfort, as here is shown.
4. As we should at all times take heed to our conversation, so in special,
when by persecution we are troubled for a good cause: For now we are upon the
trial of our faith, patience, wisdom, and other graces, as David was: and
should do as he does here. 5. We have special rules of good behavior set down
in David's example; first, we must be sure to follow such ways, as Gods word
does allow, that we may say, I have kept the ways of the Lord. Secondly, if
in our infirmity we be miscarried at any time, we must not persist in a wrong
course, but return to the way of Gods obedience, That we may say* I have not
wickedly departed from my God, neither in the point of belief, nor practical
obedience. Thirdly, we must set all the commands of God, and his written
judgments before us, to be observed, one as well as another, and must have
respect to Gods threatened, and executed judgments also, that we may say with
David, All his judgments were before me. and I did not put away his statutes
from me. Fourthly, We must study sincerity in our carriage, doing good actions
well from right principles, and for the right end, that we may say, I was also
upright before him. Fifthly, We must keep strict watch over our wicked nature,
and most raging passions and affections, lest they break out; that our
conscience may not contradict us, when we say, I have kept my self from mine
iniquity. 6. It is wisdom to join one mercy with onother, in our reckoning,
that we may say that we have gotten grace for grace, as David does acknowledge,
That as God had given to him grace to study righteousness and innocence, so
had he recompensed him according to his righteousness. 7. When the world would
bur^ our innocence with slanders, it is lawful and expedient to defend our own
good name, and to speak and write in defense of it, as David does here.

Ver. 25. With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful, with an upright
man thou will show thy self upright.

26. With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will
show thy self froward.

27. For thou will save the afficted people: but wilt bring down high looks.

From his own experience he draws up a general doctrine, concerning the
Lords holy, just, and wise manner of dealing with all men, according to their
carriage toward him. Whence learn, 1. The experiences which any of the Saints
have, of the effects of Gods word, are proofs of the certainty of Gods promises
and threatenings, and pawns of the like effects to follow unto others; For here
David draws a general doctrine from his particular experience. 2. As a man
would have a meeting from God, so must he study to behave himself toward God
and man, for Gods cause; for with the bountiful, merciful, upright, and pure,
he will deal accordingly. 3. Who^ever shall walk contrary unto God, and strive
with him; or will not submit themselves unto him, he shall walk contrary unto
them, and punish them seven times more, because of their stubbornness; for
toward the froward he will show himself froward. 4. Asbeit the godly be for a
while afflicted, and the wicked do prosper, yet after the affliction of the
godly, salvation shall come to them; and after the prosperity, vain and proud
gloriation of the wicked, their destruction shall follow, For he will save the
afflicted people, but will bring down high looks.

Ver. 28. For thou will light my candle, the Lord my God will enlighten my
darkness. From by-gon experience he strengthens his own hope of further
experience thereafter, as need should require. Whence learn, 1. Believers being
delivered out of many by-gon troubles, must not promise to themselves exemption
from new troubles hereafter, but rather make themselves ready for new exercise,
and more sad passages of Gods dispensations toward them. For Davaid
presupposes here, that he may, yea, and that he shall be thereafter in
darkness, and want for a while the Candle light of consolation. 2. As the
godly man may expect crosses, so may he be sure also of as many consolations,
and sweet seasonings of his troubles* and deliverances out of them; so that he
may say, both before trouble come, and in the midst of it, The Lord will light
my Candle, and my God will enlighten my darkness.

Ver. 29. For by thee I have run through a troup: and by my God have I leaped
over a wall. Here is another part of his experience, concerning his victories
and good success in battle, the glory whereof he ascribes altogether to God.
Whence learn, 1. Although the courage, valor and success of all soldiers is
from the Lord, yet only the believer does give God the glory thereof, as David
here. 2. Natural courage, and whatsoever measure a man may have of it, now and
then, may faint and fail altogether, when it meets with very strong
opposition; But the spiritual courage which is from Faith, is from a more sure
ground, and will not fail, when faith sets it on, whatsoever be the
apparent difficulty: for by Faith in God David was made to run through a
troop, or leap ov^r a wall into a Town, full of his enemies, with assurance of
victory.

Ver. 30. As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is
a Buckler to all those that trust in him.

31. For who is God, save the Lord? or who is a rock, save our God?

The Fourth part of the Psalm, wherein he praises the Lord expressly, for what
he had found in him; and in this he is a special type of Christ, in his
conquest and victories. The reasons of his praising, are four, set down in
order. Whence learn, 1. The constant, equable, and old way of Gods dealing with
those that believe in him, is a matter of Gods praise; and a reason why the
experience of one believer may be a ground of hope for another, to find the
like, because it is said here, As for God, his way is perfect. This is one
reason of his praise, and of the believers hope. 2. In all times by-gon,
experience has proved the word of the Lord to be most solidly true. Which
serves for the second reason of praising God, and grounding of our hope; The
word of the Lord is tried. 3. There is none of the believers excepted from the
benefit of his promises, which is a third reason of Gods praise, and our hope;
for he is a buckler to all those that trust in him. He is a defense which we
may constantly carry along with us, where ever we go, and make use of his
power and love, as of a buckler in all conflicts. 4. A fourth reason of Gods
praise, and ground of our hope is, that as there is no true Religion, nor true
Faith save one, so there is no true God save only one, whose true and tried
word, is with his true Church and Saints, who believe in him: For who is God
save the Lord? or who is a rock save our God? 5. There is no fountain of
comfort, or of strength or delivery, save the Lord, of whom only all things
have their being: for who is God save the Lord? 6. There is no ground to build
our confidence and felicity upon, save God alone, who is in Covenant through
Christ with us: who is a rock save our God?

Ver. 32. It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makeh my way perfect.

33. He makes my feet like hindes feet, and sets me upon my high places.

34. He teaches my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.

23. Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand
has holden me up, and thy gentleness has made me great.

36. Thou have enlarged my steps under me; that my feet did not slip.

He goes on to reckon the furniture, and ability for war, which the Lord did
give to him. Whence learn, 1. The man of God must resolve to be a man of war,
and to yoke with adversaries of one sort or other; Such as was David, and
Christ, and his followers represented by him. 2. The man whom the Lord sends
out to fight his Battles, he will arm him completely from head to foot; He
will gird him with strength, and make his way plain and perfect; he will make
his feet swift, he will furnish him with a retiring place on high, he will
furnish him with a Bow of steel, and with all arms offensive, and will enable
him with more skill and strength then to make use of them; he will furnish him
also with a shield of salvation, which shall save him in effect: and with all
arms defensive, and uphold him by his right hand, when he is like to be
overcome; and by his tender care of him, will make him a great man, a valiant
man of war, and hold him on his feet, that he fall not in his service. Whereof
David here has experience in his warfare, bodily and spiritual. 3. What God
has done for a man, will be better seen after the trouble is ended, then in
the mean time. The back-look upon the Lords assistance is most clear. As here
David gives the clearest count of Gods assistance, when his experience is
reviewed. 4. All the furniture of spiritual armor, in our spiritual warfare,
which here is chiefly aimed at, is only from the Lord; for he, even he only is
here declared the furnisher thereof, and without him the man is altogether
weak, witless and naked.

37. I have pursued mine enemies and overtaken them: neither did I turn again
till they were consumed.

38. I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: thy are fallen under
my feet.

39. For thou have girded me with strength unto the battle: thou have subdued
under me those that rose up against me.

40. Thou have also given me the necks of mine enemies; that I might destroy
them that hate me.

Here he makes mention of the victories which God gave to him, as a Type of
Christ, over all his enemies. Whence learn, 1. It was revealed to David, that
as he himself had, so also Christ should have many enemies, and should fight
against them, and prevail over them, and make all his followers victorious over
them all; That he should pursue his, and their enemies, in every age, and not
turn again till they shall be consumed, as is, ver. 37. till he cast them down,
that they be not able to rise, verse. 38. till he has subdued them all under
his feet, and ours, ver. 39. till he have taken them captives and destroyed
them, ver. 40. For Christ's victories are common to him and his followers, in as
far as their warfare is from him, and he is engaged to fight our battles for
us, or by us, as he sees fit.

Ver. 41. They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but
he answered them not.

42. Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did cast them
out, as the dirt in the streets.

In the type of some passages of some severe justice which David did execute
against his enemies, he sets forth the certain destruction of Christ's
enemies, in judgment merciless. Whence learn, 1. That whosoever do look for
release out of their trouble, and that not through Christ, shall have no
release at all. Though they cry, there shall be none to save them. 2. It may be
some may think themselves friends to God, and God a friend to them, and pray to
him, albeit they be enemies to Christ; but that prayer which is put up to God
without reconciliation made through Christ, shall be rejected. Though they cry
to the Lord, he shall not answer them. 3. If men pursued by Christ for their
enmity against him, shall not under the rod at least, turn to him, there
remains nothing for them, but that they be utterly destroyed, and as it were
beaten as small as the dust. 4. The obstinate enemies of Christ's Kingdom shall
perish shamefully, and as they have de^pised the blood of Christ, and of his
servants, so shall the Lord despise them; He shall cast them out as the dirt in
the streets.

Ver. 43. Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the people; and thou
have made me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known shall
serve me.

44. Ass^on as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers shall submit
themselves unto me.

In the fifth and last part of the Psalm, he promises to himself the settling
and enlargement of his own Kingdom, and prophesies also of Christ's Kingdom
represented thereby. Whence learn. 1. As was David's, so is Christ's Kingdom,
subject to intestine commotions, tumults and dissentions; as in the one there
was, so in the other has been, and will be contentions, and strivings of the
people, raised by Satan, fostered by wicked hypocrites, and by the corruption
of the Lords children. 2. Such striving and dissension do put our Lords
Kingdom in a sort of hazard, if we look to second causes, so as there will be
need of Gods help for a delivery from it. But the Kingdom of Christ shall
stand for all that, notwithstanding these contentions, that it may still be
said of his Kingdom, as it is said here of the typical Kingdom, and is
prophesied of Christ's Kingdom, Thou have delivered me from the strivings of
the people. 3. To the Prophet it was revealed, that Christ's Kingdom was not to
remain straightened within the bounds of Judea, but to be extended to the
Gentiles, over whom Christ was to reign, and now has he a long time reigned.
The Father, as he made David the Type, so has he made Christ head of the
heathen. 4. The wickedness of a person or people, whose works have been most
loathsome to the Lord, cannot hinder him to show mercy to them through Christ,
when he pleases to convert them. For he has said, A people whom I have not
known, shall serve me: which has oft-times come to pass, and will yet more
be seen effectually. 5. The word of the Lord is the Scepter of his Kingdom,
the sword whereby he subdueth people to himself; as soon as they hear of me,
says the Lord, in the mouth of his Type, and Prophet, they shall obey me. 6.
The more room the word gets in a man's heart, and the sooner it be believed and
obeyed, after signification of Gods will to him by his word, the more kindly is
the conversion, and the more of the Lords power is evidenced: as here is
imported in, as soon as they hear of me. 7. When Christ subdueth Nations to
himself by his word, and does convert the elect, or his own redeemed ones:
strangers in heart will come also outwardly unto the society of his Church and
Kingdom, though fainedly. The strangers shall submit themselves to me;
fainedly, as the word imports. 8. Even this outward offer of submission to
Christ's Kingdom, made by strangers, coming to the visible Church, is not
refused, but received pro tanto, and made a matter of glorifying of Christ. The
strangers shall fainedly submit themselves to me. For it is no small glory to
Christ that the Majesty of his Word and Ordinances, does make many stoop before
him, who are not turned truly unto him. Mean time, albeit by entering into, and
submitting to the external covenant, a man be admitted into the visible Church,
and outer Court of Gods house, yet not without real conversion is a man made a
member of the invisible Church, and admitted into the inner Court of heaven.

Ver. 45. The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close
places. He prophesies what shall become of Christ enemies at length. Whence
learn. 1. As some strangers shall come into the outward fellowship of Christ's
Kingdom, so others of them shall remain professed strangers, and disaffected
to his Kingdom, and whether strangers within, or without, shall continue to be
strangers still, both of them shall perish. For strangers shall fade away. 2.
Albeit Christ at first, may have many enemies, and unfriends where he comes to
set up his Kingdom, yet where and when he pleases to stay, and keep up his
Kingdom, his open enemies shall grow fewer. The strangers shall fade away: to
wit, where he minds to stay, and for that end thinks good to diminish them. 3.
Whether the Lord be pleased to convert strangers, or not, their strong holds,
(whether their high imaginations, or their earthly power) shall not be able to
stand before him; let him come to convert them outwardly or inwardly also, or
destroy them, as he shall be pleased, his terror shall affright them; For the
strangers (before him) shall be afraid out of their close places.

Ver. 46. The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock: and let the God of my
salvation be exalted.

47. It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.

48. He delivers me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those
that rise up against me: thou have delivered me from the violent man.

Ver. 49. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the heathen:
and sing praises unto thy name.

50. Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows mercy to his
anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore.

He concludes the Psalm with thanksgiving, and praises the Lord for his
personal preservation unto eternal life, verse 46. for overthrowing of his
enemies, verse 47. for delivery of him from them, verse. 47, 48. and in Christ's
name he sets forth the Lords glory, before the Gentiles, for the mercies
following the Kingdom of Christ, and his own Kingdom, the type thereof, ver.
49, 50. Whence learn, 1. The end of all our speeches, concerning what we have
been employed into, and have done, or have had success in, should be to show
forth the glory of God to others, and to offer praise and thanks to him: for
this, Blessed be my rock, etc. is the end whereunto David's example does drive.
2. Life, and blessed life, quickening life* the only fountain of life, is the
proper style of God, of whom most properly and deservedly we may say, The Lord
lives. 3. Because God is the Fountain of all blessedness, to Angels and men;
therefore should we acknowledge him, and proclaim him blessed, that the hearer
may seek blessedness in him alone. 4. The perfection of God in himself, the
out-letting of his goodness to the creature, his immutability in his love to
his own, his making himself to be as it were the proper good of the believer
by covenant: and his giving the certainty of salvation to the believer,
established by covenant: These and other perfections should exalt the Lord
highly in estimation, and affection of the believer, and do make the believer
heartily wish the Lord may be known to his praise: for this cause says the
Prophet, the Lord lives, and blessed be my rock, and let the God of my
salvati^n be exalted. 4. David, as a type of Christ, in name and behalf of
Christ, does give unto God the glory of taking order with his enemies, for
preserving and propagating his Kingdom, and for the delivering his people from
cruel persecuters. It is God, says he, that avengeth me, and subdueth the
people under me. He delivers me from mine enemies; yea, thou liftest me up
above those that rise u^ against me: Thou have delivered me from the violent
man.

Ver. 49. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the heathen;
and sing praises unto thy name. Besides present praising of God, he promises
to insist in praise and thanksgiving. This the Apostle, Romans 15.9. shows to
be the speech of Christ, and a prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles.
Whence learn, 1. Beside all the victories given to the Church in David's time,
as a pledge of promises, it was foretold that the Gentiles should see many
victories over the enemies of the Church of Christ, after his coming, and that
they should join with the Jews in thanksgiving to God for the same; for upon
account of the Lords lifting up Christ above his adversaries, and cruel
persecuters, Thanks shall be given unto the Lord among the heathen. 2. The
sacrifice of praise offered up in the Church, as it is the work of the Saints
in one respect, so it is the work of Christ in another respect, because he
raises by his Spirit the song in their hearts, and offers up the sacrifice
of thanks unto the Father. For it is Christ who here says, I will give thanks
unto thee (O Lord) among the heathen, and sing praises to thy name.

Ver. 50. Great deliverance gives he to his King: and shows mercy unto his
anointed: to David, and his seed, for evermore. David as a Type of Christ,
gives a reason of perpetual praising of God; to wit, the constant course of
Gods mercies shown to him, and his house, and to be shown to Christ, and his
children, and house, for evermore. Whence learn, 1. As difficulties, enemies,
and dangers of the Church, are many and great; so shall their victories over
these evils be great also; For great deliverance gives he, in a continual
tract and course, as it were, one after another, as need is. 2. All the
deliverances are given to Christ principally, and in him to his Church, and
particular souls through him. For it is said, Great deliverance gives he to
his King. 3. The choosing of a man for a service, shall by the calling of him to
it, and qualifying him for it, and sustaining him in it, be confirmed to him,
and by the course of mercy following him in all his difficulties, which he
shall meet with in his calling. Therefore significantly does he say, Great
deliverance gives he to his King, to David, a chosen Type, and to his
anointed Christ, represented by him: He shows mercy to his anointed, Christ
his seed. 4. It is mere mercy whereof Christ's followers, Christ's children and
seed do stand in need: and mercy by course constantly shall follow them, not
for a short time, but world without end, for the Lord shows mercy to David
and his seed for evermore.

PSALM. XIX. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
This Psalm is a sweet contemplation of the glory of Gods wisdom, power, and
goodness, shining in the works of Creation, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and of the
glory of his holiness, and rich grace, shining through his word and Ordinances
in his Church, v. 7, 8, 9, 10. whereof the Prophet having proof, prays to
have the right use and benefit, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14.

V. 1. THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament shows his
handy works. ALbeit the whole earth be full of the glory of the Lord, yet the
Prophet contenteth himself to pitch his meditations on the heavens alone, and
the vicissitude of day and night, and upon the course of the Suns light. Whence
learn, 1. Albeit the glory of the Lord shine in all his works, yet any portion
thereof will take up a man's meditation, when he begins to think upon it, as
here the heavens are the Prophets Theme and subject matter of meditation. 2.
The invisible things of God, even his eternal power and Godhead, and glorious
attributes of wisdom, and goodness, and Majesty are to be seen in the works
of Creation, from the beginning of the world. The heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows his handy work. 3. Though his glory be shown
to all men, yet it is the illuminate child of God that can observe it; for he
that sets it forth to others, does it by the inspiration of the Lords own
Spirit: He is a Prophet who here is stirred up to point unto us this lesson*
most worthy of our observation. For in substance the heavens declare that they
are not their own maker, but that they are made by one, infinite,
incomprehensible, omnipotent, everlasting, good, kind and glorious God. And the
firmament (taking it for the region of the air, and place of the stars)
declares how curiously he can adorn the work of his hands, and how powerfully
he can put glory abundant on the creature, though it have no matter in it to
make it glorious.

2 Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.

3. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.

4 Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of
the world: in them has he set a tabernacle for the Sun.

He looks next upon the vicissitude of night and day, and as he saw what the
heavens gave him to read, so he hearkeneth and hears what the day and the
night did speak; and he compriseth all their speech in the Doctrine of
knowledge. Whence learn, 1. The right observation of the vicissitude of the
night and day, may give instruction unto us to be wise; for day unto day, in
their revolution, utter speech to the observing ear; And night unto night, in
their vicissitude shows to the understanding man knowledge. For in substance,
the vicissitude of day after day, does serve to teach man that he lives in
time, and that his days are numbered, that his days do go quickly away, and
that time is precious, and cannot return when it is gone; and that so long as
it shall last, it shall serve man to view the works of the Lord, and to go
about his own necessary labors; and such like other speeches does it speak:
Also the night says, That man in himself is weak, and cannot endure long
toyling in labor; that as some little short rest and recreation of the
labourer is necessary, so it is prepared for him, that he may lie under a
curtain, and sleep a while, and so be fitted for more work, if more time be
lent unto him; and that he may now quietly examine, what he has been doing,
may commune with his heart and be still; and that if he do not what he has to
do in time, the night comes when no man can work: By which, and such like
speeches men may learn knowledge. ^. There is no people nor country, but as
much of the speech of the creature is spoken convincingly unto them, as may
make them inexcusable; and albeit all do not learn wis^ome, yet the voice of
the works of creation and providence, is every where in some measure heard:
their line and direction is gone out through the earth.

5 Which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a
strong man to run a race.

6. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the
ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

He contracteth his thoughts from the highness of the heavens, and pitcheth
upon the Sun, and beholds Gods glory in it. Whence learn, 1. All the glory
to be seen in the Sun belongs unto the Lord; for he has made it, and set it
in its place, as in a Tabernacle, for a time, so long as he has use and
service of it. 2. The beauty of the Sun when it arises in the morning; the
wonderful swift and regular motion of it, so tempered by the huge distance
thereof from the earth, that it cannot be seen moving, when it is running in a
circle in the heaven most swiftly: The constancy of the motion of it from day
to day, from year to year, without wearying or failing; the vast circle which
it makes every twenty four hours; the heat and virtue, and powerful operation
upon all inferior creatures are all admirable, and matter of manifesting the
glorious perfection of God, who made it, and moves it; As the Bridegroom he
rises, compasses the Circle of heaven and earth and nothing is hid from the
heat thereof.

7 The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

8 The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.

9. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord
are true, and righteous altogether.

10. More to be be desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold:
sweeter also then the honey, and the honey comb.

The next part of his contemplation, is concerning the glory of the Lord,
declared in his word and scripture; which light as it is more necessary for our
blessedness then the Suns light for our bodies, so he commends this point of
Gods glory, (far above that, which shines in the work of creation) from the
perfection, efficacy, infallibility, and sundry other properties of it. Whence
learn, 1. The Doctrine of life and salvation, set down to us in Gods word, as
a law to us, and a rule of faith and obedience, needs no deck of humane
traditions; it is sufficient in it self, and wants nothing necessary unto
salvation; For the Law of the Lord is perfect. 2. No doctrine, no word save
this divine truth, set down in Scripture, is able to discover the sin and
misery of man, or the remedy and relief from it; no doctrine save this alone,
can effectually humble a soul, and convert it to God; or make a soul sensible
of the loss it has by sin, and restore it to a better condition then is lost
by sin; for it is the property of this law or doctrine, to be converting of
souls. 3. Whosoever hearkeneth to this word, shall be satisfied about what is
the Lords mind and will in all matters of religion, concerning Gods service,
and man's salvation; for it is the testimony of the Lord, wherein he gives
forth his will, concerning what he approves, and what he disalloweth. 4. This
word being understood rightly, as it may be understood when it is compared with
it self, one part of it with another, and other means also used, which God
has appointed, may be safely relied upon: it will not disappoint a man; For
the testimony of the Lord is sure. 5. Albeit there be many deep mysteries in
this word, which may exercise the greatest wits, yet for the points necessary
for the salvation of every soul, it is so plain and clear, that it may be
understood by persons of mean wits, and may make those who are otherwise dull
of understanding, wise to salvation; for it is a testimony making wise the
simple. 6. Nothing is commanded by God in his word, but that which the
illuminate soul must subscribe unto, as equitable in it self, and profitable to
us. For the statutes of the Lord are right. 7. The approving and following of
the Lords directions given to us in his word, is a sure mean to get comfort and
joy raised in our conscience. For the statutes of the Lord rejoice the heart.
8. There is no mixture of error, no dross, nor refuse doctrine, no deceit in
the Lords word; for the commandment of the Lord is pure. 9. By the word of God
a man may clearly see himself in himself blind and naked, and wretched and
miserable, and by coming into the grace and mercy offered in the Messiah,
Christ, may see himself entered in the only safe way of salvation. By the word
of God a man may see every thing in its own colors; virtue to be virtue, and
vice to be vice and vanity: For the word illuminates the eyes. 10. The way of
worshipping, fearing, and serving God, set down in his word, is holy, and in
substance the same in all generations, and always unalterable by man for ever.
The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever. 11. The doctrines set down
in the word of God, are all of them decrees of the almighty Lawgiver, given
forth in his own Court with authority uncontrolable; all of them are true and
worthy to be obeyed; for the judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous
altogether. 12. The word of God isable to enrich a man more then all the riches
in the world, because it is able to bring him to an everlasting Kingdom; for
Gods judgments being as judicial sentences, to determine all necessary truths
and controversies, about saving truth, are more to be desired then gold, yea
then much fine gold. 13. There is more sweet comfort and true pleasure to be
found in the Lords word, then in any pleasant thing in this world. They are
sweeter then the honey, and the honey comb.

11. Moreover, by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is
great reward. The Prophet subscribeth this commendation of Gods word, by his
own experience, and seeks to make good use of it. Whence learn, 1. That
man, of all other, is most meet to commend the word of the Lord, who in
himself has felt the experience of the effects and good use thereof, as the
Prophets example does show. 2. As the word of God is able to make a man wise to
salvation, so also to make him prudent in his carriage, to eschew not only sin,
but also inconveniences, and to warn him of snares, wherein he may fall by
imprudency. For beside all the former commendation, he adds, Moreover by them
is thy servant warned. 3. When a man has said all he can, in commendation of
the word of God, he shall not be able to say all, but must close in some
general, because the benefit of observing of the Lords Statutes and Commands,
does pass his reach; for thus the Prophet closes, In keeping of them there is
great reward.

12. Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. Lest he
should seem to speak like one who seeks to be justified by his works, he
acknowledges himself a man that cleaves not to his own righteousness, but
to the fountain of free grace, and to the expiation of sin made by Christ,
signified under the shadow of ceremonial cleansing. Whence learn, 1. The most
holy man, after conversion, must make still use of the law for his humiliation,
and for driving of him to Christ continually; and when he compares himself
with the Law of God, he will be forced to blush and acknowledge himself and
every other man unable to condescend upon the particulars, and the multitude
even of his actual sins. Therefore says he, Who can understand his errors? 2.
Sins of ignorance, sins past out of memory, do leave guiltiness upon the man,
and must be counted for in heap at least: and mercy through the blood of
cleansing must be requested for, as here. Cleanse thou me from secret sins.

13. Keep back thy servant also from presumpiuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the
great transgression. He puts up another petition, to wit, That he may be
preserved from presumptuous sins. Hence learn, 1. Holiest men are most
sensible of their bygone sins, and so also of their natural sinfulness, and
readiness to fall, whereof the Prophet here is to fear, saying, Keep back also
thy servant from presumptuous sins. 2. Even the regenerate, if the Lord do not
keep them from tentation, or if he leave them in tentation, unto their own will
and strength, they may fall into most scandalous sins, against the light of
their conscience, and be slaves thereunto; Therefore prays he to be kept back
from presumptuous sins, and that God would not suffer such sins to have
dominion over him; insinuating his own weakness, if God did not prevent, did
not assist and help him to prevail against them. 3. Uprightness and
integrity in Gods obedience may stand with sins of infirmity, and sins of
ignorance, but cannot stand with presump^uous sins, against the light of
conscience* for if the Lord shall save him from presumptuous sins, then, he
says, he shall be upright. 4. Presumptuous sins, and letting sin reign in a
man's mortal body, is the high way to the sin unto death, or sinning
maliciously, with despite against God; and he that makes conscience of secret
sins, and is feared to fall into presumptuous sins, and flies to God to be
cleansed from the one, and preserved from falling into the other, may be sure
not to fall into ^he sin against the Holy Ghost. For the Prophet having
prayed to be cleansed from his secret sins, and kept back from presumptuous and
reigning sins, assures himself, That so he shall be innocent from the great
transgression.

Ver. 14. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer. The third
petition, is, for the acceptance of his service in his prayer, and purpose of
heart. Whence learn, 1. As pardoning grace, and preventing grace, and
restraining grace, must be prayed for; so also powerful, sanctifying, or
enabling grace, both for inward and outward service; yea, and grace accepting
the service when it is offered* must be sought for by prayer from God. For as
the Prophet has prayed for the former acts of grace, so also he prays here
for the latter sort, saying, Let the words of my mouth and meditation of my
heart, he acceptable. 2. As all our prayers, and all our holy endeavors, and
abilities to serve God, must be furnished unto us* by our Redeemer who is Jesus
Christ; so also every other grace, and the acceptance of our persons and
services, must come through him; and we may look for all these by virtue of the
Covenant of grace, whereby Christ is made our strength and Redeemer in all
respects: Therefore lays he all the weight on this, O Lord my strength, and
my Redeemer.

PSALM. XX. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
This Psalm was dited to the Church in form of a prayer for the Kings of
Israel, but with a special eye upon, and relation unto Christ, the King of
Israel; in respect of whom this prayer is a prophecy, and a form of blessing
of Christ, and praying for his Kingdom, whereof the Kingdom of Israel was a
type, and the Kings thereof are types of Christ. Not that the Kingdom in every
condition was figurative, or every King a type of him; But as the Priests being
taken not severally, one by one, but together, shadowed forth in something,
Christ in the Office of his Priesthood; so the Kings, not every one, but taken
together, shadowed forth in something Christ, in his Royal Office, and their
Kingdom resembled his Kingdom in his visible Church in some things, and in his
invisible Church in other some things, leaving room to some persons, both among
the Priests, and Kings, to be more specially types then any of the rest in
common, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4* 5. After which the Churches confidence to be heard is
set down, and their gloriation in God over their enemies, with dependence on
God for salvation in all difficulties and strai^s, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9

Ver. 1. THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob
defend thee

2 Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Sion*

3 Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice. Selah.

4 Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel.

5 We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the Name of our God we will set up
our banner; the Lord fulfill all thy petitions.

FRom this prayer of the Church for the King of Israel. Learn, 1. It is the
duty of all the godly, wherever they live, to pray for the welfare of their
Kings, Rulers, and Magistrates, as this example teaches. 2. Greatest men,
though they be also gracious, are subject to trouble: for even the best of the
Kings of Israel, and Christ typified by them, were not exempted therefrom. The
Lord hear thee in the day of trouble. 3. It is the part of such as desire the
prayers of others to be made for them, to pray also themselves, were they
never so great Kings; and prayer must be counted their best weapons in trouble;
The Lord hear thee, says he, in the day of thy trouble. 4. No defense to be
expected from God, but when he is looked upon and believed in as he is
manifested to us in his word. Therefore he says, The Name of the God of Jacob
defend thee. Or, God who in his word has revealed himself to Israel, and
entered in covenant to be his God, defend thee. 5. It is by virtue of Gods
dwelling amongst men, and his taking on man's nature in the person of Christ
(represented by Gods presence in Sion and the Sanctuary) that help must be
expected from God. Therefore says he, The Lord send thee help out of the
Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Sion. 6. Kings and all for whom the godly
may pray with confidence, must be worshippers of God, believers in Christ,
relyers upon the mercy of this only once offered sacrifice, represented by
often repeated typical burnt offerings. For this is imported in, The Lord
remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifices. For it is for
Christ's sacrifice that we are accepted, and that any grace is granted to us. 7.
A believer in Christ, praying according to the revealed will of God, ask what
he will, it shall be granted; he who studieth to walk sincerely before God,
studying to do what is pleasant to Gods heart, shall receive satisfactory
answers according to his own hearts wish. Upon this ground the prayer goes
here, The Lord grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy
counsel. 8. Whosoever do partake with Christ's Subjects in trouble, shall share
with them also in the joy of their deliverance; therefore it is said, We will
rejoice in thy salvation. 9. When it goes well with the King, and chief
Magistrates, it goes the better with all the subjects, and the praise of
delivery and welfare redoundeth to the glory of God who is the fountain of all
felicity; for, In the Name of our God, we shall set up our banners, says the
Church, if God shall bless the King.

Ver. 6. Now know I, that the Lord saves his anointed; he will hear him from
his holy heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand.

7. Some trust in charets, and some in horses: but we will remember the Name of
the Lord our God.

8. They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright.

9. Save, Lord; let the King hear us when we call.

This is the Churches confidence to be heard, and her glori^tion in God, and
dependence on God for salvation. Whence learn, 1. A believer may be sure he
has his request granted, when he has prayed according to Gods will; in
special when he prays for safety to the Church, and Kingdom of Christ. I
know (says he) that the Lord saves his anointed. 2. He that seeks God by
the means appointed; in special, he who seeks God, and help from him,
through Christ, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells, shall have the
grant of his prayer from heaven; for help sought to come from the Sanctuary,
ver. 2. is granted from his holy heaven, ver. 6. 3. Whatsoever be the straits
of Gods Church, or any member thereof, faith sees sufficiency in God to
relieve out of it, and does lay hold on it. ^or he hears with the saving
strength of his right hand. 4. Weak man cannot choose but have some confidence
without himself, in case of apparent difficulties; and natural men do look
first to some earthly thing wherein they confide. Some trust in charets, and
some in horses, some in one creature, some in another. 5. The believer must
quit his confidence in these things, whether he have them, or want them, and
must rely on what God has promised in his word to do unto us. But we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God. 6. That which terrifieth the believer in
the first assault of a tentation, before he go to his refuge, is contemned by
the believer when he looks to the Lord, his true defense; Charets and horses
when they are invading Gods people are terrible: but now when the Lord is
remembered, they are here set at naught in comparison. 7. The condition of the
worldly man and of the enemies of Gods people seems to be the better, at the
first, and the condition of the Church the worse. But a short resolution
comes, which determines the question in the end; the standing of the ungodly
is followed with a fall; and the low condition of the godly has a better
condition following upon it. The worldly man, and enemy, is brought down, and
falls. But the godly are made to say, We are risen and stand upright. 8. True
confidence strengthens it self by prayer, Save Lord. 9. That which is prayed
for in the type, is perfected in Christ, who is the truth; salvation is granted
to all his Subjects, whenever they call. Let the King hear us when we call.
10. And when the Lord is relied upon for safety, the means shall have the
promised blessing. The Kings of Israel were to be the more useful to the
people when safety was sought from the Lord. First, they pray, Save us, and
then, Let the King hear us when we call, or implore him.

PSALM. XXI. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
As the former Psalm was a prayer for the preservation of the Kingdom of
Israel, in relation to the Kingdom of Christ, represented by it: So this Psalm
is a form of thanksgiving unto God by the Church, for blessing of the Kingdom
of Israel, representing the blessing, and cause of thanksgiving, to be found in
Christ, and his Kingdom, wherein a number of good things are set forth* heaped
upon the King, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And ^ number of miseries set forth,
heaped on the head of his enemies, ver. 8* 9, 10, 11, 12. For both which the
Lord is glorified, ver. 13. The reason why the former Psalm and this, are
referred in so many particulars unto Christ* is, because the verity of these
things here spoken of, is to be sought in Christ, and his Kingdom: for but in
some few only of the Kings, and in some few times of the Kingdom only, was
the shadow of what is here spoken of, to be found, when the whole history is
consulted.

Ver. 1. THe King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord: and in thy salvation how
greatly shall he rejoice!

2. Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not withholden the request
of his lips. Selah.

3. For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou set a
Crown of pure gold on his head.

4 He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him, even length of days for ever
and ever.

5 His glory is great in thy salvation; honor and majesty have thou laid upon
him.

6 For thou have made him most blessed for ever: thou have made him exceeding
glad with thy countenance.

7. For the King trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most high
he shall not be moved.

The benefits bestowed on the King, and his Kingdom, are seven or eight, which
are so many reasons of thanksgiving. The first is joy in the Kings heart, for
strength and salvation given unto him. Whence learn, 1. As prayer is necessary,
so also is thanksgiving; and the offering of both to God, as it is our duty, so
it is his due; and as we should seek the concurrence of others in prayers, so
should we seek their concurrence in praises: And he that offers prayer one
day, shall have matter of praise to offer another day, as here we are taught.
2. Christ, and all his true Subjects, are sure to be furnished with furniture
of strength from God, for every employment, and to be delivered out of every
danger by God, and to have joy and rejoicing in the experimental feeling
thereof. For, The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation
how greatly shall be rejoice? This is the first reason of praise and thanks,
for this first benefit. The second benefit bestowed on Christ, to be
forthcoming to his true Subjects, is this, Satisfactory answers shall be given
to all the articles of Christ's intercession, and all the articles of the Saints
warrantable supplications. Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not
withheld the request of his lips. The third benefit is this There shall be a
ready out-giving of liberal gifts for Christ's subjects, and fruits of Gods
love, before the need thereof be felt, or observed; Thou preventest him with
the blessing of goodness: The fourth benefit is right, and title, and
possession given to Christ; a name of glory, or the gift of ^ glorious
Kingdom, wherein Christ shall give all his subjects crowns of glory. Thou
set a crown of pure gold upon his head. The fifth benefit is right to
eternal life, as the fruit of Christ's intercession; He asked life of thee, and
thou gave him even length of days, for ever and ever. The sixth benefit given
to Christ, and his subjects, is growing honor, and growing weight of glory, a
load of it, even before men; for nothing can make men more glorious, even
before the world, then Gods owning them before the world, and putting respect
upon them; yea, and the world shall more and more see and admire the glory
which God shall put upon Christ, and his Kingdom: His glory is great in thy
salvation; honor and majesty have thou laid upon him. The seventh benefit, is
a begun possession of everlasting blessedness, and joy unspeakable; partly
from the feeling of the first fruts, partly from the hope of a full harvest.
For God will never make an end of blessing whom he will bless. Thou have made
him and his followers most blessed for ever; thou have made him exceeding glad
with thy countenance. The eighth reason of thanksgiving, and the last benefit,
in relation to the giving of what is good to Christ, and to his subjects,
(among whom David, and every one of the godly come in to share) is the
unchangeablenesse of Gods mercy, and powerful love toward the believer, who
has closed in covenant with him, and does trust in him. He shall not be moved.
And why so? The King trusts in the Lord: What then? The covenanted mercy of
the most High is unchangeable, and makes all blessedness fast to Christ, and
to every believer: Through the mercy of the most High he shall not be moved.
Christ's Kingdom in his Person, and his Subjects with him, shall stand, when
all the kingdoms of the earth shall stagger and fall.

Ver. 8. Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand shall find
out those that hate thee.

9. Thou shall make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord
shall swallow the^ up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them.

Ver. 10. Their fruit shall thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from
among the children of men.

In the 2d place there is a prophecy of Gods vengeance on the enemies of
Christ, and his Church, under the type of the enemies of David's Kingdom. Whence
learn, 1. All the enemies of Christ, and his Church, shall be pursued by God,
and overtaken, and none of them shall escape his hand, neither open enemies, nor
close lurking traitors. The Lords hand shall find out all the Kings enemies, and
his right hand shall find out all those that hate him. 2. All the enemies of
Christ, and his Kingdom, howsoever they may possibly be spared and forborne for
a while, yet there is a set time for punishing of them, here called the time of
Gods anger. 3. When the time is come, their judgment is inevitable, horrible,
and completely full. Thou shall make them as a fiery oven, where the burning is
extreme hot, the heat striking upon what is in it, from all hands, above,
below, and about, on all hands, and the door closed from going out, or
suffering any cool refreshment to come in. 4. There is no possibility to
apprehend the horrible punishment of Christ's enemies: for after their casting
in a fiery oven, they are set down here as fuel, to suffer what God's being
incensed in anger, as a consuming fire swallowing them up, and devouring them
in his incomprehensible wrath, does import. 5. After the Lords vengeance is
come upon the enemies of Christ's Kingdom, his curse shall follow the works of
their hands, and upon whatsoever they sought to make themselves happy by in
their life: and his vengeance shall follow upon their posterity, till he have
rooted out their memorial from among men. Their fruit shall he destroy from
the earth, and their seed from amongst the children of men.

Ver. 11. For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous
device, which they are not able to perform. For evidencing the Lords justice,
he gives a reason of this from the design which the enemies have to root out
the Lords anointed, and his seed, ver. 11. Whence learn, 1. The malicious
enemies of Christ's Kingdom, (beside all the hatred they have shown, and evil
which they have done) are still upon plots and designs to overturn Christ's
Kingdom, and work. They in^^^ded evil against thee. The enemies of Christ's
Kingdom may possibly conceive they only oppose such as do trouble men's
interests, and not as they are the Lords childern: yet it is found, that what
they do against them, they do it against the Lord; because they do it against
his children and subjects, for his cause and service. 2. Plot what the wicked
please against Christ and his Church, they shall not be able to accomplish their
design or desire: They have imagined a mischievous device, which they are not
able to perform. 3. The evil which the wicked would do, and do set themselves
to do, shall be made their dittay, and the reason of their doom and
destruction, as well as the evil which they have done, if they repent not. For
they intended, is here given as the reason of the judgment.

Ver. 12. Therefore shall thou make them turn their back, when thou shall make
ready thine arrows upon thy strings, against the face of them. He clears
their dittay and judgment yet more, verse. 12. teaching us, 1. That the Lord
will suffer his enemies to manifest themselves in open opposition oft-times,
before he fall upon them: for here they are found in the posture of pursuers,
and opposers of God, setting their face against him, when he comes to execute
judgment on them: Thou shall make them turn their back. 2. When God falls
upon his enemies to be avenged upon them, he uses to make them, and the
beholders see, that he has set them up as a mark to shoot at: for He will make
ready his arrows, one after another, against the face of them. 3. The Lords
wrath shall so meet his enemies in the teeth, wheresoever they turn, that they
shall be forced to forsake their pursuing of the Church. Thou shall make them
turn their back.

Ver. 13. Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and
praise thy power. He closes the Psalm with giving glory to God, including
also a prayer. Whence learn, 1. When the Lords Church is preserved from
persecuters, then the Lord is exalted. Be thou exalted, says he. 2. When the
Church is delivered, it is not by her own strength, but by the power of the
Lord. Be thou exalted in thine own strength. 3. Albeit the godly be put to
mourn for a time, yet when the Lord appears for them, they get matter of joy
to themselves, and pr^^se to God. (...) sing, and praise thy power.

PSALM. XXII. To the chief Musician upon Aijeleth Shahar. A Psalm of David.
This Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ's deepest sufferings, whereof David's
exercise is a Type. The Agony of spirit in Christ, and wrestling of David's
faith as the Type, is set down to v. 22. and the victory, and the outgate to
the end of the Psalm. In the exercise there are three conflicts between sense
and faith. The first conflict, wherein the sense of trouble is set down, v. 1*
2. and faiths wrestling against it, v. 3, 4, 5. The second conflict, wherein is
the second assault of sense, v. 6, 7, 8. and faiths wrestling against it, v. 9,
10* 11. The third conflict, wherein the third assault of sense is, v. 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18* and faiths wrestling with it. v. 19, 20, 21. Then follows
the victory, set forth first in a promise of praise, v. 22. Secondly, in an
exhortation to all the godly, to praise the Lord, with a reason from his
experience, v. 23, 24. Thirdly, in a renewed promise of praise and thanks, to
the edification of the Church, v. 25. Fourthly, in a Prophecy of the increase
of Gods glory in the earth, as a fruit of Christ's suffering and victory, ver.
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

V. 1. MY God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from
helping me, and from the words of my roaring?

2. O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the night
season, and am not silent.

IN this exercise of David the type, and of Christ represented here, both do
agree in these four things. 1. Both are under the sense of wrath, and of
oppressing trouble. 2. Both are tempted to doubting and desperation. 3. Both
wrestle against the tentation, and against trouble, the occasion thereof; And
4. Both get the victory. But they differ in these four things. First, In the
measure of the trouble; David's trouble was little in comparison of Christ's
trouble; David laid not down his life under trouble; but Christ's trouble was
incomparably more, and his soul made heavy unto death, and the trouble took
his life from him. Secondly, In the manner of the trouble they differ; for
David's trouble was only a probatory exercise, without vindictive wrath; not a
curse, but a cross, for trying of him, and training of him to believe against
sense; which trouble of his paid no debt, neither his own, nor any others; but
Christ's trouble was a vindictive and avengefull punishment; for real wrath was
against him, as he was bearing our sins, and the bitter curse of the Law was
cast upon him: for he was made a curse for us; and his punishment paid our
debt, and was expiatory and satisfactory to justice. Thirdly, though both David
and Christ were tempted to doubting and desperation, yet David's tentation could
not be sinlesse, because of his sinful imperfections, common to him, and all
the rest of the godly; The tentation got some advantage of him, because of the
imperfection of his knowledge, faith, love, and abilities; and because of the
power of the body of original sin in him. But Christ's passive tentation was
altogethet sinlesse, and could not have any sin at all on his part; for albeit
he was tempted in all things like unto us, yet it is said, without sin. Because
when the Prince of this world, Satan, came and took essay of him, he found none
of his own stuff in Christ: he had nothing in him to work upon; and it was
impossible that sin could be in him, being the holy one of Israel our
sanctifier, Holy Lord God Almighty, and man also in one person, Isa. 6.3. Job.
12.41. Fourthly, they differ in their wrestling, and victory; for David
wrestled not in his own strength, got not the victory in his own strength,
(...) in and through Christ's strength, who gave David a taste only, or a smell
rather, of the cup which he was to drink out, unto the dregs, and with the
dregs, and who helped him to wrestle by Faith. But Christ wrestled and got the
victory in his own strength, which is one with the strength of the Father. For
he is Jehovah our righteousness. In all the Psalm we shall look^ upon every
passage, not so much as it concerns David the type, as wherein it concerns
Christ the truth. In the first conflict of the sense of trouble with faith;
Learn from the words as they are Christ's words. 1. God is Christ's God; he being
considered as God and man, in one person, entered in the Covenant of redemption
with the Father as Mediator and Surety for men; That he shall satisfy
justice, and do all the Fathers will in behalf of the Elect, and that God
shall be his God, and the God of all the Elect redeemed by him. Therefore does
he here say, My God, my God. 2. Faith, as it is a virtue giving perfect trust
and credit unto Gods promises made to his Son the Redeemer, is a part of that
original holiness in the man Christ, and a point of his personal perfection,
suitable to his employment. This faith he professes while he says, My God, my
God. 3. Christ, as man lying under the curse of the law for us, was really
deserted and forsaken for a time, in regard of all sensible consolation: for it
behoved him to bear the wrath, or effects of wrath, due to our sins really, so
far as might satisfy for us, and relieve us from wrath. Its true, the man
Christ could no more be forsaken, in regard of divine presence supporting him,
then the personal union of the two natures could be dissolved: But in regard of
sensible consolation, he was by way of punishment for our sins, and by way of
cursing our sin in him, really in our stead for a while, deprived, as man, of
the sense of the comfort of his own Godhead. The sense of wrath filling now
the soul of the man to the brim, and running over. Therefore speaks he of his
forsaking, Why have thou forsaken me? 4. As sense and reason can express
themselves in seeming contradictory terms, and yet without contradiction can
very well agree in their seeming opposite, and inconsistent expressions; so can
faith and sense express themselves, in seeming contradictory terms, and yet
very well agree; for as sense, and pain, and sickness in the patient, can in
its own language, and style of natural feeling, say to the Surgeon, cutting
and lancing the flesh, and to the Physician who has given a bitter portion*
you have hurt me, you have made me sick: when indeed in the style of reason and
wit, he has been healing the man, and recovering him from sickness. So sense
of sorrow, grief, pain, and affliction, desertion, and wrath can speak in the
terms of natural feeling, that which may seem to cross, but does not indeed
cross faith speaking in the terms and language of supernatural Theological
truth. Therefore My God, my God, spoken in the perfection of faiths language,
can very well agree with, Why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from
helping of me, and from the words of my roaring? spoken here in the language of
perfect natural sense; for perfect faith, and perfect natural sense were in our
Lord Christ, very God, and very man, completely holy. 5. Bitter was the cup of
Divine wrath, which Christ did drink: great was the price our Redeemer paid,
to ransom us, when the sense thereof drew forth of his Majesty such
expressions. Thus faith and feeling may both speak, each of them their own
language to God in one breath, as here they do. Now as these words are David's,
who had in him sinful corruption of nature, Learn, 1. Sense, and tentation,
and corrupt nature, may represent God in his dispensations to his own children,
as if he had forsaken altogether, and regarded not their hard condition, and
would not help, as here is shown in David's experience. 2. Faith should correct
sense, and refute tentations, and bridle effections, and not suffer their words
to go forth, expressing sense or appearance of doubting of Gods favor, till
first faith speak, and go before, and fasten its gripes on the Covenant; as
here faith goes foremost, and calls the Lord, My God, my God, before that
sense utter a word. 3. At one time, and in one exercise, these three may
concur. 1. Desertion in the point of comfort. 2. Growing trouble without help
seen. And 3. Apparent rejecting of prayer: And these three joined together do
set sore upon the faith of a child of God. For continuance of trouble is a sore
tentation, albeit comfort be now and then mixed: want of sensible comfort,
mixed with trouble, doubleth the burden, and disquieteth the mind much: but to
seem to lose labor in prayer, made for either help or comfort, is the heaviest
part of the exercise: I cry day and night, and thou hear not, is a sad
condition. 4. In this case it is the best remedy, to lay the worst of our
thoughts single before the Lord, and to tell him whatsoever is suggested to us,
and not to be Secretars to Satan; but to reveal our selves fully to God, and
fix our selves on the Covenant of Grace, wherein we have closed with him; yea,
and to double and treble our gripes of, My God.

3. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.

4. Our fathers trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou did deliver them.

5 They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not
confounded.

Now Faith having spoken with Sense, and grapled with the tentation, speaks
alone, that it may prevail. Whence learn, 1. Were tentations never so black,
Faith will not hearken to an ill word spoken against God, but will justify God
always; This should be our part in time of greatest perplexity, to say, But
thou art holy. 2. It is wisdom for a soul in a sad exercise, to take side and
part with Faith, to gather arguments to strengthen it, to divert the mind from
thinking still on its calamity, and to set it upon the contemplation of Gods
perfections in himself, and toward us in his Gospel, and of the passages of
his providence toward his people, whereby he has purchased constant praises at
their hands: In the right of which praises and possession whereof, God is
resolved to keep himself and to dwell therein as in a habitation wherein he
delights to remain. O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. 3. It is
wisdom to look to the carriage of the Godly in former times: Our Fathers
trusted n thee. To their trusting, and trusting in God constantly in their
trouble; they trusted in thee, they trusted, and the third time they trusted:
and to look upon their patient depending on God, doubling their diligence in
calling on him; as their straits did grow, they cried, they trusted: and to
remember that they did never seek God in vain, but every one of them were
delivered, and not confounded; for this direction is holden forth to us in this
example, which our Lord Jesus could well make use of for our consolation, and
whereof David made use for his own upholding.

6. But I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people.

7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they shake
the head, saying,

8 He trusted on the Lord, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him,
seeing he delighted in him.

The second conflict, wherein the sense of trouble is set forth as a new
assaulting of Faith. Whence learn, 1. Never was any child of God before Christ,
under so much misery as Christ was himself: His own heavens, his own Father,
his own Godhead did hide their face and consolation from him: Our sins
willingly taken on him, and Gods wrath pressed the weight of punishment with
the full power of Justice, both upon his soul and body: These for whom he died
despised him, he himself being emptied of all things which make men respected
to the world, and depressed lower then ever any man was, as a worm to be trod
upon, he was made a matter of common talk, and reproach in all men's mouths; set
at naught by the basest of the people; derided, and scorned in his most holy
behavior; sport, and matter of laughter was made of his sufferings; malice
feeding it self with pleasure, upon his pain and misery, and expressing it
self with the basest signs of disgrace, which disdain could devise, for
flouting of him, mocking of his saving doctrine, and faithful testimony given
unto it; insulting over him, as if he had been neither Gods Son, nor an honest
man: and all this was counted little enough for satisfaction to Justice
exacting of him, as the due punishment of our sins, whatsoever is imported in
the sad expressions, set down in the Text. 2. As the more misery the children
of God are under, the more does tentation make their misery seem weighty, for
bearing down of their confidence in God: So the more that misery seems to
grow, and the world to turn their back on Gods children in their trials, the
more should they draw near to God, and lay out their case before him, as here
we are taught by this example. 3. Let no man wonder to be despised of men, and
mocked for religion; for so was the man according to Gods own heart, and Christ
our Lord mocked more then any, in his sad sufferings. Let God deliver him,
seeing he delights in him, said his enemies.

9 But thou art he that took me out of the womb; thou did make me hope when
I was upon my Mothers breasts.

10 I was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God from my mothers belly.

11 Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help.

Here faith opposes whatsoever the complaint could import, to the prejudice of
confidence, and labors to strengthen it self by all arguments. Whence
learn, 1. As Satan makes assault after assault, against Faith, upon new
representations of calamity and misery; so we should raise bulwark after
bulwark for defense; and after we have looked upon other men's experiences
before us, we should recount our own experiences of Gods are toward us, and
should make use of all that the Lord has done unto us, for our strengthening;
for so does this example teach us. 2. Albeit men in a fit of misbelief, will
admit no proof of Gods respect unto them, except singularities, and will
question also special grace, when it is given; yet the humbled believer is so
wise, as to make use of the most common benefit which the man has received
from God for confirmation of his own faith; even the ordinary work of our
conception, frame of body, birth, and education may suffice us to draw in to
God who made us, and has done so much for us (ere we could implore him, or do
any thing for our selves) as may encourage us to come to him, and seek his
favor, whatsoever objection can be made to the contrary; for this example
teaches us so to do. 3. Seeing the Lord does many things for us, which in the
time when he does them for us, we do not observe; it is our duty to look upon
them afterward, that they may furnish us with matter of praise to God and
faith in him; for so does this example teach us. 4. Whatsoever instruments and
means the Lord makes use of, the spiritual eye pierces through them, and
looks on God as worker of all things, for and upon them, from their cradle.
Thou tookest me out of my mothers womb. 5. Children borne within the Covenant
have God for their God, from their nativity, and may lay their reckoning so;
and whenever they would draw near to God, to make use of the Covenant, they
may say, Thou art my God from my mothers belly. 6. The approaching of trouble,
and neernesse of danger should draw us near to God; who in an instant can
interpose himself between us and the evil: and the less help we have beside
the Lord himself, the more hope may we have to be helped by God; This is the
Prophets plea, Be not far from me, for trouble is near, etc.

12 Many Bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.

13 They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and roaring Lion.

From ver. 12. to 22. is the third conflict of Sense with Faith, upon the
consideration of the multitude, power and cruelty of his enemies, compared with
his own infirmity, now emptied of all strength to resist them; and these are
mixed one with another. The enemies terriblenesse is first set forth, then his
emptiness and weakness by turns, to v. 19. unto all which faith opposes it
self, by prayer to God, to v. 22, He compares ( v. 12, 13.) his persecuters
to Bulls, many bulls, strong, cruel, gaping, roaring, devouring Lions. Whence
learn, 1. The persecuters of Christ and his people, are but beastly, sensual
bodies, sold to this present world, and destitute of grace and humility; more
like in their rage to savage beasts then to rational men; commonly also they
are men of riches, and worldly power, fed and fat Bulls; and many in number, all
of them ready for an ill turn, and so cruel, that nothing less will satisfy
them, then blood and slaughter, as they are here described. And no wonder that
Christ's servants shall find it so in their case, seeing Christ himself and
his servants before us have had experience of such enemies.

14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is
like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

15 My strength is dried up like a potsheard: and my tongue cleaves to my
jaws; and thou have brought me into the dust of death.

What the Lord wrought upon his body, and natural spirits, and strength, is
here set down. Whence learn, 1. It was determined by God, that with outward
persecution of Christ, by his cruel adversaries, the Father should bruise him
and break him inwardly also, and punish him with all severity: for here his
suffering is in body and mind, in flesh and bones, in his natural spirit, and
natural courage, in heart, and whole strength, that in nothing he should be
unpunished, wherein we sinners are found polluted; to the intent that he being
fully emptied, the ransom might be full; he is poured out like water, and
emptied of all that the created humane nature could furnish. The terror of
Divine Justice and wrath did in a manner loose all the joints of his body, so
that natural courage, before the dreadful avenger of sin, did fail: his heart
was made soft like wax to receive and keep the impression of Divine terror,
til justice should be satisfied, and was dissolved like wax, in the point of
resolution to withstand it. It is melted in the midst of his bowels, his
natural strength is dried, burnt up like a potsheard, baken in the fire, his
mouth was stopped from all defense and apology; for he was content to be holden
as guilty, standing in our room. Therefore his tongue cleaved to his jaws. And
in a word, the hand of God exacteth the full price of him, and brings him down
so, as there is not a bit of him free of the punishment. Thou, says he, have
brought me into the dust of death. This David had but a taste of in his deepest
trouble: The verity and weight of this, is to be found only in Christ, of whom
this was prophesied, that it should come, and indeed is come, done and ended,
and so it behoved to be.

16. For dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me:
they pierced my hands and my feet. Again he brings forth his enemies part,
to show us that Christ's enemies were to prove but bloody dogs, when they should
be let loose upon him, whom nothing but Crucify him, crucify him, could
satisfy: and such will they be still who persecute his Church. Next, to show,
that although his enemies were to be the assembly of the visible Church, for
open profession, yet by rejecting of his grace, and opposing of him, in Gods
sight and estimation, they were holden for the assembly of the wicked. Thirdly,
to foreshew the death of the Cross to be appointed for Christ, it is said,
They pierced my hands and my feet.

17. I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.

18. They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.

Another, and further point of Christ's fore-prophecied suffering, is his
nakedness on the Cross, and the discovery of his lean body (being wasted
with decreed sorrows) and the gazing of his enemies upon him hanging on the
Cross, and the parting of his garments among the soldiers, and the casting of
lots for his upper garment, because it was woven, and could not be divided.
Whence learn, 1. All that our Lord Jesus suffered, was before decreed and
agreed upon, betwixt the Father and the Son, and foretold by Christ himself
long before his incarnation, speaking by his Spirit in his Prophets, as here
appears, by the description of our Lords death and passion, so plainly and
particularly, as if it were a History, and not a prophecy. 2. Beside pain of
body, leanness of flesh, with daily sorrows and trouble of spirit, the least
disgrace done to our Lord, the least wrong, a look unto him, the least injury
in the matter of his ^loathing, are all reckoned up in his sufferings, all
counted up in the price of redemption, that there may be nothing inlacking in
the punishment of our cautioner, whereby Gods justice might be satistisfied, or
our consciences quieted, for the expiation of our sin, by his suffering in
body, soul, same, apparel, and every other thing else, wherein justice could
overtake the guil^y.

Ver. 19. But be not thou far from me, O Lord, O my strength, have thee to help
me. Unto this last assault, faith opposes prayer for divine assistance, for
strength to bear out, and for delivery; in all which he was heard. Whence
learn, 1. Faith is made victorious over all assaults, by opening of its
tentations to God, and putting up prayer to him for help, as here is seen. 2.
If God shall not withdarw his sweet presence for supporting a soul, albeit it
should not find his presence for comforting of it, supporting presence may
suffice in a time of sad exercise: for this much did satisfy our God in his
agony. Be not thou far from me, O Lord. 3. Faith finds God to be its strength
when the believer is emptied of his own strength; O my strength, says David
the type, and Christ as man by him represented. 4. As the have of our necessity
does require, we may without limitation request the Lord to haste: Haste thee
to help me.

Ver. 20. Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog.

21. Save me from the lions mouth: for thou have heard me from the horns of the
unicorns.

He prays to be delivered from the violent blood-shedder, and bloody doggish
persecuter, and from the cruel lion-like oppressor, and then says presently,
that he is heard and delivered from the power of the enemies which were setting
upon him as Unicorns. Now concerning David, the matter is clear* for he was
delivered so from his enemies, that they got not his life: But of Christ the
question may be, how he was delivered, seeing his life is taken: For answer,
Christ here does say, that he was delivered; and so it was indeed; for when he
had paid the price, he was not holden by the bonds of death, and the grave,
but rose again the third day. Whence learn, 1. Christ was no less delivered
from dogs, lions, unicorns, his persecuting enemies, by his resurrection after
death, then if he had been taken out of their hands, when they came to
apprehend him in the Garden; yea, this delivery out of the grave, was a far
greater delivery then if he had not been slain at all: For then he had
delivered himself only, and not us: But now by the laying down of his life, he
has discharged himself of his suretiship for us, and delivered us with
himself, and so has saved both himself and us; yea, by his rising out of the
grave, he is demonstrate more fully to be the Son of God, then by any of his
miraculous escapings out from the hands of the multitude, when they were about
to apprehend him. Thou have heard me, that is, delivered me. 2. To get victory
over trouble, is a no less glorious delivery from trouble, then to be
preserved from falling into trouble; yea, its a more glorious delivery. For the
troubles are broken, by falling on the believer, like waves of the sea on the
rock, and the believer remains victor, and settled as a rock. 3. It is a
notable argument of confidence to be heard by way of delivery, when a man can
say he has in extremity of danger prayed, and has been heard as a Supplicant:
Save me, for thou have heard me from the horns of the unicorns.

Ver. 22. I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the
congregation will I praise thee. After the conflict, the victory and out-gate
by way of thanksgiving is set down, to the end of the Psalm: wherein David's
part is but a little shadow, and is swallowed up here in Christ's glory, shining
in the fruits of his passion and resurrection. Learn from David's part: That
delivery foreseen by faith, works in some sort the effects of the delivery
past in effect; to wit, quietness, peace, joy, and thanksgiving; as here is to
be seen. From Christ's part promising and prophesying of the fruits of his death
and resurrection, Learn 1. Christ, though he be God Almighty, yet by reason of
his incarnation, for the redeemeds sake, he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren. 2. The preaching of the Gospel of Christ's satisfaction for our sins
by death, and of his resurrection for our justification, is the matter of great
praise to God, and comfort to the redeemed: I will declare, says Christ, thy
name to my brethren. 3. In the right preaching of the Gospel, the Ministers are
in effect but Christ's voice. Christ himself is the principal Prophet and
Preacher: For I, says he, will declare thy name in the midst of the great
Congregation; to wit, of the whole Catholic Church on earth.

Ver. 23. Ye that fear the Lord, praise him, all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify
him, and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel.

24 For he has not despised, nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted:
neither has he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him, he heard.

He exhorts all that fear God, to praise and glorify God, because of Christ's
victory, and Gods hearkening unto his intercession made for the redeemed.
Whence learn, 1. Such as are made partakers of the benefit of Christ's passion,
and resurrection, are chiefly called, and bound to praise God for their
redemption, and to fear God more and more, that they may be more and more
fitted to praise and glorify him; for of a sanctified mouth only will God
accept praise. Ye that fear the Lord, praise him; All ye seed of Jacob,
glorify him; and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel. 2 The Fathers hearkening
unto Christ's intercession, and delivering of him from our sin, and our deserved
punishment laid upon him, is the common benefit of all the redeemed, the matter
of their common thanksgiving and praise, and the matter of their assurance of
their delivery from sin and death; Of the certainty of which delivery Christ's
deliverance is both a cause, and a pawn. For he has not hid his face from him,
but when he cried, he heard him. 3. Neither the sense of a man's own meanness,
and despicablenesse, nor the mean estimation that the world has of him, will
prejudge him when he is supplicant at the Lords hand. For he has not despised,
nor abhorred the afflictions of the afflicted.

25 My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows
before them that fear him. He renews the promise of thanksgiving, which as it
concerns David, teaches, 1. That the purpose of praising of God, is no light
motion in the hearts of his children, when the Lord has given them experience
of his respect to them; but a fixed and solid resolution to set forth the
goodness of God before others. For here he renews his promise to praise. 2.
The Lord, and the Lord only, is the Theme which the believer handles in point
of praise; no other subject of praise acknowledges he; My praise shall be of
thee, etc. 3. The opportunity of time, place and persons, offered for praising
of God, ought to be taken, and made use of by every one, according to their
calling: My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation. 4. Duties,
specially when lying upon us by vow or oaths, ought to be the more heeded, and
made conscience of: I will pay my vows before them that fear him. As this
concerns Christ's undertaking, it teaches, 1. The Son of God, and promised Son
of David, Christ Jesus, by all the work of redemption, studieth, as to bring
salvation to his elect, so to honor the Father, saying here, My praise shall be
of thee in the great congregation. 2. Albeit our Lord has finished all his
undertaking for the payment of the price and ransom of redemption, yet has he
not yet performed all which he has undertaken for making use of his purchased
salvation, unto the enlarging of the glory of his Father, and gathering into
the great congregation all his redeemed ones to be worshippers of the Father in
spirit and truth: But as he is still upon this work from generation to
generation, so is he willing still to lie under this engagement, and these
vows, till he perform them to the full: I will pay my vows before them that
fear him.

Ver. 26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that
seek him; your heart shall live for ever. He alludeth to the manner of offering
of peace offerings, where the godly friends concurring in the thanksgiving, had
a share in the feast of what was sacrificed. Whence learn, 1. The mercy
bestowed upon one of the godly, serves to refresh the souls of the rest; and
in special there is a banquet prepared for the souls of the redeemed by the
purchase of Christ's sacrifice, whereof the humbled believer is made partaker:
The meek shall eat, and be satisfied. 2. Albeit the believer, at all times, do
not find the sweetness of this feast, but be put to work after a meal
received, put to fight after a feast, and made hungry after a new meal, and be
made to pray for it, and to seek after the Lord in the use of the means, yet
shall he eat again in due time, and be satisfied: For they shall praise the
Lord that seek him, is as much as they that seek him, shall find so much as
shall make them both to have cause of praising, and also in effect to praise
him. 3. Whatsoever alterations or vicissitudes of things be in the condition of
humble believers, seeking more and more communion with God, they may be sure of
eternal life, beside what they get by way of earnest in this life. For the
Spirit of the Lord directing his speech to them, has said, Your heart shall
live for ever.

Ver. 27. All the ends of the world shall remember, and turn unto the Lord; and
all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee.

28. For the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor among the nations.

Now follows special prophesies of the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom,
wherein the Prophet by the Spirit of prophecy does speak, and teach us, 1.
That the calling of the Gentiles after Christ's resurrection, was a concluded
matter with God, whereof he gave warning long before it came, which though it
be come to pass, yet not in so ample a measure, as may be yet further
expected, because for the making of these words yet more clearly seen to be
fulfilled, it shall come to pass, that all the ends of the world shall
remember. 2. So long as men shall lie unconverted, they know not what they are
doing, they are as men sleeping or distracted, not making use so much as of the
very principles of truth, which by the light of common reason from inspection
of the creatures may be learned, concerning the invisible things of God; But
when the light of Christ's Gospel shines in upon their heart, They are made to
remember and turn to the Lord. 3. Such as are converted, do make God the object
of their worship, do embrace his ordinances, and subject themselves to his
laws and discipline; For they worship before him, become subjects to him, and
that by the powerful subduing of them to himself: For the Kingdom is the
Lords, and he is Governor among the nations.

Ver. 29 All they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: all they that
go down to the dust shall bow before him, and none can keep alive his own soul.

30. A seed shall serve him: It shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.

31. They shall come, and declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be
born, that he has done this.

A further clearing of this Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom enlarged among the
Gentiles. Whence learn, 1. That Kings, Rulers, and Magistrates shall have no
cause of jealousy from Christ's Kingdom, and his governing over nations. For
so many of them as shall embrace Jesus Christ, not only may brook their places,
honors, riches, and all lawful benefits, wherein their fatness and worldly
welfare seems to consist, but also shall be made partakers of the delicates
of the Lords house, which shall so satisfy their souls, as they shall count
his Gospel their choice cheer, and shall bless God for his consolations; for
its promised to all Christ's true subjects, who are in high place, All they that
be fat upon earth shall eat and worship. 2. As the highest condition worldly
shall not be hurt by obedience to Christ, but helped, for the benefit of the
true believer; so believers in the meanest condition they can be in on earth,
shall find relief, comfort, and making up of all their inlacks in Jesus
Christ, and shall fall down and worship their rich and bountiful Lord: All
that go down to the dust shall bow before him. 3. Whosoever shall not come to
Christ to be saved by him shall perish, and they that come unto him, shall be
forced to hold their salvation of him. For none can keep alive his own soul:
This is the proper work of the only Savior Jesus. 4. Albeit every particular
person, in every Nation, and Kingdom, be not converted unto Christ: yet so
many persons of all ranks, out of all nations, shall be converted, as shall
make evident Christ's power, and Sovereignty, to conquer subjects to himself at
his pleasure, even as many as may perpetuate his Kingdom, and the succession
of worshippers of him from one generation to another; For a seed shall serve
him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation: He will make little
reckoning of the rest, whom he converteth not. 5. Albeit there be little
appearance of accomplishing prophesies and promises of the propagation of
Christ's Kingdom from age to age, yet the promise and prophecy shall be
fulfilled. They shall come, who shall receive the Doctrine of Christ's
righteousness by faith in him, and shall declare this righteousness of faith,
and Gods faithfulness in promise keeping, to another generation, unto a people
that shall be born. 6. The whole work of redemption, converting of souls,
comforting of souls, propagation of the doctrine of righteousness, and
manifestation of Gods glory thereby, shall from age to age be declared to be
the work of God himself, which he does by his instruments, and means. They
shall declare to their children, and successors, that God has done this; to
wit, all that is spoken of here, or elsewhere in his word: To a people that
shall be born, that he has done this.

PSALM. XXIII. A Psalm of David.
This Psalm is the expression of the Prophets confidence in Gods grace,
wherein from the settling himself in the belief of our covenanted relation,
between God and him, he does draw sundry comfortable conclusions and
confirmations of faith, from it, concerning the Lords furnishing every
necessary good thing to him, ver. 1, 2. For recovery of him from every evil
condition, wherein he may fall, ver. 3* And for assisting and comforting him in
the greatest danger he could fall into, ver. 4. And for making him blessed in
despite of his enemies, ver. 5. And for his continuing in Gods grace, and
fellowship for ever, ver. 6.

Ver. 1. THe Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. HE lays down for a ground
his relation to God, and thence confirms his assurance to have the fruits
thereof. Whence learn, 1. The Lord is content to demit himself to be compared
unto any thing which may import his love, and respect, and care of his own. As
here for our comfort he is pleased to be called a Shepherd. 2. The grounds of
our faith in God, making us to have right unto him by covenant, should be
solidly laid, and these being firmly laid, then comfortable conclusions may,
and should be drawn from thence, as here the Prophet does. 3. In special,
whatsoever sweet relation the believer stands in with God, he may assure
himself of all the fruits, and good, which that relation can import. As here
having said, The Lord is my Shepherd, he assures himself then, he shall not
want; to wit' what such a Shepherd, sees necessary for such a sheep.

Ver. 2. He makes me to lie down in green pastures; be leads we beside the
still waters.

3. He restores my soul: he leads me in the paths of righteousness, for his
Names sake.

He goes on numbering the benefits following from the foresaid relation; partly
showing what experience he has had, partly assuring himself what further to
find. Whence learn, 1. As the Shepherd provideth good and wholesome pasture for
his sheep, and a place of safety and rest, with the commodity of all needful
refreshment of calm running waters: So does the Lord furnish the food of life
to the believer with quiet rest, and satisfaction of timous consolation, by his
word and Spirit: He makes me lie down in green pastures, etc. 2. It is
possible through the evil that is in us, we fall in decay of graces, in
sicknesses of diverse sorts; yea, and that we wander away from the Shepherd, and
the society of the flock sometime. In which case we should perish, if our
careful Lord did not apply himself to our necessities, to relieve us; for it
is he that restores our soul. It is he that reclaimeth us from our wanderings:
it is he that directs us, and keeps us from going on still in bypath. He
leads me, says he, in the paths of righteousness. 3. It is not for any good
we deserve, or have done, or can do, for which he takes such care of his weak
and foolish children. It is for the glory of his free grace, constant love, and
sworn covenant, even for his own Names sake.

Ver. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear none evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
He presupposes he may fall in new, and harder troubles, then ever he fell in
before, and yet hopes to be delivered therefrom. Hence learn, 1. The believer
in his best condition may not promise to himself immunity from trouble, or
perils; but must prepare for the worst, even to be put to extreme danger of
perishing, and in such darkness as were most like, and near (unto death) To
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, where sheep may fall in the
pit, or be fallen upon by every devouring beast in the dark. 2. The fruit of
former delivery out of trouble, should encourage us to hope for deliverance out
of whatsoever new trouble we may fall into, as the Prophets example does teach.
3. Faith after a victory is very stout and has warrant indeed to be so, and
may, and should resolve to be stout by Gods grace; howsoever when trouble
comes (which is the touchstone of the strength of faith) it may discover
weakness for a time. For here David says, I will fear no evil, though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death. 4. The consideration of Gods
covenanted presence with his own in trouble, and of his power to protect, and
deliver them, and of his wisdom and goodness to make his own profit by
troubles* may, and should comfort the believer against the fear of perishing in
whatsoever trouble. For David gives this as a reason of not fearing evil. Thou
art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

5. Thou preparest a Table before me in the presence of mine enemies, thou
annointest my head with oil, my Cup runs over. From the grounds of his
Faith, confirmed by experience, he sees still satisfaction from God, who gives
the banquet to him, as it were in his enemies sight. Whence learn, Albeit
sometime the believer may be put to hardship and hazard, for trying and training
of his faith; yet sometimes also the Lord will give him rich evidents of his
love and kindness unto him, if not in both outward and inward benefits, yet at
least in spiritual consolations comparable to a royal feast, as here, Thou
preparest a Table before me. 2. Although the enemies of the godly, are not few,
both bodily and spiritual, all concurring to mar^ the felicity of the Lords
children, yet shall they not be able to hinder their sense now and then of
satisfactory blessedness maugre them al; for as often as God sees fit, he gives
his own the banquet, in the presence of his enemies. 3. When it pleases the
Lord to comfort a believer, and to give him the banquet, there is nothing
wanting, during the time of the Lords comfortable entertaining of him, which
may strengthen him, or rejoice him; but as much given unto him sensibly, as may
make him say, Thou annointest my head with oil, and my cup runs over, Psalm.
92.10. and 104.15.

6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I
will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. He shows that in his former
speeches, be meant not of earthly benefits, although these also be worthy of
acknowledgment, and of thanksgiving for them; But of spiritual mercies, by
this, that he is assured of the continuance thereof, in this life, and in the
life to come. Whence learn. 1. The delight and satisfaction of the believer is
not in any earthly portion, but in Gods good will and pity toward him; Gods
goodness and mercy is the matter of his contentment. 2. An humble believer,
who in his own eyes is like a weak witless sheep, and yet does follow the
Shepherd, may assure himself from the Covenant relation between God and him,
of the constancy of Gods good will, and actual outletting of liberal gifts of
good things unto him, and of removing of evils, both of sin, and of the fruits
of it, and be persuaded of his own perseverance in the way to salvation, all
the days of his life; for here is an instance for it, Surely goodness and
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. 3. As a believer may be assured
of the constant course of Gods love to follow him, and of his own preserving in
the way of life, so may he be persuaded of eternal life, and everlasting
communion with God in heaven. And this perfecteth the felicity of the believer;
and no less can do it then this; I will dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever.

PSALM. XXIV. A Psalm of David.
The Psalmist having in the first place set down Gods Lordship in the world,
that he may thereby commend the special Prerogative of the true Church, ver. 1,
2. describes in the next place the true Citizens of this spiritual Kingdom,
ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. And exhorts in the third place all Incorporations, and in
special the visible Church, to accept the offer of a more entire communion with
God in Christ, that they may enjoy the spiritual privileges of the subjects of
the invisible and spiritual Kingdom, v. 7, 8, 9, 10.

v. 1. THe Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they that
dwell therein.

2. For he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.

From the Lordship and Sovereignty of God over all the world. Learn, 1. The
Lords power and authority over the Saints, considered in their natural
condition, is no less then over the rest of the world, and the Lord is no more
bound to one then to another, laying aside the decree of his own good will and
pleasure; The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the world and they
that dwell therein. 2. The earth is so full of the riches of Gods bounty toward
man as it can hold; and the standing miracle of the dry land, lifted up
contrary to the nature of that element, which is to be under and not above, and
much higher then the element of water; is a standing evidence of Gods power and
care employed to make a habitation for man; For he has founded the earth upon
the seas, and established it upon the floods, commanding the element of water
to go down below the earth, as if it were the foundation thereof.

3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy
place?

4 He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul
unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and righteousness from the God
of his salvation.

6 This is the generation of them that seek him: that seek thy face, O Jacob.
Selah.

In the second place he comes to the special dominion of God and Christ in the
Church, and asks for the marks and privileges of the true subjects of this
Kingdom. Whence learn, 1. God has chosen a Church out of all the earth, to
be his peculiar people, with whom he may converse, and to whom he may give
privilege of communion for ever with himself; he has his own holy and high
hill, he has his own holy place, to wit, a holy universal Church, represented
by the hill of Sion, lifted up above the inferior valleys; he has his holy
Tabernacle, where he gives the signs of his presence, separate from the
common multitude, and wordly affairs; who shall ascend into the hill of the
Lord, and who shall stand in his holy place? He compares the invisible Church,
to a hill or mountain, and the holy place, because Gods true Church indeed for
firmness, durablenesse, dignity above all other Incorporations, and spiritual
sublimity, is like a hill above the plain, lifted up above all the world, a
holy society, wherein God delights to dwell. 2. Not every one who is a member
of the visible Church, but only true Converts, who make up the invisible
Church, have the honor and happiness of ascending unto the spiritual use,
end, meaning and profit of the Ordinances of God in his Church, and of keeping
constant communion with God in heaven, represented by standing in the holy
place. Therefore for stirring up of outward professors of religion, to examine
themselves, lest they be mistaken and so perish; the question is here made to
God to show who shall ascend to his hill, and who shall stand in his holy
place. 3. The marks of a Citizen of the invisible Church and Kingdom of God,
are such only, as God and a man's own conscience can soundly judge of; to wit,
faith in God, manifested by endeavored sanctity of thoughts, words, and deeds,
by way of obedience to the First and Second Table in sincerity: for he must
after Covenanting with God by Faith, which makes him a subject, study also
cleanness of hands, or innocence of life, and that out of a pure heart,
cleansed by the blood of sprinkling for justification, and by the clean water
of begun sanctification; And therefore he must not any more look upon the
deceitful baits of sin, with a longing desire to have them; for that were to
lift up his soul unto vanity. Neither must he mis-regard an oath, whether in or
after the taking of it; for that were to swear deceitfully, seeming to stand in
awe of God when he does not fear him at all. 4. Every believer who sets
himself to bring forth the fruits of his faith in obedience to Gods law, shall
have a gracious reward, he shall receive the blessing from the Lord. 5. The holy
life of the true believer, is not the cause of his justification before God, by
reason of the imperfection thereof, and impossibility to satisfy the Law
thereby; But he shall receive justification and eternal life, as a free gift
from God, by virtue of the Covenant of grace: therefore it is said here, That
he shall receive righteousness from the God of his salvation. 6. Whosoever
they be within the visible Church, who have the marks of true Covenanters, such
as are here described, yea, whosoever are seeking God, to make them such;
whosoever are seeking reconciliation with God, and communion with him, whether
they be Jews or Gentiles, bound or free, male or female; they are the
generation, that shall ascend and dwell in Gods holy place; for this is the
generation of them that seek him. The generation that seek thy face (says he
to God.) This is the true Jacob, the true heir of the promises.

Ver. 7. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in.

8 Who is this King of glory? the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in
battle.

9. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, even lift them up ye everlasting doors, and
the King of glory shall come in.

10. Who is this King of glory? the Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory.
Selah.

In the third place, having described these persons who shall surely dwell in
heaven with God, he exhorts all the members of the visible Church, to the
intent they may receive righteousness and salvation from God, (who is in
covenant with his Church) heartily to welcome Christ Jesus, the King of glory,
and Lord of hosts, dwelling in the midst of them in the Tabernacle, shadowing
forth and signifying his coming in the flesh, by his giving oracles from the
Ark of the covenant, defending them, feeding them, and fighting their battles,
and at length in David's time ascending on Mount Sion, he and the Ark of the
covenant triumphantly, to let them see in a shadow, how after his great
battles, foughten for our redemption, he should ascend to heaven, and make way
for his subjects to come up after him, to dwell with him: He exhorts, I say,
patent doors to be made unto him, wherever he offers himself to Kingdoms,
Cities, Incorporations, visible Churches, Families, and hearts of men in
special. Whence learn, 1. The way to make men true Converts, true believers,
true Saints, and inheriters of heaven, is to receive Christ heartily and
honorably, to cast up doors in hearty consent of faith and love, like
triumphant Archers for welcoming so glorious a conqueror to be their guest;
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, etc. 2. Whosoever shall receive the offer, and
open the heart to him, he shall close covenant with him; Be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. 3. He is an unknown
King till he be manifested to us; and such as are wise, when they hear of him,
will seek to know him. Who is this King of glory? will be their question. 4.
Such as seek to know Christ, shall indeed have experimental knowledge of him:
That he is able to save them to the uttermost, to work all their work for them,
to defend them from their adversaries, and to give them complete victory; He is
the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. 5. We have need again
and again to hear the offer of Christ's grace, and to be wakened up to observe
Christ, and his glory: need to be exhorted again and again to open our hearts
wide to him. Lift up your heads, ye gates, the second time. 6. Christ is indeed
glorious, and a glorious King, in all the passages of redemption, and salvation
of his people; albeit the ignorance and unbelief, and the crosses, and
troubles following his Kingdom in this world, do obscure his glory to the
carnal eye: And therefore no wonder, that men do oftener move the question about
his Kingdom and Glory, asking Who is the King of glory? 7. Christ Jesus (whose
ascension was prefigured by the ascending of the Ark upon Mount Sion, convoyed
with David, and all Israel,) as he is true man, so he is also very God
Almighty, one with the Father, and Holy Spirit, in his Godhead: for The Lord
of hosts he is the King of glory.

PSALM. XXV. A Psalm of David.
In this Psalm the Prophet being in danger of his life by his enemies without,
and troubled with the sense of sin within, makes his prayer for relief from
both, mixing meditation with prayer along the Psalm, for strengthening of his
faith: So first he prays from v. 1. to v. 8. then meditateth, v. 8 9.10. In
the third room he prays again, v. 11, In the fourth is a new meditation, v.
12, 13, 14, 15. In the last room is a prayer from v 16 to the end.

Ver 1 UNto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

2. O my God, I trust in thee; let me not be ashamed: let not mine enemies
triumph over me.

3. Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed which
transgress without cause.

In the entry of his prayer, he draws his eye off all relief save God alone,
and fixes his trust upon him, and then prays: Whence learn, 1. It is
necessary for a Supplicant, if he would have help from God, to loose his
confidence off all creature help, and set his eye and heart on God, as David
here lifts up his soul to God. 2. Faith in God, fixed on the covenant, gives
wings to the soul, as misbeliefe causes it to sink: O my God, says he, I lift
up my soul, I trust in thee. 3. It is not enough to act faith in time of a
strait; but it is profitable to observe also the least measure of faith
bestowed on us, and to entertain it, were it never so little, and to avow it
that it may be fixed when we go to pray: for before David put up any petition,
he prefixeth, I lift my soul to thee, I trust in thee: for otherwise the prayer
of the Supplicant can find no footing. 4. The believing Supplicant shall never
be disapointed of promised help: nor shall the hope and expectation of the
enemies of God be satisfied: He will not suffer the believer to be ashamed, nor
the enemy long to triumph. 5. The godly in their prayer are not selfish, nor
suitors for singularities to be granted unto them, but are content, yea, and
desirous, that all other believers may share in their mercies: Yea, let none
that wait for thee be ashamed, says he. 6. The godly shall not want enemies,
albeit they give no offense to the world: for carnal hope and expectation to
obtain worldly gain by opposing of the godly, may, and usually does, set the
wicked on work against them; but they that look to have advantage that way,
shall be close disappointed; for the godly shall escape their snare, and they
shall lose their hoped advantage, and shall gain to themselves nothing save
shame, and a mischief: For let them be ashamed that transgress without a
cause, is an enduring petition, and a granted petition against them.

Ver. 4. Show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths.

5. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation;
on thee do I wait all the day.

6. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses: for they
have been ever of old.

Here he prays for grace to behave himself holily under his exercise, and to
have renewed experiences of mercies, such as he had felt formerly. Whence
learn, 1. The understanding of the way how the Lord uses to deal with his
children, serves greatly for patient bearing of affliction; and the best way
to eschew the snare of adversaries, is to carry our selves holily. Therefore
prays David four times to be instructed, and effectually taught, and guided
in the ways and paths of Gods truth, or faithful word. 2. Because the Lord in
covenanting with us, takes the work of our salvation in hand, not to lay it
down till he have perfected it; he allows his children, in all particular
difficulties, to hold this ground, and constantly to expect the accomplishment
thereof, whatsoever strait they fall into: and to wait for direction how to
behave themselves, till it be perfected: for David gives this for a reason of
his prayer, Thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do I wait all the day
long. 3. Though the course of kindness and mercy seem to be interrupted by
affliction, and temporal desertion, and to be forgotten on Gods part; yet
faith must make use of experiences, and read them over unto God out of the
register of a sanctified memory, as a recorder to him, that cannot forget:
Remember thy tender mercies O Lord, and thy loving kindnesses. 4. Mercies and
kindnesses sometimes felt, may be, and should be followed up unto the very
fountain of eternal love, and election, from which they came; so shall the
channel be opened, and run clear with fresh consolation so much the sooner;
Remember thy mercies to me, for they have been ever of old.

Ver. 7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to
thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord. He laboure^^ to
have his sins removed, as the chief impediment of the granting of his prayer:
Whence learn, 1. New affliction^ may easily renew the sense of old sins, even
from the time of youth, albeit forgiven of God, and forgotten by the
beliveever, and the tempter can make use thereof against faith in the day of
trouble; in which case the believer without loss may read over blotted
accounts, and renew petitions for pardon: Remember not, says David, the sins
of my youth, nor my transgressions. 2. As God holds two Courts in a man's
conscience, concerning sin; one of justice, according to the Law, or Covenant
of works; another of mercy, according to the Gospel, and Covenant of grace
offered in the Mediator, which is posteriour to the other Court; wherein the
man who has glorified justice, and acknowledged his sin, and deserved
perdition, is pardoned; (for the ransom paid by the Messiah Christ Jesus the
Mediator, to whom the sinner is fled for refuge:) So the believer has two
reckonings with God, about his sins. One according to justice, and another
according to mercy; and albeit the believer will never refuse to read,
acknowledge, and subscribe again and again, the first reckoning to be just, yet
he will not stand to that reckoning for payment; but will hold him to the last
bargain of grace, and mercy, and goodness, which clears the claim of the
first account: for this is David's practice here, that the first account may be
forgotten: Remember not the sins of my youth. And that the last account and
rekoning may stand, and be held in memory, saying, According to thy mercy,
remember thou me* 3. For evidencing the stability of the account of mercy for
pardoning of sin, the glory of Gods goodness is laid in pawn in the covenant;
and that holds all fast unto the believer: Therefore, says he, Remember, for
thy goodness sake, O Lord.

Ver. 8. Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the
way.

9 The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.

10 All the paths of the Lord (...) mercy and truth, unto such as keep his
covenant, and his testimonies.

In the second place after praying, he falls upon a meditation of the grace
and good will of God to a believer, and of his merciful dealing with him in
every condition. Whence learn, 1. In the secret exercise of the Sants, a pause
may be usefully made in prayer, and a meditation, or soliloquie may be fallen
upon, when the Lord does fit matter for fostering faith, and furthering of
prayer, as here we may in David's practice observe. 2. The goodness and
faithfulness of God in his promises, and his readiness without respect of
persons, to be gracious to every one who comes unto him, is the fountain of
the believers strength, hope, and consolation: Good and upright is the Lord, is
here a Well of comfort to the Supplicant. 3. The conscience of sin must not
keep the believer back from confidence to be heard in his prayer, when he
comes to seek direction: for from this ground, That the Lord is good, the
Prophet draws this consequence, Therefore will he teach sinners in the way.
4. Gods justice will not hinder his mercy to be bountiful, nor will former
breaking of commands, prejudice the sinner, who being weary of his wandering,
does seek to be directed hereafter in the Lords way; He will teach sinners in
the way. 5. When by affliction a man is humbled, and brought to submit himself
to God, he shall not want a guide to lead him out of his trouble, to direct his
paths, till the delivery come; for God will guide the meek in judgment, most
wisely and discreetly, as his good requires, and teach him his way. 6. The
property of the believer, is to cleave to the covenant, and to what the Lord
has set down in his word, They keep his covenant, and his testimonies; and
will not part with them whatsoever come. 7. Whosoever do hold fast the covenant
of grace, and do make conscience of obeying Gods word, they may be sure that
all their troubles, and variety of exercise is nothing but Gods way, to make
them partake of Gods promises; for unto such all the paths of the Lord are
mercy and truth.

Ver. 11. For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon my iniquity: for it is great. In
the third place, having labored to strengthen his faith, he falls to prayer
again, for remission of sin. Whence learn, 1. The conscience of sin will oftener
assault our faith then once, and so often as it assaulteth, it is to be answered
with renewed prayer to God; O God, says he, pardon my iniquity. 2. The honor
of the Lord is engaged by covenant for remission of sin to the penitent
believer, and the Lord counts it a glory to be merciful; Therefore, says he,
For thy Names sake pardon. 3. Faith can make advantage of misbeliefs arguments
to retort them against it, and can plead for pardon from the very multitude and
grieveousnesse of sin; as here, Pardon my iniquity, for it is great. For the
greater sin is acknowledged to be, the more is the object of pardon made clear,
for it cannot be paid for by the sinner, and the more is the Lords pity
letten forth, that the believer be sensible of the weight.

Ver. 12. What man is he that fears the Lord? him shll he teach in the way
that he shall choose.

13. His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the earth.

14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show them
his covenant.

In the fourth place there is another meditation of Gods goodness to a
believer, for strengthening of his faith yet further, wherein he lays down
three general promises, made to them that believe in God, and do stand in awe
to offend, ver. 12, 13, 14. and by way of Syllogism he assumeth of himself,
that he is a believer, whereupon he infers the conclusion, ver. 15. Whence
learn, 1. The fear of God (importing care to serve God according to his word,
and to stand in awe to offend him) is the necessary property of a true and
lively believer; Therefore it is made the believers cognizance, and mark to
discern him by: What man is he that fears the Lord? 2. The believer walking
in the fear of God, may expect from the Lord direction and light, how to carry
himself in all perplexities, so often as he in his need shall seek it of God;
for in dubious cases, God shall teach him in the way that he shall choose. 3.
Albeit the believer be put to trouble, and hard exercise, yet shall he have
place always with God, as a man reconciled to him, and peace in his conscience
also, as his good does require, and he shall have contentment in his lot; for,
his soul shall dwell at ease. 4. The surest way to transmit inheritances to a
man's children, and to make houses to stand, and however matters go, for a man
to be sure of the Kingdom of Heaven, (signified by an inheritance in the Land
of Canaan) is, that the parents fear God, and that the children do follow their
footsteps, and fear God also; For the seed of the man fearing God shall inherit
the Land. 5. The man that fears God, shall know more of Gods mind then others
shall; he shall know the good and acceptable will of God for his direction in
dangerous controversies, and for his satisfaction about Gods dispensations,
both toward himself, and others, and for his consolation in all afflictions;
For the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. 6. Albeit the Lords
covenant with the visible Church be open, and plain in it self to all men, in
all the Articles thereof, yea it is a mystery to know the inward sweet
fellowship which a soul may have with God, by virtue of this covenant* And a
man fearing God, shall know this mystery, when such as are covenanters only in
the letter, do remain ignorant thereof; For to the fearers of God only is this
promise made, That to them the Lord will show his Covenant.

15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, and he shall pluck, my feet out of the
net. Having laid the ground of his reason in the former verses, which is in
sum this, To every believer God will be gracious, as his need is: now he
assumeth, I am a believer; For mine eyes are ever toward the Lord. Therefore to
me God will be gracious in my need, and so pluck my feet out of the net, as my
need now requires. Whence learn, 1. The believer can read his own name, and
his own blessedness in the promises made to believers, and can draw out the
extract of Gods decree of absolution, direction, consolation, and salvation in
his own favors; for where the general is written, there all the particulars
are also written in effect: And so the believer may read his name written in
the book of life, as here David does read his own deliverance, in the Charter
of Believers; Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, therefore he will pluck my
feet out of the net. 2. The believer is not a little helped to believe, and to
draw sweet conclusions from inspired Scripture, to strengthen himself by
avowing himself to be a believer, or to have the true property of a believer,
as here David does, saying, Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord; First, he
avoweth his Faith, and then draws this conclusion from it, he shall pluck my
feet out of the net. 3. To depend on God, for the supply of all necessities,
and for deliverance out of all straits, is the property of true Faith; for the
Prophet to prove himself a believer, and to have an interest in the mercies
formerly set down, ver. 12, 13, 14 he says, ver. 15. Mine eyes are ever toward
the Lord. 4. Though the godly walk among snares, and nets, set by their
enemies, bodily and spiritual to entrap them, yet God will either direct their
way, to eschew these snares and nets, or will pluck their feet out of them; For
this is the Prophets comfort, Thou shall pluck my feet out of the net.

16. Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and
afflicted.

17. The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my
distresses.

After meditation, he concludes his exercise, with petitions for himself, and
for the Church. The Petitions for himself are six, in so many verses. In the
first, learn, 1. Natural sense and suggestion of Satan, says, that God does
turn his back on us, when he does not sensibly by outward works show himself
for us as we could wish; But Faith makes advantage of the tentation, by
adhering to God in time of a seeming desertion, and prays for his manifesting
of himself unto us; Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me. 2. A felt, and
acknowledged miserable, helpless, and desperate condition, is to the believer
half a promise, and a whole reason, to expect relief from God; Turn thee
unto me, and have mercy one me, for I am desolate and afflicted, ver. 16. and
so also in his second Petition, The torubles of my heart are enlarged, O bring
me out of my distresses. As his troubles were multiplied and enlarged, his
heart was straightened, and his distresses multiplied, and this he brings for a
reason of his hope to be brought out of these straits.

18. Look upon mine affliction, and my pain, and forgive all my sins. From the
Third Petition, Learn, 1. How sad and fearful troubles, a believing and
beloved soul may be brought into, no words can sufficiently express, he is
desolate, afflicted, the troubles of his heart are enlarged, he is in more
distresses then one; he is in affliction and pain, which no eye can see, nor
any beholder judge of, save God only; therefore says he to God, Look on my
affliction, and my pain. 2. Sore trouble will waken up the conscience of sin a
fresh, and call to mind forgiven and buried sins; which new challenge cannot
be answered, but by prayer for a new application, and intimation of remission
of sins; As here, forgive all my sins.

19 Consider mine enemies: for they are many, and they hate me with cruel
hatred.

20. O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust
in thee.

From the Fourth and Fifth petition, relating to the hazard of his life, from
his bodily enemies, Learn, 1. The multitude, power, rage and cruelty of the
enemies of the Lords people, is a ground of hope to the believer, to be
delivered from them. Consider my enemies, for they are many, etc. 2. There is
no surer evidence of deliverance, then faith in God, settled on a promise, Let
me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee.

21. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee. The sixth
Petition is, for the fruit of his innocent behavior toward his enemies. Whence
learn, 1. Albeit a man be burdened with the sense of many sins against God, yet
he may have the conscience of innocence toward his enemies; And here a good
conscience gives great boldness before God, to hope for delivery; Let
integrity and uprightness preserve me. 2. Integrity of life, or a good
behavior after prayer, is as needful as before it; yet neither integrity
before, nor after must be leaned upon, but Gods goodness and mercy only; Let
uprightness preserve me, so David reasons, for I wait on thee.

22. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. He closes his exercise
with a Prayer for the Church. Whence learn, 1. It is the common lot of all the
Saints to be exercised with plurality of troubles; and as the troubles of each
particular member should not swallow up the sense of the troubles of the
Church; but rather private trouble should make every one sensible of the like
or greater troubles of the rest of the body; So should the delivery of the
whole Church be sought after, as our own, yea and more then our own; and as our
last petition: and how ever the matter shall go with our selves, let us pray,
Redeem Israel O Lord, out of all his troubles.

PSALM. XXVI.
David being oppressed by the Judges of the Land, his powerful adversaries, and
being exiled from the house of God; he appealeth to God, the supreme Judge in
the testimony of a good conscience, bearing him witness, first of his
endeavor to walk uprightly as became a believer, ver. 1, 2, 3. And secondly,
of his keeping himself from the contagion of the evil counsel, sinful courses,
and example of the wicked, ver. 4, 5. Thirdly, Of his purpose still to behave
himself holily and righteously, out of love to be partaker of the public
privileges of the Lords people in the congregation, v. 6, 7, 8. Whereupon he
prays to be free of the judgment coming on the wicked, ver. 9, 10. According
as he was purposed to eschew their sins, ver. 11. And he closes his prayer
with comfort and assurance to be heard, ver. 12.

Ver. 1. JVdg me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted
also in the Lord: therefore I shall not slide.

2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.

3. For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy
truth.

FRom David's appellation from the unjust sentence of men against him in their
courts and elsewhere, calumniating him and burying him under slanders, from
which God and his own conscience knew he was free: Learn, 1. Gods children may
be for a time unjustly in their cause and name, so born down with calumnies by
Judges and others, that they must content themselves with the approbation of
God, and of their own conscience, as David does here. 2. When no remedy is seen
on earth for Gods oppressed children, remedy may be had from God, the supreme
Judge, who can redress all matters abundantly. This did David, when he said,
Judge me, O Lord: that is, do the part of a just Judge to me, in this
controversy between my adversaries and me. 3. He who appealeth to God, had
need of a good cause, and a good conscience, for his carriage in it, that he
may say with David, I have walked in mine integrity. 4. A good carriage in any
controversy is then only comfortable and commendable, when it is the fruit of
faith in God: therefore David adds, I have trusted also in the Lord. 5. He
that in obedience to God does carry himself righteously, may be assured he shall
stand and prevail; for this conclusion does the Prophet draw from these
grounds, saying, I shall not slide. 6. Not only must a man's hand be free from
injuring his party, but his affections also: In which case, the upright man is
content the Lord should try him, and tell him what is wrong, that it may be
amended hereafter; for here sincerity says, Examine and try my reins. 7.
Sincerity of behavior may abide the trial of the conscience, and expect the
approbation of God, when the word of God is the man's rule, and fear of
interrupting of the sense of sweet communion with God, is the awband to keep
him to his rule* for so does David prove his sincerity here: for thy loving
kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth, to wit, looking
to thy precepts, threatenings, and promises.

Ver. 4. I have not sat with vain persons* neither will I go in with
dissemblers.

5. I have hated the congregation of evil doers and will not sit with the wicked.

The second part of the testimony of his conscience, that he has rejected the
course of wicked men, and their ill counsel, and that he would neither follow
the way against his enemies, which they followed against him, nor hearken to
the evil advice, which wicked men, under whatsoever pretense of good will to
him, did offer to him, for a sinful transaction, or private revenge. Whence
learn, 1 Though innocence may seem to make the godly a prey to their enemy, yet
it will promote their cause more before God, and give greater contentment to the
conscience, then witty wicked plotting against witty and wicked enemies; for
this does David's example teach us. 2. A godly man may take the service of many
in a case of Law-businesses, and civil matters, whose counsel he must refuse in
a moral duty; as when David's followers counseled him to slay the King, when
he had him in his power in the Cave; In such a consultation or debate, he will
not sit nor go in with the wicked. 3. He that gives ill counsel, whatsoever
pretense of friendship, or advantage be made to commend the counsel which he
offers; yet in that point, he is a vain man and a dissembler. So does the
Prophet style him here. 4. It is necessary to hate and abhor every wicked
course, lest if we do not hate it, but can hearken unto it, we be drawn over to
embrace it: I hate (says he) the congregation of the evil doers.

Ver. 6. I will wash my hands in innocence: so will I compass thine Altar, O
Lord.

7. That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
wondrous works.

8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells.

The third part of the testimony of his conscience, is concering his
resolution, to behave himself righteously and godlily out of love to honor
God, and to be the fitter for worshipping of God, and serving him, as he should
be employed. Whence learn, 1. The man whose hands are not clean from injuries
done to men, his conscience should tell him, that he is not meet to offer
worship to God: and where guiltiness is, it should be taken away, lest the
worship be refused: So resolves David, I will wash my hands in innocence, and
so compass thine Altar. 2. Whatsoever was the ceremony of the godly with their
friends, in compassing the Altar with songs of praise, when they offered their
peace offerings, it yields a fit direction for every worshipper, and offerer
of prayer, or praise to God, to do it with an eye to Jesus Christ, the true
Altar that sanctifies our offerings, and makes our persons and services
acceptable? for the compassing of the Altar, with an eye on it, signified this
duty. 3. The Lords mercies to his own are mavelous in effect, when all
circumstances are well considered; Therefore are they here called wondrous
works. 4. To love the fellowship of the Saints in the public worship of God,
is a token of our interest in God; and the conscience of this love is
refreshful, as here. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house. 5. The
meetings of the Church should be to proclaim the Lords glory in the exercise
of all his ordinances; and where this is endeavored, there will God dwell, for
such holy assemblies, are the place where his honor dwells, albeit many of
the members of the Church be such before God, as they were in Saul's time,
whereunto this Psalm relates.

Ver. 9 Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men:

10 In whose hands is mischief: and their right hand is full of bribes.

11 But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be merciful
unto me.

Now he prays to be exeemed from the company of the wiced in their
punishment, seeing he has gotten grace to resolve, not to walk in their sin.
Whence learn, 1. The Lord has a harvest and a gleaning time also, set for
cutting down, and binding together in the fellowship of judgments, Gods
enemies, who have followed the same course of sinning: for here we are given to
understand, that God will gather their soul, and so will le^ none escape. 2.
Such as separate themselves (not from the lawful society, but) from the sinful
ways of the world; shall also be separate from the society of their punishment;
The soul of the one and the other shall not be gathered together. Gather not my
soul with sinners. 3. Ungodly men will never stand to consent to the taking of
the life of the godly, if by a fit tentation they be put to it, a bribe, or
fear, which is all one, will do the turn; for sinners here are declared bloody
men, in whose hands a mischief is, and their right hand is full of bribes. 4.
It is the mark of a wise and godly soul, not to be diverted from his God or
godliness, by the tentation of loss or gain, which overturneth the worldly
man; for David resolves, go others where they will, as for me, I will walk in
my integrity 5. A man so resolved, that is, who has chosen God for his
Redeemer, and Gods ways for his rule, may be sure to be borne through all
difficulties, all troubles and temptations, and to meet with mercy in the
course and close of his life; for David after resolution of faith in God, and
resolution honestly to endeavor obedience to God in his course, he prays
(which is as good as a promise to us) Redeem me, and be merciful to me.

Ver. 12. My foot stands in an even place: in the Congregations will I bless
the Lord. He closes the Psalm comfortably; Whence learn, 1. The believer,
resolving obedience to God, and wrestling in prayer with God, shall not want a
comfortable answer; his conscience shall speak good to him, and God shall ratify
the testimony of it, with his testimony: and thus shall the man be established
in that sweet course of faith and obedience, and have cause to say, My foot
stands in an even place. 2. Such a man may be assured to bless God effectually,
for the performance of promises, and that in good company, either in this life,
or in the next, or in both; and in this life with assurance, he may say with
David, In the Congregation will I bless the Lord.

PSALM. XXVII.
In this Psalm David sets down what use he had of his faith in God, in the
time of his trouble: and first, how he strengthened his faith. verse. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. and next how he prayed, upon the foresaid grounds, verse. 7* 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. And thirdly, what advantage he had by believing in God, in the time of
his exercise, ver. 13. Whereupon he exhorts all the godly to follow his
example, under hope to be helped, as he was helped, ver. 14.

Verse. 1, THe Lord is my light, and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is
the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? THe grounds of strengthening
of his Faith are three. The first is, That God by virtue of the Covenant has
obliged himself to give direction and comfort in trouble, and deliverance out
of it; from which he infers, that he needs not fear his enemies. Whence
learn, 1. When we are to wrestle in prayer, against the doubts, which trouble
and tentation may raise in our hearts to mar our confidence in prayer; It is
wisdom to arm our selves by faith against these doubts, before we pray, for so
does the Prophets example teach us. 2. He who is in Covenant with God, has
solid ground to expect from God, direction and comfort in every trouble, and
deliverance out of it; for by virtue of the Covenant of grace David says, The
Lord is my light and my salvation. 3. When we have fastened our faith on God, we
may then with reason defy our enemies, and say with the Prophet, of whom shall
I be afraid? 4. When our enemies do appear strong, and we know our selves to be
but weak, we should oppose the Lords strength to our tentation, that we may
resist all fear; for so teaches David, The Lord is the strength of my life, of
whom shall I be afraid?

Ver. 2 When the wicked, even mine enemies, and my foes came upon me to eat up
my flesh, they stumbled and fell. The next ground of confidence is, that he has
proof and experience of the fruit of the Covenant, when he was in greatest
danger to be overtaken by his enemies. Whence learn, 1. When the rage of the
wicked against the godly does break forth, then no less then the precious life
of the godly can satisfy their beastly cruelty; they hunger even to eat their
flesh. 2. God can easily make the wicked in their hottest pursuit of the godly,
to come short of their purpose, as here, to stumble and fall. 3. Experience of
Gods power is very forcible to confirm our faith, and to erect our hope, as it
did David's faith.

Ver. 3 Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear:
though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident After settling of
his faith, he puts on a resolution to stand to his point, in resisting assaults
of fears, from whatsoever tentation. Whence learn* 1. It is a means to
strengthen faith, to resolve by the grace of God to put faith in act, in
whatsoever difficulty, and in a manner to lay hands on our selves, ^o hold up
this shield against whatsoever fiery darts, albeit possibly when it comes to
push of pike, we be not found so strong as we are stout, as here David does. 2.
The Lord being ours by Covenant, and the Lord proved to be ours in experience,
is warrant and reason sufficient for us to put on such a resolution; Though
war be raised, in this (that is, upon the foresaiid ground) will I be
confident, says he.

Ver. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after: that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. A third ground of confidence,
is the conscience of his purpose to study to have constant communion with God,
in the use of the means, and the conscience of his very earnest desire to have
the benefit of all the public ordinances, in the fellowship of the Church.
Whence learn, 1. Hearty resolution to subject our selves to all Gods
ordinances, and to follow the appointed means of communion-keeping with God, is
a sound mark of solid faith, and the conscience of this resolution, serves
much to confirm our confidence in God, If we can say with the Prophet, This
one thing have I desired, etc. 2. In the using of the means and ordinances of
Gods house, the glory of the Lord may be seen, counsel, and direction in all
things may be had with comfort and spiritual delight to our souls; for in the
ordinances David was to behold the beauty of the Lord, with delight, and to
enquire in his holy Temple. 3. The desire of communion with God, and love to
his ordinances, where it is sincere, should have the chief place in the heart,
above all earthly desires and delights whatsoever. One thing have I desired. 4.
A sincere desire must not be suffered to go away, but should be pursued
resolutely, and recommended to God daily. This I will still seek after, says he:
and the means of communion with God in the public fellowship of the Church
must be constantly continued in, even all the days of our life.

Ver. 5, For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the
secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me upon a rock. He gives
a reason of his so earnest a desire to have fellowship with God, entertained by
the use of all Gods ordinances, because in this way he was sure that faith
should draw all necessary comfort and protection from God, as need should
require. Whence learn, 1. Faith keeping communion with God, finds him
all-sufficient in all necessities, to supply every inlack of the creature,
where the believer stands in need; He will be a pavilion in warfare, and a
hiding place, and a rock of refuge: that is, God will make a man as quiet by
faith, in himself, as if there were no hazard; In the time of trouble he shall
hide me in his pavilion: In the secret of his Tabernacle, shall be hide me, he
shall set me up upon a rock. 2. The godly cannot promise to themselves the
influence of Gods grace in time of need, otherways then by following divine
ordinances, both private and public, so far as they may be had; for the
Prophet promises to himself this protection, as a fruit of his faith, fostered
by the use of the ordinances. I desire says he, to dwell in thy house, and to
enquire in thy holy Temple; for in the time of trouble he shall hide me, etc.

Ver. 6. And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about
me: therefore will I offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy: I will sing, yea
I will sing praises unto the Lord. After this wrestling of faith, he obtains
victory, and assurance of satisfaction to his desire, and the grant of all that
he was to seek in his Prayer. Whence learn, The Lord can give a believer
assurance of what he would have, and make him so clear of the possession of the
Promise, as if it were in his hand, as here the Psalmist is sure to prevail
over his enemies, sure to come to the Temple even as he wished, And now shall
mine head be lifted up above mine enemies, I will offer sacrifices of joy in
his Tabernacle.

Ver. 7. Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and
answer me.

8. When thou said, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face,
Lord, will I seek.

In the second place, having thus strengthened his faith, he enters the lists
with his present trouble and tentations, and encountreth them by Prayer to God
upon the foresaid grounds, in three Petitions. In the first he prays for the
sensible experience of Gods favor, as his present condition required; wherein
he strengthens his faith by three considerations. The first is, because he had
gotten grace to close with the Word of God* inviting him to seek what he
sought, ver. 8. Whence learn, 1. Confidence in God, is diligent in Prayer, and
despises not the means, whereby the mercy hoped for, may be brought about; But
by Prayer it makes particular application of the Lords good will offered to
all, unto it self; that it may be helped in the present need, as here David
does, Hear me when I cry, have mercy on me, answer me. 2. As the Lords Word
encourages us to seek things of God, which without a warrant we durst not
seek; ^o when we have gotten grace to embrace Gods warrant given to us by
Precept or Promise, we may ask with confidence to obtain; Hear me, answer me,
why? When thou saidest, Seek ye my face; my heart answered, I will seek thy
face, O Lord.

Ver. 9. Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger: thou
have been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. He
meets here with an objection from his sins and mis-deservings, and prays it
down, adding another consideration to confirm his faith from bygone experience
of mercy, notwithstanding of his unworthiness. Whence learn, 1. Though (when
we would draw near to the Lord) sense of sin and unworthiness, and fear of
wrath do flee in our throat, yet faith cleaving to Gods goodness, and to the
promises of mercy, and to our relation unto our God, may cry down the
tentation, Hide not thy face, put not away thy servant in anger. 2. The former
experinces which we have had of Gods being gracious to us, according to the
tenor of the Covenant of salvation, should confirm our faith, that God will
never cast us off, nor any man that cannot endure to be separate from him: Thus
David reasons, Thou have been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God
of my salvation.

Ver. 10. When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me
up. A third consideration to confirm David's faith, is a nearer relation between
God and David, then between David and his Parents. Whence learn, The bands
between God and a believing soul, are more strait and intimate, and more
strong, then any band civil or natural between him and any creature; and they
are appointed to hold fast when natural bands do fail, as here is asserted.
When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. This is
for the first petition.

Ver. 11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me into a plain path, because of
mine enemies. The second petition is for Direction in a holy and wise carriage,
that his enemies get no advantage against his behavior or person. Whence
learn, 1. There is danger of desertion, or of Gods leaving us to the will of
our enemies, if we carry not a good cause in a lawful, holy, tender way; and
therefore we had need to seek our direction from God, to be taught in his way,
and led in a plain path. 2. Because the enemies of the godly are ready to
calumniate their cause, and their intentions, and to take advantage to
calumniate them upon the least occasion of a questionable practice, we had the
more need to be circumspect, and to pray to be directed in a plain path,
because of our enemies.

Ver. 12. Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false
witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty. The third
petition is, to be delivered from the power of the enemy, prosecuting their
false calumnies, and raging in cruelty. Whence learn, 1. The godly have reason
to pray with submission, that they may not fall in the hands of men because of
their cruelty, and to say to God, Deliver me not over unto the will of mine
enemy. 2. Because it is easy for the Lord to mitigate the enemies fury, or to
break their power, or to elude their craft and power* Let us pray, Deliver, and
let God choose the way of delivery. 3. When the good cause of the godly, and the
persons also are left to suffer both together, there is ground that God in that
case will interpose himself in due time: for this is David's reason of hope to
be helped, because false witnesses resolved to oppress him in name, and
breathers out of cruelty, were set to have his life, ever rising against him:
and here he is a clear type and example of the suffering of Christ, and his
followers.

Ver. 13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living.

14. Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart:
wait, I say, on the Lord.

In the third place he comes to show, and to make use of the benefit he had by
believing, that he may encourage others to follow his example in their trials.
Whence learn, 1. Discouragement under trouble, is a sort of quitting of our
cause, and of all comfort in it; but faith keeps a man close to his cause,
and from being overcome with troubles; it holds up his heart in his duty, till
the Lord send an out-gate, wherein he were not able to subsist otherwise:
Unless I had believed, I had fainted. 2. Our expriences of the good of
believing in the time of straites, should be communicated to others, as our
calling may suffer to encourage them, for so does the Prophet, saying, Wait on
the Lord, and be of good courage. 3. The striving to take courage from the
ground of faith, shall be followed with strength from God to go under the
trouble, and to find comfort now and then, and full delivery at last: He shall
comfort thy heart. 4. Albeit the Lord let the trouble lie on, and strong
tentations to increase, and grief of heart to grow, yet must we still wait;
for at the due time, the out-gate shall come, Wait I say, on the Lord.

PSALM. XXVIII.
In the first part of this Psalm, we have the Prophets conflict against his
enemies, such as in the former Psalm is to be seen, wherein he prayerh for
audience, ver. 1.2. and delivery to himself, ver. 3. and that God would
vindicate his own justice against his disdainful enemies, ver. 4, 5. In the
latter part, the Prophet having gotten comfort in his Prayer, does glorify
God, ver. 6. and strengthens his own and the rest of the godlies faith, ver. 7,
8. and prays for a blessing to the Church, ver. 9.

Ver. 1. UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock, be not silent to me: lest if
thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.

2. Hear the voice of my supplications when I cry unto thee: when I lift up
mine hands toward thy holy Oracle.

IN his conflict with trouble, he runs to God for a comfortable answer, with
reasons to help his hope to be heard. Whence learn, 1. It is good to pray in
time of trouble, and to be instant, and resolved to be instant; For unto thee
will I cry, does import these three. 2. A soul in great straits is not able to
suspend, and want comfort long: it must have some comfortable answer, because
of what God is unto it by Covenant, My rock, be not silent unto me. 3. It
brings deadness of spirit on a supplicant, when his Prayer is not taken off
his hand, which albeit it be by no reason, but a consequence ill inferred from
the Lords not answering of us, yet we are subject to this evil, and should pray
to have it prevented: Be not silent, says he, lest I become like them that go
down into the pit. 4. Though the heart be in bonds in time of Prayer, under
trouble, yet the Lord will not despise the voice, nor the knees bowed, nor the
hands lifted up, no^ the least expressions of a supplicants desire, to be
helped by him: Hear my voice when I cry, and the lifting up of my hands, says
he. 5. Seeking of God in Christ, and trysting the fullness of the Godhead in
the Person of the Mediator, represented by the Tabernacle and Oracle,
answers all objections from the supplicants unworthiness, and gives
encouragement to expect a good answer from God; for to this purpose does he
mention his lifting up of his hands toward the Lords holy Oracle.

Ver. 3. Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity:
which speak peace to their neigbours, but mischief is in their hearts. Now he
prays God would deliver him, and not deal with him as with an enemy. Whence
learn, Albeit there be sin in the godly, yet are they not workers of iniquity,
nor treacherously disposed toward their neighbors, when they pretend to have
friendship with them; and therefore may the godly expect from God, not to be
dealt with, as obstinately wicked and impenitent sinners; for this he means,
saying, Draw me not away with the workers of iniquity, etc.

Ver. 4. Give them accordong to their deeds, and according to the wickedness
of their endeavoure: give them after the work of their hands, rend^r to them
their deserts.

5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

He prays now against his enemies, not out of private revenge; but being led
with the infallible Spirit of Prophecy, looking through these men to the
enemies of Christ, and of his People in all ages. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
imprecations must not be used against our own enemies, nor for any injury done
to us, nor against any in hatred of their persons, nor against every enemy of
God, but only against desperate sinners, and that in general, rather then with
an eye to this man or that man in special; about whom we may be mistaken; yet
the imprecation of the Spirit of God standing in the Scripture, cries still
against obstinate sinners, although we cannot condescend particularly upon
their names; God shall give them according to their deserts. In the
controversy between the godly and their enemies, not only does God show by his
word, which party he allows, but also by the works of his providence, in
favors of the godly, and against their enemies, he does give forth his mind,
according to what he has said in his Word to be observed; but when both these
are misregarded, he will destroy the wicked, and not suffer them to carry on
their purpose; for because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the
operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

Ver. 6. Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my
supplications.

7. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with my song will I praise
him.

8. The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed.

The other part of the Psalm, wherein he makes use of the good answer given
to him; first honoring God for it, then strengthening his own faith by it; and
thirdly strengthening the faith of others also. Whence learn, 1. The believing
supplicant shall not seek God in vain; he shall not fail in due time to find
such fruit, as shall make him bless and praise God for the answer; for in the
entry of the Psalm it was, Be not silent to me, O Lord, lest I become like
them that go down to the pi^* and here, Blessed be the Lord, because he has
heard the voice of my supplication. 2. What faith says to God in wrestling, it
shall be made to subscribe it victoriously and experimentally thereafter, My
rock, said he, hear me, ver. 1. And here, The Lord is my strength and my
shield; to furnish me within and without. 3. It is a good use m^de of
experience, to confirm our faith thereby, and to commend the course of
believing in God, as here David does, My heart trusted in him, and I am helped.
4. The joy of faith and of sense also, will be given sometime together to the
godly, for the increasing of their joy, as here he shows, Therefore my heart
greatly rejoiced. 5. Albeit we must praise God in whatsoever condition we can
be in; yet spiritual rejoicing does specially call for singing a Psalm unto
God, Therefore with my song will I praise him, says he. 6. What the Lord is to
one of the godly calling on him in the sense of need, he is unto them all the
same: as he was David's strength, ver. 7. so is he their strength, to wit, all
his peoples strength, ver. 8. 7. All the blessings which believers get do
belong unto Christ, first as to the anointed of the Lord in chief, and to his
servants as partakers of his anointing; for the Lord is the saving strength,
or the strength of salvation to his anointed, or to his Christ, and those that
are true Christians, partakers of his Unction, or holy Spirit; What concerns
David is but a shadow, and as one who is a partaker of the holy Unction through
Christ.

Ver. 9. Save thy People, and bless thine inheritance; feed them also, and
lift them up for ever. He closes his Prayer with intercession for the Church.
Whence learn, 1. Such as find access in Prayer to God for themselves, should
speak also a word for his Church, and pray, Lord, save thy People. 2. The
Privileges which the godly have are common to them all. The godly are all Gods
people, his inheritance, his flock: and as the benefits imported under these
titles are common, so are the duties due from us to God, imported thereby,
common also, and to be so studied, that we may discharge them, as we would
find from God the benefits of protection and deliverance, as subjects whom he
will save; of being watered and warmed, as his inheritance, fed and led on, as
his flock, and exalted over all our enemies, or being lifted up for ever.

PSALM. XXIX.
David exhorts Princes and great men, to humble themselves before God, and to
worship him (as he has commanded) in his public ordinances, verse 1, 2.
First, because he is infinitely higher then they, and more terrible to all men,
then they can be to their subjects or inferiors, as the uttering of his
Majesty and power by thunder does make evident* ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Secondly, because he offers the means of saving knowledge, even all his
ordinances, whereby men may heartily glorify him in their assemblies, ver. 9.
Thirdly, because he is an everlasting King and Ruler of all the creatures, ver.
10. And fourthly, because such as do humbly submit themselves to him, and
worship him as his People should do, shall be furnished with abilities for
every good work, and shall be abundantly blessed.

Verse. 1. GIve unto the Lord, (O ye mighty) give unto the Lord glory and
strength.

2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name; worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness.

HE directs his speech and exhortation to the Potentates of the earth, that
they may humble themselves before God, and give him the glory of all power, and
authority, and excellency above themselves, and above all other creatures.
Hence learn, 1. Of all men Princes should be most careful to glorify God, and
yet it is most rare to see them humble themselves before him: for natural
corruption is as strong in them as in others: Their education does breed them
to high and stately thoughts of themselves, their riches and power puffs them
up, and flatterers ordinarily following them, do make them forget themselves
and God also. Therefore are they here thrice exhorted to give glory to God. 2.
It is most necessary that Potentates do humble themselves before God, and be
particularly dealt with to that purpose, because their example and authority
does move many outwardly to submit to God, or stand out from his service:
therefore he speaks to them in their grandeur, Give glory to God, O ye
mighty. 3. As men are great in the world, so they are ready to think much of
their own strength, of what their power is able to reach to, and what honor is
due to them; but if they reckon right, strength and glory belongs to God. And
according as he is above them in power and excellency, so should he
proportionably be magnified, Give unto the Lord glory and strength, and give
unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. 4. He will have no glory of men, but
as he has prescribed to men in his own ordinances, given forth in his Word to
his Church: Worship him in the beauty of holiness, that is, in the glorious
sanctuary, the place of public meeting; beautiful indeed, not for timber or
stones so much, as because the holy and beautiful means of grace to men, and
Gods worship showing forth his glory was there to be found.

Ver. 3. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: The God of glory thundereth,
the Lord is upon many waters.

4. The voice of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty.

He proves that strength and glory belongs to the Lord, by one only work of
thundering, and kindling fire in the midst of watery clouds; that he may make
thunder in the conflict of water closing in the fire, and fire breaking through
the clouds, how often soever he pleases to show his power to the children of
men. Whence learn, 1. Though the standing works of Creation speak most of God,
yet such is our foolishness, that we are least apprehensive of that which is
daily seen, and a less work more rarely occurring will move more; as for
example, the thunder or the Eclipse of the Sun or Moon, will move more then the
making of heaven and earth. 2. No work of the Lord is rightly taken up till he
himself be looked unto, as the immediate Worker of it: therefore he points out
the sound of the thunder, as the voice of the Lord upon many waters. 3. Though
the Lord should be observed as the worker of every work, yet not at first is he
seen in his work to any purpose, till we by oftener reviewing his operation
about it, be somewhat affected with his glory and power therein; therefore he
repeateth the second time, The God of glory thundreth; And the third time, The
Lord is upon many waters. 4. When the thunder or any work of God is well
considered, some invisible thing of God will appear therein; as for example,
his power and majesty will be evidenced in the thunder; for the voice of the
Lord is powerful and full of majesty.

Ver. 5. The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars; yea, the Lord breaks the
Cedars of Lebanon.

6. He makes them also to skip like a Calfe: Leebanon and Syrion like a young
Unicorn.

7. The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire.

8. The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness: the Lord shakes the
wilderness of Kadesh.

9 The voice of the Lord makes the hindes to calve, and discovers the
forests: and in his Temple does every one speak of his glory.

He insisteth in his subject, and shows the effects thereof, on trees, ver.
5. on mountains, ver. 6. on the fire of the thunder, parting it in lightning,
ver. 7. on the waste wilderness, ver. 8. on the beasts and woods where they
haunt, ver. 9. Whence learn, 1. That the stupidity and senselessness of man is
greater then that of the brute creatures, which are all more moved with the
thunder, then the hearts of men for the most part, as here may be seen in the
comparison. 2. One work of God dwelt upon, shall show more of God then many of
his works being slightly looked on, and passed over: as for example, this one
of the thunder, considered with the effects, says more then many; yea, one
sensible and understanding man, will discover more of God in one work of God,
then many in their ordinary mood, either in that work, or in any other, or in
all his works.

Ver. 9. The voice of the Lord makes the hindes to calve, and discovers the
forests: and in his Temple does every one speak of his glory. He gives a
second reason of his exhortation to the mighty, to worship God in the beauty of
holiness, because in his Temple every one does speak of his glory. Whence
learn, 1. The glory of the Lord is shown forth in all the earth, and in all
his works, but in his Temple, in his Church, his works are holden forth
expressly and fully, for there by his Word, his counsel is opened, his
holiness, his goodness, justice, mercy, and all his attributes are declared.
Without the Church, men are compelled to acknowledge glory now and then, but in
his Church, men do declare his glory distinctly and willingly. In his Temple
does every one speak of his glory, all men there do confess his praise, and
every thing in the Temple holds forth something of Christ and his benefits,
to the glory of Gods mercy; and this is more then the world understands.

Verse 10 The Lord sits upon the flood: yea, the Lord sits King for ever.
A third reason, to move Princes to give to God glory and strength, is, because
his Kingdom reaches to the ruling of the waters, and because he is a King
immortal. Whence learn, 1. As the strength of the Lord appears in all his
works, so especially that he rules the raging sea, whereby once he did drown
the world, and now binds up, that it should do no more so again, The Lord
sits upon the floods. No King is King over every Kingdom and King, but God
is King above all Kings; No King is of long continuance, but the Lord is the
everlasting King, He sits King for ever; and therefore every mighty man
should do him homage, as his King, his Lord, and supreme Superior.

Verse 11 The Lord will give strength unto his People: The Lord will bless his
People with Peace The last reason to move Potentates to give all glory to God,
and to join with his People in glorifying of him, is, because of the
blessedness of his people, who worship him in his holy Temple. Whence learn,
1. The power of the Lord is not against his people, but for his people, against
his and their enemies, He gives strength to his People, to wit, against their
enemies, and for furnishing them to every part of his service whereunto he
calls them; The Lords people do give the glory of power and strength to the
Lord, And the Lord will give strength to his People. 2. The true worshippers of
God, whatsoever may be their exercise in the world, may be sure of
reconciliation with him, and of true blessedness, For the Lord will bless his
People with Peace.

PSALM. XXX. A Psalm and Song at the dedication of the house of David.
David praises God for his late deliverance from the hand of Absalom, ver. 1,
2, 3. And secondly, he exhorts others to praise God also for his mercies,
ver. 4, 5. Thirdly, he confesses his carnal security, and how he was
corrected for it, ver. 6* 7. Fourthly, he shows how he prayed for mercy, ver.
8, 9, 10. And fifthly, he praises the Lord for his gracious answer, ver. 11,
12.

THe Inscription of the Psalm shows, that it was endited at the dedication
of David's house, after it was polluted by Absaloms vileness with his fathers
Concubines, as David's security and trouble after that herein described, gives
us to understand. Whence learn, 1. That no benefit or creature-comfort is
lawful and pure to us, except it be sanctified by the Word and Prayer, except
we dedicate our selves and the creatures also to Gods service; and more
specially the dedication of a man's house with the Ceremonies of the law, used
about the dedication thereof, teaches us to consider and to ackdowledge before
God, That we are the Lords Tenants at will, received by him in his lodgings, to
be entertained by him during our abode on earth; It teaches us also that our
houses should be holy, both for the Persons in our company, and for the
exercise of Religion therein daily, before and after our lawful daily
refreshments and employments therein; and that the Lord only is the Preserver
of us, and of our houses, against what evil might otherways befall us, by men
or devils, or any other accident; and that the house is polluted, especially
when God is openly dishonored therein: in which case we are to seek mercy to
our selves, and to our families, and to pray to God for the continuance of his
guard about us, and his grace, to make a right use of our house hereafter,
which is the substance of the old Ceremonies used in dedication of a man's house.

Ver. 1. I Will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up; and have not
made my foes to rejoice over me.

2. O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.

3. O Lord, thou have brought up my soul from the grave: thou have kept me
alive, that I should not go down to the pit.

HE praises God for a number of mercies concurring together in his
deliverance, out of the hazard of losing both his life and his Kingdom. Whence
learn, 1. The more the Lord exalts us, we should humble our selves the more
before him, and magnify his bounty: for David will extol the Lord, here,
because the Lord had lifted him up. 2. The disappointment of our enemies is a
new mercy, beside our delivery from their cruelty, and a reason of thansgiving
to God, when he makes our foes not to rejoice oyer us. 3. When God seems to
desert us, and expose us to hazards; readily our spirits grow sick, and
deadness of spirit, (with inability to go about any point in our calling, or
of his service) do seize on us; but when after the prayer of faith grounded on
the Covenant, the Lord sends relief, it is a reviving of us again, as we see
in David's case, O my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me. 4.
Preservation from evil, and delivery out of evil are mercies equivalent;
rescuing a man from instant death, should be looked upon as resurrection from
death, and acknowledged so to be in our thanksgiving to God; for David here
says, The Lord has brought up his soul from the grave, because he had kept
him alive, that he should not go down into the pit.

Ver. 4. Sing unto the Lord, (O ye Saints of his) and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness.

5. For his anger endures but a moment, in his favor is life: weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

The second part of the Psalm, wherein he stirs up others to praise God for
his mercies. Whence learn, 1. Dwelling a while upon the consideration of
mercies shown unto us, brings with it rejoicing in God, and ^ singing
disposition, whereunto when we are once wakened and warmed, we will think that
one mouth to praise God is too little, as here we see in David, who not only
praises God himself but also sets all the Saints on work to the same
purpose, saying, Sing to the Lord all ye Saints of his. 2. Albeit we had no
present sense of lately received remarkable mercies, yet bygone experiences of
the Lords faithfulness and holiness, should give matter of thanks and praise,
on all occasions, specially in the Congregation, where his works are called to
mind: Give thanks, says he, at the remembrance of his holiness. 3. Albeit we
were not upon the thoughts of any particular experience, yet the known
perfections of God should furnish matter, and in special, because howsoever we
be sinful, and do provoke the Lord often, yet he, as he is slow to anger, so is
he soon pacified, his anger endures but for a moment. 4. When reckoning is
rightly made, the tokens of Gods displeasure are but for a moment. But the
evidence of his favors to believers is a lifetime, for in the midst of wrath
he remembers mercy; and the tokens of his favor, are far more then of his
displeasure, and wrath soon goes, and favor shines latest, and is of
longest continuance; Wrath is but temporary at the longest, but favor endures
for ever: His anger is but for a moment, but in his favor is life, yea life
everlasting. 5. When the Lord shows himself angry at a soul, it is dark and
cold night with it, and what can it do, but weep or walk heavily in this case,
when the bridegroom is as absent? Weeping may abide for a night. 6. Unto the
believer the longest winter-night has a change to the better following it:
consolation is certain after a mournful condition; Weeping may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning.

Verse 6. And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.

7. Lord, by thy favor thou had made my mountain to stand strong: Thou did
hide thy face and I was troubled.

In the third place, he comes to his late experience, which gave occasion and
matter of this Psalm; he abused his prosperity, not remembering that because his
standing was by grace therefore he should have stood in awe, and feared to
forget himself, and therefore he was chastised for it. Whence learn, 1. A child
of God, after long trouble may have a time of outward rest and prosperity; for
example, David, whose troubles were many, does acknowledge here that he was in
prosperity. 2. As men in ^^ouble do fear they shall never be rid of it, so when
God grants a change to the better, they think never to be so troubled again;
This fleshly security is a soul sickness, attending prosperity, and the most
holy men may easily be overtaken with it; for David confesses, I said in my
prosperity, I shall never be moved. 3. The consideration that our standing in
any good condition, is of Gods mere favor and grace, should keep us in fear
and trembling to offend, and prevent our falling in carnal security. This David
acknowledges for aggravating of his fault, Lord, by thy favor thou had made
my mountain strong. 4. The Lord will not suffer his own to lie still in carnal
security, but will withdraw the bolster and pillow of those benefits whereon
they do sleep, and together with that, will withdraw also the sweet sense of
reconciliation, and put his own in trouble to waken them: David's experience
teaches so much, Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. 5. Men
understand the folly of their sinful way, and of their careless entertaining
of Gods favor, not so well in the time of prosperity, as after they have
smarted for their folly, and have found the fruit of their forgetfulness of
God, and of their too much embracing and resting on prosperity to be nothing,
save sore and sad troubles, both bodily, and spiritual; for this is taught us
by the reckoning that David now makes, as a Pilot, discovering a rock, to
forwarn others to beware of security; and this reckoning is all after his
trouble, and after his victory also over it.

Ver. 8. I cried to thee, O Lord, and unto the Lord I made supplication.

9. What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to pit? shall the dust
praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?

10. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord; be thou my helper.

In the fourth part of this Psalm he shows his recovery out of his trouble,
and out of his sinful security which drew it on; he prayed, disputed and dealt
with God, til the Lord delivered him. Whence learn, 1. As the fire and the
hammer, and the files do serve to put off the rust off iron, so does affliction
to rouse a godly soul out of security, and drive him to earnest Prayer; for
after trouble is come, David cried to the Lord. 2. Albeit a man has
miscarried, and proved ungrateful to God in his prosperity, and unmindful of
his resolutions and promises made to God in his low estate, when he should come
to prosperity; yet when trouble comes to waken him up, and call him to a
reckoning, he must not despair, nor set down in discouragement in the
conscience of huge guiltiness. But because the Lord is angry, and no remedy
but Gods grace, he must lay himself at Gods feet a supplicant: Unto the Lord
David made supplication. 3. Faith in God is very argumentative, and will dispute
well for the man's life, having the Covenant of grace as a ground to go upon; It
will take a reason to strengthen it self from Gods nature, who does not delight
in the death of a penitent sinner, and a reason from no advantage unto justice,
by the man's destruction, when justice may have satisfaction in the Redeemer,
and the man may be saved also; What profit is there in my blood, when I go down
to the pit? and a reason from the man's purpose to glorify God, to the edifying
of others in his life, if he should be spared: from which mercy if he should be
cut off, it would be more bitter to him then death; Shall the dust praise thee?
Shall it declare thy truth? 4. When faith has said to God that it has to say,
it will wait for a good answer, will rely on his mercy, and expect relief from
the Lord, as here David does, Hear, O Lord, have mercy on me, be thou my helper.

Verse 11 Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou have put off
my sackloth, and girded me with gladness:

12 To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee; and not be silent: O
Lord, my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

In the last part of the Psalm he thankfully praises God, for granting unto
him all he desired, and obliges himself to a more careful carriage, and
setting forth of Gods glory. Whence learn, 1. It becomes the child of God to
weep when he is beaten, and to humble himself in the exercise of Prayer, and
Fasting; for David's mourning and sackcloth, shows his exercise in his former
trouble. 2. As security turns all our joy into trouble, so sincere seeking of
God in trouble, is the way to turn all our trouble into joy, Thou have turned
for me all my mourning into dancing, etc. and great is that joy which a
reconciled soul finds in God, after renewed feeling of the interrupted sense
of mercy. 3. A well ordered tongue, watching all opportunities to glorify God,
and edify others, is a main point of a man's excellency, not only above beasts,
but also above all men, who do not use their tongue for God, and for good to
others; Therefore David calls his tongue his glory. 4. The very intent of
Gods showing mercy to men, is to oblige them to give praise and glory to
himself before the world, thou have girded me with gladness, says he, To the
end my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent. 5. The right use of
our experiences of Gods mercy to us, is first to fasten our faith in God, and
to stand fast to the Lords Covenant, made with us in Christ; next after
acknowledging that this is our duty, to be thankful to God, to engage our
hearts to the discharge thereof constantly: The first of these the Prophet does
here by calling God, The Lord my God; the next he does in these words, I will
give thanks to thee for ever.

PSALM. XXXI. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
Another exercise of David, wherein he being in great danger to be taken by his
enemies, prays for delivery, ver. 1, 2, 3 4, 5* 6. Secondly, he strengthens
his faith by his bygone experience. ver. 7, 8. Thirdly, in Prayer he lays
out his lamentable condition before God, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Fourthly, he
wrastleth on in Prayer for comfort and safety to himself, and confusion to his
enemies, ver 14 15 16 17 18. Fifthly, being delivered and comforted by a new
experience of Gods merciful preservation of him, he makes good use of it, by
praising God for it, and exhorts the godly to love God and rely on him, ver.
19 20 21 22 23 24.

Ver. 1. IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be ashamed: deliver
me in thy right^ousnesse.

2. Bow down thine ear to me, deliver me speedily: be thou my stong rock, for
an house of defense to save me.

3. For thou art my rock, and my fortress: therefore for thy Names sake lead
me and guide me.

FRom his interest in God by Covenant, he strengthens himself in Prayer for
delivery. Whence learn, 1. Faith avowed and maintained, furnishes prayer, and
gives hope to be heard; for David having first said, In thee, O Lord, do I put
my trust; he subjoyneth, Let me never be ashamed: For this much may a believer
expect, that albeit he be put to hang down the head for a little, yet he shall
not at last be ashamed. 2. As the Lord sends in his wisdom, trouble after
trouble, upon a believer, so he sends in his justice and faithfulness,
promised delivery after delivery from oppressors, Deliver me in thy
righteousness. 3. Where the danger is pressing, and the affection is ardent,
the Petition may be repeated without babbling, and speedy help my be craved
without limitation of God; and hearkening to a poor supplicant, as it were,
with a bowed down ear, may be prayed for without abasing of Gods Majesty, as
here, Bow down thine ear to me, deliver me speedily. 4. Were there but a
moment betwixt us and perishing, and our enemies stronger then we, were ready
to lay hands on us; faith sees that God can interpose himself speedily, and
lift us up above our enemies reach: Be thou my strong rock, for a house of
defense to save me. 5. What the Lord is engaged to be unto us by Covenant, we
may pray and expect to find him in effect; Be thou my strong Rock, says he,
for thou art my Rock. 6. When trouble and uncouth passages discover our
ignorance, our blindness and weakness unto us, we have God engaged for his
glories cause, to take care of us, and to bring us through; for the Prayer of
the believer is, For thy name sake lead me and guide me.

Ver. 4. Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me, for thou
art my strength.

5. Into thine hands I commend my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth.

6 I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the Lord.

He comes more particularly to his danger, and prays for delivery, and
strengthening his faith by sundry reasons. Whence learn, 1. As the children of
this world are more wise in their generation, then the children of the light:
so do they hunt and overtake the godly, by their crafty devices against him,
They laid their nets privily against David, and ensnared him. 2. Though the
godly be both weak and simple-witted, yet they have a wise and strong God to
call upon, who is able to break the snare, and set his own free, whose help
David imploreth here, Pull me out of the net, for thou art my strength. 3. The
way to quiet our minds, in the hazard of our mortal life, (which is soon and
easily taken away, and we cannot our selves preserve,) is to put our soul over
on Gods care and custody, Into his hands committing our spirits. 4. The Word of
God, giving assurance to the believer of his Redemption, is a ground
sufficient, to make him confidently commit his soul to Gods keeping; for he may
say with warrant, Thou have redeemed me, O God of truth. 5. Worldly men that
believe not in God, have some other thing wherein they trust beside, as riches,
friendship, their own wit, etc. which carnal confidences are but lying
vanities, whereof the true believer must be aware, and hate the way of such as
follow them; for David hated them that regarded lying vanities, because he
trusted in God.

Ver. 7. I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my
trouble: thou have known my soul in adversities;

8. And have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy, thou have set my feet
in a large room.

In the next place he strengthens his faith by his former experience, and
promises himself after this present sorrow, joy and gladness, whereof he has
some present sense, stirred up by calling to memory his experience. Whence
learn, 1. In the midst of trouble faith will furnish matter of joy, and promise
to it self gladness, especially from the memory of bypast experiences of Gods
mercy; as here, I will rejoice and be glad in thy mercy. 2. When a believer is
in adversity, the Lord will not misken him, he will make him know, that even
then he has an eye upon him, and friendly affections to him: Thou have known
my soul in adversity. 3. Adversary power shall not get their will of a fixed
believer, but he shall have delivery from them, and victory over them, either
temporally or spiritually, or both ways; for here is the experience of it, Thou
have not shut me up in the hand of the enemy, thou have set my feet in a large
room. 4. The ground of our gladness, when we have found a proof of Gods
kindness to us, should not be in the benefit so much, as in the fountain of
the benefit; for this gives us hope to drink again of the like experience,
from the fountain which did send forth that benefit. Therefore David says, I
will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy for ever.

Ver. 9. Have mercy upon me, O Lord; for I am in trouble: mine eye is consumed
with grief, yea, my soul and my belly.

10. For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength
fails, because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.

11. I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my
neighbors, and a fear to my acquaintanc: they that did see me without, fled
from me.

12. I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel.

13. For I have heard the slander of many, fear was on every side: while they
took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life.

In the third place he lays out his lamentable condition, in regard of
perplexity of mind, and decay of natural strength, by grief and sorrow of
heart, and in regard of the contempt of his adversaries, and neglect of his
friends, and hazard of his life joined with the sense of Gods displeasure for
his sins, wherein he is a type of Christ suffering for our sins imputed to
him, and an example of the hard exercise of the Saints* Whence learn, 1. Great
and of long continuance may the troubles of the godly be, great may their grief
and heaviness of heart be, before they get comfort, as the example of this
meek man, so holy in his way, so subdued in his affections, does show by sundry
expressions. 2. Albeit the Lord needs no words to inform him of our condition,
or to move his affection to his children in trouble, yet he has appointed us
for evidencing our faith in him, and dependence upon him for relief, to come
and tell him what aileth us; and indeed it is an ease to the godly heart, to
have the Lord to speak unto, and lay out their case before him, as here we see.
3. The conscience of sin joined with trouble, is a load above a burden, and
able to break a man's strength more then any trouble; for here he says, my
strength fails because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed. 4. When
the godly have many and powerful enemies, then their acquaintance and
neighbors, and the multitude of the people will readily believe that all
misreports of them are true, and this makes the grief of the godly the
greater; as here, I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but specially among
my neighbors. 5. When the godly fall under persecution and trouble, their
worldly friends for fear of danger, or burden by them, will turn their back on
them, and forget acquaintance, yea and natural bands with them also; and then
must the godly lean to God, and expect comfort from him. This is holden forth
in this type of Christ, and example of believers under trial; I am a fear to
my acquaintance, etc. 6. Long lying in trouble will make a man to be forgotten
of his friends, as if he were dead, and make him to lose all estimation at
their hands, as if there were no worth in him at all. I am forgotten as a dead
man out of mind, I am like a broken vessel. 7. It is Satan's policy to draw
great men and Counselors of State in tops with the godly, because commonly
what great men esteem of the godly, that passes for current; and it is Satan's
policy first to laden the godly with slanders, and then to persecute them to
death, I heard the slanders of many, they took counsel together to take away
my life. 8. In a sharp trial a soul may be assulted with terrible tentations
on all hands, and feel terror and fighting within and without, fear, says he,
was on every side.

Ver. 14. But I trusted in thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my God.

15. My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and
from them that persecute me.

16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies sake.

17. Let me not be ashamed, O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let the wicked
be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.

18. Let the lying lips be put to silence, which speak grievous things proudly
and contemptuously against the righteous.

In the fourth place he wrestles by faith for delivery, and comfort in the mean
time till delivery come to himself, and disappointment to his enemies. Whence
learn, 1. It is the nature of faith, and it is the believers duty, to oppose
help from God, unto all tentations, were they never so many; as here David did.
But I trusted in thee, O Lord. 2. Except we hold fast the grip of our Covenant
with God, and avow it before him, trust will fail, and tentations readily
prevail: much use made David of the Covenant in his strait, I said, Thou art my
God. 3. Faith can make good cheer of the general grounds of Gods providence, by
making application thereof to its present use. The dispensations of al men's
comforts and troubles, life and death, are in Gods hand, and not in men's power:
my times are in thy hand, says David. 4. Because all power is in Gods hand,
prayer to him will prevail more for delivery from enemies, then any means
besides; Deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and them that persecute me.
5. When the cloud of trouble hides the Lords favor, faith knows it may
shine again, and therefore prays through the cloud for dissolving of it; make
thy face to shine upon me. 6. As we must study to approve our selves to be the
Lords servants, by studying obedience to him; So must we make grace and nothing
else save grace, the ground of our hope to be helped, comforted, or saved.
Shine upon thy servant, says he, save me for thy mercies sake. 7. As the
humble prayer of the persecuted godly, shall be granted and have effect; So the
proud brags, colored calumnies, and threatenings of slanderous and cruel
adversaries, shall be shamefully refuted and disappointed; and if the enemies
shall not timously cease to persecute, they shall be made to cease in their
graves, Let me not be ashamed, for I have called on thee, let the wicked be
ashamed, and made silent in their graves; let lying lips be put to silence,
which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.

Ver. 19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the
sons of men!

20. Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence, from the pride of man:
thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues.

21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous kindness in a
strong City.

Comfort and deliverance being the answer of his prayer, he praises God, and
stirs up the godly to set their hearts on God, and trust in him at all
times. Whence learn, 1. The bounty of the Lord to his own people seen in the
World, observed in the Lords ordinary dispensation toward them, and felt in a
man's own experience, is able to ravish the heart with admiration of the
blessedness of Gods people, as here, O! how great is thy goodness! 2. Beside
what consolation of spirit the Lord gives to his own, the Lord sometimes will
manifest so much respect in his providence to his servants, that not only the
godly, but also they who are but children of men, will be forced to acknowledge
the Lords singular respect to them; and beside what the Lord bestows either
inwardly or outwardly upon his own in this life, there is yet more laid up for
afterward, for completing of the blessedness in the life to come: How great
is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou
have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men! 3. How great
peace of conscience before God, and comfort in the holy Ghost, the Lord can
give a believer when he has to do with proud open persecuters, and privily
whispering slanderers; It is a secret and hid mystery to the worldly man: this
David describes in a similitude taken from wa^fare, Thou shall hide them in
the secret of thy presence from the pride of man, thou shall keep them secretly
in a pavilion from the strife of tongues. 4. As every believer having gotten
any experience of Gods goodness, should read it as a particular proof of some
general promise made to the godly; so should he subscribe the truth of that
promise, in favor of all believers, and bless God for his own particular
experience of it; for so does the Prophet here, saying, He has showed his
kindness to me, that is, how kind a God he is to his own, is in a strong
City; that is, preserved me in the wilderness, as if I had been in the best
fenced City in the world, furnished with men, victual and ammunition in
abundance.

Ver. 22. For I said in mine haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes:
Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto
thee. He confesses the great distress he was in, and how weak his faith was
under the tentation; this he does to his own shame acknowledge also, that he
may give the greater glory to God. Whence learn, 1. The faith of the godly may
be shaken, and the strongest faith may sometimes show its infirmity. I said in
my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes. 2. Though faith be shaken, yet
it is fixed in the root, as a tree beaten by the wind, keeping strong gripes
of good ground; Though faith seem to yield, yet it fails not, and even when
it is at the weakest, it is uttering it self in some act, as a wrestler; for
here the expression of David's infirmity in faith is directed to God, and his
earnest prayer joined with it, I am cut off from before thine eyes, yet thou
heardest the voice of my supplications. 3. Praying faith, how weak soever,
shall not be misregarded of God; for nevertheless says he, thou heardest the
voice of my supplication. 4. There may be in a soul at one time both grief
oppressing, and hope upholding: both darkness of trouble, and the light of
faith; both desperately doubting, and strong griping of Gods truth and
goodness; both a fainting and a fighting; a seeming yielding in the fight, and
yet a striving of faith against all opposition; both a foolish haste, and a
settled stayedness of faith; as here, I said in my haste, etc.

Ver. 23. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves the
faithful, and plentifully rewards the proud doer.

24. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart: all ye that hope
in the Lord.

Now he makes farther use of his experience, in exhorting all the godly to
follow his example, encouraging them yet with hope of like success. Whence
learn, 1. The gracious dealing of God with believers, should glue their own
hearts, and all other Saints hearts that hear of it, unto God in faith and
love. O love the Lord all ye his Saints. He puts love for faith, because it
is inseparable from faith, and faith works by love, and love proves the
sincerity of faith. 2. The faithful man shall not want an upholder, albeit he
had no friends: for the Lord preserves the faithful. 3. The proud man shall
not want a pursuer, and one to be avenged on him for his pride and oppression,
though all the world should let him alone, for the Lord does plentifully reward
the proud doer. 4. Albeit opposition be made unto a believer, yet must he
resist every thing which might put him back from trusting in God; for it
becomes a believer to be stout; Be of good courage. 5. Who so aims at
courage in the Lord, shall be furnished with strength to double out his
undertaking of faith: Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart.
6. Hope grounded on the promise, must be fixed, that our courage may be founded
not on our selves, but on the word of God: Be of good courage all ye that hope
in the Lord.

PSALM. XXXII. A Psalm of David, Maschil.
David in this Psalm describes the blessedness of the man justified by faith,
by way of general Doctrine, set down, ver. 1, 2. Which he clears by his own
experience, ver. 3, 4, 5. Then he shows the uses both of the general doctrine,
and of his own experience; First, for inducing the godly, to go to God by
prayer in trouble. v. 6. Secondly, for confirming of his own faith* ver. 7.
Thirdly, for teaching all men submission to God, and not to strive with him
when he does correct or exercise them, ver. 8.9. Fourthly, for believing in God
in all conditions, ver. 10. And fifthly, for making the Lord the joy and
delight of the justified man.

MAschil is put in the inscription of the Psalm, signifying instruction; to
teach us, That the Doctrine of justification by faith is a lesson which all men
have need to learn, and to learn more and more solidly; because salvation and
daily consolation in all the exercises of a man's soul depends on it.

Ver. 1. BLessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.

2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity: and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

IN the Doctrine set down in these two verses; Learn, 1. That sin draws on a
debt which no man can satisfy for: such a debt, as a man must perish, if it be
not forgiven. 2. Sin is a filthiness, which neither God can behold, without
abominating the sinner, nor the guilty conscience can look upon without horror,
except it be covered. 3. Sin draws on a guiltiness, which may draw men to
damnation, if it shall be imputed. 4. There is no justification of a sinner by
his good works before God, but only by the forgiveness of his evil works, as
the Apostle, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. citing this place, proves, Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven. 5. Justification by faith, or remission of sins is
accompanied with right unto salvation, because it is written, Blessed is the
man whose transgression is forgiven. 6. Justification by faith, or absolution
from sin, is accompanied also with the upright endeavor of sanctification; for
of the justified man it is said, Blessed is the man in whose spirit there is no
guile. 7. Albeit no man lives and sins not, yet God has a way to cleanse
the conscience of the upright man; who honestly and without guile, endeavors
to walk before God, by bringing him to give account of his debt, and to
acknowledge his filthiness, and his guiltiness before God, and then for
Christ's sake forgiving him, and with Christ's righteousness covering him, and
for Christ's mediation, not imputing iniquity unto him.

Ver. 3. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day
long.

4. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into
the drought of Summer. Salah.

He declares this Doctrine by his own experience, how Gods wrath never left
pursuing of him, til he came to make use of this doctrine, acknowledging his
sin, and fleeing to the benefit of remission of sin, for the blood of the
Messiah, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, in the symbol of the
expiatory sacrifice then daily offered for sin. Whence learn, 1. That man is
fittest to speak of the Doctrine of man's sin and misery, and of Gods free grace
and mercy, who has felt the bitterness of sin and wrath, and the sweetness
of Gods grace by experience of Gods pardon; therefore is this Doctrine
recommended to the Church by David, who had felt both. 2. A justified man who
knows the Doctrine of Justification by faith in Christ, possibly, yea readily
may forget to make use of this precious truth, when he has most need of it,
being under guiltiness, and the pressure also of Gods fatherly wrath for it;
for David for a while being in this condition, was silent, and came not off at
first to seek relief the right way: for he kept silence, and did not come to
the acknowledgement of his sin, but was taken up only with the sense of the
Rod. 3. When the Lord is about to make his child sensible of his sins, and of
the necessity of a free remission of them, through the Mediator, he can awake
the conscience of sin, by the sense of sad affliction, and can increase the
heat of the furnace, and make his child roar for sorrow and pain, and thereby
weaken his natural strength, and waste his spirits and his flesh, and his
bones, and drive him to deaths door, til he make use of the Doctrine of
Justification, or remission of sin by faith in God the Redeemer; This was
David's case, when he kept silence, his bones waxed old. Gods hand was heavy
upon him night and day, and the sap of his body was dried up as a piece of
moist earth is dried in the drought of Summer.

Ver. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I
said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Selah. At last the Lord led him to the right remedy,
pointed out the way unto him of humiliation, and confession of sin, and seeking
of mercy, as it is prescribed in the Word, and so he was relieved. Whence
learn. 1. Before the Lord let his child go from under the Rod, after he has
given him an essay of himself, and of his own way how unprofitable it is, he
will bring him about to the right way of relief, as here we see. 2. The only
way to quiet the conscience, to pacify wrath, and remove judgment, is
ingenuously to confess sin, and to aggravate it sincerely (laying aside
extenuations, excuses, and subterfuges, for justifying of Gods dealing with us,
and for humiliation of our own selves before him,) and to fly to Gods mercy,
laying out all before him; as before a gracious God, who does pursue
controversies with his own, only to the intent, that they may make peace with
him in the Mediator, and so be reconciled. So did David, He acknowledged his
sin, and that unto God, he hid not (...) iniquity. 3. Reconciliation with God,
and renewing our peace is ready at hand, when we take the right way (as is
said) to be delivered, for so son as David resolved opon this course, and
said, he would confess, it follows, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

Ver. 6. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when
thou may be found: surely in the floods of great waters, they shall not come
nigh unto him The first use of this Doctrine and of David's experience, is to
teach others how to behave themselves in their trouble. Whence learn, 1. The
Doctrine of Justification by gracious forgiving iniquity, is the ground of all
the godlies approaches to God, and right worshipping of him; for to show the
use of this Doctrine, thus tried by experience, he says, Every godly one shall
pray unto thee. 2. There is a time when God may be found, to wit, so long as
God is offering grace, and sparing extremity of wrath, which time men ought to
lay hold on, not knowing how short while it may last: They shall pray in a time
when thou may be found. 3. It is possible, that a godly man may be in the
midst of the waters of sore troubles, and yet these troubles not come near
unto him, because God can furnish the man an Ark in Christ, whereby he shall
swim above the deluge: and when God keeps off trouble, that is proves not
hurtful, (much more when he: makes trouble a means of spiritual good to a man,
and gives the man true peace and contentment in himself) it is verified what
is promised here, Surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come near
him.

Ver. 7. Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance From the second use wherein
David confirms his own faith for time to come, Learn, 1. Experience of Gods
mercies by gone should fasten resolution, to make use of faith hereafter in all
troubles, as here. 2. The godly after one trouble, should prepare for another,
after one delivery expect another, as here. 3. What God has proved himself to
be to us before, we may promise, he shall be the same to us in effect hereafter,
because he is that by Covenant and promise to us, what in practice we have
found him to he; for David reasons thus, Thou art mine hiding place, thou
shall preserve me from trouble; that is, I shall have no damage by trouble, as
is said. 4. A justified soul resolving to make use of God in every condition
that can come unto him, according to the Covenant, may promise to himself a
comfortable out-gate of all his troubles, and matter of praise and joy from God
on all hands, yea, he may confidently say with David, Thou shall compass me
about with joyful deliverance.

Ver. 8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go: I
will guide thee with mine eye.

9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule which have no understanding: whose
mouth mu^t be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come n^er unto thee.

From the third use of teaching others to be wise, by his example, Learn, 1.
The right use of experience is to edify others as our calling requires; when
we are converted, we should strengthen our brethren; for this David does, I will
instruct thee, etc. 2. When we have heard how others have been afflicted, we
should be wiser, and take instruction by their example, that we strive not with
God, but submit our selves under his hand, acknowledge our sins, and seek mercy
of him: Be not as the horse or the mule. 3. Whosoever will not submit unto God,
and seek unto his favor, shall find themselves so much the more hardly dealt
with, as horses and mules are bound in with bit and bridle.

Ver 10 Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord,
mercy shall compass him about. From the fourth use of maintaining a course of
adhering to God in all conditions, because it shall be better with the believer,
then with the wicked; Learn, 1. There is no advantage to be had by repining
against God, only the multiplication of sorrows shall follow thereupon, sin upon
sin, wrath upon wrath, judgment upon judgment; and after temporal evils,
everlasting shall follow, for many sorrows shall be to the wicked. 2. Not
repining against God, taking with our chastisements, acknowledging of our sins
in our affliction; seeking in to Gods mercy, and leaning unto him, puts
difference between the wicked and the godly; for here the believer is set in
opposition to the wicked, and to the man that is like a horse or mule; for he
is called the man that trusts in the Lord. 3. Whatsoever tentation, trouble,
or opposition shall make assault against the believer; mercy shall make the
defense; and shall give the deliverance on all hands, for mercy shall compass
him about.

Ver. 11 Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy,
all ye that are upright in heart. From the last use of making God our joy and
delight; Learn, 1. Such as understand the way of Justification by grace, and
have fled to God for pardon of sin, and so are justified, have great matter of
rejoicing, and should make conscience to rejoice in God: for to them it is
said, Rejoice ye righteous. 2. The justified man is no counterfeit in the
matter of Religion, nor hypocrite in the matter of outward obedience to the
Lords Law, He is a righteous man, he is upright in heart. 3. The matter of his
joy and triumphing is the Lord himself, his grace, his good will, his Covenant,
his promise, and constant kindness and mercy, for it is said to them, Be glad
in the Lord.

PSALM. XXXIII.
This Psalm in Gods Providence has no Inscription, as also many others have
none; that we may look upon holy Scriptures as altogether inspired of God, and
not put price upon it for the Writers thereof, whether their name be expressed
or not. In it there is first an exhortation to praise God, ver. 1, 2, 3. for
his powerful, wise, and righteous government of all things in general, ver. 4,
5. and more specially for his powerful guiding the works of Creation, ver. 6,
7. Secondly, an exhortation, as to praise God, so also to fear him, for his
omnipotency, and his powerful overruling and disappointing all the devices of
men against his Church, and his powerful executing all his own will, v. 8, 9,
10, 11. Thirdly, a proclaiming the blessedness of the Lords Church and People,
and of Gods praises in reaching his Providence over all the world, in favors
of his People, ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. In special, for disappointing and
evacuating all vain confidences of men, great and small, who do not trust in
him, ver. 16, 17. and taking care of such as fear him, and trust in him, to
deliver them from all evil, v. 18, 19. Fourthly, the use is set down which the
godly do make of this doctrine, and song of praise.

Ver. 1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the
upright.

2 Praise the Lord with Harp, sing unto him with the Psaltery, and an
instrument of ten strings.

3 Sing unto him a new Song, play skilfully with a loud noise

FRom the exhortation made to the godly to praise God, Learn, 1. That to
rejoice in God is a point of praising of him, for it is here expounded to be
praise; Rejoice in the Lord says he, for praise is comely. 2. Albeit all be
bound to praise God, yet none will do it cheerfully and acceptably, save only
the godly, Rejoice, ye righteous. 3. There is no exercise more becoming the
godly, then praising of God, whether we look to the object of the praise, which
is God; or whether we look to their obligation above all people in the world;
For praise is comely to the upright. 4. There is no exercise whereunto we have
more need to be stirred up, then to praise; such is our dullness, and such is
the excellency and necessity of the work, as the Ceremonial use of musical
instruments in the paedagogie of Moses, did signify and import; the religious
use whereof, albeit it be taken away, with the rest of the Ceremonial Law; (the
natural or civil use thereof remaining still the same, both before the
Ceremonial Law and after it,) yet the thing signified, which is the bending all
the powers of our soul and body to praise God, is not taken away: and this
necessity of our up-stirring is imported in a threefold exhortation. 5 The
praises of the Lord, being well considered, will yield continually new matter,
and fresh delight in the work. Sing unto him, says he, ^ new Song.

Ver. 4. For the Word of the Lord is right, and all his works are done in truth

5 He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of
the Lord.

From the arguments of praise taken from his good governing of all things in
the general, Learn, 1. The powerful appointment of what is done in the world,
and the execution thereof in effect, is most holy, just and equitable, that the
creatures are so ranked as they are, some of them superior, some inferior;
some of them ruling, some of them serving; some of them stronger, some weaker;
some of them agreeing to other, some of them disagreeing one from another; some
of them feeding upon, and others of them made food and prey to others; all
making up a harmony of well ruled concords and discords, all is done well and
equitable: for, The Word of the Lord is right, and all his works are done in
truth. 2. The Lord cannot but do justly, because his nature is such, He loves
righteousness and judgment. 3. There is no part of the world we can set our
eyes upon, but it speaks praise to God for his bounty to his creatures, and
specially to man. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.

Ver. 6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the host of
them by the breath of his mouth

7 He gathers the waters of the Sea together as an heap, he lays up the
depth in store houses.

From the Works of Creation, Learn, 1. The omnipotency and wisdom of God in
creating heaven and earth, and all things of nothing; as they do praise God, so
also do they prove the power and righteousness of his governing them. By the
Word of the Lord the heavens were made. 2. How easy a thing it is to God, to
govern and guide the World well, appears by his making of all things at a
word, He made all the host of them by the breath of his mouth, and it can cost
him no more to uphold and rule them at his pleasure. 3. He is able to ward off
whatsoever evil can befall us: For he gathers the waters of the sea as an heap,
which would naturally overflow the earth. 4. He has more bands over our heads
to keep us in fear, and awe before him, and amongst the the rest, He lays up
the deep in storehouses, to let them loose, when and where, and how far he
pleases.

Ver. 8. Let all the earth fear the Lord; let all the inhabitants of the world
stand in awe of him.

9 For he spoke, and it was done, he commanded, and it stoodfast.

10. The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught; he makes the
devices of the people of none effect.

11 The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations.

In the second place, he exhorts as to praise, so also to fear him. Whence
learn, 1. The right use of the works of Creation, is, to take up, how glorious
and how dreadful the Creator of them is, and to beware to offend him. Let all
the earth fear before the Lord. 2. No man on earth is exempted from Gods
judgment, when he transgresses Gods Law, albeit he be without the Church: Let
all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. 3. His omnipotency
manifested in framing and settling the frame of the world at a word: should move
men to fear him; for it is given for a reason to fear him, Because he spoke,
and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. 4. Such as fear not God, have
many devices of their own, how to make themselves blessed, and how to overturn
his Church and People; but God disappointeth them of their design, both in the
one and in the other; He brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught, and he
makes the devices of the people of none effect, and therefore all should fear
him. 5. The whole work of the Lords Providence, from the beginning of the
world to the end thereof, is all at once before his eyes, and all the Lords work
is deliberately fixed by him; The counsel of the Lord stands for ever. 6. The
Lord goes on in executing of his determinate resolution, from one generation
to another, without being frustrate of his purpose in any thing, less or more
at any time: The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his
heart to all generations. 7. Such as follow Gods direction, do obey his
revealed Will, do take the course set down by him in his Word, for their
reconciliation with him, through the Messiah Christ, and do set his Word before
them, to be the rule of their faith and obedience, cannot be disappointed of
what is promised by God in his revealed will, For the counsel of the Lord
stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations.

Ver. 12. Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord: and the People whom he
has chosen for his own inheritance.

13. The Lord looks from Heaven: he beholds all the sons of men.

14. From the place of his habitation, he looks upon all the inhabitants of
the earth.

15. He fashioneth their hearts alike: he considers all their works.

In the third place he shows the blessedness of Gods people, in order to his
praise who has chosen them, and who does dispose of all things to their
behoof. Whence learn, 1. Of all the people on the earth, the Lord has only
entered in Covenant with his Church, to be their God in a peculiar way; for
here, There is a Nation whose God is the Lord. 2. Such as do lay hold on God as
their God, are the only blessed people in the world; for it is said, Blessed is
that Nation, whose God is the Lord, 3. Such as in the sense of their own sin
and misery, and consideration of the vanity of all things beside God, have
chosen God for their God, to live in Communion with him, they have evidence of
their Election; for they are here called, The people whom he has chosen. 4.
Such people, as is said, are that peculiar portion of the world, which God has
set apart for himself to draw the rent of his glory in the world by them, and
from them in a special way; and whom he will keep in his possession for ever,
and not suffer himself to be bereft of them; For they are the People whom he
has chosen for his inheritance. 5. Though the Church be the only inheritance
of God, yet the rest of the world is the object of his wise, holy and powerful
providence, no less then the Church: The Lord looks down from heaven, and
beholds all the sons of men. 6. There cannot be a plot on earth against Gods
Church: but God is privy to it, and knows it perfectly; for from the place of
his habitation, he looks on all the inhabitants of the earth. 7. The Lord
cannot be ignorant of the most secret device of men, better or worse, because
he is the Maker of the hearts of all men, He fashioneth their hearts alike,
(that is, the heart of one as well as of another) he considers all their
works, that he may make of them what he will. 8. Men had need to consider
whereupon their heart is set, and what course they are upon, and what work they
are about, for he knows the heart, and considers every man's work.

Ver. 16. There is no King saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is
not delivered by much strength.

17. An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither, shall he deliver any by his
great strength.

18. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope
in his mercy:

19. To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.

Here he sets at naught all carnal confidence of men, that his people may
neither fear their enemies, nor trust in their own furniture, and prefers
trusting in God, to all carnal confidence whatsoever. Whence learn, 1. Trusting
in means, (such as a man's strength, and the assistance of other men, or other
creatures,) is an error so natural, and fixed, as it had need to be refuted by
God, who has said, that they are a vain confidence to lean unto, which cannot
deliver a man, There is no King saved by the multitude of an host, a mighty
man is not delivered by much strength, and a horse is a vain thing for safety:
And the actual frustrating of men's hopes, to be helped by authority, strength,
or external helps, should teach men not to lean to them, when they are making
use of them. 2. The man that believes in God, and fears him, is in a more
safe condition, then the wicked in all their power and riches: Behold, the eye
of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and hope in his mercy, to deliver them.
3. The whole perfection of a Christian life is comprised in these two, trusting
in Gods mercy, and fearing him: for this is the description here of the Elect,
and blessed man. 4. The godly cannot secure themselves from being brought in
straits and necessities, but may be sure that God shall have a care of them in
their necessities, and give them a blessed out-gate out of them all, For his
eye is on them, to deliver them from death, and to keep them alive in famine.

Ver. 20* Our soul waits for the Lord; he is our help and our shield.

21. For our heart shall rejoice i^ him; because we have trusted in his holy
Name.

22. Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us: according as we hope in thee.

In the last place is set down the use of this doctrine, which the godly should
make of it. Whence learn, 1. All the points of the Lords praise, are props of
the Saints faith, and grounds of their hope, as this Conclusion drawn from this
song of praise, does show: Our soul waits for the Lord, etc. 2. Every
believer may rejoice, and promise to himself cause of rejoicing through faith
in his name, Our hearts shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in him.
3. Faith always differenceth it self from presumption, by praying for what is
promised, Let thy mercy be upon us, say the Believers. 4. Because the hope of
the godly is grounded upon Gods promises, therefore it shall not be
disappointed, But Gods mercy shall be on them, according as they hope in him.

PSALM. XXXIV. A Psalm of David, when he changed his behavior before
Abimelech; and he drove him away, and he departed.
In this Psalm David praises God, for his delivery from the King of Gath, and
exhorts others to praise God with him, for his experience of Gods mercy, ver.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Then for making farther use of this mercy, he gives out
general doctrines concerning Gods protection and care of his children, with the
uses thereof, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. Thirdly, he gives counsel how to lead a
blessed life, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. Fourthly, he enforces his counsel by
promises to the godly, who obey Gods counsel, and threatenings to the wicked
man, who obeys not, ver. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

FRom the Inscription We learn, 1. That it is to good purpose to observe
special mercies, in a special manner, and to note the circumstances thereof as
here is done. 2. And that men in a preposterous fear, flying from one danger,
may fall in another worse, as David did, when he fled into an unhallowed place,
amongst Gods enemies, for fear of Saul, he falls in Abimelech or Achish his
hands. 3. And that God pitieth the infirmity of his children, and gives
success, some whiles to weak and unthrifty shifts, as here when David changed
his behavior, he escaped. 4. That God can and does dispose of men's hearts, as
he has a mind to work by them: for he did move the heart of Achish not to
take notice of David, otherwise then of a distracted man.

Ver. 1. I Will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be
in my mouth.

2. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof and
be glad.

HE promises here for his own part to praise God for the mercy received:
Whence learn, 1. As no mercy should be misregarded; so, notable mercies should
be specially remembered, and God blessed for the same. 2. It is a point of
thankfulness, to take all occasions to speak of God to others, His praise
shall be continually in my mouth. 3. Whatsoever be our condition in our selves,
matter of gloriation in God shall never be wanting to the believer, and this
gloriation is a duty and a point of praising God, My soul shall make her boast
in the Lord. 4. Only humble souls sensible of their own weakness are the
people who do reap benefit by Gods mercies, bestowed on others and themselves:
The humble shall hear and be glad.

Ver. 3. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together.

4. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.

He exhorts others to praise God with him, magnifying him for his greatness,
and exalting him for his highness. Whence learn, 1. The Saints are obliged to
help one another in praises as well as in prayer, albeit it comes to pass
that many do crave the aid of others prayers; who call not for their help to
praise: for here it is, Let us exalt his name together. 2. By Prayer the Lord
is sought and found, and it is no small matter of comfort to us, and glory to
God, that our prayer is regarded: I sought the Lord, says he, and he heard me.
3. The fear of what is like to be, should not hinder prayer; for the fears of
the godly, are not certain prophecies: for God can deliver out of them all, He
delivered me out of all my fears.

Ver. 5. They looked unto him and were lightened: and their faces were not
ashamed.

6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
troubles.

He is glad, and commends Gods goodness to him for the fruit of this mercy
to other believers. Whence learn, 1. One man's experience may be an
encouragement to many, to run to God for the like alms. This David foreseeth
shall be the fruit of Gods mercy to him, when men seeing him delivered, shall
look to God, and take comfort, and confidence by this means. They looked on
him, that is, on David, and so may we on Christ (represented by him) and at the
fullness of the Godhead dwelling in Christ; So they were lightened, and thus
comforted in the midst of the darkness of their troubles: and their faces
were not ashamed; because of confidence raised by this experience, that they
should find the like mercy, when they stood in need. 2. The way to make best
use of the example of Gods mercy to any person set down in Scripture, or which
fall forth in our time, or are made certainly known to us any way, is to look
upon them, not as they differ from us or our condition, but as they draw
nearest in similitude to us, and unto the mean condition we are in, for so do
the Saints look on David, saying, Not this rare Saint David, or this great
Prophet David, or this holy man David, who was according to Gods heart; but
this poor man David cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
troubles.

Verse 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

8. O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusts in
him.

In the next place are set down general Doctrines concerning Gods care of
believers, to protect and feed them; and the uses thereof; To trust and fear
God. Whence learn, 1. A right sight of Gods dealing with a man's own self, will
give him great light about the Lords manner of dealing with others, his
children, as here. 2. Though the Godly walk among foes, and be in a continual
warfare, yet they are well looked to and guarded. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them. 3. The sense of Gods mercy and goodness, is the
sweetest thing that ever was felt, and is able to season the bitterest cup that
ever believer drank of: Taste and see that the Lord is good. 4. By faith is the
taste of this sweetness gotten: for blessed is the man that trusts in him. 5.
All that the believer can attain to in this life of spiritual consolation,
whether by faith or experience sweetened with lively comforts of the holy
Ghost, is but a taste in comparison of what is to be had hereafter, and yet
that taste, O how sweet a joy, unspeakable and full of glory is it! O taste and
see that the Lord is good. 6. Affliction purges the taste of the believer, and
a soul driven from all worldly helps, but fitted for exercising spiritual
senses, as here we see, David's taste is purged well after trouble. 7. As God is
very communicative of his goodness, and offers himself to men to be taken a
proof of: so also gracious souls do wish and invite others to share with them
in whatsoever grace the Lord does bestow on them, as David does here, saying to
all, O taste and see. 8. Albeit this sweetness be not found at the first
out-putting of faith, yet let faith rest on God, and it shall feel in due time,
for blessed is he that puts his trust in God; yea, faith it self is a taste
of that grace that is in God.

Ver. 9. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints: for there is no want to them that fear
him.

10. The young lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord,
shall not want any good thing.

Another Doctrine concerning Gods care to feed and provide for all necessary
furniture, unto the believer, with the use thereof; which is to fear God.
Whence learn, 1. True believers in God must study holiness, for evidencing of
their faith; for therefore are they called Saints, and his Saints. 2. The fear
of the Lord is the property of the Saints, whereby they are set on work to do
what the Lord commands, and to forbear what he forbids; and no bonds of
inclination, counsel, example, laws, fear of shame, or punishment from men,
are able to keep a man in order when he meets with a fit tentation to sin,
but the fear of God restrains the man both outwardly and inwardly, in secret,
and open, always, and every where* and whatsoever measure of holy fear the
Saints have attained unto, yet may they be exhorted, and must hearken unto
exhortation, to grow in this grace: O fear the Lord, ye his Saints. 3. Such as
fear God, need not to want any necessary furniture in Gods service, for there
is no want to them that fear him. 4. Proud oppressors, wealthy and potent
Princes, that trust in their own power, shall not be so sure of their own
standing and furniture, as the meanest of true believers are. The lions do lack
and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want. Though the godly
may want many earthly things yet shall they have food and raiment, and shall
not want any good thing. 6. The right sort of fearing of God, and laboring for
more and more near communion with him, are inseparable properties of the
Saints, for they that are called Saints are called here fearers of him, and
seekers of him also.

Ver. 11. Come, ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

12. What man is he that desires life: and loves many days: that he may see
good?

13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile:

14. D^part from evil, and do good: seek peace, and pursue it

In the third place, he gives direction how a man shall live blessedly, by
evidencing the sincerity of the fear of God in him, which is a grace
inseparable from faith in God, manifesting it self in obedience to his
commands. Whence learn, 1. There should be such mutual love and respect between
the teacher and the people taught, as is between parents and children; yea, God
in his servants offereh himself as a father ready to instruct his visible
Church, as his children, Come, ye children, says he, and hearken unto me. 2.
The true fear of God is the way to live blessedly in this life; where misery
most abounds, and this should be a motive to seek after this grace, for it is
asked here, What man is he that desires life, etc? and then the way to attain
to it, is set down in some particulars of the fear of God, as the inseparable
companions of faith in God. 3. The true fear of God must evidence it self by
the fruits thereof, such as are the ruling of man's tongue, and of the rest of
the outward man; eschewing whatsoever the Lord forbids, and endeavoring every
good duty which God commands, and the keeping peace with all men so far as
in us lies, for so does the Prophets words bear, verse. 13, 14. This is the
evidence of the fear of God in effect, when such outward works proceed from
inward principles of saving grace.

Verse. 15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous: and his ears are open
unto their cry.

16. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth.

In the last place he presses this Doctrine by showing the privileges of the
righteous, and the miserable state of the wicked, setting the one against the
other, in opposition thrice; In the first learn, It is a good means to keep our
hearts in the fear of God, to consider the gain of godliness, and the damage
and danger of wickedness, as here they are set in opposition. 2. Such as have
their eye upon God and his word, for righteousness and life, may be sure of
the watchful eye of God on them, for their direction in their way, their
consolation in their grief, and deliverance out of trouble; for, The eyes of
the Lord are upon the righteous. 3. As the righteous lend their ears to Gods
word, to his promises and precepts: so the Lord lends his ear to their
supplications and desires, His ears are open to their cry. 4. On the other
hand, as the wicked, who fear not God, set their face to do evil, and to
transgress Gods commands; so God shall set his face against them, to be
avenged upon them: The face of the Lord is against them that do evil. 5. The
only happiness which the wicked man seeks, is to have riches, honor and
pleasure in the earth, and to have his own name in estimation among men
hereafter, and these things also, beside the loss of heaven shall be taken
from him, and his temporal life withal; for The face of the Lord is against
them, to cut off their remembrance from the earth.

Ver. 17. The righteous cry, and the LORD hears, and delivers them out of
all their troubles.

18. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saves such as
be of a contrite spirit.

19 Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out
of them all.

20 He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.

21 Evil shall sla^ the wicked; and they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate.

Another opposition, of the good appointed for the godly, and the evil
appointed for the wicked. Wherein learn, 1. The Lord puts the godly to
trouble, and by trouble puts them to their prayers, and delays answer til
the need be great; and then they do cry to the Lord, and then he gives
evidence of his hearing, and sends deliverance; for The righteous cry, and
the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles. 2. It is as
true, as it may seem strange, that the Lord will press his own so long with
trouble til he break their hearts, and kill their natural courage and
confidence; for here are the godly described to be men of a broken heart, and
contrite spirit. 3. Though the Lord so break the natural confidence of his own,
and so empty them (by trouble) of all conceit of their own worth, wisdom or
ability to deliver themselves out of trouble, that they may rely on God only;
yet will he not withdraw himself from them, nor suffer them to perish in
discouragement. The Lord is near to them that are of a broken heart, and saves
such as be of a contrite spirit. 4. Though the righteous be the only men in the
world whom God loves best; yet will he not only not exempt them from trouble,
but also will exercise them with multitudes and varieties of troubles from his
own hand immediately, from Satan's temptations, from the malice of the wicked of
the world, etc. Many are the troubles of the righteous; for thus will the Lord
conform the redeemed to their head, try, and train them up in faith, and
patient submission to Gods will; teach them to pray and wait on, and give proof
of the sincerity of the grace given to them. 5. The godly are as often delivered,
as they are troubled; either by removing of the trouble, or by giving strength
and patience to bear it, or comfort under it, and certain hope of outgate from
it; or by ending all troubles to them at once. His troubles are many; but the
Lord delivers him out of them all. 6. The Lord moderateth, weighs, and
measures all the troubles of his own, what they shall suffer in their life and
death, and leaves it not to the will of the instruments of their trouble. He
keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken. This was true of Christ our
Lord, of whom many things were prefigured, and prophesied in the Psalms; and in
this amongst the rest, which shows: That in the Psalms, as the matter will
suffer, Christ is much to be eyed, and more then David, of whom at (...), the
same seems to speak chiefly. 7. As to the opposite state of the wicked; We
learn, That the wickedness of the wicked, is both the meritorious cause, and
the means also of the wicked man's destruction; For evil shall slay the wicked.
8. It is the mark of a wicked man, to hate the righteous for his righteousness;
and so is it set down here. 9. He that hates the righteous, or the image of
God in his neighbor, shall be guilty of all the consequences of the enmity, and
be destitute of comfort when he has most need, He that hates the righteous,
shall be desolate.

Verse. 22. The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants; and none of them that
trust in him shall be desolate. The third opposition between the righteous and
the wicked, is in relation to what is said in the former verse. Whence learn,
1. The wicked shall perish in their sin, and for their sin; But the righteous
shall not perish in their sins, nor for them; for, Evil shall slay the wicked;
but the Lord shall redeem the souls of his servants, to wit, out of sin and
misery. 2. As the wicked are servants of sin, and serve an ill Master, and get
an ill reward; so the godly are servants of righteousness, and have God for
their Master, and shall have delivery and salvation for their reward, as the
comparison here set down shows. 3. As the wicked who are destitute of faith
in God, when they fall in trouble, want consolation: So all the righteous, who
are no other then sincere Believers in God, shall have good company and
consolation in all their trouble, and never be left alone: for, The haters of
the righteous shall be desolate, but none of them that trust in God shall be
desolate.

PSALM. XXXV.
This Psalm is a representation of Christ's hottest contest with his
adversaries, wherein they are about to do their worst against him, and his
Kingdom; and he denounces the hottest wrath of God against them, for their
everlasting overthrow, set forth under the shadow of David's contest with his
irreconcilable enemies. Wherein he prays God to arise for him, ver. 1, 2, 3.
and take order with his despiteful enemies, ver. 4, 5, 6* 7, 8. which as it may
comfort the supplicant, so shall it serve also for Gods glory, ver. 9, 10. A
maine reason of which petition, is the unjust and ingrate dealing of his
enemies with him, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Whereupon he renews his
petition the second time, ver. 17, 18, 19. Pressing his former reason from the
enemies unjust and insolent disposition, ver. 20, 21. and then renews his
petition the third time for himself against his enemies, ver. 22, 23, 24, 25,
26. and for all the favorers of his cause, ver. 27, 28.

Ver. 1. PLead my cause (O LORD) with them that strive with me: fight against
them that fight against me.

2. Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for my help.

3. Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me;
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

FRom his petition for himself; Learn, 1. Such as take part with God against
his enemies, the Lord will take part with them against their enemies: If any
plead against the Believer by verbal calumnies, and slanders, the Lord will be
their party. If any will oppose the godly with violence, the Lord will oppose
them: For this prayer of one of the godly, is as good as a promise to all,
Plead my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: fight against them that
fight against me. 2. There is defense abundance to be found in God, against
whatsoever the enemy can do; a shield and buckler in Gods hand, when he
pleases to stand up and help. 3. The Lord can terrify the enemy, so that he
dare not assault the man whom God pleases to defend, and hold him off with
long weapons, giving the enemy some other thing to do, then pursue his people:
He can draw out the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute the
godly. 4. He can quiet the hearts of his own in the midst of persecution, and
make them fearlesse, in persuading them of their salvation, everlasting at
least; and this may fully satisfy, if the Lord say unto their soul, I am thy
salvation.

Verse 4 Let them be confounded and put to shame, that seek after my soul: let
them be turned back and brought to confusion, that devise my hurt.

5. Let them be as chafe before the wind: and let the Angel of the Lord chase
them.

6* Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them.

7. For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which without
cause they have dug for my soul.

8 Let destruction come upon him at unawares, and let his net which he has
hid, ^atch himself: into that very destruction let him fall.

From his petition against his enemies; Learn, 1. Shameful disappointment shall
they find at length who intend to destroy the godly; Let them be confounded and
put to shame, that se^ke after my soul. 2. Though the enemies of Christ and the
godly, advance in the prosecution of their hurtful devises, yet shall they be
forced to retire with shame. They shall be turned back and brought to confusion,
who devise their hurt. 3. As the enemy has pursued, so shall Gods wrath pursue
him, and chase him, and drive him to perdition: They shall be as the chafe
before the wind. 4. Albeit there were no earthly man to pursue Christ's enemies,
yet avenging angels, or evil spirits shall be let forth upon them and their
families, to trouble them: Let the Angel of the Lord chase them. 5. The Lord
shall put them to such straits, as they shall not know what hand to turn to, what
way to take, and in the way which they take, they shall fall: Let their way be
dark and slippery. 6. When they are fallen in a mischief, the hand of the Lord
shall be stretched out against them still; Let the Angel of the Lord pursue them.
7. Though the godly by behaving themselves innocently, cannot eschew the
persecution of the wicked; yet innoc^nt behavior is a great ease to the
conscience of the godly, a matter of encouragement to them in their addresses
to God, and a great aggredging of the ditty of the enemy, as here twice he
says, Without cause they hid their net. 8. Though the enemies of the godly do
plot secret devices against them, yet not so secret, but God can give warning
of it, and make it an errand for the godly, to pray to him, to disappoint the
plot, as is here imported; They have hid for me their net in a pit. 9. The
wicked know not how to be sure of their prey, when they hunt for the life of
the godly. They prepare the net, and set it; they hide it, and they hide it in
a pit. 10. When the enemies of Gods people do least expect harm, then shall a
mischief surprise them; Destruction shall come upon them unawares. 11. The very
course which the enemy takes against Gods Church and people, shall be the
nearest course to destroy themselves: Let his net that he has hid, catch
himself: Into that very destruction let him fall.

Ver. 9. And my soul shall be joyful in the Lord; it shall rejoice in his
salvation.

10. All my bones shall say, LORD, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the
poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor and the needy from him
that spoileth him?

He brings a reason of his prayer from the comfort which he should have, and
the glory which God should have, by the means. Whence learn, 1. It is a good
reason to strengthen our hope to be heard, when our comfort and Gods glory may
both be promoted, by the granting of our desire, as here we find it. 2. The
destruction of the enemies of the Church, is not a matter of rejoicing in men's
destruction, but of rejoicing in the Lord, and in his wise manner of delivering
of his people; My soul shall be joyful in the Lord, it shall rejoice in his
salvation. 3. In the estimation of the godly, the tongue is too little to
magnify the Lord for his mercies; for their desire is, that all the powers of
the soul, and that all the parts of the body, even the bones, which are least
sensible in their own kind, might praise him; All my bones shall say, etc. 4.
The Lord has ways wonderful, others and more then ever man conceived, whereby
he can deliver his own in their lowest condition from their oppressors, when
they are in the height of their power and pride, Lord, who is like unto thee?
which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, etc. 5. Though
before deliverance come, Faith has cause to say all that sense can say of Gods
praises, after deliverance is come; yet when sensible experience of a hoped
delivery is come, there is a more hearty and a more cheerful manner of
expressing of the Lords praises, then can be before it come; as the promise of
the Prophet, to say, so and so, as is in the Text, after the delivery is come,
does import. 6. It is a sort of (as it were) engaging of God to deliver, when
the heart of the Believer ingageth it self to glorify God after the deliverie;
for here the Prophet makes use of this, promising praise toward this end.

Verse 11. False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I
knew not.

12 They rewarded me evil for good: to the spoiling of my soul.

13 But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackloth: I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.

14. I behaved my self, as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed
down heavily, as one that mourns for his mother.

15. But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together;
yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not;
they did tear me, and ceased not.

16 With hypocritical mockers in feasts: they gnashed upon me with their teeth.

He amplifieth that reason of his petition, taken from his enemies carriage, by
laying before God their falsehood and ingratitude. Whence learn, 1. The godly
are subject, not only to be backbitten, and traduced privily, and slandered
more openly; but also to be charged unjustly before Judges, and pursued
criminally for their life without a cause, and to have false witness led
against them, that they may be condemned under color of Law; this was found in
effect by David, and Christ represented by him. False witnesses did rise up;
They laid to my charge things that I knew not. 2. No bonds of nature or
humanity will bind up the wicked from persecuting the godly, even to death, how
well soever the godly have deserved of them, They rewarded me evil for good, to
the depriving me of my life. 3. True love is best known, as by rejoicing at
another welfare, so by grieving for his grief; When they were sick, my
clothing was sackcloth. 4. Hearty prayer also for any man, is a token of
unfeigned love to a man, specially when prayer and fasting are joined together
for them, I humbled my soul by fasting. 5. When the expressions of grief, by
words or tears in prayer for any, waken up the affection yet more to pray
ardently for them; It is yet a farther token of unfeigned love of them for whom
we pray. My prayer (says he) returned into my bosom; which is as much, as my
expressions in prayer, in sighs, affectionate words and tears, affected my
heart ( Lament. 3.49.51.) with new motions of earnest dealing for them. 6. True
Christians affection to their enemies, is able to affect the soul, as much to
the seeking their welfare, and commiserating their misery, as the natural
affection of a natural man can affect him toward friends and kinsfolk, in
nearest natural relations unto him; for David says, I behaved my self as
though he had been my friend or brother; I bowed down heavily as one that
mourns for his mother.

From the evil meeting which he received of his enemies, ver. 15, 16. Learn, 1.
Many of those that pretend great friendship to the godly in time of prosperity,
may not only turn their back upon them, in time of adversity, but also turn to
be their open enemies, and rejoice in their calamity; But in my adversity,
says he, they rejoiced. 2. The troubles of the godly do draw the wicked into a
more near union amongst themselves, as it were congratulating one another in
their sinful courses, and strengthening one another; They gather themselves
together. 3. Base rascals, who have nothing to commend them, save merely their
hatred of Gods, people, and of their piety, will get respect amongst the enemies
of Christ, and of his people, for that very reason, because they hate the
godly, and will be admitted in the fellowship of ringleading enemies; Yea the
abjects gathered themselves together against me. 4. In the meeting of the
wicked among themselves, Christ and his followers have their name torn and rent
in pieces continually, with calumnies and slanders, which possibly come not to
their ears half of them: They gathered together, and I knew it not: they did
tear me in pieces, and ceased not. 5. Sad ^aunts and scoffs of pretended holy
men, jearing at true piety; is no small part of the persecution of Christ, and
of his followers; for here amongst the rest are hypocritical mockers. 6. When
the wicked without fear do fill and stuff their belly in their feasting in the
time of the Churchs trouble: Their scoffs and their jests, yea and their bloody
expressions of cruelty against the godly, are the most relishing sauce of their
banquets: With hypocritical mockers in their feasts, they gnash upon me with
their teeth.

Ver. 17. Lord, how long will thou look on? rescue my soul from their
destruction, my darling from the Lions.

18 I will give thee thanks in the great Congregation: I will praise thee among
much people.

19 Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let
them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

20 For they speak not peace; but they devise deceitful matters against them
that are quiet in the land.

21. Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye
has seen it.

He repeateth his petition for delivery from his enemies the second time, and
presses the same reason taken from the insolent and cruel disposition of the
enemy. Whence learn, 1. The time of trouble and persecution of the godly may
continue much longer then the goldly did expect, in which case as they must
wait on patiently, till the Lord put to his hand to relieve his Church, and
punish their enemies; so they may ease their heart, in laying their earnest
longing to be delivered, before the Lord, and say, Lord, how long will thou
look on? 2. As it is lawful to lament the Lords seeming long delay to help us,
so we must not complain too soon; for before David utters this, how long, he
is long in trouble, and in danger of his life, by unreasonable and beastly
cruel men, and is altogether destitute of all means of relief, as his prayer
testifies; Rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the Lions.
3. The godly by faith in the deepest danger, may see their delivery in their
sadest and darkest sorrow; yea may behold the light of consolation coming; in
their banishment, may behold their liberty, and see their fellowship with the
Saints; and in the midst of complaints, may promise to themselves reasons of
praise, and the payment of their vows made to God, as here we see in the midst
of this sad condition the Prophet says, I will give thee thanks in the great
congregation: I will praise thee among much people. 4. It augmenteth the grief
of the godly, to see the wicked take advantage of their trouble, and mockers of
Religion to rejoice over their sufferings in a good cause; and they may
heartily deprecate this evil, that it may not at least, last long; Let not
those that are my enemies rejoice over me. 5. The less cause of provocation of
our enemies be given to them by us, the greater is the hope of delivery, and
the readier shall be our help from God, and the less cause shall be to the enemy
to wink with the eye, as witty well pleased scoffers do, when they get their
will; Neither let them wink with the eye, says he, that hate me without a
cause 6. Albeit godly men's quiet carriage in the land where they live, will not
save them from the hostile speeches, and malicious plottings of their
adversaries against them, yet shall their quiet behavior speak to God for
them; and against their enemies, and ma^e a speedy mischief come upon them from
the Lord; for to this purpose he says, They speak not peace, but they devise
deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the land. 7. The enemies of
the Church are a base generation, taking pleasure and sport in the miseries of
the godly, who do not injure them, yea are a vain and insolent generation,
triumphing over the weakness of the innocent, when they are in low condition,
and in the case of suffering, which common humanity, and ordinary generosity
does abhor, They opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our
eye has seen it.

Ver. 22. This thou have seen: (O LORD) keep not silence: O Lord, be not far
from me.

23. Stir up thy self, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God,
and my Lord.

24. Judge me, O LORD my God, according to thy righteousness, and let them not
rejoice over me.

25. Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not
say, We have swallowed him up.

26. Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that rejoice at my
hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonor, that magnify themselves
against me.

He renews his petition for himself and against his enemies the third time.
Whence learn, 1. Such as feed their eyes upon the miseries of others, and
specially on the miseries of the godly, the Lord shall not wink at their
wickedness, but make it appear, that he has marked their cruelty, that he may
punish it exemplarily; for after the enemies crying out, our eyes have seen,
the Prophet adds, This thou have seen, O Lord, be not silent. 2. The hardest
condition that can befall a believer, is a tolerable case and condition, if God
draw near to his soul: for all the remedy that David craveth, till the outgate
come, is this, O Lord, be not far from me. 3. Though the Lord for a time suffer
his own to lie under foot oppressed, yet for his justice sake, and for his
covenants sake, he will justly determine the controversy, and clear his own
servants, He will stir up himself to do judgment* and decide their cause. 4.
In the decision of the controversy between the godly and their enemies, the
cause of the godly shall get no wrong, but be declared to be righteous, and the
enemies shall have no matter to rejoice in. He shall judge the godly according
to their righteousness, and shall not suffer the wicked to rejoice over them. 5.
When the enemies of the Church have laid their last reckoning of the issue of
their bloody course against the godly, they shall see the matter to go
otherways then they would, or expected on both hands. They shall not have cause
to say, So would we have it, or we have swallowed them up. They are too too
precious a morsel for them to devour. 6. Shame and confusion, dishonor and
disgrace on all hands shall be upon one, and upon all Christ's enemies, who seek
the detriment of his cause, and to have gain to themselves, by opposing of him,
and his cause in his peoples hand; for this prayer against them shall still
speak effectually, Let them he ashamed and brought to confusion together, and
let them be clothed with shame and dishonor, etc.

Ver. 27. Let them shout for joy, and be glad that favor my righteous cause;
yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which has pleasure
in the prosperity of his servants.

28. And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness, and of thy praise all the
day long.

As David prays for himself, so he prays for all the favorers of his
righteous cause, as the type of Christ, whose spirit spoke by him, for the
edification of the Church in all times coming. Whence learn, 1. It is one mark
of godliness amongst many other, to befrind the cause of Christ, and to further
it in the person of his Saints suffering for righteousness, with their best
affection; for here they are described by being the favorers of their
righteous cause. 2. In the persecution of the godly for the cause of Gods truth
and true Religion, all the godly are concerned: and as they partake of the
sufferings with others under Christ the head; so shall they partake of the joy
of the victory, and outgate which shall be exceeding joyful at last; Let them
shout for joy, and be glad (says the type of Christ) that do favor my
righteous cause. 3. The troubles of the godly are not so many, but room is left
for sometimes prosperity, for God loves the prosperity of his servants, to
wit, as it may conduce to his purpose, and their good. 4. When any of the godly
are delivered from their persecutors, all the rest of the godly are bound as
they understand of it, to set forth the power of God, and his love and bounty
manifested and forth coming to his people: Let them say, Let the Lord be
magnified, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants. 5. Whatsoever
opposition the enemies of Christ, and of the godly shall make, Christ shall
keep up the open profession of true Doctrine, which manifests the
righteousness of God; leading men to eternal life, and bringing glory to God;
for this is the undertaking of the type and of Christ represented by him, after
the hottest contest between him and the wicked enemies. My tongue shall speak
of thy righteousness, and of thy praise all the day long.

PSALM. XXXVI. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, the servant of the LORD.
This Psalm has three parts. In the first David sets down the perverseness of
the wicked in their sinful course and devices against the godly and himself,
ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. In the second, he comforts himself, and does settle his faith
on the praises and properties of God, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. In the third he
prays in the behalf of Gods children, and for himself, to be delivered from
the wicked, ver 10, 11, 12.

FRom the inscription, Learn, That to be a servant of the Lord is an honor,
and a privilege above all earthly privileges; and by giving a sweet testimony
to the conscience, it does season every condition of life, more then any
earthly advantage can do.

Ver. 1. THe transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is
no fear of God before his eyes.

2. For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to
be hateful.

3. The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he has left off to be
wise, and to do good.

4. He devises mischief upon his bed, he sets himself in a way that is not
good: he abhors not evil*

FRom his observation of the carriage of the wicked; Learn, 1. Albeit all the
world cannot be discerned to be graceless and unconverted, yet the lewd life of
some may speak their being in the state of corrupt nature unconverted, to the
conscience of a discerning man; For the transgression of the wicked says in my
heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. 2. It is not the
imperfection or short coming in the fear of God, but the being destitute of it
altogether, that proves a wicked man: There is no fear of God before his eyes.
3. As a man that fears God is watchful over his own ways, and censorious of
himself; so the man that fears not God is secure and well pleased with his
own doings, He flattereth himself in his own eyes. 4. As the man that fears
God labors to inform his conscience well, that he may not commit iniquity;
so the man that fears not God, does gull and deceive his own conscience, till
he have gotten the iniquity accomplished, and it be now made open in its own
colors, He flattereth himself in his own eyes, till his iniquity worthy to be
hated be found, or his iniquity be found to be hateful. 5. As the man that
fears God will discern the sin in himself, whereof he is in danger, before
any man perceive it; so the man that fears not God, will not see his own sin,
no nor when any that looks upon his way may see it, He flattereth himself in
his own eyes, till his iniquity be found to be hated. 6. As the man that
fears God makes conscience of his speeches, and will be loath to cover sin
with vain pretenses and excuses, but rather will confess it. So the man that
fears not God, will not stand, whatever pretense he uses for doing of
iniquity, nor what excuse he makes for the iniquity, when it is done, for
deceiving both others and himself. The words of his mouth are iniquity and
deceit. 7. As the man that fears God, by all means striveth that he may grow
wiser and holier, so the man that fears not God, will misregard, and cast off
the means of wisdom and holiness; He has left off to be wise, and to do good;
whatsoever he seemed to have before, he goes back even from that more and
more. 8. As the man that fears God, communeth with his heart upon his bed,
that he may not sin, no not in his heart: So the man that fears not God,
devises how he may plot and perform sin willingly, He devises mischief on his
bed. 9. As the man that fears God does abhor that which is evil, and
labors to be sure that the way he is upon is good: so the man that fears
not God, takes no farther notice of what he does, then what is most for his
purpose; and neither abhors what he would be at, because it is evil, nor
affects it, because it is good* but having digested his purpose, by
meditation and resolution, he goes on obstinately, He sets himself in a way
that is not good; he abhors not evil, and such were David's enemies, and such
will be the enemies of Christ and his people.

Ver. 5. Thy mercy (O LORD) is in the Heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches
unto the clouds.

6. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains: thy judgments are a great
deep; O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.

7. How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! therefore the children of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatnes of thy house: and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.

9. For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.

The second part of the Psalm, wherein David comfort himself in God, and
setleth his faith on the praiseworthy properties of God. Whence learn, 1. The
turning of the believers eye off the wickedness of their adversaries, and
looking to Gods goodness, and wise dispensation, will comfort his heart against
all that the enemy can do, and set him on work toward godliness, so much the
more as he perceives atheism in them; for when David had pointed out his
enemy, he falls to the praising of God, saying Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the
Heavens. 2. Albeit the carriage of the wicked toward God, and the godly, does
tend to obscure Gods glory, in the point of justice toward the one, and point
of mercy toward the other; yet the works of creation, and the constant
government thereof, shall bear witness of the constancy of Gods mercy and
faithfulness, and righteousness, and judgment, as here is shown. 3. Though
the effects of Gods mercy should not appear to the believer on earth, yet faith
will see them in their fountain and cause, Thy mercy O Lord (says the
believer) is in heaven. 4. Let Gods works and his word be compared together,
and the truth of his promises and threatenings shall be so traced, and seem to
be true, as shall satisfy us, and let us see so far till our eye can follow no
farther, Thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds. 5. Whatsoever carnal reason
may judge of Gods dispensations toward the godly, and the wicked: yet his
holiness and justice is firm and unchangeable, Thy righteousness is like the
great mountains. 6. Albeit we cannot see through matters, nor reconcile cross
cogitations, sometimes offered from the grounds of faith on the one hand, and
from the effects of providence offered by sense on the other hand, yet must we
remember that God is wiser then we, and his deep draughts are past finding out
by us, Thy judgments are a great deep. 7. This one consideration of Gods
course of kindness to his own creatures, making his Sun to shine, and his rain
to fall on his enemies, as on his friends, may quiet our mind, concerning Gods
sparing for a time the wicked, and liberal dealing with them; O Lord, thou
preservest man and beast. There is a course of common preservation, and
kindness, running toward all. 8. Over and above common kindness there is a more
entire, special, and precious love and kindness toward believers in God, which
is inexpressible a^^ ^^^teth comparison, How excellent, or precious is thy
loving kindness, O God! says David, speaking of this. 9. The belief (...) Gods
readiness to let forth this love, may and should, and does animate men to draw
near unto him, albeit they have as yet no experience of the fruits of it,
Therefore the children of men that put trust under the shadow of thy wings. 10.
The Lord without exception of any, to whom he sends the Gospel, and without
exception of any within the visible Church, does offer to be reconciled through
Christ Jesus, to every man who shall fly into the propitiatory and mercy-seat
erected in Jesus Christ; who is God incarnate, according as he was holden forth
in the figure of the golden Ark of the Covenant, and stretched forth wings of
the Cherubims, as is here said, Therefore the children of men put their trust
under the shadow of thy wings. 11. Such as do not give the lie to God, when
they find not at first what they hoped for, but do indeed believe in his word,
and wait on till he make his word good to them; such as do not tempt or take
essay of God, as if they would see what believing may do, and then do quit
their gripes if their expectation be not answered; but do indeed trust God upon
his word, and do resolve to die with the gripe in their hand, of his freely
offered Covenant of grace in Christ, and of his promises made to them that fly
to him for refuge, shall be sure to be in more respect with God, then common
subjects. They shall be Domestics of his house, of the household of faith, to
whom God shall keep a table furnished for spiritual life unto them; he shall
make them now and then, when it is meet time for the hungry to feed abundantly
and to be satisfied, They that put their trust under the shadow of thy wings,
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house. 12. In the use of
the means and holy ordinances of God given to his Church, God shall make the
man, that indeed gives him credit upon the word of his grace, sensibly feel
the joy of the holy Spirit, to be unspeakable and full of glory, and that there
are greater contentments to be found for a man's soul* in God reconciled through
Christ, then the world can yield beside; for, Thou shall make them drink of the
rivers of thy pleasures* 13. Whatsoever can be found in the creature, even when
God blesses the use thereof to his own children* is but a drop from the Ocean,
is but a little water out of the well, in comparison of what a believer will
see and feel to be in God reconciled through Christ, For, with thee is the
fountain of life. 14. No light* save the light of Gods revealed word in holy
Scriptures for the mirror, no light but the light of Gods Spirit illuminating
the soul looking upon the mirror, can make a man understand, or believe, or
sensibly discern the wisdom, comfort, and felicity, which is held forth to his
Church in his ordinances, and felt in himself by experience: In thy light
(says he) shall we see light.

Ver. 10. O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know thee, and thy
righteousness to the upright in heart.

11 Let no^ the foot of pride come against me and let not the hand of the
wicked remove me.

12 There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not be
able to rise.

The last part of the Psalm, wherein he prays for all believers, himself being
included, and then for himself in particular. Whence learn, 1. The true mark of
a godly man stands in the conjunction of faith in God with sincere study of
obedience to him, for, He is the man that knows God, and is upright in heart.
2. Albeit what the believer has found in God by experience, he may expect it
shall be continued to him, both for his entertainment by God* and defense and
deliverance in his righteous cause from his enemies; yet must he follow his
confidence with prayer, O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know
thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. 3. As we have no right to
any benefit, but in so far as we are of the number of upright-hearted
believers, so should we seek every benefit we would have, as being of this
number, and as seeking that others may be sharers with us, as David does
before. 1. It is the Lord only who can divert proud persecuters, that they hurt
not his children, and it is the Lord only who can keep his children in the
course of faith and obedience, when the wicked employ their power against them:
Therefore does David pray, Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let
not the hand of the wicked remove me. 5. The ruin of the enemies of the godly
is as certain as if it were already past; yea faith may look upon it through
the prospect of the word of God, as if it were to be seen and pointed out to
others to behold with their eyes, There are the workers of iniquity fallen. 6.
The fall of the wicked is not like the fall of the godly, for though the godly
fall sundry times, yet they recover their feet again, but a fall is prepared for
the wicked, after which they shall not recover themselves, They are cast down,
and shall not be able to rise.

PSALM. XXXVII
This Psalm tends to guard the godly against the ordinary tentation unto
envy, emulation, fretting, and discouragement in the way of godliness, arising
from the temporal prosperity of the wicked, and that by eight directions or
counsels from the Lord, each of them confirmed by reasons: most of which are
comparisons of the blessed estate of the godly at the worst, with the estate of
the wicked at their best. The first direction or counsel, ver. 1, 2 the second,
ver. 3 the third, ver. 4 the fourth, ver. 5 6 the fifth ver. 7 the sixth, ver.
8 9 10 11 12, to ver 26. the seventh; ver 27 to ver 33 The eighth direction,
ver 34 to the end.

Ver. 1 FRet not thy self because of evil doers; neither be thou envious
against the workers of iniquity

2 For they shall soon be cut down like the grass: and wither as the green herb*

THe first direction is to beware of fretting at, or envying of the prosperity
of the wicked, because their prosperity is but temporal. Whence learn, 1.
Wicked men may be in a more prosperous condition in the world, then the godly;
and oftentimes, yea and for the most part are; for this is presupposed here as
an ordinary tentation in all ages and places. 2. Albeit carnal reason and
suggestions of Satan and corrupt nature, do from the prosperity of the wicked,
and the ordinary troubles of the godly, furnish tentations unto the godly, to
be malcontents with Gods dispensation, yet should the godly take heed that
they be not overcome by, or yield in any sort to this tentation, Fret not thy
self because of evil doers. 3. As tentation to male-contentment makes
assaults on the one hand, to render the godly weary of well doing, so tentation
to emulation of the wickeds course, and following of their way, assaulteth on
the other hand, but should no way get place, Neither be thou envious against
the workers of iniquity. 4. If it were well considered, that all the prosperity
of the wicked is but in things concerning the outward man's back and belly, and
that this prosperity is but temporal, and oft-times of shorter continuance then
a man's own brittle life, there should be no ground of envy found therein; for,
They shall soon be cut down like grass, and wither like the green herb.

Ver. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and
verily thou shall be fed. From the second point of Gods counsel and direction;
Learn, 1. Holding fast the Covenant of Grace made with God, through Christ, and
studying to bring out the fruits of faith, in obedience to Gods command, is a
sovereign remedy against male-contentment with a man's own condition, and
against envying of the wicked, Trust in the Lord, and do good. 2. Continuance
in the faith, and obedience of God, whatsoever tentation we meet with, is the
surest way to have Gods blessing in this life, and to have heaven, (represented
by Canaan) after this life, Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell
in the Land. 3. The upright believer in God is the only man that gets the right
use of the creature, and in whose cup the true juice of Gods benefits being
pressed out is poured, whose bread is dipped in oil, and in whom spiritual life
is constantly entertained, Verily thou, that art such a man, shall be fed.

Ver. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires
of thine heart. From the third direction to ward off the tentation; Learn, 1.
The godly man has warrant to make God the object of his delight, who being
reconciled to the believer through the Mediator, is become the believers own,
in whom he may continually rejoice; but the object of the ungodly prosperous
man's delight, is but some creature or temporal trifle; for to the believer it
is said, Delight thy self in the Lord. 2. Though the believer be rich in his
rights, yet he is slow to make use* thereof, and has need to be stirred up to
take possession, Delight thy self. 3. If the believer shall make use of his
Covenant-right, and interest in God, and set his affections upon him, he shall
find such solid contentment and satisfaction in God, as he shall not envy the
condition of the most prosperous wicked man in the world; for it is said,
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give thee the desire of thy heart.
And certainly the forgetting or not harkening to this direction, is the cause
of our being male-contented with our lot, and of our envying of the wicked.

Ver. 5 Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it
to pass.

6. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as
the noon day.

From the fourth direction; Learn, 1. When we bear the burden of our own
affairs our selves, and are chastised with anxiety and want of success, and
with envying the ungodly who prosper better then we do; the best remedy is
first to do our duty, as we are enabled in the use of the means, then cast the
care of the success over on God, as the plowman does when he has harrowed his
land, and let the burden of it rest on God, and let us not take it off him
again, but put our mind to rest, resolved to take the harvest in good part, as
he shall send it; Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him. 2. The man
who follows this direction, shall come to speed best in his affairs; because
God shall do that, wherewith the man shall have reason to be satisfied; for that
which he would have done, or what is better, shall be effected, Commit thy cause
unto the Lord, and he shall bring it to pass. 3. It is possible that the godly
following this counsel, may be misreported of, and both lose his labor and
estimation among men, yet it shall not be long so; for, God shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light. 4. Albeit the godly and his cause may be obscured
by a shorter or longer winter-night of trouble, as shall please God to appoint,
yet shall he and his cause and integrity be found absolved by God in due time,
He shall bring forth thy judgment or decree of absolution as the noon day.

Ver. 7. Rest on the LORD, and wait patiently for him: fret not thy self
because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings
wicked devices to pass. From the fifth direction; Learn, 1. The victory over
this tentation to envy the wicked, is not gotten at first, nor by carnal
reason, but by faith in God, and patient waiting on him, Rest on the Lord, and
wait patiently for him. 2. As the tentation unto fretting is very pressing,
when we see the wicked get so much of their will, so much of their purpose
brought to pass: so we have need to be pressed again and again to resist this
tentation; Therefore is it said again, Fret not thy self because of him who
prospers in his way, or because of the man that brings wicked devices to
pass.

Ver. 8. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thy self in any wise to
do evil. The sixth direction is to curb this tentation, in case it has already
defiled and fired a man's spirit, lest it break out, and make the believer put
forth his hand to iniquity. Whence learn, 1. The insolency of the Wicked is
such, and their provocation of the godly oft-times so great, that their spirits
are much stirred and kindled with indignation, and thoughts of private revenge;
yet must not this passion prevail with the godly, but should be striven
against: Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: vengeance is the Lords, he will
repay. 2. The godly should eschew the motions of fretting, anger or envy
against the wicked; and if anger enter, he must cease from it; if it urge it
self on him with pretenses of reason or violent impulsion, he must forsake it;
but by any means he must keep this tentation within doors, that it drive him
not to break forth to a completed sin in action and doing of wrong, Fret no^
thy self in any wise to do evil.

Verse 9 For evil doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the LORD,
they shall inherit the earth. The Prophet presses this direction by sundry
reasons; and in special, by six comparisons of the Lords way and purpose about
the wicked and the godly, how prosperous soever the wicked may be for a time,
and howsoever the godly may be afflicted and exercised for a time. The first
comparison is in this verse. Whence learn, 1. If any who pretend to be godly,
shall by the foresaid tentation forsake the way of godliness, and follow the way
of the wicked, they shall have the reward of the wicked for the changing of
their way, For evil doers shall be cut off. 2. It is not the present condition
whereinto men are, which is to be looked unto, but what shall become of them at
length; for all the prosperity of the wicked is blasted with this one sentence
of the supreme Judge, Evil doors shall be cut off. 3. Albeit the godly be kept in
some hardships for a time, as young heirs in their minority; yet shall their
inheritance in heaven (represented by the land of Canaan) be reserved unto
them; and in the mean time by their heirship in Christ, they have solid right
to what portion in this world God does allow them, they have the use thereof
with a good conscience, and remain on the earth as long as God has service for
them, however the wicked would thrust them out of the world as unworthy of it:
and if they be banished out of one country, they know, the earth is the Lords,
and the fullness of it, and they live more contentedly in that condition, then
the wicked do live in their nest; for, They that wait on the Lord shall inherit
the earth.

Ver. 10. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be: yea thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.

11. But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace.

From the second comparison of the wicked and the godly; learn, 1. We must not
pass sentence suddenly, to absolve their way who are prosperous, or to condemn
their way who are crossed; but we should wait upon Gods word, til God from
heaven manifest his judgment about both, which shall not long be delayed in
regard of the wicked; for, Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be, yea
thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. 2. Submission
unto Gods dispensation allayeth all troubles, and enlarges the good of every
benefit; and a good construction of Gods dealing with us, brings much peace
and quietness of mind with it, and enricheth our portion, The meek shall inherit
the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.

Ver. 12. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his
teeth.

13. The Lord shall laugh at him; for he sees that his day is coming.

14. The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down
the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.

15. Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be
broken.

The third comparison of the wicked and godly loses a doubt, when the godly
cannot get living in their mean condition, in presence of the wicked, but their
life is also in peril by their plotting, for effectuating the destruction of
the godly. Whence learn, 1. The godly have to do, not only to wrestle against
the thriving condition of the wicked, but also with their deadly hatred: The
wicked plot against the righteous, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. 2 The
godly must make the Lord to be party against the wicked, and must oppose his
justice, power and wisdom to the enmity of the wicked; for albeit the godly be
forced to mourn at their threa^ning, yet their plotting and prattling against
the godly, as if they could do any thing of themselves; is ridiculous, The Lord
shall laugh at them. 3. If the godly did consider of the wicked, as the word of
the Lord speaks of them; they might look upon their boasts, as on the brags
of a man upon the scaffold, ready to be executed: For, God sees his day is
coming. 4. The godly must resolve to bear the open violence also of the wicked,
and to be made as butts for their arrows, and sheaths for their swords, which
is more then their words: For, The wicked have drawn out their sword, and bent
their bow. 5. Before deliverance come unto the godly, they shall find
themselves in a weak condition, for any thing they can do for themselves; for
here they are poor and needy; and the wicked thinks to cast them down. 6. Those
are the truly godly, and the objects of the wickeds malice, who for their
inward condition depend on God in the sense of their poverty and neediness, and
withal are of an upright conversation, as they are here described. 7. When the
wicked are most near to do a mischief to the Lords people, then is a mischief
most near unto them; Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bow
shall be broken.

Ver. 16. A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of many
wicked.

17. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the
righteous.

The fourth comparison of the godly and wicked, loses another doubt about the
wealth and power of the wicked. Whence learn, 1. The odds between men's living
and means of livelihood stands not in more or less abundance of worldly goods,
but in Gods blessing, which because it accompanies the provision of the godly,
have they less or have they more; therefore, A little that one righteous man
has, is better then the riches of many wicked. 2. The little something of the
godlies provision is made to subsist for the poor man's standing, while the
power and wealth of the wicked comes to nothing; For the arms of the wicked
shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the righteous.

Ver. 18. The LORD knows the days of the upright; and their inheritance shall
be for ever.

19. They shall not be ashamed in the evil time; and in the days of famine they
shall be satisfied.

20 But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat
of Lambs: they shall consume into smoke, they shall consume away.

From the fifth comparison of the godly and wicked; Learn 1. The godly have
two advantages above the wicked, one in this life, another in the life to come.
For the first, all the vicissitudes of dangers and daily necessities of the
godly are taken notice of in a special way by God, choosing and weighing to
them exercises for their condition, moderating them in their measure and time,
seasoning them with mixture of consolation, turning them to their best;
furnishing all necessaries to bear out their exercises, and sending particular
deliverances one after another: For the Lord knows the days of the upright.
As for the next life, he has reserved for them an inheritance of constant
blessedness, never to be taken from them: Their inheritance shall be for ever.
2. Albeit the Lord will not exempt the godly from sharing in common calamities
with the wicked, yet shall they have the evidences of Gods favor to them in
the time of trouble, and shall not be disappointed of the kindness promised by
God, and expected by them: They shall not be ashamed in the evil time. 3.
Whatsoever scant or inlack be of creature-comfort, the godly shall be supplied
to their reasonable satisfaction: In the days of famine they shall be
satisfied. 4. When the wicked are most liberally dealt with, it is but a
feeding of them like beasts to the slaughter, all their glory shall vanish, and
they themselves shall be destroyed in Gods wrath: But the wicked shall perish,
the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of Lambs, they shall consume into
smoke, they shall consume away.

Verse 21. The wicked brroweth, and pays not again: but the righteous shows
mercy, and gives.

22. But such as be blessed of him, shall inherit the earth, and they that be
cursed of him, shall be cut off.

From the sixth comparison, Learn, 1. In the midst of the wicked man's wealth,
he is often times wanting, as if he were a poor man; if he have much wealth, he
has much to do with it, and many times is unable to defray his charges without
borrowing; and when he has borrowed, he is either unable or unwilling to pay
again, and so is but a miserable wretch with all he has; or he is a profuse
prodigal and deceiver of his creditors: The wicked borrows, and pays not
again. 2. On the contrary, the righteous man by his godly behavior, mannageth
the little which God gives him so well, as he needs not to borrow; he
wants not for any good work which God calls him unto, and is able to supply
others necessities: The righteous shows mercy, and gives. 3. The blessing of
God on the godly, makes the odds betwixt them and the wicked, for it is to
him as good as the inheritance of the whole earth; but Gods curse rooteth the
wicked man out of the earth; for Such (says he) as be blessed of him, shall
inherit the earth; and they that be cursed, shall be cut off.

Ver. 23. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delights in
his way.

24 Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast dow; for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand.

25 I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.

26 He is ever merciful, and lends; and his seed is blessed.

He closes the confirmation of the sixth direction with enumerating sundry
privileges of the godly, of some whereof, he made observation in his own time.
Whence learn, 1. The privileges of the godly are so great, as should content
him, albeit his outward prosperity and wealth be not such as he conceives the
wicked to have; for God teaches the godly how to behave himself in his
particular actions, prudently and holily: The steps of a good man are ordered
of the Lord, he approves the course the godly man keeps; He delights in his
way. Though the godly man through infirmity fall into a sin, or by his sin
draw on a calamity on himself, yet the Lord recovereth him again; Though he
fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; and that he perish not when he
falls, the Lord shall preserve him by holding a grip of him; The Lord
upholdeth him with his hand. 2. Albeit the Lord will not exempt the godly from
poverty, nor yet their seed; albeit we presuppose the children be godly also,
if he think it good to exercise them so; yet the Lord has made the examples of
such misery so rare, as a man of good years could observe few or none of them
beggars; specially in the Prophets time, when God by external benefits, was
training his people to the hope of spiritual things, as David here testifies.
3. It is a gift of God to use whatsoever a man receives of God, so as others
be helped thereby; The godly is ever merciful and lends. 4. The readiest way
to bring a blessing to a man's house and posterity, is to be godly himself; for,
The godly man's seed is blessed.

Ver. 27. Depart from evil, and do good; and dwell for evermore.

28. For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his Saints, they are
preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.

29. The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.

From the seventh direction, and the reasons thereof teaching how to guard
against fretting at, and envying of the prosperity of the wicked; Learn, 1. To
meet an injury with another injury, or to recompense evil for evil, or to
forbear to do good where it is not deserved, is not the way to be blessed: But
by the contrary the way of possessing settled felicity, is to depart from evil;
and to do good, so shall a man dwell for ever. 2. The love that the Lord
bears to righteousness, is the cause why it cannot but be well with the
righteous: For, The Lord loves judgment. 3. The Lord may well exercise his
children with trouble, yet he will not withdraw himself from them in trouble,
but will stay with them, and bear them company, and save them to the uttermost;
He forsakes not his Saints, they are preserved for ever. 4. As wickedness is
the ready way to root out a man and his family from off the earth; so is
righteousness the way to establish a man's family, and to bring himself to a
solid habitation with God for ever; For, The seed of the wicked shall be cut
off. The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever; that is,
in Heaven signified by that land.

Ver. 30. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks
of judgment.

31. The Law of his God is in his heart; none of his steps shall slide.

Because so much is spoken of the righteous man, he describes him by three
properties; one in his words, another in his affections, a third in his
deliberate actions, and course of his ways and life. Whence learn, 1. The
righteous man studieth in his speeches to glorify God, and edify those he
speaks to, and in all things he is truths friend; The mouth of the righteous
speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment. 2. For his affections,
he loves that which is commanded of God, and hat^th that which is forbidden
him, because God has taken him in Covenant with himself to be his man; The Law
of God is in his heart. 3. For his course of life, whatsoever tentation he does
meet with, to divert him from the faith and obedience of God, he will not
choose another way, then the Law of his God; None of his steps shall slide.

Ver. 32. The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him.

33. The LORD will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is
judged.

For clearing of the seventh direction, he answers an objection from the
persecution which the righteous are subject unto from the wicked; Whence learn,
1. Temporal blessings or benefits are not so promised to the godly, as that
they shall be free from troubles, crosses and persecutions. For the Lord for
his own glory, for edification of his Church, and for conviction of his
enemies, and for perfecting his children in holiness, uses to suffer the
wicked to hunt and persecute them, even to death; The wicked watches the
righteous, and seeks to slay him. 2. The wicked may apprehend the righteous
man's person, lay false accusations to his charge, and bring him before Judges,
and not get his will of him, to drive him from a righteous cause: For, The Lord
will not leave him in his hand. 3. Albeit the righteous man by persecutions may
be judged, and condemned to death unjustly, yet may he be more then a
conqueror through God that loves him, and cares for him; For God will not
condemn him when he is judged. And that may suffice him against whatsoever
flesh can do to him.

Ver. 34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to
inherit the land; when the wicked are cut off, thou shall see it.

35. I have seen the wicked in great power: and spreading himself like a green
bay tree.

36 Yet he passed away, and lo, he was not; yea, I sought him, but he could not
be found.

The eighth direction, is to wait on God, and to keep his way; serving with the
former direction, to guard the godly man's heart against all tentations of
fretting, envy, anger and emulation, because of the wicked man's seeming more
prosperous condition in the world then his own, and this direction is confirmed
with five reasons. Whence learn, 1. He that believes on God must not make
haste, nor judge rashly of matters as they seem for the present, but must
attend till God make his word good; Wait on the Lord. 2. True patient hope and
waiting on God, must be joined with the study of obedience to Gods directions;
Wait on the Lord, and keep his way. 3. Though the godly be kept under for a
while and humbled, yet God shall lift them up to a satisfactory estate: He
shall exalt thee to inherit the land. This promise is the first reason to move
us to wait on the Lord. 4. In every age some of the wicked shall be made
spectacles of Gods threatened judgment, before the eyes of the godly, to give
assurance of his judgment; that he shall overthrow all the rest in due time,
and avenge on them all the wrongs done by them unto the godly: When the wicked
are cut off, thou shall see it. And this is the second argument to confirm the
exhortation. 5. How the wicked have seemed very glorious in the world for a
while, and shortly both they and their glory did vanish, every man in his own
time should make their own remarkes and observations, as the Prophet shows
here, that he had his observations in his time, verse. 35, 36. And this is the
third reason to confirm the direction taken from experience concerning the
wicked.

Ver. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man
is peace.

38. But the transgressors shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked
shall be cut off.

The fourth reason of the direction, is from the happy close of the course of
the godly, and the certain perdition of the wicked; Whence learn, 1. The Lord
gives so many remarkable instances of the comfortable departure of the godly
out of this life, as may give assurance of the dying of all the upright in Gods
favor: Mark the upright man, for the end of that man is peace. 2. Whether men
be witnesses or not of the departure of the wicked, one and all of them die in
a desperate condition; they are deprived of heaven and earth, and perish soul
and body at the expiring of their breath: Transgressors shall be destroyed
together; the end of the wicked shall be cut off.

Ver. 39. But the salvation of the righteous is of the LORD; he is their
strength in the time of trouble.

40. And the LORD shall help them and deliver them; he shall deliver them from
the wicked, and save them because they trust in him.

The last reason to move men to wait on God, is from his care of the godly.
Whence learn, 1. How hard soever the condition of the godly be, the Lord has
ways of his own to preserve and save them; yea the Lord is resolved, and has
passed his word that he will save them: The salvation of the righteous is of
the Lord. 2. So long as God is pleased to let righteous men's trouble continue,
he will now and then comfort them, and will enable them to their trouble, when
comfort is suspended: He is their strength in time of trouble. 3. When the
godly in their trouble feel their own wants and weakness, he will furnish what
in them is lacking, till the delivery come; The Lord shall help them, and
deliver them. 4. Albeit many be the troubles of the godly, especially from
their wicked persecuters; yet by faith in God they shall keep their conscience
clean: Their cause they maintain whole, and shall have their souls safe, do
what their persecuters can; He shall deliver them from the wicked, and save
them because they trust in him.

PSALM. XXXVIII. A Psalm of David, to bring in remembrance.
In this Psalm David in trouble both of soul and body, as an example of the
hardest exercises that Christ's followers can fall into; First, prays for the
mitigation of his trouble, and removal of wrath, verse. 1. And secondly, lays
out this sense of the trouble which he felt immediately from God, verse. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thirdly, having put up his confused desires to God, for prayers,
in the sense of his inability to express himself, verse. 9, 10. He lays out his
sense of the grief and troubles which he felt from men, and endured with great
patience, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. Fourthly, he sets down the wrestling he had in
prayer to God, because of his persecution by his adversaries, verse. 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20. And closes the Psalm, not having gotten comfort for the time,
verse. 21, 22.

FRom the Inscription; learn, that exercises of conscience, the more heavy they
have been, the more should they be remembered, and the passages thereof more
carefully marked; when the sense thereof is most fresh, lest they pass without
the fruit which may be had of them after delivery: for thus much are we taught
by the Inscription of this Psalm, wherein it is entitled: A Psalm of David,
to bring to remembrance.

Ver. 1. O LORD, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure: FRom his prayer for mitigation of trouble and removal of wrath;
learn, 1. It is consistent with Gods Fatherly love, and our Sonship, to taste
of Fatherly wrath against our sins, as this place proves. 2. Albeit it is
not lawful for us to follow our natural desires in prayer, or to seek to be
free of chastisement; yet may we seek mitigation of trouble, and tempering of
our cup, so as we may digest it, and we may pray for the removal of Fatherly
wrath also; Rebuke me not in thy wrath, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

Ver. 2. For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thine hand presses me sore.

3. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is
there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

4. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head; as an heavy burden, they are
too heavy for me.

5. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness.

6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the day long.

7. For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease: and there is no
soundness in my flesh.

8 I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietnesse of
my heart.

He gives the reason of his prayer from his pitiful case both in soul and
body. Whence learn, 1. When it pleases the Lord to make his children sensible
of their sins, and of his dreadful justice; he can make the tokens of his
displeasure against sin piercing sharp, and pressing heavy: Thy arrows stick
fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. 2. Although the Lord should set us
as a mark to shoot at, and lay the heaviest load of judgments on us for our
sins; yet we must not seek the ease thereof, nor can we have ease from them,
save by coming to God himself, to bemoan our misery, as this example teaches
us. 3. As the sense of trouble on our body, or any way else will waken the
conscience of sin; so the conscience of sin, and feeling of wrath due for
our sin, will make no small alteration on our very bodies: There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, nor rest in my bones because of
my sin. One sin will waken the memory of more sins, till they present
themselves as an innumerable army; My iniquities are gone over my head. 5. How
light soever sin may seem when it is committed, it will be found insupportably
heavy, when God pursues for it: As an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me.
6. When the Lord does smite the conscience for sin, the rod will not fail to
make a wound, which shall have need of the cure of the Physician, according to
the bruise made by his hand, or deep peircing of his arrows; for after arrows
and pressing hand, he mentions wounds more then one. 7. When a wounded spirit
is not timeously by a right cure bound up and healed, the wounds do grow the
longer the worse; the longer, the more guiltiness, filthiness and perplexity
of spirit does grow: My wounds do stink and are corrupt. 8. As through our
inconsideration of our duty, and danger of sinning we fall actually in sin, and
do draw upon our selves wrath: So by our inconsideration of the right remedy,
we augment that measure of both: My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my
foolishness. 9. So long as the conscience of sin and sense of wrath kept on
thereby do last, the man's wit and his courage, and his countenance and his joy
are smitten, both before God and men: I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I
go mourning all the day long. 10. To add to the pace, and to make the sense of
sin more bitter, the Lord can lay his hand on the body, and make the
loathsomness of the sickness resemble the loathsomness of the sin which drew it
on, and to speak unto the conscience in its own language, the cause why it is
sent unto him: For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease; and there is
no soundness in my flesh. 11. A wounded spirit will dash and beat down the
stoutest heart it can meet with, I am feeble and sore broken. 12. If the Lord
pursue a man's conscience for sin, and intimate his displeasure against him, and
continue this exercise for any time; it will pass the man's power to hide or
smother his grief, or hold in the expressions thereof: I have roared b^ reason
of the disquietness of my heart.

Ver. 9. Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from
thee.

10. My heart pants, my strength fails me; as for the light of mine eyes,
it also is gone from me.

In the third place, that he may bring forth the trouble which he suffered from
men, and his patience toward them, he presents his heart to God, as it was
full of confused desires, in stead of explicit prayers, being now unable to
express himself more largely* Whence learn, 1. As sin causes wrath, and wrath
sore (...) and sorrow; so these evils looked upon, should waken desires to have
them removed, and send us to seek the true remedy (...) in God, as here does
the Psalmist. 2. As desires and (...) if they be presented to God, have their
own speech, which we cannot express in time of our confusions; so should we
(...) of them, not as of vanishing expressions of nature, but as prayers
stirred up by God, and standing before him til they receive their answer; Lord,
all my desire is before thee. 3. It is not wrestling with trouble within our
selves, nor venting our grief as natural men, which can give us ease, but
pouring out one heart before the Lord which must do it: All my desire is before
thee. 4. The strength of faith in the godly is not so great, as to swallow up
all infirmities; but so great as to wrestle with them, and confess them to God,
who uses to supply his own with his strength and wise direction, when their
own strength is evacuate, and the man is before God humbled: For here even
David's heart pants and his strength fails him, and the light of his eyes is
gone from him; not so much in regard of the bodies decay, as in his spiritual
condition, expressed in bodily terms; and thus much for the troubles, which he
felt immediately from Gods hand.

Ver. 11. My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore: and my kinsmen
stand afar off.

12 They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me: and they that seek my
hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long.

13 But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that opens not
his mouth.

14 Thus I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.

From the troubles which he felt from men; Learn, 1. A wounded spirit is a
disease which the natural man has no skill of, nor will to meddle with; but
flies from it, as from a plague or pest; My lovers and my friends stand aloof
from my sore. 2. In time of sad affliction and narrow trial of our faith,
natural bonds between us and our kinsfolk, will shrink and fail us, so as we
shall have little comfort in the earth; My kinsman stand afar off. 3. In time of
sad exercises and hard trials, as friends may fail, so enemies may make head;
and by craft and cruelty, by slanders and cunning policy, open enmity and
secret plotting may conspire against a man's fame, good cause and life, They
also that seek after my life, lay snares for me; and they that seek my hurt,
speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long. 4. The more
emptied, afflicted, disconsolate, forsaken of friends, pursued by foes a man
be; if he go to God for reconciliation and relief, he has ground of hope to be
helped, and to have God engaged to him so much the more; for here David makes
this use of all his troubles, he lays all out before God. 5. It is possible,
yea and oft-times comes to pass, that the godly have so many lies made of
them, calumnies and slanders devised and vented against them by so many mouths,
that they are not able to follow them, or to answer and refute them, but are
forced to misken them, and in patience hold themselves quiet till God make
matters clear for them: But I as a deaf man heard not, and as a dumb man
opened not my mouth. 6. When the godly overloaden with multitude of calumnies,
and the multitude of enemies backing them, do sit down in patient silence, nor
seeing to what purpose they speak: They are taken readily as guilty, or as such
who cannot refute the thing which is alleged of them, or maintain the truth
which they profess, and this is an addition unto all the rest of their trouble;
As David imports, saying: Thus was I as a man that hears not, and in whose
mouth are no reproofs.

Ver. 15 For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou will hear, O Lord my God.

16 For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when my
foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.

17. For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me.

18 For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.

19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate me
wrongfully, are multiplied.

20 They also that render evil for good, are mine adversaries; because I follow
the thing that good is.

In the fourth place he sets down his wrestling against his persecuters,
seeking to destroy both him and his righteous cause, Hence learn, 1. It is a
sore and high degree of the trial of the godly, when at one time God pursues
for sin, and friends withdraw from them in the duties of humanity, and
persecuters are likely to destroy their lives, and withal do suppress Religion
in their person by this means; and yet this has been the case of many of Gods
children, and may be also, as this example teaches us; yea, also our Lord
Jesus, his condition was like this, when he suffered for our sins. 2. Sore
trials cannot be born without holding fast the gripe of the Covenant of Grace;
for this fixes faith, and strengthens hope, and furnishes patience in
greatest troubles; for David rendereth this reason, for his bearing patiently
his foresaid hard condition: In thee, O Lord, do I hope; Thou will hear, O
Lord, my God. 3. If the Covenant be holden fast, whereby we may warrantably call
God our God; we may be as it were, surety to our self for a good answer from
God; Thou will hear me, O Lord my God. 4. When the enemies of the godly in
their righteous cause, are ready to triumph over the godly and their cause, and
the godly are like to be discouraged, if the Lord help not; then the godly may
be sure the Lord will hear and help: For David gives this for a reason of his
persuasion, that God would hear him, ver. 15. because the enemies otherwise
would triumph, and he be made to halt, and turn off the way, verse. 16, 17. for
in this the Lords glory is interested. 5. When the outward prosperous condition
of the godly is changed, and their feet slip, and the hand of the Lord lies on
sore without relaxation, even they of strong faith are ready to be discouraged
and faint; so weak are we in faith when a hard trial comes: For, When the
enemy magnified himself against David; When his feet slipped, when his sorrow
was continually before him; He confesses he was ready to halt; To warn the
godly, that they might guard against this tentation. 6 To keep our selves from
fretting under trouble, it is expedient that we compare our sins with Gods
fatherly chastisements of us, and that we take course for remission of our sin,
and turn^ the sorrow raised by affliction into godly sorrow for sin; for this
David resolved in his distress, I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry
for my sin. 7. The Lord so disposes of the outward condition of the godly and
the wicked in this life, that the godly oft-times have the mourning part, and
the wicked the rejoicing part, and that so much the more as they see the head
of the godly is born down: I will be sorry for my sin, but mine enemies are
lively and strong. 8. As it is a matter of grief to see the affliction of the
godly growing, and the enemies growing in joy, and strength, and number; so it
is a matter of comfort, that the enemies of the godly are enemies without a
just cause given to them: They that hate me wrongfully, are multiplied. 9. We
must not leave off the doing of what God requires at our hands, albeit we
should have the hatred of the world; for David followed that which was good,
albeit his adversaries for that very cause did render to him evil for good.

Ver. 21. Forsake me not, O Lord; O my God, be not far from me.

22 Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation.

He closes the Psalm with prayer, laying all his weight on the Covenant, not
having gotten comfort for the time. Whence learn, 1. We must not limit the Lord
to give us comfort and deliverance, when we think we have greatest need of it,
but must leave our prayer at his feet, as the Prophet does. 2. The believer
must be so wary to lean unto sense, that he must hold the gripes of faith not
only when he misseth sense of comfort, but also when Gods dispensation toward
him, and his sense thereof does seem to speak most contrary to faith: Forsake me
not, O Lord; be not far from me: Make haste to help me, says David's Faith,
when his sense speaks what his prayer here imports, that is, present
perdition. 3. The bond of the Covenant of Grace is able to bear the weight of
the believers most heavy burden, and by virtue of it, he may lay claim unto
God, as his own God, and lay claim also unto salvation in him; for
notwithstanding of all the troubles and tentations laid forth in this Psalm,
the Believer sustaineth all on this ground; O my God, O Lord my salvation; And
here is the victory of Faith.

PSALM. XXXIX. To the chief Musician, even to Jeduthun, A Psalm of David.
Another such like hard exercise as in the former Psalm, wherein David
acknowledges his infirmity in a passionate expression, when he was in trouble,
ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Secondly he recovered and comforted himself, ver. 5, 6, 7.
Thirdly, what was his prayer in this exercise, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Ver. 1. I Said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue;
I will keep my mouth with a bridle* while the wicked is before me.

2. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good, and my sorrow was
stirred.

3 My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned; then spoke I
with my tongue.

4 LORD, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is:
that I may know how frail I am.

THe Prophet for fear of impatient expression in his trouble, resolved to keep
silence in the audience of the wicked, but was not able to keep in his
passionate wishing for death. Whence learn, 1. As it is the Lords will that we
should have the infirmities of the Saints registered unto us for our
edification, as well as their virtues: So it is his will, that when the
confession of our infirmity may profit others, we should not spare to let it be
known, as this passage teaches us. 2. Conscience of our weakness, and of the
unruliness of our tongues, ready to break forth in the time of tentation,
should make us take better heed to our selves, and to watch over our speeches:
I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. 3.
Because the wicked may take advantage of the godlies miscarrying in time of
their trouble, it is needful to watch the more over our behavior and words in
their presence: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while they are before me. 4.
When we are about to keep in our corruptions, and amend our own faults by our
own way of it, by our wisdom, our strength, our resolutions, we do not eschew
the evil we would eschew, and we also fall in a fault we were not aware of, as
here in stead of praying to God to direct one part of his speech after another,
that he might speak prudently in the audience of the wicked, he did not speak
at all, he did not speak that which he might, and should have spoken: I was
dumb with silence, I held my peace even from good. 5. When grief is not rightly
vented but suppressed, it is not thereby assuaged but increased rather: I held
my peace, and my sorrow was stirred. 6. The power of sinful nature, and enraged
passions is such, that even when they are opposed by reason of strength of
grace in us, they may easily overpower us, except God put to his hand to help
us in the conflict; My heart was hot within me: while I was musing the fire
burned: then spoke I with my tongue. 7. It is a natural evil in man when he is
overcome by trouble in this life, to wish for death, looking to be in a better
condition by the change; As the sick man looks for ease by changing of his
bed, and here ver. 4. we have the example of it. 8. The shortness of this life
is a mitigation of the troubles thereof unto the godly, and the fear that life
should continue longer then the afflicted man would, augmenteth the trouble;
and this is the fountain of this passionate and curious wish: Lord make me to
know mine end, and the measure of my days what it is: that I may know how
frail I am.

Ver. 5. Behold thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as
nothing before thee; verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.
Selah.

6 Surely every man walks in a vain show: surely they are disquieted in
vain; he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them.

7. And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

In the second place, not being answered in this curious question, but secretly
checked for his impatient wish, he contents himself with the known truth, That
this present life is but short how long soever it shall last, and resolves to
wait on Gods time patiently. Whence learn, 1. For tempering our condition
whatsoever it be, it should suffice us to know, that whether we be in
prosperity or adversity, our time in this life is but short: Thou have made my
days as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee. 2. Not in
prosperity, but in adversity, is the uncertainty, weakness, emptiness, and
vanity of prosperity, and things temporal well seen; for in troubles says
David, Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. 3. Whatsoever
seems excellent in the eyes of natural men in this world is but the shadow of
what it seems; health, strength, prosperity, riches, pleasure, honor,
dominion, power, authority are but the shadows of things so named; Every man
walks in a vain show. 4. Too much care and anxiety about things of this life,
is a sickness and folly, Surely, they are disquieted in vain. 5. Experience
puts a deep stamp of the truth upon a man's mind, and causes him to set his
subscription unto it without hesitation, Verily, surely, surely, is the seal of
this truth here delivered after his experience. 6. The too much care which men
take to gather riches, this toyling and traveling, this spending of body, of
wit and time, this frowning on some, and fawning on others, this pleading and
fighting with some, and flattering of others, with the rest of other shifts by
which men use to gather riches, (which they must leave behind them, and do not
know to whom) is a point of great folly and vanity in men; He heaps up riches,
and knows not who shall gather them. 7. The right use of the perceived vanity
of all things under the Sun, is, that we should be sent by that consideration
unto God to rest on him; And now, Lord, what wait I for? 8. That which God has
promised in the life to come, is only satisfactory and able to quiet a man's
mind, and make him patiently wait on God in all his trouble; What wait I for?
my hope is in thee.

Ver. 8. Deliver me from all my transgressions; make me not the reproach of the
foolish.

9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou did it.

10. Remove thy stroke away from me, I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.

11 When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a mothe: surely, every man is vanity. Selah.

12. Hear my prayer, O LORD, and give ear unto my cry: hold not thy peace at
my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers
were.

13. O spare me, that I may recover strength; before I go hence, and be no more.

In the third place, he prays to be freed from his sins* and the sense of
Gods wrath, using sundry reasons to help his faith. Whence learn, 1. Seeing sin
does plunge us in all perplexities, and brings trouble after trouble upon us;
the best cure of our trouble, is to seek pardon for our sins; Deliver me from
all my transgressions. 2. The ungodly are fools, let them seem to themselves
and others what they please; for all their way and work is to make themselves
miserable; therefore does the Scripture call them foolish. 3. That the wicked
get no advantage of us so as by troubling of us to drive us from the profession
of righteousness, for which they do persecute us, should be the main care of
every Believer under persecution: For this is David's prayer, Make me not the
reproach of the foolish. 4. It is usual to us to see our duty after we have
sinned, better then before; for, after experience of his falling, he resolves
it is his duty not to speak an impatient word, but to be silent, and not open
his mouth, to wit, impatiently. 5. The consideration of God for our party, with
whom we have to do in trouble, should humble us, and make us quiet; David
says, he should not have opened his mouth, Because thou Lord did it. 6.
Prayer for removing the tokens of Gods displeasure, especially after prayer for
remission of sins, is not contrary to patience and silen^ submission under Gods
hand; for he prays also, Remove away thy stroke from me. 7. When we feel the
Lords hand heavy upon us, we may bemoan our selves to him with submission to
his will, for he pitieth us, and will lay no more on us then we are able to
bear, I am consumed by the blow of thy hand. 8. The stoutest and strongest
courage will soon be brought down by trouble of conscience; when God enters in
judgment with him, man falls down: When thou with rebukes do correct man for
iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a mothe: surely, every
man is vanity. 9. When God seems to refuse to hear prayer, true faith will
follow God with more fervent prayer, and crying, and tears, and not leave God
without a good answer: Hear my prayer, O Lord; give ear unto my cry, hold not
thy peace at my tears. 10. The more our hearts be alienated from this world,
and conversant with God by faith; the more we miss our country, our parents,
our kinsmen on earth, and have our conversation in heaven, the more we may be
assured that God shall avow himself to be our God: I am a stranger and a
sojourner with thee. 11. Entering our selves heirs unto the godly, who lived
before us in their estrangements from the world, and seeking after heaven,
intitleth us unto their comforts also; I am a sojourner, as all my fathers. 12.
It is an usual tentation unto the godly in their trouble, that they shall
never be relieved out of it in this life; O spare me before I go hence. 13. The
godly may pray for a little breathing before death with submission, that they
may the more quietly render up their spitits to God: Spare me, that I may
recover strength before I go hence and be no more. 14. If the Lord do not
hearken to us when we would, let us leave our petition beside him till he
answer it, as here the Prophet does.

PSALM. XL. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
David as a type of Christ in the whole Psalm, and as an example of the
exercise of the godly, gives thanks for the experience of Gods delivering of
him out of a notable trouble, verse 1, 2, 3, 4. In the second place, he is led
on in his thanksgiving to praise God for the great work of Redemption by Christ
the Son of God coming into the world, which is the fountain of all other
mercies to the Saints, verse 5, 6, 7.8. In the third place, David in type, and
Christ in the accomplishment, giving account of his prophetical office,
intercedeth and prays for the evidence of Gods favor to himself personally
and mystically considered, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and for disappointment of
his enemies, verse. 14, 15. and for the comfort of all the godly beholding his
exercise and his delivery which he confidently does expect, verse. 16, 17.

Ver. 1. I Waited patiently for the LORD, and he inclined unto me, and heard my
cry.

2. He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set
my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.

3. And he has put a new Song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many
shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.

4. Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust: and respects not the
proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

In his thanksgiving, Learn, 1. As the Lord of set purpose delayeth to answer
the prayer of his own, and suspendeth to help them out of trouble for a time,
that he may try and train their faith to a better measure; so the believer must
resolve to wait on patiently, I waited patiently for the Lord. 2. Albeit
waiting for the time is joined with languour and grief, yet the remembrance of
it is sweet, and it wants not a blessing following it, I waited, and he
inclined to me, and heard my cry. 3. The godly may be brought in their trouble
to as desperate like condition, as a man fallen in a horrible deep and dark pit,
sinking in miry clay, out of which there is no appearance of relief: in which
case as the greatness of the danger commends the faith of him that calls
upon God, and waits for him; So does it commend Gods wisdom, power, goodness
and faithfulness in delivering the patient waiter. To this end says the
Psalmist, He brought me out of an horrible pit, and out of the miry clay. 4.
The man who depends on the Lord when he is delivered out of trouble, is not
left to himself, but the Lords care attends him to guide him after his
delivery; He brought me out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and
established my goings. 5. As it is a part of our duty to glorify God after
every mercy, and in a special manner when the mercy is very notable: So it is
a new gift of God to enable a man to give thanks, and praise for the mercy
received; therefore it is put for a point of thanksgiving, He has put a new
song in my mouth. 6. As the experience of Gods mercy to one who is in Covenant
with God, is the encouragement of all believers: so should it be the common
matter of praise unto God from them all, therefore does he call the praises
which he did sing, The praises of our God. 7. The right observation of Gods
mercy to his children, especially when he will show himself eminently, is able
to strike a man with much awe and reverence of God, who is fearful, even in his
praises; Many shall hear and fear. 8. Then do we make right observation of Gods
mercy to his children, when thereby we encourage our selves to look for the
like mercy, when we call for it in our need; Many shall hear and fear, and
trust in the Lord. 9. As the preciousness of faith is not seen in the time of
trial, so well as after the victory; so the fruit of it when it is seen is no
less then true blessedness: Blessed is the man who makes the Lord his trust.
10. All true believers are humble toward God, and of a high spirit against
whatsoever comes in competition with him, and will despise every man's way who
regards not him: So the mis-believer is proud toward God and his truth, but a
base subject of his own spirit, and to lying vanities; for the believer here is
opposed to the proud, and to such as turn aside to lies.

Ver. 5. Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works, which thou have done,
and thy thoughts, which are to usward; they cannot be reckoned up in order
unto thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be
numbered. In the second place he is led up to the consideration of Gods
wonderful care and providence about men, and in special to the work of
Redemption by Christ's coming into the world. Whence learn, 1. One of the Lords
wonderful works of providence well meditated upon, may and should lead us to the
consideration of many other his works of that kind, Many, O Lord my God, are
thy wonderful works, which thou have done. 2. The works of Gods providence
about us should lead us up to the counsel of God, to behold his care of us, his
mind and purpose to usward, who are brought into Covenant with him, for
confirming of our faith in him; Many, O Lord my God, are thy thoughts which are
to usward. 3. Albeit the Lords deep thoughts and works of wonder about his own
people, be unspeakable, unsearchable, and innumerable, yet must we not cease to
look upon them, and speak of them in heap when we cannot attain to them in
tale, They cannot be reckoned up in order to thee: If I should declare and
speak of them, they are more then can be numbered.

Ver. 6. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou
opened; burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required.

7. Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me.

8. I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy Law is within my heart.

He condescends upon a particular which did overcome his declaration and
searching, to wit, the Covenant of Redemption between the Father and the Son
coming into the world, some articles whereof he touches, as they are rehearsed
by the Son speaking here by his Spirit. Whence learn, 1. The work of Redemption
by Christ, the Covenant betwixt the Father and the Son about our Redemption,
the incarnation of the Son of God, and the course of the salvation of the
redeemed, is one of the most wonderful things that ever was heard tell of,
wherein so many wonderful works of God, so many wonderful thoughts of God about
us do concur, that they can neither be declared nor numbered, nor set in order:
for this work here touched is set down for an instance of what was said in the
former verse; now that this is spoken by Christ, the Apostle, Heb 10.5, 6. etc.
does show unto us. 2. Albeit sacrifices and oblations were appointed to be
offered before Christ came yet were they not acceptable in themselves, but in
respect of the sacrifice of Christ signified by them; not they, but Christ
signified by them could take away sin, Sacrifices and offerings thou did not
desire, burnt-offerings and sin offerings thou did not require, to wit, for
any worth in themselves, or by way of real satisfaction for sin. 3. The
ceremonial law was not to remain, but to be taken away when Christ came to
offer himself, who was foreshadowed by the sacrifices and Levitical ordinances;
for, Sacrifices and oblations thou did not desire, but mine ears thou have
opened* which presupposes thou have formed a body unto me, as the Apostle,
Heb. 10.5. does show; and so the rejecting of the ceremonies, is at the
incarnation, or at the forming of the body of Christ, and bringing the Son into
the world. 4. The Son of God incarnate becomes voluntarily, a very capable,
discreet, ready and obedient servant to the Father for us: Mine ears have thou
opened, to wit, for receiving of every command; or mine ears have thou boared,
as the servants ears were boared under the Law, when he choosed to stay still
with his master in service, Exodus 21.5. 5. By offering of burnt-offering God
was not satisfied for sin, but only by Christ's coming and offering himself a
sacrifice once for all, Burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required;
Then said I, Lo, I come, says Christ. 6. Both in the book of Gods eternal
decrees, and in the book of holy Scripture, this way of taking away the sins of
men was established, as the only way to effect it; for that the seed of the
woman by his suffering should bruise the head of the Serpent was foretold by
God, Genesis 3.15. and Christ was the Lamb slain in the representative sacrifices
from the beginning of the world; In the volume of thy book it is written of me.
7. Jesus Christ God incarnate is in Covenant with God the Father, that
believers may be in Covenant with God by this means also, therefore does he
call him, O my God: as our Lord, Job. 20.17. says I ascend to my Father and
your Father, to my God and you^ God. 8. All Christ's sufferings and service done
in our name for us, was most willingly and heartily undertaken and discharged
by Christ, I delight to do thy will, that is, as the Apostle* Heb. 10.10. does
expound, it to perform whatever might sanctify us throughout for ever. 4. The
way of our redemption by Christ's doing and suffering for us, is Gods own
device, his very will and pleasure; and the obedience of Christ unto the very
death of the cro^^ done in our name unto the Father, has pleased the Father
fully* I delight to do thy will, O my God. 10. The Son of God incarnate was
perfectly holy, so as he could answer to the law completely, and give account
of it to the Father; yea thy law is within my heart: That these words may be
applied to David, and made use of by every believer in their own degree and
measure, there is no question: but that they are principally and in the main
intention to be applied to Christ speaking of himself, the matter it self does
evidence; for who but he can ascribe to himself the accomplishing of what the
typical sacrifices fore-shadowed? who but ^e could satisfy for sin, which the
sacrifices could not? Again, the Apostle Paul Heb. 10.5, 6, etc. does clear the
matter so, as (...) ground of doubting is left. In all the Psalm, le^ David be
as the shadow, but let Christ be the substance.

Ver. 9. I have preached righteousness in the great Congregation: lo, I have
not refrained my lips, O Lord thou know.

10. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart* I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness, and
thy truth from the great Congregation.

In the third place, as Christ has given an account of the execution of his
Priestly Office, in expiation of sin; so here he gives account of his
Prophetical office, to make way for his intercession. Whence learn, 1. Christ
did not only undertake to suffer for expiation of our sins, but also he
undertook to apply to his people, by preaching, the fruits of his sufferings,
for their righteousness and salvation, for justifying, sanctifying, and saving
the redeemed; I have preached righteousness in the great congregation. 2. The
way appointed for application of the grace purchased to the redeemed, is
preaching; I have preached righteousness in the great Congregation, in the
visible Church, and in all confluences of the redeemed where opportunity is
offered. 3. As Christ did not conceal what might save souls, but did
communicate it carefully; so should they who are trusted by him to preach
without fear sincerely, as they will be able to answer God, proclaim it, I have
not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou know. 4. The true way of justification
of sinners by faith, is a Jewel so precious and necessary for poor souls, that
it should not be concealed, I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart.
5. One Sermon on this subject is not sufficient, it is necessary to make this
mystery plain, how by faith in Christ the man that flies to him is justified
from his sins, and saved according to the Covenant past between the suffering
Mediator and God the faithful promiser to justify and save by his own way, I
have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation. 6. The way of righteousness
and salvation purchased unto believers by Jesus Christ, is very solid and
complete; for first, this way of forgiving sins unto us, because of the
satisfaction made by Christ for us in his obedience unto the Father, even unto
the death of the Cross, is of Gods own devising, and his free-gift; therefore
as it is called the righteousness of God, Romans 3.21, 22. So here it is called
Gods righteousness. O Lord, I have not hid thy righteousness. And the salvation
or eternal life annexed unto this imputed and gifted righteousness bestowed
upon the embracer of it, is also of Gods devising, and his free-gift; therefore
it is also called his salvation, I have declared thy salvation. Next the
certainty and ground of the believers assurance that this righteousness and
salvation is made fast unto him, is the truth of God, and faithfulness of God,
obliging himself to make good this way of justfication and salvation by the
Covenant of redemption made between the Father and the Son our Mediator, as in
the promises of the Covenant of grace is set down in Scripture, which can no
more disappoint the believer, then the truth and faithfulness of God can fail,
I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation. And last of all, the
fountain, spring and rise, and unchangeable ground of righteousness and
salvation purchased by the redemption made by Jesus Christ, and applied to us
by faith in him, is the mere good will and pleasure of God, the free grace, the
free love and bounty of God, without any deserving of the redeemed; I have not
concealed thy loving kindness, and thy truth from the great Congregation; This
indeed is a solid ground. 7. The plain preaching, declaration, and
manifestation of this Gospel with the grounds thereof, is able by the blessing
of God to persuade a trembling soul to lay it self over upon Jesus Christ, and
to rest upon the unchangeable truth and kindness of God offered to every poor
humble sinner, without exception; for the preaching of these things, not
refraining of the lips, not hiding of this precious and saving truth, the
declaration and not concealing of it, is given up here for the sufficiency of
means, to apply the purchased righteousness and salvation by Christ to the
redeemed; and this execution of Christ's Prophetical Office has been faithfully
performed by him, not only in his personal preaching in the days of his flesh,
but also in his Ministers both before his incarnation and since, which also
shall be continued from generation, to generation, to the end of the world,
maugre all opposition; for Christ shall be able to make no less perfect account
of his other Offices then of the Kingly Office, when he shall give up the
Kingdom to his Father. 8. What may concern David here as the type of Christ,
or as one of the servants of Christ, we take it up in one word, which is this:
The more faithful Preachers be to declare the Gospel to the salvation of souls,
the more confidence and comfort shall the testimony of their conscience afford
to them in the day of their trouble, when they come before God; as the Prophet
here by experience finds.

Ver. 11. Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O LORD: let thy loving
kindness, and thy truth continually preserve me.

12. For innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken
hold upon me; so that I am not able to look up: they are more then the hairs of
mine head, therefore my heart fails me.

13. Be pleased O LORD, to deliver me: O LORD make haste to help me.

Christ having given account of his performances, of what was undertaken,
intercedeth for the promised mercies to his Mystical body and to himself, as
standing in the room of the ransomed; wherein David as the type of Christ, and
as a member of Christ's mystical body, has his own place. Whence learn, 1.
Because the price of Redemption is holden here as fully paid, and nothing is
left unpayed by Christ; therefore the application of the purchased mercy must be
granted; for Christ, here speaking, having declared his performance of his part
of the Covenant, from ver. 6. to ver. 11. does now require the performance of
promised kindness and mercy to him and his mystical body, saying, Withhold not
thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness, and thy truth
continually preserve me; and this is a standing petition of the Mediator, in
favor of his afflicted mystical body in all generations. 2. The
unchangableness of Gods loving kindness, and truth of promises made in his
Covenant, is a solid ground of assurance that the Lord will not withhold his
tender mercies from the afflicted believer; for upon this ground do the parts
of his petition run; Withhold not thy tender mercies from me, and let kindness
and truth continually preserve me. 3. Albeit the troubles which are inflicted,
be drawn on by sin, and be the effects of just wrath for sin, yet are they also
the object of tender mercies, when the afflicted do present both their troubles
and their sins, which deserved them before Gods merciful eye; for here a reason
of hoping for tender mercy* is brought from both trouble and sin lying on, for
innumerable evils have compassed me about, and mine iniquities have taken hold
on me. 4. By virtue of the intercession of Christ, every believer may take up
the same supplication in Christ's name, and present it in his own behalf unto
God, in the time of trouble and necessity; for as David might make this use of
it, as one of the members of the mystical body: so may all the rest of
believers also; because Christ the Mediator does own all the sins of all his
redeemed ones as his own, as made his by consent to have them imputed unto him,
and has born the punishment thereof so much as may and does satisfy justice
for them. Therefore Christ in the behalf of his redeemed ones, and every
believer in Christ for that respect may expect continual preservation by the
loving kindness and truth of God laid in pawn for it by the Covenant, when they
have recourse to God in the time when trouble and guiltiness does both set on
at once; for the reason of the prayer is so conceived, as it may fit both the
Mediator interceding for his mystical body, and every wearied soul also who is
fled to God through Christ by faith in him, that he may find his outgate and
deliverance in, with, and for Christ, Let thy loving kindness and truth
continually preserve me; for innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine
iniquities have taken hold on me. 6. Nothing can so empty a man, and lay him
low, and fill him with confusion of face, as his sin pursuing him; Mine
iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up. 7. When
all that is a man's own, as natural strength, wit, or courage does fail; yet God
does not fail and faith does not fail; For here when it is come to this, my
heart fails me, Faith stands up, and in prayer pleads for mercy and
kindness upon this very reason, because the heart does fail. 8. As the strait
is great, and the burden heavy, and the creature weak: so is the delivery and
help near at hand, Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord, make haste to
help me.

Ver. 14. Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul
to destroy it: let them be driven backward and put to shame, that wish me evil.

15 Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame that say unto me, Aha, aha!

From this part of his prayer, which is against his enemies: Learn, 1. As the
Lord for the intercession of Christ, will not fail to help his people in
trouble; so will he not miss to disappoint, and bring mischief upon the enemies
of his people, how many and how strong soever they be; Let them be confounded
together and ashamed that seek after my soul to destroy it. 2. Not only the
open persecuters of the godly, but all their ill willers and unfriends, who
could be content to see evil come upon Gods Church, shall be punished with the
open adversaries; They shall be driven backward and put to shame that wish them
evil. 3. The mocking of the godly and putting them to shame, is the shame
indeed of the mockers, and not of the godly, upon whom in their suffeings the
Spirit of glory does rest, and therefore shall the wicked scorners bear their own
shame and their punishment; Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame,
that say unto me, Aha, aha!

Ver. 16. Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let such as
love thy salvation, say continually, The LORD be magnified.

17. But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me: thou art my help
and my deliverer, make no tar^ying, O my God.

From this prayer that the rest of the godly may have comfort by his delivery,
which delivery he does confidently expect; Learn, 1. As every mercy to every
believer gives a proof of Gods readiness to show the like mercy to all
believers, when they stand in need; so should every mercy shown to any of the
number, being known to the rest, be made the matter and occasion of magnifying
the Lord, Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee. 2. The
godly whose property it is to be partakers of the affliction of Christ with
others, and to seek God, and to wait for the Lords way of delivery, and do love
the safety of his people, shall have reason to rejoice and praise God
continually for new evidences of his mercy to his own; Let all those that seek
thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let such as love thy salvation, say
continually, The Lord be magnified. 3. It is an usual condition of the godly,
before they be delivered out of any difficulties, to be made once sensible of
their own weakness, emptiness, and necessities; as here, I am poor and needy.
4. It is an ordinary exercise of the afflicted, to be despised of the world,
and contemned; and this also is a tentation to move them to mistake their own
condition before God; for so does the Psalmist propound the matter before God;
But (says he) I am poor and needy. 5. Whatsoever the world or sense and false
suggestions do say of the afflicted, yet faith gives ground of assurance that
our base and mean condition is so far from making us loathsome to God, that by
the contrary the lower we are brought, the more we are in his heart and
estimation; Yet the Lord thinks upon me; and Gods respecting of us, may
easily make up our loss of respect among men. 6. When the believer has fastened
his faith, he may expect shortly his relief, Thou art my help and my deliverer,
says he, and then make no tarrying, O my God.

PSALM. XLI. To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
David as a Type of Christ, and one of his afflicted followers, after prayer
comfort himself against the uncharitable judgment, which the wicked had of
him in his affliction, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. In the second place, he complains of
his enemies cursed disposition against him, and prays to be delivered out of
his trouble, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 In the third place, he is answered
comfortably, and praises God for it, ver. 11, 12, 13.

Ver. 1. BLessed is he that considers the poor: the Lord will deliver him in
time of trouble.

2. The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
the earth; and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies.

3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou will make
all his bed in his sickness.

4. I said, Lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against
thee.

THat he may comfort the godly in their afflictions, and correct the common
judgment of the world concerning afflicted people, he gives a reason for which
it is safe to judge charitably of every man who humbles himself before God in
his affliction. Whence learn, 1. Albeit it be usual for the world to judge all
them that are afflicted, to be plagued of God in wrath, yet it is a blessed
course to study to frame our hearts to a wise and discreet judging of other
men's estates, by looking to a man's behavior in his trouble, and to judge
charitably of the man who is contrite, and humbles himself before God in his
afflictions, Blessed is he that considers the poor, or gives comfort and
instruction to the weak. 2. It is a blessed thing for a man afflicted and
humbling himself before God to judge charitably of his own condition, as well as
of another condition in the like case; for, Blessed is he that considers the
poor, is so set down as it is applicable to the patient in affliction judging
of himself, no less then to the beholder of another in affliction: and for
confirmation of this, he gives six reasons of comforting the afflicted and
humbled man, and confirming the charitable beholder and judger of him as a
fellow-sufferer with him. 3. The afflicted and humble man shall be delivered out
of his trouble, be what it may be, The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.
This is the first reason of the comfort, and withal a reason of confirmation
and encouragement of him that does judge wisely of the afflicted. 4. The Lord
has a way of delivery, not only from trouble, that a man fall not in it, and
not only of delivering from trouble, by removing of the trouble, but also a way
of delivery, when the trouble is yet remaining; to wit, by sustaining the man,
comforting of him, saving of him from any harm by the trouble, giving him good
by the trouble, quieting his mind by patient submission unto God under the
trouble, etc. The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble: and this is branched
out in particulars in the verses following, as so many reasons of comfort, and
charitable judging of his own condition and others. 5. Albeit the godly be
brought very low, yet shall he not perish, The Lord will preserve him and keep
him alive; and this is the second reason of comfort; albeit he faint, and have
soul-swarses now and then, yet shall spiritual life be kept in him. 6. None of
the godly man's afflictions shall hinder or take away his begun blessedness, even
in this world; He shall be blessed on the earth: and this is the third reason of
comfort; if it may be for Gods glory and the man's good, this temporal life
shall be preserved, and evidences of Gods blessing shall be seen upon him. 7. No
persecuter shall drive the godly man from his point, and make him forsake God,
or the way of godliness; if he slip in a step, God shall raise him up again;
Thou will not deliver him to the will of his enemies: and this is the fourth
reason of his comfort. 8. The Lord will strengthen the godly to bear whatsoever
trouble he puts on him; The Lord will strengthen him on the bed of
languishing: and this is the fifth reason of his comfort. 9. The Lord shall
mitigate and moderate all the afflictions of the godly, and ease him under his
trouble, as tenderly as when a sick persons bed is made the best way that can
be for his ease; Thou shall make all his bed in his sickness: and this is the
sixth reason of his comfort. 10. The man who may look for all these
consolations, and may be judged of charitably, whether it be himself or
another, is the man who in the sense of his sins humbles himself before the
Lord, especially when he is afflicted, and flies to Gods mercy: first, to have
sins pardoned; and next, to have his trouble removed, as God sees it fit for
his salvation. This is pointed out in David's behavior under his trouble, of
set purpose that he may give the character of the Lords poor man, to whom the
foresaid comforts do belong, and of whose estate a good construction is to be
made; I said, Lord, be merciful to me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against
thee.

Ver. 5. Mine enemies speak evil of me: When shall he die, and his name perish?

6. And if he come to see me, he speaks vanity: his heart gathers iniquity
to it self, when he goes abroad, he tells it.

7. All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise my
hurt.

8. An evil disease, say they, cleaves fast unto him: and now that he lies,
he shall rise up no more.

9. Yea, mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread,
has lift up his heel against me.

10. But thou, O LORD, be merciful unto me, and ^aise me up that I may requite
them.

From his complaint against his enemies, set down in the second place; Learn,
1. Evil speeches against the godly will be taken notice of by God, and made a
part of the wickeds ditty, Mine enemies speak evil of me. 2. The malice of the
enemies of godliness is such against the godly, as nothing but their utter
overthrow and root^ng out from the earth of such a sort of people can satisfy
them, When shall he die, and his name perish? say they, 3. The godly have to do
not only with open enemies, but with secret false dissemblers also, who will
profess friendship with fair words, when they are following the way of malice,
from whose falsehood there is no refuge more then from the force of the open
enemy, save to fly* to God, the Judge of all oppressed people: If he come to see
me, he speaks vanity; many fair words, but none of them true. 4. The end of
the wicked man's pretended kindness to the godly, and of his insinuating of
himself in their fellowship is, that he may make observation of something in
their behavior, or condition or speeches, whereof he may make advantage against
them* If he comes to see me, his heart gathers iniquity to it self; when he
goes abroad he tells it. 5. Albeit the wicked can do no more against the
godly then God will permit to be done for the godly man's exercise and good, yet
many are the consultations which the wicked have, that they may hurt and
destroy the godly, All that hate me whisper together against me, against me do
they devise my hurt. 6. When the godly fall in straits, the wicked judge that the
godly shall never get out of their trouble, and in this hope do refresh
themselves, An evil disease cleaves fast unto him, and now that he lies, he
shall rise no more. 7. The lot appointed to Christ, and to all the true members
of his mystical body as well as to David, is to find in the time of their trials
a hard meeting in the world from the wicked, how many bonds soever of nature,
friendship, familiarity, or obligations of the wicked unto the godly intervene,
which otherwise might require better offices; Yea, mine own familiar friend in
whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me. 8.
We must not dwell upon our miseries in time of trouble, as if we had nothing to
do, save to weep and mourn, but we should turn our selves to God, and pray to
him for mercy, and expect a delivery, as the Psalmist does here, But thou, O
Lord, be merciful to me, and raise me up. 9. Albeit it be not fit for every
believer, to resolve requiting of their persecuters and enemies, as it was sit
to David as a Magistrate, and to Christ who is King of Kings, here represented
by him; to resolve vengeance, and to execute the same also against their
enemies; yet every believer may be assured of this, that what injuries are done
to Christ in their person, Christ shall requite their persecuters; for he in his
mystical members shall never be so born down, but he shall be raised up again (as
he was raised up personally after his personal suffering) Raise me up, that I
may requite them.

Ver. 11 By this I know that thou favourest me because mine enemy does not
triumph over me.

12. And as for me, thou upholdest me in mime integrity: and set me before
thy face for ever.

13. Blessed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting and to everlasting,
Amen and Amen.

In the last part of the Psalm in his thanksgiving, presupposing that the Psalm
was drawn up after the delivery from the trouble which is set forth in the
former part. Whence learn, 1. Albeit external deliveries from enemies, and
success eternal do not always serve for marks of Gods favor (for an ill man
in an ill cause may have success for a time) yet when the man is reconciled to
God, and the cause which the reconciled man defends against his persecuters,
is the Lords cause; in this case if God shall give to his servant either
spiritual victory, that the enemy do not so prevail over him, as to drive him
from his righteous cause; or external victory, and deliverance also from the
power of the adversary, together with the spiritual victory; in this case (I
say) the word of God, and the work of God concurring, do give evidence not only
of Gods favoring the man's person, but also of his favoring the man's cause and
carriage in the cause, so as he may say, By this I know that thou favorest me,
because mine enemy does not triumph over me. 2. Uprightness is a special means
to bring a man through difficulties, and whatsoever infirmities the believer be
subject unto, he shall not want comfort, if he keep the conscience of integrity,
uprightness, and sincerity; for this is the Psalmists rejoicing, when he looks
back upon his former exercise under trouble, As for me, thou upholdest me in my
integrity. 3. The wise wrastler with tentations, is made at length to see and
acknowledge by the experience he has of himself and of Gods help in time of
tentation, that all the glory of his standing and bearing out in trouble for
righteousness, does belong to the Lord, Thou upholdest me in mine integrity.
4. Experience of Gods gracious bearing out of a believer in time of trial,
serves for a good argument to make him confident of the continuance of Gods
favor to him for ever; yea after experiences and victory, God uses to give
some measure of persuasion of his everlasting love toward them that have
overcome; as here, Thou set me before thy face for ever. 5. He that gets a
sight of Gods love to him, may knit Gods felt favor in effect with Gods
everlasting love decreeing to show favor, and his everlasting love
communicating it self to him, and performing the decrees of love touching him,
and may behold the course of everlasting blessings running from eternity before
the world, to everlasting after the world; and the believer having seen it,
should acknowledge this with praise and thanksgiving; as here, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting. 6. He that sees the course
of Gods love to himself, sees Gods love in conjunction with the rest of the
Lords people also, who are joined in the same Covenant with him unto God in
Christ. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, says the Psalmist, now when he will
bless God for his own particular mercy. 7. Fresh experiences of Gods love in a
particular trial, especially when the soul is lifted up to the eternal
original, and everlasting endurance of it, will make a soul heartily with all
his strength give everlasting praise to God, and seal it affectionately again
and again, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting,
Amen, and Amen.

PSALM. XLII. To the chief Musician, Maschil, for the sons of Korah.
In this Psalm David shows what was his longing after the fellowship of the
Saints in their public worship and service of God, in the time of his
banishment, by the persecution of Saul, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. and how he wrastled
with discouragements, by checking himself for it, and by praying to God,
whereby he was erected unto hope and confidence to be answered, ver. 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11.

Verse. 1. AS the Heart pants after the waterbrooks: so pants my soul after
thee, O God.

2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before God?

3. My tears have been my meat day and night: while they continually say unto
me, Where is thy God?

4. When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me; for I had gone with
the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and
praise, with a multitude that kept holy day.

HE sets down his sad condition in his banishment, especially when he
remembered the solemn assembly of Gods people at the Temple, and saw himself
either in the wilderness, or among the heathen, deprived of the use of public
ordinances. Whence learn, 1. It is not a bare formal use of the ordinances, but
communion with God himself, which the lively believer does seek after in the
use of the public ordinances, My soul painteth after thee, O God. 2. Spiritual
affections when they are raised, and by delay, or by outward restraint are kept
off from satisfaction, are comparable in measure or in the point of sincerity
to the kindly appetite of natural food, As the heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. 4. Worshippers of the true
God do find, and more and more may find lively refreshments to their souls in
him, the experience whereof does kindle their desire of the renewing thereof by
such means, as they have found refreshments by before, My soul thirsts for
God, for the living God. 5. Because the assemblies of the Church, for the
exercise of Religion, are the trysting places, where God uses to show himself
to his people; therefore lovers of God are hearty lovers of the public
ordinances, and most desirous to frequent them for that cause; When shall I
come and appear before God? 6. It is not enough for the wicked to see the godly
in affliction, except they impute the misery of the godly unto their Religion,
and insult over them, either as Atheists, or as false worshippers, or as
hypocritical people forsaken of God; They say continually unto me, Where is thy
God? 7. To find Satan and wicked men, and Gods sad dispensations seeming to
speak rejection from God, and to see the glory of the true Religion, and a man's
own interest in God called in question, and thrust through with fiery darts of
insulting enemies, is a matter indeed of great grief, and able to render all
the comforts of the earthly creatures tastless to a godly soul, My tears have
been my meat day and night, while they say unto me, Where is thy God? 8. As
they who have had most plenty of the means of grace, may have scarcity of them
ere all be done; so no one will take the inlack of them more heavily, then they
who have reaped most spiritual benefit by them; When I remember these things, I
pour out my soul in me. 9. The Saints should be so far from separation from the
fellowship of the visible Church in the public exercise of holy ordinances,
albeit they know certainly that all are not sound professors who are to join
with them, that it should be their joy to have multitudes partaking in the use,
(at least of some) of the public means, and such as were not publicly
scandalous joining in all the ordinances, whereby God might be openly honored,
and his elect among them might in Gods own time be converted; for David went
with the multitude, and that to the house of God, with the voice of joy and
praise, and with a multitude that kept holy day. And this was at the time when
King Saul and his Courtiers were joined in the public ordinances with him, and
with Jonathan, and other such godly persons: Now what the constitution of the
Church visible was in Saul's days, in regard of the hypocrisy of professors
known to David, sundry of David's Psalms do make evident, and yet for all that
he wishes to have the like occasion of worshipping God again, and does account
highly of what he sometimes did enjoy.

Ver. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul; and why art thou disquieted in me?
hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.
In the second part of the Psalm, he wrestleth with discouragements, and the
conflicts are four. In the first he labors to comfort himself three ways;
first by checking himself for his dejection of spirit, and for disquietness;
next, by stirring up the grace of God in himself, namely faith and hope;
thirdly by application of the word of promise made unto him for strengthening
of both to bear him o^t, till the Lord should manifest his promised kindness.
Whence learn, 2. When sore troubles in stead of humbling a man, do press him
down unto dejection and discouragement of mind; it is a gracious man's part to
check himself for this reasonless fit of unbelief* and to put his conscience to
answer for yiedling so far to the tentation; Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
2. Mis-belief in a child of God is followed with restlesness of spirit, as a
chastisement drawn on by that sin, for which disquieting of himself the man may
justly be challenged also, and will not be able to give a reason for it, Why
art thou disquieted within me? 3. The only means of remedying discouragements
and unquietness of mind, is to set faith on work to go to God, and take hold
on him, and to cast anchor within the vail, hoping for and expecting relief
from him, Hope thou in God. 4. The believer in the midst of trouble, may
promise to himself new experience of Gods kindness and consolation by delivery
out of it, and to God he may promise praises: I shall yet praise him for the
help of his countenance.

Ver. 6. O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember
thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Missar. In
the second conflict he turns him to God, and lays the case of his
discouraged heart before him, laboring to make use of old experience. Whence
learn, 1. Albeit a dejected and disconsolate soul may and should deal with it
self rationally, to recover it self, yet can it not do it effectually; but as a
man sick and weak and fallen from his bed calls for help, so must it call to
God and lay out its case before him, that he may recover it: O my God, my soul
is cast down within me. 2. Albeit the power of making the means effectual, be
not in us, but in the Lords hands, yet must we not cease to use the means
rationally still, whereby the Lord uses to convey his efficacious power, and
to call to mind experiences, as a good means for recovering of our selves; My
soul is cast down, O God, therefore will I remember thee from the Land of
Jordan. That is, I will aim at comforting my self, by remembering what I have
found by experience in several places of Judea of thy goodness to me: and I
will look to the holy land, and to the Temple, the place where thy gracious
presence is offered, and where thy honor dwells.

Ver. 7. Deep calls unto deep, at the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy
waves and thy billows are gone over me. In the third conflict, wherein the very
remembrance of bygone experience, which even now was made use of to comfort
him, does kindle a fresh again his grief. Learn, 1. Though the using of the
right and appointed means to comfort us, should seem to us to have a contrary
effect to what we intended, and to increase our grief by our using them, yet
still must we wrestle on, using still one means after another, mixing prayer
with all other means, as David does here, saying, Deep calls to deep, at the
noise of thy water-spouts. 2. As the noise of rain from the clouds raises a
noise of the inferior waters and floods; as the raising of brooks does raise
the rivers, and all do shut themselves into a sea; and as the waves of the sea
do call one upon another to follow the former at the back: so one grief does
waken another, one tentation does strengthen another, one affliction augmenteth
another, till a sea of troubles raised by a storm be like to overwhelm the man,
All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.

Verse 8. Yet the LORD will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in
the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.

9. I will say unto God, My rock, why have thou fore gotten me? why go I
mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy?

To oppose this new assult, faith puts forth it self the third time, promising
to the wrastler what God has promised to the believer; whereupon he resolves
to plead his cause more hardly, and ply God yet again with prayer more
earnestly, that he may prevail: Whence learn, 1. Faith sees in Gods Word and
in bygone evidence of his truth manifested in his word, as it were a written
order and commission ready to be given forth in acts of providence for
satisfying the believer with so much fresh experience, as may fill him day and
night with sense of Gods love and songs of praise, Yet the Lord will command
his loving kindness in the daytime, and in the night his song shall be with me.
2. The care of our life bodily, spiritual, and everlasting, lies upon God, by
virtue of his Covenant with us to keep it, to feed it and renew it in all the
decays thereof, till it be possessed of unchangeable blessedness, the belief
whereof is a ground of perseverance in prayer, My prayer shall be unto the God
of my life. 3. Faith may improve its right before God, and plead that the
believer be not rejected, and may regrate any appearance (which is offered to
sense) of rejection, I will say unto God, Why have thou forgotten me? 4. The
believer in his complaints must not weaken his own faith, but weaken his
unbelief rather, and to this end should fasten his faith ere he complain, I
will say unto God, My rock, there faith is fastened, then follows the
complaint, why have thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the
oppression of the enemy?

Ver. 10. As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me: while they say
daily unto me, Where is thy God?

11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and w^y art thou disquieted within me?
hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the help of my
countenance, and my God*

In the fourth conflict which he has chiefly with the mockers of his Religion,
and of his cause, and of his trust in God; Learn, 1. The sharpest part of a
believers trial and affliction is, when in his person Religion and Gods glory
is mocked; this cruel sort of persecution pierces deepest in his heart,
because it tends to drive the man to desperation, and to make Religion and
faith in God out of request, As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach
me. 2. Continuance of the reproach of godliness, and of the insolency of
mockers scorning Religion in the afflicted man's face, in the time when it
seems that his affliction speaks desperation of relief, does greatly
increase the power of the tentation, and the godly man's grief: A sword in my
bones, while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God? 3. As the battle against
discouragements and unbelief uses to be oftener renewed even after the believer
has gotten the victory once and again, and as the wrastlers weakness uses
oftener to be made evident: so the same means and weapons must be oftener used,
and we must not be weary to fight on; for, Why art thou cast down, O my soul,
is now repeated as before; the mis-beleif and disquietness drawn on by
mis-belief, must be yet again rebuked, Why art thou disquieted within me? Faith
and hope must be set on work against all the disappearances of help, Hope thou
in God; we must (as it were) be surety to our selves for Gods promises made to
us, that they shall be performed; I shall yet praise him. 4. As when the Lord
does withdraw both the outward tokens of his favor, and also his inward
consolation for a time, the countenance of the godly cannot choose but be heavy,
cast down, and look sad like a man that is sick; so when God returns to
comfort, and to own his own either both inwardly and outwardly, or inwardly
only; the man's face looks cheerful, He is the health of my countenance. 5.
Although the Lord for a time shall nether remove the outward affliction, nor
yet inwardly give comfort, yet faith will sustain it self upon the Covenant,
and lay its whole weight upon it, and may do it confidently; for it will not
sink under the man, nor under his burden, He is my God.

PSALM. XLIII.
This Psalm tends to the same purpose with the former; for David in exile
complains of his persecuters, and prays for delivery, and regrateth his sad
condition, ver. 1.2. prays for restitution unto the liberty of the public
ordinances, promising to praise God at his returning cheerfully, ver. 3, 4. and
warstleth with his discouragements as he did in the former Psalm, ver. 5.

Verse. 1. JVdge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: O
deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.

2. For thou art the God of my strength, why do thou cast me off? why go I
mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy?

FRom his complaint and prayer against his enemies; Learn, 1. As the godly have
usually enemies powerful, many, crafty and cruel, oppressing them for
righteousness; so want they not a Judge impartial, who is sufficient to take
order with their adversaries, to whom they may and should address themselves in
their affliction, as David does here; Judge me, O Lord, and plead my cause
against an ungodly Nation. 2. The craftiness and falsehood, and fair pretenses,
whereby the enemies do palliate their cruel purposes, are more dangerous then
their professed cruelty; from which no wisdom, except divine direction, can
save a man; O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man. 3. What the
oppressed Church, or particular Believer wants, that God has, and is to be
forthcoming for the Believers use and benefit, (as his need shall be) to
uphold him by it, and comfort him, and deliver him, and bless him: For, Thou
art the God of my strength. 4. Although the Lord be all in all to us by
Covenant; yet for our good and his own glory he may so exercise us, as we may
want possession for a time of what we have in promise; yea, and seem also to be
thrust out of our right; in which case if we shall once fix our faith, we
shall have liberty to dispute our right against all tentations, and to express
the sense of our condition unto God without being mistaken, as here David does,
saying (not before, but after the fixing of his faith:) Why do thou cast me
off? Why go I mourning for the oppression of the enemy?

Verse. 3. O send out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me, let them bring
me unto thy holy hill, and to thy Tabernacles.

4. Then will I go unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: yea, upon
the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God.

From his prayer and promise of thanksgiving; Learn, 1. No tentation unto
discouragement, nor seeming desertion should divert the Believer from pursuing
his desire of relief, but rather kindle his affection in prayer: O send out thy
light. 2. Comfort, deliverances from troubles, and performance of promises,
when they most disappear, are kept in store for us, and fast locked up, to be
let forth in due time unto us: O send out thy light, and thy truth. 3.
Direction how to carry our selves till we obtain our desires, and observation
of the steps of Gods providence; bringing us to the possession of promised
mercies, are necessary preparations for the mercy which we seek, and should be
prayed for as mercies in order preceding that particular which we should have:
Let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill. 4. Spiritual grief must
have spiritual comfort; godly sorrow for distance from God and want of the
comfortable use his of ordinances, admits no comfort, save a comfort of that
kind; for David longs more to have the free use of the public ordinances,
then to have the Kingdom; Therefore says he, let them bring me to thy holy
hill, and to thy Tabernacles. 5. The first thing a soul is to look unto in his
address to God, is the means of expiation of his sin, and that is Christ
(represented by the Altar) offering himself a ransom for the sinner, and
sanctifying the person of the offerer, and the worship and service of the man
that comes to God through him; Then will I go to the Altar of God. 6. This way
of making address to God by Christ, gives present access to God, and peace to
the soul of him who draws near this way: Thus I will go to God. 7. God laid
hold upon through Christ, furnishes not only peace, but unspeakable joy also
to the believer; yea, God reconciled through Christ, is the life of the
believers gladness, I will go to God, my exceeding joy. 8. As is the longing of
the soul after God, when it is at a distance from him: so is the consolation
and satisfaction which it finds after renewed access; and as the supplicant
is earnest for renewed sense of fellowship: so does he purpose that the praises
of God shall be hearty at the receiving of that which he longed for, and also
that his faith shall be stronger by the fastening of the bond of the Covenant
between him and God more strongly: I will praise thee with the harp, O my God.

Ver. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance and my God. He closes this Psalm as the former, setting faith and
hope on work to wrestle with discouragement. Whence learn, 1. The strongest
Believer may be overtaken with fits of dejection and discouragement; for this
Champion finds his soul cast down. 2. A praying soul believing in God through
Christ, has no reason of dejection and discouragement, whatsoever reason of
humiliation he may have: Why art thou cast down, O my soul? 3. It is a
sanctifying means for wrestling out of discouragement, to dispute mis-belief to
the door, or to dispute our selves out of the dumps by reason taken from the
Lords word; and it is wisdom to get the conscience to be our friend, when the
mind and the heart are in a wrong temper in this case; it is necessary to take
Gods part against mis-belief, and unwarrantable unquietness, and to dispute
both his cause and our own against tentations: Why art thou disquieted within
me? 4. No rest to a troubled and unquiet spirit, but by casting anchor on the
Rock, and hoping in God; Hope thou in God. 5. Hope cannot raise it self in
trouble, but by the gripe of a promise; Hope in God, for I shall yet praise him.
6. Though faith be in darkness, yet will it see afar off; so soon as it puts the
prospect of the Covenant of Grace to its eye, it discerns the proper remedy
of present evils to be in God, and the good it would be at, coming along unto
it, and is as sure of it, as if it were in possession: He is the health of my
countenance, and my God.

PSALM. XLIV. To the chief Musician, for the sons of Korah.
The Church under heavy persecution: First, strengthens her faith in God
before she enter upon her lamentation, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. In the
second place, she lays forth her sad sufferings under the hands of cruel
persecuters, verse 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. In the third, she professes
her constant adherence unto God, and does avow his truth for time bypast, and
her purpose to continue for time to come, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. In the
last place, they pray unto the Lord to arise, and relieve them from their cruel
persecuters, for the glory of both his justice and mercy, ver. 23, 24, 25.

FRom the Inscription, Learn, Seeing the Canon of the whole Hebrew Bible is
commended to us by Christ and his Apostles, as the undoubted word of God, and
the undoubted Scriptures given by inspiration of the Holy Spirit to the holy
men of God, the writers thereof, as kept inti^e and not vitiate by the Jews,
(whose honor for preserving faithfully the Oracles of God committed unto them,
is unstained, Romans 4.2.) We are not to trouble our selves about the name of the
writer, or time of writing of any part thereof; especially because God of set
purpose concealeth the name sundry times of the writer, and the time when it
was written; That we might look in every book, more to the enditer of it, then
to the writer of it; and that the use of any exercise of any of the Saints set
down therein, might be so much the more large, as the consideration of
particular circumstances of time and persons, (whereunto it might seem only to
be applied) were laid aside; For this Psalm wanting the name of the writer, and
time of the writing of it also, is looked upon by the Apostle, Romans ^.36. not
only as an experience of the Church before us, but also as a prophecy of the
martyrdom of Christians under the Gospel, and as encouragement to stand
constant in the faith in hottest persecutions.

Ver. 1. WE have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us what
works thou did in their days, in the times of old.

2. How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how
thou did afflict the people, and cast them out.

3. For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them; but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto them.

FOr the confirmation of their faith, they lay forth three arguments. The first
is from the Lords mighty work in driving out the Canaanites, and planting their
fathers in Canaan, made mention of in holy Scripture. Whence learn, 1. The
informations which the Scripture does give us of Gods working for his people,
is as sure, and should be so looked upon by us; as if the people of God who
lived in the days when these works were done, and who were eyewitnesses
thereof, should also rise up from the dead when the Scriptures are read, and
testify unto us, saying: Of these things we were eyewitnesses, and we tell
them unto you for unquestionable truths; for thus much do these words import:
We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us what thou did
in their days. 2. The Scripture does keep the declarations of Gods work and
will so fresh, and clean and pure from the mixture and superfluity and
imperfection of humane tradition, that God will own it as his own proper
testimony, when we bring it before him: Our ears have heard, O God, what thou
did in the times of old. 3. Gods old works have new use in all ages, for the
furtherance of Believers faith, patience and comfort: We have heard what thou
did in times of old, say the Saints now in trouble; and standing in need of
experience of the like works of God for them. 4. Albeit comparison of bygone
better times with ours, does augment grief and tentation at first; yet when
they are well looked upon in their end and use, they serve to comfort us, and
confirm our faith, as here the persecuted Kirks use-making of the like
condition of the Lords people before them does teach us. 5. Although Families
and Nations were rooted in a Land, like old Oak-trees, and were very long
possessors of it; yet God can drive them out of it, by what instruments soever
he pleases to do it; The work of vanquishing Nations, and subduing of them,
and casting out of them, is the Lords work: Thou did drive out the heathen
with thy hand. And so is the planting of a people in a land, or continuing
families in succession: Thou plantedst our fathers, and castedst out the
people. 6. The Lords part in a work is best seen, when man's part and all that
he, as an instrument has done, or could have done in it, is all declared null;
being considered as separate from God, who moved the instruments, and did work
by them what he pleased: They got not the land in possession by their own
sword, etc. 7. The fountain of all good which is done to, or by the Church, is
the only mere favor of God and his good pleasure; That they are an
incorporation, a Church planted, fost^red, defended so long, watered, spared so
long, all is free favor; Neither did their own arm save them, but thy right
hand, etc. because thou had a favor unto them. 8. When God shows the light
of his countenance to a people or person, he will also show his power for them;
Thy arm and the light of thy countenance, gave them the land in possession.
These two go together.

Ver. 4. Thou art my King, O God; command deliverance for Jacob. The second
argument for confirmation of the Church, is from the relation between God and
her; Thou art my King, O God, etc. Whence learn, 1. Trouble does make Faith
thirsty, and teaches the believer to make use of his right and interest, and
relations between God and him, which otherwise possibly might have lien idle in
his coffe^; yea, and Faith by trouble is made wise to choose out the relation
which serves most for its present use; Thou art my King, O God. 2. Relations
between God and his people, do stand constantly in adversity, as well as in
prosperity: The godly in persecution have God for a King to come unto, from
whom they may expect all the benefits which Subjects can expect from a potent
King, as here the Church says to God, how ever thou think it fit to put us
under the feet of persecuters; yet Thou art my King, O God. 3. Whatsoever be
the particular condition of any member of the Church, their prayer should be
put forth for the whole body; specially when the persecution is of the whole:
Command deliverance for Jacob. 4. It will cost the Lord but a word to deliver
his people: Let him give out order, and it shall be effected; The Church craveth
no more, but Command deliverance.

Ver. 5. Through thee will we push down our enemies; through thy name will we
t^ead them under that rise up against us.

6. For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

7. But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that
hated us.

8. In God will we boast all the day long; and praise thy Name for ever. Selah.

The third argument to confirm their Faith, is the conscience of their sincere
purpose, to give God the glory of inabling them unto all duties, whereunto he
has promised to enable them. Whence learn, 1. The believer may promise to
himself whatsoever God has promised unto him; has God promised to give his
own people the victory over their enemies? then the believer may promise to
himself he shall overcome his persecuters, and through Gods strength be more
then a conqueror over them; Through thee will we push down our enemies. If the
enemy make head against them after a defeat, the Believer may say, Through thy
Name will we tread under that rise up against us. 2. The less confidence me have
in our selves or in any thing beside God, the more evidence have we of the
sincerity of our faith in God: For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my
sword save me. 3. It is a proof of sincerity of Faith, to give God as much
credit for time to come, as he has gained to himself, by the evidencing of his
truth in time bygone; My sword shall not save me: But thou have saved us, and
therefore through thee will we push down our enemies. 4. Whosoever does hate the
Lords people, shall be forced to think shame of their enmity one day; Thou have
put them to shame, that hated us. 5. The glory which we give to God in
prosperity, we should give him the same in our adversity; change of times and
dispensations should not change his glory, nor our confidence in him: Though
the Church be under foot of men, the Churches God is above all: In God will we
boast all the day long, and praise thy Name for ever.

Ver. 9. But thou have cast off, and put us to shame, and go not forth with
our armies.

10. Thou make us to turn back from the enemy; and they which hate us, spoil
for themselves.

11. Thou have given us like sheep appointed for meat; and have scattered us
among the heathen.

12. Thou sellest thy people for naught; and do not increase thy wealth by
their price.

13. Thou make us a repro^ch unto our neighbors, a scorn and derision to
them that are round about us.

14. Thou make us a b^ word among the heathen; a shaking of the head among
the people.

15. My confusion is continually before me, and the shame of my face has
covered me.

16. For the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth: by reason of the
enemy and avenger.

Having thus fastened a resolution to believe constantly in God, the Psalmist
lays forth the lamentable condition of the Church before God, with the
tentation which did assault his people in their sufferings. Whence learn, 1. It
can stand with the constant love of God to his people, to put them to so hard
exercises by variety of troubles; as he may seem not only to break off his
former course of kindness toward them, but also to cast them off, and turn
against them, by sending sore judgments on them, which ordinarily do speak
unto humane sense wrath, and utter wrath; Thou have cast off; yea, and they may
seem disappointed of their hoped for protection and assistance from God; Thou
have put us to shame: and may lose heart and hand when they go to battle
against their enemies in a good cause; Thou go not forth with our armies,
ver. 9. and be put to flight in battles, and be made a spoil to their
despiteful enemies: Thou make us turn back from our enemies, and they that
hate us, spoil for themselves. v. 10. and being destitute of humane help for
recovery, may seem to be left in the hand of the enemy, to dispose of them (as
it may seem) to his pleasure; Thou have given us like sheep for meat. And
albeit all believers cannot be cut off, yet we may lose the face of a Church or
Congregation: Thou have scattered us among the Heathen, ver. 11. and may be
made underlings and slaves to oppressors with no apparent advantage to the
Lords glory, but seeming loss rather; Thou sellest thy people for naught, and
do not increase thy wealth with their price, ver. 12. And may be deprived,
not only of the common duties of humanity, which may be expected of neighbors,
but also be disdained by them, mocked and reproached by them: Thou make us a
reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are about us,
ver. 13. And in a word, may be the most despised people under heaven; which as
it is the just punishment of the scandalous carriage of the visible Church,
when they make Gods name to bereproached among Idolaters and heathen people; So
is it the sharpest trial and tentation of the truly godly that can be; Thou
make us a byword among the heathen, a shaking of the head among the people,
verse. 14. Learn also, 2. As Gods presence manifested among his people, and for
them in the sight of the world, makes them the most famous, wise, courageous,
prosperous and blessed people in the world: So when God being provoked by the
wicked behavior of his professed people, leaves them, with-draweth his
protection from them, will show himself angry at them; they become foolish and
feeble sheep, a despicable and disdained people above all others; We turn back
from the enemy. Thou have given us as sheep appointed for meat, a reproach, a
scorn, a byword. 3. Whatsoever calamity comes upon us, howsoever, and for
whatsoever cause, we may safely take God for the worker of all our woe; albeit
the meritorious cause be in our self, the inflicting of the calamity is of the
Lord; for there is no trouble in the City which the Lord will not avow himself
to be the inflicter of; for here the Prophet puts all upon God, Thou have done
it, five or six times. 4. When the visible Church has drawn on misery on her
self, and God has inflicted calamities justly on her; it is safer to go to
God, and lay before him all his work of justice, and the misery which lies on
us, then to keep it within our breasts, or tell it of him to others; He that has
wounded us, is only able to heal us, so does this example teach us to do. 5.
When the visible Church is visited with sad calamities, the true members thereof
are partakers of the trouble and sorrow, and shame of that condition: My
confusion is continuallly before me, says the Psalmist. 6. It is not very soon
that the Church is delivered out of her trouble, when once she falls in it;
there is a time wherein it is continued: My confusion is continually before me,
and the shame of my face has covered me, ver. 15.7. When the enemy does
reproach Religion and righteousness, because of the calamity of the godly; the
more is spoken of Gods respect to the godly, and their cause, the more the
enemy reproacheth and puts the godly to shame; and so (while Gods
dispensation seems to speak the contrary) it seems to be but their own
confusion for the godly to speak of God, or godliness, and righteousness of
their cause. This is a sad case, The shame of my face has covered me, for the
voice of him that reproacheth, and blasphemeth, by reason of the enemy and the
avenger* verse 16.

Ver. 17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee: neither
have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant.

18. Our heart is not turned back: neither have our steps declined from thy way.

19. Though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us
with the shadow of death.

20. If we have forgotten the Name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a
strange god:

21. Shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.

22. Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep
for the slaughter.

In the third place, the godly do profess for all that is said, their
steadfastness in the profession of their faith for which they were persecuted.
Whence learn, 1. It is the duty of the Lords people, whatsoever trouble or
persecution they shall fall into, to be steadfast in the profession of the true
Religion, and in every point of controverted truth: All this is come upon us,
yet have we not forgotten thee. 2. As the maintaining of controverted truth
must flow from faith in God, and love to him, entertaining the affectionate
remembrance of Gods kindness, whatsoever change of dispensation they shall
feel: So the passing from a point of truth in time of trouble, is a forgetting
of God who is but hiding himself for a while, till the trial be perfected;
Therefore say the faithful, All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten
thee: 3. As the Lord has been pleased to enter into Covenant with his Church,
and to make the Covenant a sanctified means for keeping his people more
steadfast in their duty; So should his people make conscience of keeping
Covenant made with God, and of remaining steadfast in the maintenance of every
duty whereunto they stand bound therein, that when they give account thereof,
they may say with comfort, We have not dealt falsely in thy Covenant. 4.
Covenants which people do make for adhering to the true Religion, and to mora^^
duties commanded in Gods word, are not of the nature of humane Covenants,
wherein man and man are the parties, and God only judge and witness; but are
such Covenants as God is also a party therein, to whom a people is so much the
more engaged, as they are sworn to keep his Law, and therefore such Covenants
are called Gods Covenant: We have not dealt falsely in thy Covenant. 5. No
excuse from hazard of trouble, or persecution can guard the conscience, to
shift or pass from the Covenant of God: Nothing can make us give a comfortable
account of our carriage in relation to the Covenant, save upright and straight
dealing before God; We have not dealt falsely in thy Covenant. verse. 17. 6. The
Lord can procure more honor to himself in the time of the persecution of his
scattered people by the constancy of his Martyrs, and suffering Saints in their
open profession and maintenance of his truth before their persecuters; then
when the visible Church lived in prosperity, and scandalized their neighbors
by their ill behavior, as this experience of scattered Israel makes evident.
7. A good conscience does much sweeten affliction in the time of trial, as here
appears. 8. It is necessary for making a man constant in the outward
profession of truth in the time of persecution, that his heart be established
by grace, that his heart be fixed, trusting in the Lord; These shall be born
through, who may say, Our heart is not turned back. 9. It is necessary to watch
over our several actions, lest by little and little in particular passages we
be drawn aside from our walking with a straight foot toward the Gospel; and
lest the heart be stolen away by little and little from the truth; therefore
these two must be joined together in our endeavor: That neither our heart be
turned back, neither our steps decline from the Lords way, verse. 18. 10. Albeit
the Lord for perfecting the full trial of the faith of his people should put
them in the power of most cruel Tyrants, and in daily danger of losing their
life, yet should they choose to suffer all extremity of torments, and death it
self, rather then to depart from the truth; for so did the Lords approved
witnesses before us: Though God did break them sore in the place of Dragons,
and cover them with the shadow of death, v. 19. 11. In the time of trial
concerning Religion, two sorts of sins are to be eschewed. The one is the
passing from any point of the truth of doctrine or divine ordinances; The other
is the practicing of any point of false worship of another institution, then
what is the Lords; Whether under pretense of offering it to the true God, or
with profession unto another God; for both these are to be eschewed, because
the first sort of sin is a forgetting of the name of God: The other is, a
stretching out of our hands to a strange god. 12. The Lord who searches the
depth of a man's heart, will make special search for corrupters of Religion,
and depravers of divine Doctrine, worship or ordinances, and all sorts of
idolatry, whatsoever excuses or pretenses be used for the coloring or covering
of the same: If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our
hands to another god, shall not God search this out? v. 20. 13. In time of
persecution for Religion; nothing can counter balance the terrors and
allurements of the persecuters, and make a man steadfast in the cause of God,
save the fear of God, and love to God settled in the heart; For the reason of
the Saints stedfastnesie in this Psalm is, because God would have searched out
their sin, if they had done otherways; for he knows the secrets of the
hearts, v. 21. 14. Such as resolve to bear out the profession of the truth,
must resolve to give their life for the maintenance of it: We are killed all
the day long. 15. It is ordinary for the world to hate the servants of God, and
true Saints, more for their faithfulness to God, and uprightness in his
service, then for any other cause; For thy sake are we killed. 16. It is mercy
to us, that when God might punish us for our sins, he does make our correction
honorable, and our troubles to be for a good cause; For thy sake are we
killed. 17. Although all the hours of the day the persecuters were taking and
killing some of our Brethren, the Saints for their faith in God, and fidelity
in his service; yet that must not divert the rest from following of the truth,
and professing of true Religion; How long soever the Lord continue the
persecution and our trouble for his cause, we should resolve constantly to
endure to the end; Yea, for thy cause are we killed all the day long, verse. 22.

Verse 23. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.

24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face? and forgettest our affliction, and our
oppression?

25. For our soul is bowed down to the dust; our belly cleaves unto the earth.

26. Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake.

In the last part of the Psalm, the Psalmist in behalf of the Church does pray
to be delivered from the cruelty of persecuters; and being in bitterness of
spirit for anguish and grief, does vent his present sense of Gods dispensation,
yet corrected by faith; Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Lord who watches over
Israel be most vigilant for every one of his children, and never slumbereth nor
sleeps, but is still upon his work, his glorious work of preparing his jewels
for eternal life, even when he puts his people in the furnace of affliction
by hottest persecution, (for then in special he is about to glorify himself
and his Saints also in the trial of their precious faith, and is bringing to
the view of men and Angels, that he has a people who do love him better then
their own lives, and who will endure any misery rather then deny any point of
his truth committed unto them;) yet such is the strength of natural senses and
affections, such is the partiality of self-love in carnal disputation about
Gods providence, when he puts his people to so sad sufferings for no fault
done to their persecuters; and such is the power of Satan's tentations, helped
on by humane infirmity, and perturbation of passions, that God is looked on as
if he misregarded the case of his own people, and took no more care of them
then a sleeping man does of his business, and this is imported in this
expression; Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? 2. Faith does not allow not
subscribe unto carnal sense, but in presenting the objections thereof unto
God, does really refute them. First, in that by prayer it goes to God, who is
the hearer of the most secret sighs of supplicants, at whatsoever time, night
or day, or in whatsoever place opened up unto him. Secondly, by entreating him
to refute the slander and calumny which carnal sense, and suggested tentations
did put upon him, Awake, arise; that is, let it be seen by the manifesting of
thy justice and mercy, as thou usest to do by thy open working for us, that
thou take notice of our sufferings, and of our persecuters violence. Thirdly,
by avowing that such misregarding of his own cause and servants, as sense and
tentation did vent, is inconsistent with his nature, Covenant, Promises, and
practices toward his people; for, Why sleep thou, is as much as, it is not
possible that thou sleep; and why here is not a word of quarrelling, but a
word of denying, that any reason can be given for such a thought, as God
sleeps. Fourthly, by avowing faith and hope of God manifesting himself in due
time, for deciding of the controversy between them and their persecuters; for
what he prays for, he believes to obtain. His prayer being according to the
revealed will of God: and Awake why sleep thou, O Lord, is as much as I
believe, Lord, that thou will indeed let us and the world see that thou art not
sleeping in all this our hard sufferings for thy sake; and therefore I pray
thee show thy self early. 3. As tentation, if it cannot fasten upon us any
thought of Gods careless misregarding of us in our sad sufferings; yet will it
suggest suspicions of Gods wrath, indignation, hatred, rejection, and
reprobation of us; So faith will study to dispell this mist, and quench this
fiery dart by prayer also; Cast us not off for ever, giving assurance, that
albeit there were wrath in their exercise, yet it shall be but for a short
time, and shall not be perpetual. 4. As tentation, if it cannot fasten upon us
suspicion of Gods hatred of us, and of his purpose to cast us off for ever; yet
it will suggest that God is pursuing us for some sin which we know not of,
that he is wroth with us in suffering persecuters to prevail and to oppress
us, (when in the mean-time he is glorifying himself, and his truth in us,
edifying others by our constancy in such a point of truth, and by our patience
in bearing the cross, to the advantage both of the present age and posterity:)
So faith must study to dispel this mist also, and to quench this fiery dart as
well as the former by rejecting this to be the cause; for it is no token of
Gods pursuing sin in wrath, when God gives us grace, not only to believe in
him, but also to suffer for his Names sake, and the Gospels; When he makes us
to be his public Martyrs and witnesses for his truth, some in one degree of
Martyrdom, some in another; When he makes the spirit of glory, and of God to
rest upon us, and so blesses us, that when on the persecuters part he is evil
spoken of, he is on our part glorified. This (I say) is no token of wrath, no
token of pursuing us for our sins. Therefore albeit sense calls this a hiding
of his face, yet faith will not admit these causes which might import wrath:
For, Wherefore hidest thou thy face? is in the terms of faith, as much as,
Albeit it be true, that we have sinned, and thou seem to hide thy face; yet
I cannot admit this thought, that this thy dealing with us is in wrath; I see
no reason why I should expound thy dispensation so; yea, the very question
wherefore, imports that the Psalmist cannot condescend upon any suggested
reason of this sort, to prove the hiding of Gods face, as sense would say; and
therefore he expects the Lord will show forth tokens of his love and good
will to them in due time. 5. As when these tentations are refuted by faith,
long-lasting trouble meeting with infirm flesh, does hold up the complaint of
poor frail man, not being able to endure trouble long, weak nature is ready to
think that it is forgotten or laid aside, and strikes still upon its own
string of lamentation, whatsoever faith does speak to the contrary, whether it
have reason or not; So faith must do its office, and that is, when it cannot
stop complaining, it must lay forth before God in prayer the lamenter, and his
lamentation to find pity; Why forgettest thou our affliction, and our
oppression? 6. All the reason that a poor persecuted and afflicted person can
bring from himself, to plead pity when he lamenteth his case to the Lord, is
his own weakness, emptiness, low condition, near drawing to discouragement,
fainting and dying; For, Our soul is bowed down to the dust. 7. The godly soul
under persecution, resolves never to yield to the will of the persecuters, nor
quit the Lords cause, but to lie supplicant at Gods feet from day to day, and
there to die, if it be his will to delay or deny outward relief. Thus much the
gesture of the supplicant speaks; Our belly cleaves to the earth. 8. Though
the Believer do find no reason in himself of his prayer for relief, yet he
finds reasons sufficient to give him hope in God; As first, The Lords
Sovereign power and place to help such weak creatures as come to him in their
need; Arise for our help, arise a help for us: Secondly, the office of a
Redeemer, wherewith he clothed himself in the Messiah Christ Jesus; in the
paction of whose redemption, and payment of the price of it, and begun and
perfected accomplishment of it, every Believer has undoubted interest and
right unto all particular deliveries out of all straits, as branches, and
appendices of the great Redemption of their souls unto eternal life. And this
is hinted at in these words; Arise for our help, and redeem us. Thirdly, the
purchased, promised, and constantly running forth, and offered mercy of God to
Believers, loses all objections and doubts arising from our sins,
unworthiness, and ill-deserving: For, (Redeem us for thy mercies sake)
imports so much.

PSALM. XLV. To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the sons of Korah,
Maschil: a song of loves.
Laying aside what uses to be spoken here of Solomon's marrying of Pharaohs
daughter, and of some typical things therein, (tending to the extenuation of
Solomon's fault) as conjectural, and serving nothing to the advantage of that
marriage, presuppose the conjecture did hold, both concerning the occasion, and
also what might seem typical in it, because similitudes taken from, and types
made of what thing soever God pleases, do serve to make clear what the Spirit
will have taken up about Christ, or about any spiritual antitype; but does not
serve to make clear the thing resembled by the antitype, from being sinful, as
by the type of Agar, and of the brazen Serpent, and of Jonas his punishment,
and sundry other similitudes and parables set down in Scripture does appear:
But we are sure this Psalm is a song, describing the mystical marriage of the
Messiah Christ Jesus our Lord, and his Church, wherein Christ the Bridegroom is
praised, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And the Church his Spouse is
instructed in her duty to him, ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And the end of the
song declared to be the everlasting praise of Christ, ver. 16, 17.

COncerning the Inscription, that this Psalm is altogether spiritual and holy,
appears; First by this, That it is directed to the public Minister of Gods
worship, to be made publicly use of in Gods public praises. To the chief
Musician, for the sons of Korah. Secondly, it is entitled Maschil, a song to
give instruction to the Church of God, concerning the Majesty and grace of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the duty of the Church, and the spiritual blessings of
the Believers. Thirdly, it is a part of divine Scripture, ranked among the holy
Psalms, and acknowledged by the Church of the old Testament for such.
Fourthly, the testimony of the Apostle, applying it directly as the word and
speech of the Father to the Son of God, Christ Jesus, Heb. 1.8. Fifthly, the
matter and words of the Psalm, which cannot be verified in any person save in
Jesus Christ alone. Sixthly, the plurality of loves here spoken of, to show
unto the Reader the excellency of the love of Christ, or the love of God to us
in Christ Jesus; wherein the perfection of all loves that ever was heard tell
of, is surpassed; It is a song of loves.

Ver. 1. MY heart is enditing of a good matter* I speak of the things which I
have made touching the King: my tonque is the pen of a ready writer. THis Verse
is a commendation given to this song by the Spirit of God, by way of Preface.
1. It is a good matter. 2. It is inspired; The Spirit of the Lord making the
heart filled with his presence, to be boiling in the enditing of it. 3. It is
of Christ the King. 4. It is the Poem of the inspired Prophet, made ready to
express what is furnished by the Spirit, for the edification of the Church in
all ages. Whence learn, 1. The knowledge of the love of Christ to his Church,
and of his espousing of her, is the sweetest subject, the matter of the most
glad tidings that ever sinners did hear of, and worthy indeed to be called a
good matter. 2. The heart acquainted with this sweet and saving knowledge, will
be more ready to communicate what it knows, then able to express it self;
the heart will be as a spring-well, a boiling pot, according to the measure of
the Lords presence in it. 3. The theme of the praises of the believing soul is
Christ's person, clothed with offices for the salvation of souls. For the main
subject of this song is touching the King.

4 When the heart is full of gracious affection, the tongue will be loosed to
praise God, so as others may be edified: out of the abundance of the heart, the
mouth will speak heartily; My tongue, says he, is the pen of a ready writer.

Ver. 2. Thou art fairer then the children of men: grace is poured into thy
lips: therefore God has blessed thee for ever.

3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty: with thy glory and thy majesty;

4 And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.

5. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies; whereby the
people fall under thee.

6 Thy throne (O God) is for ever and ever: the scepter of thy kingdom is a
right scepter.

7 Thou love righteousness* and hate wickedness: therefore God, thy God,
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

8 All thy garments smell of mirrhe, aloes, and cassia: out of the ivory
palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.

9 Kings daughters were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did
stand the Queen in gold of Ophir.

In the description of the excellency of Christ, the very true Son of God,
there are set down sundry points of glory. The first is, no beauty among men
comparable to the beauty of Christ, who is not only the fairest of ten thousand
for wisdom and holiness, and whatsoever virtue can be named, as he is man;
but also as he is God, he is the resplendency of his Fathers glory, the holy
one of Israel; of whose glory the whole earth is full, by whose beautiful
righteousness and power the deformity of sin and misery of his own is taken
away in part, and shall be removed fully, therefore justly is it said of him,
Thou art faire^ then the children of men. 2. Christ by the doctrine which he
delivers is able not only to discover sin and misery, and the true way of
delivery from the same by grace, and to direct a man in the way of salvation by
grace, but also graciously and powerfully to persuade a man to embrace it,
Grace is poured into thy lips. 3. Christ as man is furnished abundantly and
above measure, for communicating of the blessing to his hearers invincibly and
infallibly, and for making his Doctrine effectually powerful to salvation to
whomsoever he will; for, Therefore (or to this purpose) God has blessed him for
ever. 4. Christ is furnished to subdue and conquer and bring in so many as he
pleases under subjection unto his Kingdom; he has his sword even the rod of
his mouth, his word which is sharper then any two-edged sword which no man can
withstand. 5. He goes not abroad to conquer or subdue without this his sword,
which is his word; it is always with him ready to be drawn forth, and to be
thrust in the soul and conscience of the hearer, with whom he minds to deal,
His sword is girded upon his thigh. 6. Christ is Almighty, and so able to make
good all that he speaks, and to make his word of precept, promise and
threatening effectual unto the errand for which it is sent, He is most mighty.
7. Where he is pleased to open his word and to discover himself what he is,
they that s^t in darkness do see a great light of his own glory as God, a
shining light, a glorious light, making open the deep counsel of God, and
mystery of men's salvation, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with
thy glory. 3. Where he pleases to show himself, there the stateliness of a
mighty Monarch is seen, the sovereignty of the rule of heaven and earth is
seen, able to shake the heart with fear, and awe of his greatness, with his
glory there is majesty or stately magnificence. 9. The wheels of Christ's
Chariot, whereupon he rides when he goes to conquer and sub^ue new converts
to his Kingdom, are Majesty, truth, meekness, righteousness, manifested in the
preaching of his Gospel; Majesty, when the stately magnificence of his person
and offices is declared; Truth, when the certainty of all that he teaches in
Scripture is known; Meekness when his grace and mercy is offered to rebels; and
Righteousness, when justification by faith in his name, is clearly set forth.
10. Christ goes no voyage in vain, he comes not short of his intent and
purpose, but does the work for which he comes, preaching the Gospel, In his
majesty, truth, meekness, and righteousness he rides prosperously. 11. Christ
can do what he will; he can do terrible things to make his enemies tremble, and
his friends reverence him with holy fear, having omnipotency in him to work by,
as ready as a man has his right hand to employ; let him but will to have any
thing done, and it shall be done; he has not long to advise what he is able to
do, as men consult with their ability, whether they be so powerful as to effect
what they intend, or would have done, Thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things. 12. Albeit he needs no admonition to do what he is in doing or will
do, yet loves he to have his children furthering the advancement of his
Kingdom, showing unto him what they would have done, and praying unto him that
his Kingdom may more and more come, as the form of speech endited by the holy
spirit does import, Gird thy sword, ride thou prosperously, etc. 13. Christ in
his conquest is to meet with his enemies, of who^ some will openly oppose him,
some will feignedly profess subjection, but will not heartily submit themselves
unto him, but stand aloof and at a distance, being far from him in their
hearts, when with their lips they draw neer-hand unto him; both these are here
called The Kings enemies. 14. Such as do not draw near unto him in their heart,
he can and will send messengers of wrath unto their heart, threatenings which
shall be executed, terrors which shall be followed with judgments, and judgments
which shall end in their destruction, sudden and unexpected; how many or how
strong soever they seem to be, they shall not stand before him nor be able to
hinder his conquest, Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies,
whereby the people fall under thee. 15. Christ Jesus the promised Messiah was
revealed to the Church of Israel, to be the very true eternal God, that their
faith and ours might have satisfaction, and a solid ground to rest upon, in the
all sufficiency and infinite worthiness of the promised Redeemer, as the
Apostle, Heb. 1.8. confirms unto us, citing to this purpose this very text,
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever. 16. Christ shall not want a Church
from generation to generation; let persecuters do their worst, he shall reign as
King, and sit on his throne in his Church, giving forth his laws, and executing
them, oppose him who will, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever* 17. The
Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, which is the Gospel or the word of God in
Scripture, whereby he gathers his subjects and rules them, and the manner of
his governing his people by the rules of his law and discipline, is most just
and equitable, a righteous scepter, whereby the subjects may be instructed in
all righteousness, and may be justified and made righteous; The scepter of thy
Kingdom is a right scepter. 18. The holiness and righteousness of Jesus
Christ, both as he is God, and as he is God incarnate, is so essential to his
person and employment, that his rule of government and administration of his
affairs in his kingdom cannot be but right, as for direction, so also for
rewards to them who obey his direction, and punishments of the disobedients,
Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity. 19. As Christ is very God, so
is he very man in all things (except sin) like unto us whom he calls, Psalm.
22.22. and Heb. 2.12. his brethren, and here his fellows, sharemen and
partakers of all that is given to him, and joint heirs with him, Romans 8.17. and
by reason of making covenant in our name with the Father, and by assuming of
our nature, according to the tenor of the covenant, God becomes his God and
our God, and he in our name as man receives the gifts of the holy spirit
without measure, for fitting him as he is man to manage his Kingdom in
righteousness effectually; for it is said, Therefore, or to that intent, God,
thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness. 20. The gifts and graces
of the holy Spirit spoken of here in terms of oil, (employed for figuring men's
furnishing unto their calling, and enabling of Kings and Priests unto their
offices, and employed also in the entertainment of honorable guests invited to
a feast) are so bestowed on believers, joynt-heirs with Christ, as Christ is
not degraded from his sovereignty by his partners exaltation; for of Christ it
is said, Thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. 21. As the attendants of great persons are refreshed by the smell of
their ointments and perfumed garments, so are Christ's attendants refreshed with
the consolation of Christ's Spirit perfuming all his outward ordinances, wherein
as in his garments he does show forth himself to his church more comfortably,
then any perfume or odoriferous spice can set forth, All thy garments smell of
myrrh and aloes and cassi^h. 22. Not only the heavens where God shows fo^th
his glory to souls of just men made perfect, but also all the places where his
honor dwells, all the meetings of his church where he shows himself in his
ordinances to a spiritual eye, are all of them most glorious and stately
palaces; for there is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and there is the beauty of
holiness, whence does come forth the smell of his graces in his ordinances, as
out of Ivory palaces. 23. It is savoury and well-pleasing to Christ, when his
people find pleasure in him, and are refreshed by his blessing upon the public
ordinances; for, Thereby they have made thee glad, says the Psalmist to Christ.
24. Albeit the catholic church consisting of true converts or real Saints, be
but the one and only true Spouse of Christ, yet particular visible churches
consisting of Saints by calling, by obligation, by profession and common
estimation, their own or others; some of them being true Saints indeed in the
Spirit, some of them but counterfeits, and Saints in the letter only, are in
number many, as they are dispersed for time and place wherein they do live, and
do make up sundry incorporations and Ecclesiastic consociations in Parishes,
Towns, Countries and Kingdoms, as the Lord gives them occasion, opportunity
or possibility to make use one of another for communion of Saints; in this
respect (I say) they are many, and therefore the true Spouse, the true church
consisting of true converts (whose praise is of God, to whom only they are
certainly known, and not of men) being but one, is compared to the Queen; but
the particular churches, whose collections and consociations is known to men,
being many, are compared to Ladies of Honor which serve the Queen; of this
sort is here prophesied, that the most renowned cities, countries, Provinces,
and Kingdoms should be professed attendants of Christ the bridegroom's honor,
and professed servants of his church, and promoters of the honor, estate, and
welfare of his spouse; Kings daughters among thy honorable women. 25. Albeit
our Lord will allow a place of honor and room in his own court unto visible
churches in their several consociations greater and smaller, for that service
which they may do in order to the gathering in of the Elect into the inner
court of nearest spiritual communion with him, yet it is the universal
invisible church which he counts his Spouse; she is the Queen who has access
unto him to be in highest honor beside him, Upon thy right hand did stand the
Queen. 26. As the whole society of true Saints reverently attend the will of the
Lord, that every one of them in their place may honor the Lord: so are they
all highly honored of the Lord, and adorned with whatsoever may make them
glorious; for the ornaments put on by Christ, such as are adoption,
justification, sanctification, with all other relations tending to their
felicity, are here compared to the finest Gold; The Queen does stand at his
right hand in gold of Ophir.

Ver. 10. Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear: forget also
thine own people, and thy fathers house,

11. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty: he is thy Lord, and worship
thou him.

12 And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, even the rich among the
people shall entreat thy favor.

13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold.

14 She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: the virgins
her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.

15 With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the
Kings Palace.

This is the other part of the Psalm wherein the Spirit of the Lord speaks
to the true Church-militant, and directs her in her duty, and encourages her
by sundry inducements to follow the Lords direction. Whence learn, 1. As
because their is spiritual love and respect between God and his Church,
therefore the Cevenant and the spiritual communion between Christ and his Church
is compared to a marriage: So because the derivation of all spiritual life,
grace and motion which the Church has, is from God, and depends on him;
Therefore the Church is compared to a daughter, Hearken, O daughter, and ver.
13. she is called the King^ daughter. 2. The way and order of bringing the
Church to her duty, is by her hearing of his word, consideration of what is
taught, and subjection of her spirit to the obedience of faith; Hearken, O
daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear. 3. Because even the true members
of the Church, whose praise is not of men but of God, are in this life
entangled in affections to their old ways and corruption of manners; Therefore
every one has need to renounce and forget more and more their old lusts and
enticements of the world, which is a very true fruit, and necessary evidence of
their hearing in faith, Forget also (says he) thine own people, and thy
fathers house. 4. The more we renounce and abandon our lusts and sinful
inclination in obedience to God, the more are we beautified with holiness, and
are acceptable to God In our endeavors, Forsake thy fathers house, so shall the
King greatly desire thy beauty. 5. Christ has all right unto our service, and
by creation, redemption, and covenant we are absolutely bound to serve and
honor him in all things: He is thy Lord, and worship thou him. 6. When the
Church honors Christ he will honor her, and make the noble and potent in the
world submit themselves to her and seek communion with her, and to esteem the
meanest true member of the Church, more blessed then riches or honor can make
any man: The daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift: The rich among the
people shall entreat thy favor. 7. The glory of the true Kirk, and of every
true member thereof is in things spiritual, not discernable by the uptaking of
the natural man; for what is outwardly professed, is inwardly studied unto
sincerity by them who worship God in spirit and in truth; and the graces
wherewith she is adorned, as knowledge, faith, love, hope zeal, courage,
sob^iety, patience, are not the object of outward beholders, but most beautiful
in the eyes of a spiritual discerner, and in the eyes of him that sees in
secret: The Kings daughter is all glorious within. 8. Whatsoever inherent
graces the Saints have, and how beautiful soever they be; yet they have need of
a garment which may hide their imperfections, and beautify them before God; to
wit, the imputed righteousness of Christ, the Husband of the Church, who only
has this garment to sell, Rev. 3.18. and though it be bought without money and
without price, yet it is very rich; for whatsoever either nature or art can
furnish to set it forth, is but a shadowing similitude of it, Her clothing is
of wrought gold. 9. Though the marr^age of Christ and his Church be bound up,
and the hand-fasting be past, and tokens of love be given to the Bride yet the
full solemnity of the complete marriage is delayed til a set time, that the
particular members and the whole Church may be perfected. The time of the
brides being brought to a constant habitation with Christ, is at the Lords
appointed time; to wit, at the death of every particular Saint, and of the
whole Church together at the day of our Lords second coming; the day is coming,
wherein she shall be brought unto the King. 10. Albeit now there be many
imperfections of the Saints, which Christ's imputed righteousness does hide, yet
in the day of the Churches being brought to the presence of God to be with him
for ever; she shall have no imperfection, spot or wrinkle, or want of any thing
which may per^ect her glory in all respects; she shall put on immortality and
incorruption, and her very body of flesh shall be made conformable to the
glorious body of our Lord Jesus; She shall be brought unto the King in raiment
of needle work: Wherein the height of artifice and of natures materials are
joined as the fittest similitude which can express this unexpressible glory.
11. The same shall be the glorious state of particular Saints, and particular
congregations, which shall be of the whole church universal; whereof as every
true congregation and particular Saint therein is a part, and have contributed
their service in their time to the good of the whole church, as handmaids to
the Mistress: so shall they share in the glorious reward; The virgins, her
companions shall be brought unto thee, so says the Psalmist unto Christ. 12.
Great shall be the joy of men and angels in the general meeting of the whole
church, all being gathered together by the angels, who have lived from the
beginning of the world to the ending thereof, and all received in the
fellowship of God in blessedness to endure for ever, with gladness and
rejoicing shall they be brought, they shall enter into the Kings palace.

Ver. 16. In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou may mak^
princes in all the earth.

17. I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations: therefore shall
the people praise thee for ever and ever.

The two last verses may be applied both to the Bride the true militant church,
and to the Bridegroom Christ Jesus, the King of Saints. As it is applied to the
church, Learn, 1. The Saints have no ground of gloriation in their progenitors
according to the flesh, of whom they draw nothing but what is polluted with
sin; but all the glory of the church, is rather in her children which she
brings forth by the Gospel unto God, In stead of thy fathers shall be thy
children 2. What any member of the church seems to lose in the world by
forsaking thereof and coming to Christ, it is made up to them by Christ in
spiritual respects, if not also in temporal blessings when God sees fit, In
stead of thy fathers shall be thy children. 3. The true children of the church
are indeed the excellent ones of the earth, and princes indeed, wherever they
live, in comparison of all other men who are but the beastly slaves of Satan:
Thy children are princes in all the earth. 4. The true church shall be
honorable, and honore^ by her kindly children in all generations, because of
the estimation which God puts upon her in his holy Scripture: I will make thy
name to be remembered in all generations: Therefore the people shall praise thee.

These verses may also be applied more pertinently to the bridegroom Christ
Jesus, for whose praise the whole Psalm is composed. ver. 1. Of whom only the
words can be verified fully, as only capable of what is ascribed directly to
the person spoken unto here, and cannot be well ascribed to Solomon and
Pharaohs daughter in their marriage; because partly Solomon's marriage with
outlandish women, is marked among his faults, and so can hardly be esteemed to
be honored with this song delivered to the Church for her perpetual
instruction; partly because in the Inscription there is not so much as mention
of Solomon's name, either as type or resemblance of this marriage of Christ and
his Church; and partly also because what is here spoken, has little typical
verity answering to it in the History of Scripture concerning Solomon's
marriage, or children of Pharaohs daughter. And lastly, this song is set down
not in a typical manner, but in a simple similitude of the marriage of a King
and Queen indefinitely, whose marriage uses to be the most glorious of all
eatthly marriages, and fittest to lead us up to that incomparably glorious
spiritual marriage of Christ and his Church. In which consideration from these
words, Learn, 1. Christ does not draw glory from his progenitors according to
his flesh, but gives being and gracious being to such as he regenerateth by
his word and Spirit to be his children, and so it may be said to Christ, In
stead of thy fathers shall be thy children. 2. The excellency of Christ's
children and their princely disposition above the rest of mankind unregenerate,
is of Christ's making; he only it is, of whom properly it may be said, Thou
shall make thy children princes in all the earth; for, He has made us Kings
and Prists to God and his Father. 3. By the Spirit that indicted this Psalm,
and all other Scriptures Christ's name shall be holden forth and remembered from
age to age, while the world lasts, I will make thy name (says the Spirit) to
be remembered to all generations. 4. Christ's espousing unto himself a Church,
and gathering more and more from age to age by his word and Spirit unto it, his
converting souls, and bringing them in to the fellowship of his family, and
giving unto them princely minds and affections where ever they live, is a
large matter of growing and everlasting glory unto his majesty; for in regard
of this point, and what is said before in this Psalm, he adds as the close
of all, Therefore shall the people praise thee.

PSALM. XLVI. To the chief Musician for the sons of Korah, a song upon Alamoth.
After some notable delivery of the Church from the enemies, the Lords people
do confirm themselves in their resolution to trust in God, and not to be afraid
of trouble, because of his comfortable presence among them, which is like unto
a river of continual refreshment, as late experience did give evidence, ver. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and do exhort all men in the world to observe this his late
work, and make use of it for their humiliation, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. as the Church
does make use of it for confirmation, ver. 11.

Ver. 1. GOD is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble.

2. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be removed: and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

3. Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled: though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. Selah.

FRom bygone experience of Gods defending his Church, the Lords people do
strengthen themselves in the faith of Gods word, concerning the care of his
people; and from this ground do guard their heart against the fear of all
possible trouble in time coming. Whence learn, 1. Faith in Gods word and the
profession of it, is made much more vigorous and lively after felt-experience
of the verity thereof; for the Church did believe this truth before this late
delivery, but now after this fresh experience they are animated to set to their
seal to it more confidently, saying, God is our refuge. 2. Albeit the Church
were destitute of all humane strength within her self, and were forsaken; yea
and pursued by all Kings and Princes, yet has she God for a retiring place,
and for furnishing of what is sufficient for her subsistence; God is our refuge
and strength. 3. Albeit the Lord will not exempt his people from trouble, yet
he will be near them in trouble; and when their weakness is discovered to them,
then he will help them, and will not delay his help too long, but will give
help in time of need effectually; for God is to his people, A very present help
in trouble. 4. Nothing can guard the heart of Gods people against the terror of
possible, or imminent troubles, sa^e faith in God; for here the Lords people
having fixed their faith, do make this inference, Therefore will we not fear.
5. The terror of apparent trouble, is the touchstone of confidence in God, and
then is faith fixed, when it does look upon the greatest dangers and troubles
that can be imagined, with resolution to adhere to God and to that truth that
persecuters do oppose, whatsoever may come. We will not fear, though the earth
be removed. 6. Albeit the whole frame of the world were changed, and the work
of creation were either dissolved or confounded, which shall be in effect at the
last day; yet faith finds footing and ground to stand upon in God himself, We
will not fear, though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea,
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with
the swelling thereof. Selah.

Ver. 4. There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God:
the Holy place of the Tabernacles of the most High.

5. God is in the midst of her: she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and
that right early.

The Church does look upon the Lords word and ordinances joined with the
blessing of his Spirit among them, as upon a sufficient consolation against
whatsoever trouble can be imagined. Whence learn, 1. Although there be many
particular persons in the Lords Church militant, and many particular
Congregations as there were many habitations in Jerusalem, and many tabernacles
at the time of the solmn feast, when all the Lords people were gathered
together to the keeping thereof; yet are they all one Church universal, one
kingdom of God, one City compact together in the union of one sealed Covenant,
one true faith and Spirit* The plurality of the Tabernacles of God does make
but one City of God here. 2. Albeit trouble without comfort may fall on men who
know not God; yet to believers within the Church there can no trouble come,
wherein the true Citizens may not find consolation and joy to uphold them
against all causes of sorrow, There is a river, the streams whereof make glad
the City of God. 3. The consolat^ons which God furnishes to all who will make
use of them within the Church, are not like the consolations which the world
can afford, which are in all respects insufficient to overcome trouble; but the
consolations of God are abundant, constantly running, ready at hand, and able
to make a man a conqueror over trouble effectually, and to make him rejoice in
the Lord in the midst of ^^ouble; for this is imported in the similitude of
refreshing water; There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the
City of God. 4. God will never forsake his people who seek after him, but where
they are following his ordinances in any measure of sincerity, there will he
be; God is in the midst of her, 5. As the consolation of the Church, so also
the stability of the Church, and continuance of it from generation to
generation, depends upon Gods settled residence therein; God is in the midst
of her, she shall not be moved. 6. Gods presence among his people will not
exempt them from trouble, but from perdition in trouble: he will not exempt the
bush from burning, but from being consumed, For God shall help her. 7. Albeit
the Lord do not appear at the point of time when we would, yet shall he come
and help in time of need most timeously, God shall help her, and that right
early.

Ver. 6. The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the
earth melted.

7. The LORD of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

He clears the doctrine delivered, by a late experience of Gods taking order
with the enemies of the Church, at the time when they in great confluence and
power made assault against her. Whence learn, 1. It is no small indignation
which the world does bear against the Lords Kingdom, his people, and work
among them: nor is it any mean power from which the Church is in danger to
suffer hardship, but fury in the height of it, and force in the farthest extent
of it, may she expect to encounter with; The heathen raged, the Kingdoms were
moved. 2. It is not the worldly power of the Lords people which can sustain the
assault of their raging enemies, but God himself must prove party to her
oppressors; therefore here the Lord does interpose himself for his people; The
Lord utters his voice. 3. It shall not cost the Lord any business to dispatch
the enemies of his people; let him show himself a little, let him but say the
word, and they are gone; as Snow before the Sun, or fat cast into the fire, so
are they consumed; He uttered his voice, the earth melted. 4. Any one
experience of the Lords working for his church may suffice to confirm the faith
of his people concerning his perpetual presence in his church, for assistance
of his people in their difficulties; for from this one experience he draws
the inference; The Lord of hosts is with us. 5. What the Lord is in wisdom,
power, and other attributes, that may the church apply to her self, and be sure
to have the fruit of it as her need requires; if hosts of heathen and huge
great Armies of whole Kingdoms he against his church, yet still we may be sure
God the Lord of Armies will stand up against them, and for his church, The Lord
of hosts is with us. 6. The covenant of God made with the church in former ages
is good enough security to the church in after ages; for obtaining whatsoever
benefit his covenant includes; The God of Jacob is our refuge* yea the rights
made to the incorporation of the church, is as good security for the use of
every particular believer, as if it were made personally to every member by
name; and therefore as wise citizens do reckon whatsoever they can claim by
their town-charter, no less to belong to them then their own private
possessions: so whatsoever the believer can claim by virtue of the great
charter made to the church, he should reckon it as sure to be his as if his
proper name had been specified in the promises; for, The God of Jacob is our
refuge, is thus much; because God is undoubtedly the God of Jacob, and his
childrens refuge; he must undoubtedly be our God, who are members of that
incorporation, and our refuge.

Ver. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in
the earth.

9. He makes the wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaks the
bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the chariot in the fire.

10. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen: I
will be exalted in the earth.

11. The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

In the latter part of the Psalm, he exhorts all men to make use of this
deliverance given to the Church for their humiliation, confidence in God, and
consolation. Whence learn, 1. When God does work works of wonder in favor of
his Church, most men mark not the Lords doing; such is the dullness and
stupidity, ingratitude, mis-belief and perverseness of men, either thinking
little of his work, or ascribing the praise to instruments, or some other thing
besides God; so that there is need to call unto men, and set them to their
duty; Come and behold the works of the Lord. 2. Wonderful calamities does God
pour out upon the enemies of his people, when he enters in judgment with
them; for what they intended to do to his people, he does unto them, Behold,
what desolations he has made in the earth. 3. When it seems good to the
Lord, he can give peace universally to his Church, and a whiles breathing from
the trouble of outward enemies, He makes wars to cease to the ends of the
earth. 4. Long preparations for war, arms and ammunition which have been made
with great labor and expenses against his Church, the Lord can soon give a
short account of them, and make them useless when he pleases, He breaks the
^ow^, and cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the Chariot in the fire. 5.
Because men cannot understadd what they are doing, or what is their duty so
long as their passions are aloft, so long as their minds are tumultuous,
busied about many things, and distracted from what is most necessary; it is
good for people from time to time to gather in their straying thoughts, to
silence their passions and perturbations, and humbly compose themselves for
observation of whatsoever God requires of them, Be still, and know that I am
God. 6. It is better for men to be wise and acknowledge the Lord by the words
of his instruction, then to leave their lesson to be learned by doleful
experience and danger of destruction, Be still, and know that I am God. 7.
There is not so ready a way for the Lords people to quiet their mind against
the fear of trouble and persecution of men, as to settle their faith about Gods
taking care of his people and of his own cause, and of his mind declared
against his and their enemies; Be still, and know that I am God. 8. The Lord
will not be at a loss by the opposition of his enemies, he will not fail to
enlarge his glory, the more that men go about to suppress it; he will make an
inrode upon his adversaries lands, and make them know himself to be God, either
to their conversion or confusion and destruction; I will (says he) be exalted
among the heathen. 9. How little notice soever be taken of the Majesty of God
oft-times in the visible Church, and always without the Church he be
misregarded, yet will he see to his own glory, not only in the Church, but also
among the enemies of the Church; and not only among such as have actually
invaded his people, but also among them far and near that have taken no notice
either of him or of his people; I will be exalted in the earth. 10. Whatsoever
manifestation of Gods power be made in the world by his judgment against his
enemies who know him not; yet he is ever doing for his Church, and not against
her; The Lord of hosts is with us. 11. The Church of God or belivers, need not
care how many be against them seeing they have more for them then can be against
them; to wit, God and all the creatures at his command, The Lord of hosts is
with us. 12. The strength of the Church stands in her renouncing her own, and
fleeing into Gods strength, and not in opposing their enemy by strong hand,
but by betaking of themselves to God; The God of Jacob is our refuge. 13. We
have need to make God the ground of our confidence, and to make our communion
with God the ground of our comfort; for God is sufficient for us against every
evil, and God is sufficient unto us for furnishing every good; and we have need
to fix and settle our grounds, by oftener subscription of this truth, and oftener
avowing of it, The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, is
repeated.

PSALM. XLVII. To the chief Musician. A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
This Psalm is a Prophecy of the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, and of the
conjunction of Jews and Gentiles in one body under Christ their ^ead and Lord,
delivered by way of exhortation to Jews and Gentiles, joyfully to praise the
God and Savior of his people Jesus Christ* on whom the Psalmist looks as now
ascended into heaven triumphantly after the full payment made of the price of
Redemption, and as going about the gathering in of the Redeemed Gentiles, til
he bring in the fullness of them into one Chruch with the Jews; the exhortation
is prefi^ed, ver. 1. and repeated, ver. 6, 7. the reasons of the exhortation to
a joyful praising of him are seven. The first, ver. 3. The second, ver. 3. The
third, ver. 4. The fourth, ver. 5. The fifth, ver. 7. The sixth, ver. 8. The
seventh, ver. 9.

Verse. 1. O Clap your hands (all ye people) shout unto God with the voice of
triumph. FRom the exhortation to Jews and Gentiles, joyfully to praise the
Redeemer; Learn, 1. Christ's Kingdom and the benefits thereof do belong to more
nations then one, for in him the redeemed in all the nations of the earth are
blessed, Clap your hands all yea people, or, all ye Nations, says the Lord. 2.
The Kingdom of Christ coming to a people, or family, or person, is matter of
chief joy to them, because thereby delivery comes from sin, Satan, and misery,
and sure mercies of righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost with
eternal life brought to them, and therefore just reason to say to them to whom
Christ comes, O clap your hands, shout unto God with the voice of triumph. 3.
Our joy and our victory over all our enemies, which Christ has purchased and
brings to all believers in every Nation, is the matter of Christ's praise and
does declare that he is God, who having in his manhood suffered, wrastled
against sin, Satan, death, hell, and the curse of the law, did by the power of
his Godhead prevail before he brought joy to the Gontiles. Thus much do the
words of the exhortation import; for his triumph presupposes his victory, and
his victory presupposes his battle before he overcame, and the commanding of
the Gentiles to clap their hands and shout, and to shout with the voice of
triumph, presupposes their interest in the victory; and while they are bidden
shout to God, the triumpher, who in all this Psalm is the Redeemer Christ (as
shall appear hereafter;) it imports that the Redeemer is God, and howsoever he
is God inseparably from the Father and the Holy Spirit, yet here he is
distinctly to be looked on in his person; and howsoever he is inseparably to be
praised with the Father and Holy Spirit, yet here distinctly to be praised for
this his work of victorious Redemption of sinners; therefore it is said with
distinct relation to his person, Shout unto God with the voice of triumph.

Ver. 2. For the Lord most high is terrible, he is a great King over all the
earth. From the first reason of the joyful praising of Christ, taken from his
Sovereigne Majesty over all the world; Learn, 1. That the Redeemer, the
victorious triumpher, is the Lord very God, essentially Jehovah, the Lord most
high. 2. Christ is able both to keep his subjects in subjection by his rod and
corrections, and to take order with his enemies also, how high soever they be,
The Lord most high is terrible. 3. Christ has right and just title to erect a
church in what country and kingdom he pleases, without asking any man's
license, and to set up among his subjects the profession of his name, and
practice of all his Ordinances pertaining to the exercise of Religion in
doctrine, worship, and Ecclesiastic government of his subjects, He is a great
King over all the earth.

Ver. 3. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.
From the second reason for joyful praising of Christ, taken from the increasing
of his own Kingdom, and the exalting of all his subjects above the rest of the
world; Learn, 1. The true church of Christ may from age to age promise to her
self addition of new subjects, or bringing down of their enemies under their
feet; for as the true church in the Prophets time might say, so may also every
true church say after them, He shall subdue the people under us, and the
nations under our feet. 2. If it will not please the Lord at such a time as men
would wish, to execute judgment on their enemies, nor yet to convert them, and
make them additional subjects to his Kingdom, yet shall he not fail to make his
own people victorious over their opposition, power, and persecution, and more
then conquerors in this respect, He shall subdue the people under us, and the
nations under our feet.

Ver. 4. He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he
loved. Selah. From the third reason of Christ's praise, taken from the care he
has for sustentation and welfare of his subjects; Learn, 1. As God by
allotting of earthly Canaan for the inheritance of his people, did testify his
care to provide for them both earthly suste^ance and an enduring substance for
their spiritual subsistence represented thereby; so will he provide for the
sustenance of all his subjects in all ages, both bodily and spiritual, He
shall choose our inheritance for us. 2. As he is most loving of us, and more
wise to make choice of what is good for us, then we our selves are: so will he
employ his wisdom and love in carving out unto us our lot* measure, portion,
and inheritance; He shall choose our inheritance for us, and not leave it to our
carving. 3. The main part of the inheritance of Christ's subjects is no earthly
thing, but his very best blessing, such as he gave to Jacob above Esau; Their
inheritance shall be the excellency of Jacob. 4. The fountain of Christ's care
for all his subjects, is common to them and to Jacob, and that is his love, The
excellency of Jacob whom he loved, shall be their inheritance. Selah.

Ver. 5. God is gone up with a shout, the LORD with a sound of a trumpet. From
the fourth reason of Christ's praise taken from his glorious triumphing over all
his enemies and ours when he ascended to heaven; Learn, 1. He that ascended,
what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?
he that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that
he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4.9. That is, Christ being very God, descended
in humbling himself to take on him the shape of a servant, and when he had
perfected the work of redemption ascended in our nature, the same very person
still, very God, which descended; for God is gone up with a shout. 2. As the Ark
of the covenant, the figure of Christ, after the victory gotten over the chief
enemies of the church, ascended up to Sion, and Gods presence in it; So Christ
after victory obtained of his chief enemies on the cross, ascended triumphantly
into heaven, God is gone up with a shout, Jehovah, with the sound of a trumpet.

Ver. 6. Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing
praises.

7. For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.

The exhortation given to all people to praise Christ for the work of
redemption, is repeated, and directed to the church of the Jews more
particularly with a fifth reason of praise, taken from a nearer conjunction
between Christ and them, then between him and any other Nation. Whence learn,
1. Albeit the Lord does show his glory in the works of creation, and is shining
daily in the works of providence also; yet in the work of redemption,
conversion and salvation of souls* his glory is manifested far more; for here,
praise, praise, praise, and the fourth time praise is called for. 2. When
believers in Jesus Christ do consider how he abased himself to assume our
nature, how he paid the ransom for us as surety, how he did encounter and
fight with all our enemies, and being victorious in our name, ascended in our
nature with the shout of the victory, and sound of the trumpet of the
triumpher, they cannot choose but see reasons of praising joyfully the glorious
Godhead of Jesus Christ, and of singing praises to him as God again and again.
3. Of all Nations of the earth, the Jews have the first place, privilege, and
prerogative, most bonds with, and interests in Jesus Christ; for he delivered
them out of Egypt, settled them in Canaan, held house among them in a
Tabernacle, answered them by Oracle out of the A^ke of the covenant the type of
his incarnation, took upon him to be their King and sanctifier, the holy one of
Israel, their Redeemer, took of them his humane nature, and was born a Jew,
therefore had the Prophet good reason to say to the church of the Jews, Sing
praises to our King* sing praises* and in this song may all they join with the
Jews, who have embraced Jesus for their King. 4. Christ is so King over the
Jews, as he also extends his kingdom over all the earth, not only in regard
of his power in a common manner, but in regard of his special grace gathering
in subjects out of all parts of the world, til he have the full number brought
in and saved, he, he only is the true Catholic King, for God is the King of
all the earth. 5 As none can praise God, or praise Christ sincerely, who do not
understand the reasons for which they should praise; so he that praises
understanstingly, cannot choose but praise affectionatly, therefore says he,
Sing ye praises with understanding.

Ver. 8. God reigns over the heathen: God sits upon the throne of his
holiness. From the sixth reason of Christ's praise taken from the keeping a
church among the Gentiles, for gathering the redeemed out of all Tongues and
Languages, and reigning among them as King of Saints, and author of holiness;
Learn, 1. To the end that Faith may find footing and a Rock to rest upon, we
must in all the promises, works and praises of Christ still remember that as he
is now very man, so is he also eternally God, and that no man reasonably or
with understanding can praise him as the Redeemer and perfecter of what is
spoken of him in Scripture, except he acknowledge him to be God; therefore is
Christ eight times in this Psalm calls God, beside the ascribing unto him
works proper to God only; and twice he is called by the incommunicable name of
Jehovah the Lord; and in this verse Godhead is twice acknowledged in him, as
King of the church among the Gentiles; God reigns over the heathen, God
sits upon the throne of his holiness. 2 Because the sum of Christ's
Kingdom is holiness, and his work is to teach, prescribe and command holiness,
to take away sin, and powerfully to apply and work in his own redeemed ones
holiness, and to continue in his actual governing of his Subjects, til he have
made all and every one of the redeemed perfectly holy; therefore is his throne
in a special manner called the throne of holiness; God sits upon the throne
of his holiness.

Ver. 9. The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of
the God of Abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly
exalted. From the seventh reason of Christ's praise, taken from his converting
of great men of the earth, (as Kings and Princes) and bringing them to the
obedience of the faith and union with the true church; Learn, 1. Albeit often
times it is seen, that not many rich, noble, or potent are called; yet God for
his own glory is from time to time bringing in some of them, and when it may
glorify his name, shall bring in and perfect what is promised, and prophesied
here; The princes of the people are gathered together. 2. It is a point of
Christ's praise in the conversion of men, that his omnipotency makes men
voluntary Subjects, and to come in to him as by invincible power on his part,
so also deliberately with a free election, and hearty consent of will on the
converted m^ns part: The Princes of the people, and excellent ones in the
earth* of whatsoever rank converted unto Christ, are voluntary people, for the
original suffers also this reading, The voluntary of the people are gathered
together. 3. The church of the Jews is the mother church, whereof Abraham and
the godly Jews yea and Christ himself were Members; The church of the Jews is
the Olive-treee, whereunto all the converts of the Gentiles are ingraffed,
gathered, and made one people with Abraham and the faithful among the Jews;
The Princes of the people are gathered together, the people of the God of
Abraham. 4. The unity of the church stands in the union of the Spirit, under
the service of the only true God, and in conjunction with his people, for the
union of Jew and Gentile, is the gathering together of the Princes of the
people to the God of Abraham. 5. As there is a necessity of the union of Jews
and Gentiles in one visible Christian Church, because it is promised and
prophesied that it shall be so; So there is reason to wish for the more evident
union of them; that they may be as eminently consociate as ever the Christian
Churches were, (either in the Apostles time, or in the Christian Emperors
time,) in a general Assembly or ecumenical council; for that there is at least
a possibility of an ecumenical council, or a general assembly of Jews and
Gentiles in this world under Christ their King. This place makes it plain,
because after it is foretold that there shall be such a union of all the people
of the God of Abraham, Jews and Gentiles, as their princes shall be gathered
together, He takes away the chief ground of a great objection which may be made
from the discord and disagreement of the Princes of the world; some of them
being averse altogether from the Christian Religion, some of them from the true
Religion of Christ, and all of them almost dissenting one from another, and
warring one against another; whereby now for many years the gathering of an
ecumenical council has not been possible. He meets this objection in the
Text, saying, For the shields of the earth belong unto God, that is, the hearts
and power of all the Kings of the earth are in the Lords hand, and he has the
disposing of shields, armies and ammuintion, with all their commanders and
rulers in the world, and therefore can make them serviceable for the nearest
conjunction and union of his visible church, which can be for his glory in this
world, as he sees ^it how and when he will. 6. When all is said of Christ's
praise that man can express of him, there is no possibility to attain to the
full or satisfactory setting forth of his glory as it deserves; but men must
content themselves to set sail^, and to rest in the general, that Christ is and
shall be very highly glorified; for so the Psalmist closes, saying after all;
He is greatly exalted.

PSALM. XLVIII. A Song and Psalm for the sons of Korah.
In this Psalm the Lord is magnified for all his mercies bestowed on his
Church, (resembled by Jerusalem,) ver. 1, 2, 3. And in special for a late
mercy manifested in a passage of his care to preserve Jerusalem, a type of the
Church universal, against the assault of mighty Kings, ver. 4, 5, 6. The uses
of which mercies are set down in number seven; The first, v. 7. The second v.
8. The third, v. 9. The fourth, v. 10. The fifth v. 11. The sixth, v. 12, 13.
The seventh, v. 14.

Ver. 1. GReat is the LORD, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God,
in the mountain if his holiness.

2. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion: on the
sides of the North, the city of the great King.

3. God is known in her palaces for a refuge.

IN the first place he declares his purpose to give God the praise of
whatsoever is commendable in Jerusalem, or done unto it, or wrought for it.
Whence learn, 1. As God shows his greatness and glory in all his works, and
specially in his care for, respect unto, and operation in his church; so should
he have glory and praise from his church, for and from all his works, but
specially for his care of her: Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in
the city of our God. 2. As it is the benefit of Jerusalem, and of his church
represented thereby, to be united and governed in a regular incorporation; so
it is a matter of Gods praise, that he makes his visible church above all other
incorporations and societies of men in the world to be his city, with which he
will be in covenant, and wherein he will manifest his holy Name; Therefore
Jerusalem, and the church represented by her ^s here called, the city of our
God, and the mountain of his holiness. 3. Whatsoever could commend Jerusalem
for situation in the point of pleasantness, commodity, strength or
stateliness; all is but a shadow of the glory of the Lords church, and in
particular, as the joy of the whole land depended on Ierusalems welfare, and
this city did adorn all Iudeah, and the great Kings palace adorned her; So the
church is the joy of the whole earth, by holding out to all the light of saving
Doctrine, and showing the authority, power, wisdom, and grace of Christ; who
is her great King, and does beautify his church, for the illumination of the
blind dark world; Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount
Sion, on the sides of the North, the city of the great King. 4. As the walls,
houses, and palaces of Jerusalem were not the strength of the citizens; but God
was her strength as they had learned by experience; so worldly strength is not
the confidence of Gods church* but God only, who defends her by his power;
God is known in her palaces for a refuge.

Ver. 4. For lo, the Kings were assembled: they passed by together.

5. They saw it, and so they marvelled; they were troubled, and hasted away.

6. Fear took hold upon them there; and pain as of a woman in travel.

He confirms what he has spoken, by a late experience of deliverance from
the invasion of mighty Kings, gathered to besiege and destroy Jerusalem. Whence
learn, 1. The Lord by experience from time to time, makes manifest his care to
defend his church against most mighty oppressors; who use to combine themselves
together, when they mind to overthrow the church: For lo, the Kings were
assembled. 2. Many imaginations are in the heads of adversaries when they are
plotting the ruin of Gods church, which when they are about to execute, do
vanish and prove presumptuous and vain apprehensions of their own ability, and
of the churches weakness; When the Kings were assembled, they passed by
together. They found themselves unable to effect what they intended, and hoped
to bring to pass. 3. When the strait comes, and the church is in danger* then
the Lord does show himself for her, and against her enemies, and makes men see
his interest in his church; now when the Kings were assembled, they perceived
themselves mistaken wonderfully; They s^w it, so they marvelled. 4. Such as
come to bring trouble to Gods church, come to catch troubles to themselves;
When Kings assembled to trouble Gods people, they saw, and marvelled, and were
troubled. 5. If the enemies of the church could foresee their own foul retreat,
they would not advance or make assault against the church; for now when they
did see matters, as they were indeed, they were troubled, and hasted away. 6.
Besides the mischief which God brings upon the churches enemies, when he
begins to plead by way of judgment against them, he sends terror on them
also, a messenger of the ill-tidings to forwarn them that worse yet shall befall
them: Fear took hold upon them there. 7. Heart and hand, courage and
strength, counsel and resolution does fail a man, when he sees God to be his
party, and to be prevailing against him: Fear took hold on them, and pain as
a woman in travail; Sudden, unexpected, sore and inevitable is their
destruction when it comes.

Ver. 7. Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an East wind. The first use
they make of this experience is this, they are led up by it to see and
acknowledge Gods power in all the world, to take order with and destroy
whomsoever he will. Whence learn, 1. No power can stand before God, and none
can escape his hand; go whither they will, he can arm some of his creatures
against them both by land and sea; Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an
East wind. 2. One work of the Lords justice or power against his enemies, and
one experience of his merciful defending of his church, should lead his people
to acknowledge his Sovereign power and omnipotency over all, whereby he (having
all creatures at his disposal) can secure his people from all quarters, and
destroy all that shall rise against them; for this speech says this in
substance: Thou who scatteredst the armies of Kings who had invaded us, have
power in all the world by sea and land to overtake thy enemies; for, Thou did
break the ships of Tarshish with an East wind.

Ver. 8. As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in
the city of our God. God will establish it for ever. Selah. The second use is
this, by this experience we perceive that the Lord will keep his promise to his
church, and preserve her for ever, Whence learn, 1. They that believe the word
of God, and do mark his works foretold in the word, shall see and find by
experience the event thereof to answer to the prediction; and ha^ing their
faith so confirmed: they should say; As we have heard, ^o have we seen in the
city of the Lord. 2. The mercies of the Lord bestowed on his church for her
defense and continuance, do (...) from his covenanting with his Church; for the
reason of the ^^rcy now bestowed is; because the city of the Lord of hosts, is
the city of our God. 3. Albeit all Kingdoms and Commonwealths be subject to
destruction, and have their certain limits and periods; yet the church, the
Kingdom of Christ, the city of God shall endure throughout all generations;
and the gates of hell shall not prevail over it; God shall establish it for
ever.

Ver. 9. We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy
Temple. A third use is the acknowledgement of the sweet fruit of their former
patient depending upon Gods kindness in the use of the public ordinances, and
now they perceive by this late experience it was not vain. Whence learn, 1.
They that believe Gods loving kindness in the time when there are apparent
signs of his wrath, and patiently do depend on him in the use of holy
ordinances, shall not be frustrate of their expectation, as here the Psalmist
does acknowledge. 2. As it is a good thing patiently to wait on Gods loving
kindness in the use of the means, when troubles and dangers do come; so it is
a good thing for the godly after receiving the fruit of their faith, hope and
patience, to observe the grace gotten of God, which made them to meditate upon
and look unto his loving kindness: and so to strengthen themselves in their
resolutions, to follow this blessed course hereafter, as the faithful do here:
We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple.

Ver. 10. According to thy Name, O God; so is thy praise unto the ends of the
earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness. A fourth use is their
gladness, because of the increase of Gods glory by this his late mercy toward
them, wherever it should be mentioned. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever God gives
himself out for, that will he be found to be answerable unto in effect, even to
all his holy and magnificent attributes: According to thy Name, O God, so is
thy praise. 2. The manifestation of Gods Name by preaching of his word comes
to many, who will not subscribe all to be true that is said of him: But
afterward when he makes his word good to the comfort of his people, and
overthrow of his enemies, men will be forced to say of him, that he is as good
as his word, and that his works do loose his word laid in pawn for performance
of it; According to thy Name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the
earth. 3. The Lords power is not idle, but constantly working in equity and
justice for performance of promises and threatenings, for defending his people,
and punishing his enemies; Thy right hand is full of righteousness.

Ver. 11. Let mount Sion rejoice; let the daughters of Judah be glad, because
of thy judgments. A fourth use is to stir up all good people to rejoice,
because God has pleaded their cause against their enemies. Whence learn, 1. It
becomes all men to be glad to see God glorify himself in deciding
controversies equitably; but most of all the people of God, who have the
present benefit thereof, and in whose favors controversies between them and
their enemies are decided; Let mount Sion rejoice, and the daughters of Judah
be glad. 2. Albeit it be lawful for Gods people to rejoice when the enemies
are punished; yet had they need to take heed to their spirit, that their joy be
not fleshly, for satisfaction gotten to their vindictive passions; but
spiritual, for the declaration of Gods kindness to his people, and just
indignation at the wickedness of their malicious persecuters: Let them be
glad, because of thy judgments.

Ver. 12. Walk about Sion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof.

13. Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that ye may tell it to
the generations following*

The sixth use of this late experience of the churches delivery, is to observe
the impregnable defense of the church, shadowed forth by the walls of
Jerusalem, for the encouraging of Gods people in all ages, and advertising of
all men to beware to attempt to do her wrong in time coming. Whence learn, 1.
The church of God is so well guarded by Gods wisdom, power, good will and
justice, as with a wall of fire, that all the strength to be observed in the
walls and towers of earthly Jerusalem are but shadows; For, Walk about Sion,
and go round about her, and tell the towers thereof, is no other thing then
look through the type, and consider Gods protection represented thereby. 2.
When a type is to be studied, observation particularly may and should be made
of whatsoever in it may lead us further in upon the right uptaking of the
antitype resembled thereby, Walk about, go round about; Mark ye well her
bulwarks, consider her palaces; for in God, or in Gods attributes something
answerable to all these will be found. 3. What light the Lord furnishes
concerning himself and his church which may glorify God, and serve the
posterity for their edification, should be transmitted unto them: Mark, that
ye may tell it to the generations following.

Ver. 14. For this God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our guide, even
unto death. The seventh and last use of this experience of the church, is
consolation in God to Gods people in every hard case, and encouragement to them
against all future fears, because God is the same constantly to his people in
all ages as the late experience of the church had given proof. Whence learn, 1.
The great Maker of Heaven and Earth, and Redeemer of his people is one and the
same for ever, both in himself and toward those that believe in him; This God
is our God. 2. God is still in covenant with his church, and with all the
members thereof, as well in one age as in another; Now, as of old; for This God
is our God for ever and ever. 3. God will guide them whose God he is, when they
seek his counsel out of desire to follow it, and he will not lay down the
conducting and governing of those who have committed themselves unto him, but
will guide them constantly all the days of their life; He will be our guide,
even unto death.

PSALM. XLIX. To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
This Psalm sets forth the gloriation of a Believer in the grace of God, and
in his blessed condition, wherein he is lifted up above all the wealthy and
honorable men in the world, who are not reconciled unto God: And this the
Psalmist delivers out of his own feeling and experience. And first, because
it is a main matter, and worthy of all acceptance, he makes a Preface to his
gloriation, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Then he comes out with it, making his boast in
God; That by faith in God he was so secured against sin and misery that they
should not be able to mar his happiness ver. 5. Thirdly he does prefer his
blessedness above whatsoever wealth or riches could yield to a man, verse. 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. and above whatsoever dominion over fa^ir lands, or honor among men
could yield to any man, either living or after his death, either to himself or
to any of his posterity, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. Fourthly, he gives reason of
his gloriation, because being justified by faith, and at peace with God, he was
sure of delivery from every evil, and to be received out of his grave into
glory and fellowship with God, verse. 15. Fifthly, he guards every true Believer
against every tentation which might disquiet him, when he sees himself and
other godly persons in outward trouble, and the wicked in prosperity, verse. 16,
17, 18, 19, 20.

Ver. 1. HEar this, all ye people, give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world.

2. Both low and high, rich and poor together.

3. My mouth shall speak of wisdom: and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding.

4. I will incline mine ear to a parable: I will open my dark saying upon the
harp.

THe Preface calls to the hearer for attention, faith and affection to this
excellent mystery which he is to deliver unto all men concerning the
blessedness of the Believer above all other men in the world. Whence learn, 1.
A prepared and sanctified ear is necessary for heavenly doctrine, and people
had great need to be stirred up to take knowledge of the excellency of it; Hear
this, all ye people, give ear. 2. The doctrine of salvation, of faith, and of
consolation against sin and misery, concerns all people in the world to know;
Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world, both high and low, rich and poor
together. 3. That is true wisdom and understanding, which does make men wise
to salvation, and which makes them truly blessed in this life; and this wisdom
is not the birth of man's brain, but is revealed in the word of the Lord,
delivered to his Church by the holy men of God in holy Scripture; My mouth shall
speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. 4.
As it is necessary for the Preachers encouragement to believe what he does
preach; so is it a great inducement to the people to hear Gods word from him
who does speak Gods word, because he does believe, and does subject his spirit
to the Lords word, as the Prophet does here; I will incline my ears to a
parable. 5. The doctrine of true blessedness* and of the mystery of man's
salvation manifested in the Scripture, does far transcend the carnal wisdom
of the world; the excellency of the Gospel unto the natural man, is a parable
and dark saying: I will open my dark saying on the harp. 6. How dark and
difficult soever the mystery of the Gospel be to the carnal world; yet to the
man of experience it is plain, sweet and comfortable; and a man of experience
as he is best seen in that matter, so is he most willing, heartily to
communicate it to others; I will open (says he) my dark saying upon the harp:
Intimating his delight in the doctrine.

Ver. 5. Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my
heels shall compass me about? After this Preface he utters his parable and
dark saying, the substance whereof is this: I am so persuaded of the favor of
God now reconciled to me by the blood of the Covenant, that neither do I need
to fear bypast sins, nor any trouble which can come on me hereafter: And this,
I say, to let all men know that this blessedness may be attained by every man,
who shall acknowledge his sins, and embrace the offers of grace made by God
with his directions unto life, as I have done. Whence learn, 1. What God has
spoken in his word of the blessedness of the man that is justified by faith,
every true believer may find, and may attain to be fully assured of their
perseverance unto eternal life; for here is a proof and example of it in the
Psalmists person. 2. This Doctrine of the unspeakable peace of the Believer
reconciled to God through the blood of the Covenant, is a point of truth which
the world is ignorant of, and hardly will believe: No wonder therefore he did
call it before, and here utters it as a parable and dark saying. 3. A
Believer after reconciliation, must neither exempt himself from danger of
sinning, nor from giving daily account of his carriage unto God, nor from
challenges for sin, nor from ordinary chastisements for sin, nor from heavy
troubles and ill days which he may meet with; whether by Gods immediate hand
for his correction, or by the persecuters of godliness for his further trial,
exercise and training of faith; for here the Psalmist presupposes that evil
days will come: he presupposes that every sin or iniquity of every action and
passage of his life, shall leave behind it an impression of guiltiness to be
taken notice of thereafter, like the print of a man's foot when he lifts his
heel and walks forward; he presupposes after remission of sin, after the
daily exercise of repentance, after frequent intimation made of remission of
sin, and that oftener from day to day repeated, a man may be brought back in the
day of trouble to an account for altogether, and old reckonings may be raked up
again by the troubled conscience, and by the accuser of the Brethren, and that
God will be ruling the business for the further glory of the riches of his
grace, and further good of his exercised child; for here the Psalmist
foreseeth, and speaks of his looking for days of evil, and of the iniquity
of his heels compassing him about, as what shall or may befall him. 4. Faith in
the Messiah Jesus Christ, is able to make a man, not only at length to triumph
over sin and misery, over the curse of the Law, and condemnation, or trouble
and persecution, but also before trouble come in humble and solid confidence to
be fearless for what can come, and to look all possible evils out of
countenance; Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil* etc. 5. Albeit it be
possible when it comes to push of pike, and when the man is yoked in the
conflict with troubles from without, and challenges for his sins within, that
the strongest in faith may find himself not a little afraid; yet when he
considers the ground laid down for settling of his faith, to wit, the truth
of the covenant, the merit of the Mediators sacrifice, and the freedom,
riches and immutability of Gods love and grace, with the Psalmist he may
confidently profess and acknowledge, that he has no reason to be feared for
what Satan or the conscience may threaten him with; for this also is imported
in wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels
shall compass me about? which is as much as if he had said, whatsoever may be
my weakness, and exercise in trial; yet I know there is no just reason why I
should fear condemnation, or to be debarred from the possession of full
blessedness, by whatsoever possibly can come unto me.

Verse. 6. They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches,

7. None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom
for him:

8. (For the redemptoon of their soul is precious, and it cease for ever)

9. That he should live still for ever, and not see corruption.

10. For he sees that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish person
perish, and leave their wealth to others.

In the third place, the Believer prefers this his blessed condition to
whatsoever either riches or honor or any earthly thing can yield to any man.
Whence learn, 1. The blessedness of the Believer, and the glory of faith is
best seen, when the vanity of all earthly happiness and worldly gloriation in
any thing beside God is discovered and compared with the condition of the
Believer, therefore are they that trust in their wealth, brought in comparison
with the Believer here. 2. In whatsoever men do count their felicity to stand,
in that they put their confidence, and do glory in it, as here is presupposed:
They that count riches their happiness, They trust in their wealth, and boast
themselves in the multitude of their riches. 3. The weakness of all worldly
things to make a man blessed does best appear when death comes* for when the
time thereof is come, no rich man can help himself, nor yet joining his riches
with his brothers riches, can help his brother, either by lengthening his life
and suspending death temporal, or by recovering him from death when he dies*
None can by any means redeem his brother. 4. All men are Gods prisoners of
war, his captives, and liable by justice to death temporal and eternal; and
there is no delivery from death, whether temporal or eternal, but by paying a
ransom unto God, which is impossible for a mere man to pay; None can give to
God a ransom for his brother. 5. We are not redeemed with silver or gold, or
any perishing thing; our ransom must be of greater value then a mere man can
pay, that is a man, and no more: The redemption of a man's soul is precious, and
it cease for ever. 6. Not so much as this worldly life can be perpetuated, by
whatsoever wealth, or riches, or humane ability can do; far less can the life
of God, and that blessedness in heaven be purchased by any mere man; None can
redeem his brother, that he should still live for ever and not see corruption.

Ver. 11. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever,
and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their lands after their
own names.

12. Nevertheless, man being in honor, abides not; he is like to the beasts
that perish.

13. This their way is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings.
Selah.

14. Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them; and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty shall
consume in the grave from their dwelling.

He compares the gloriation of the Believer with the condition of those who
are not only rich, but also honorable, and Lords of great rents, fair lands,
houses and heritages; and he does prefer the blessedness of the Believer to
their condition also: Whence learn, 1. Albeit experience does teach that death
is common to men of all ranks, wise and foolish, rich and poor, and all; yet
men are so besotted, as when they see this, they do not consider it, that they
might not place their happiness in any thing, wherefrom they may be separated
by death: The worldly man sees the wise man die, and also the foolish. He sees
also that many rich men do leave their goods they know not to whom; They leave
their wealth to others: and yet for all this their seeing the mortality and the
folly of mortal men dying before them, they that survive a little do not draw
wisdom from this observation, but dream they shall deceive death, and make
themselves some way eternal; they think to perpetuate their name in their
posterity by their heritages and the honors of their great families: Their
inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling places to all generations. They call their lands after their own
names. 2. The cause of this folly is his deceived heart, avd vain conceits and
imaginations, which by death are blown away; Their inward thought is to
eternize themselves. Nevertheless, man being in honor, abides not; or does
not attain his fancied eternity. 3. The blessedness of the wealthy, potent and
honorable man, as it is not permanent: so it leaves him in the dirt at length,
and in no better case (if he have no faith or saving knowledge) then a beast:
Neverthe^esse, man being in honor abides not, he is like the beasts that
pelrish. 4. Though the men who are most able to purchase lands, and to transmit
them to their posterity, are counted ordinarily the most wise men; yet when men
spend their wit and care mainly about things of this present earth, the Lord
pronounces them to be fools: This their way is their folly. 5. Though the
observation of the folly of predecessors should make the posterity wise; yet
few are found father-better, or father-wiser; but fools follow fools in a race,
and folly will not want a patron so long as fools are gone before: This their
way is their folly, yet their posterity approve their sayings. 6. A worldly man
not reconciled to God, dies as a foolish, sensual and secure beast as he
lived; Like sheep they are laid in the grave, for they are deaths prey both
soul and body; Death shall feed on them. 7. The righteous man justified by
faith, and studying to live righteously, albeit you look on him in the worst
estate he can be in the world, under poverty and persecution; yet he is in
better condition then the richest and most honorable ungodly man in all the
earth; and albeit this does not appear in this dark world, to blind men that
have not the light of Gods word in them; yet at the resurrection it shall be
seen, that the poor and mean just man shall be in a glorious condition above the
worldling: The upright shall have dominion over them in the morning. 8. The
whole glory of the worldly-minded man is shortly consumed so soon as he dies,
and then he changes his lodging for the worse, the best days that ever he
shall see are gone: Their beauty shall consume in their grave from their
dwelling.

Ver. 15. But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he
shall recieve me. Selah. In the fourth place he perfects the comparison, and
gives a reason of his gloriation, whereof we heard, ver. 5. The sum whereof,
is this, wealth and riches, nobility, honor and dominion among men can follow
an ungodly man no farther then the grave, there all welfare does forsake him
for evermore but as for me who am reconciled to God, justified, and in some
measure sanctified, though I die, yet do I live in my soul, being kept by God
til the day of complete redemption, and then my soul being deprived only for a
while of the body, shall have i^ restored again in the resurrection, and then
soul and body both shall fully be redeemed and delivered from the power of the
grave: for as God has received me into favor in this life, and shall receive
my soul at death; so at the time of the delivering of my body from the grave,
he shall receive me both soul and body into his fellowship, and therefore my
condition is better* how many days of evil soever I shall see in this life,
then the condition of an ungodly man in the world, how wealthy, how honorable
and apparently happy soever he be in this world; yea, I may justly glory over
all ungodly men, and say yet again, wherefore should I fear in the days of
evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? For God will
redeem my soul from the power of the grave. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the godly
may be subject to mortality and outward misery of this mortal life, common to
him and the ungodly, yet here is the difference, he is sure of a deliverance
from all misery; But God shall redeem my soul, seith he; which God will not do
to the ungodly. 2. Hope of the resurrection is the godly man's chief
consolation, and this was the hope of the Saints before Christ came, as well as
since: God shall redeem my soul from the power of the grave. 3. A believer has
good warrant to be persuaded not only of his reconciliation with God in this
life, but also of the receiving of his soul after this life unto the fellowship
of the glory of God both in soul and body at the resurrection; God shall
redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall receive me. Selah.

Ver. 16. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich; when the glory of his house
is increased.

17. For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend
after him.

18. Though whiles he lived, he blessed his soul; and men will praise thee,
when thou do well to thy self.

19. He shall go to the generation of his father^, they shall never see light.

20. Man that is in honor, and understands not, is like the beasts that
perish.

In the last part by way of exhortation, to make use of this Doctrine, he
guardeth every Believer against every tentation which may arise from the
prosperity of the wicked, and the hardship of the godly in this life. Whence
learn, 1. It is a tentation which shakes the faith of the godly sometimes,
when they see the flourishing prosperity of the wicked, and their own daily
affliction; but this should not move the godly, or make them suspect themselves
to be in a wrong course, and the ungodly in a better way: Be not thou afraid
when one is made rich. 2. The consideration of the shortness both of our
temporal calamity and of the ungodly man's prosperity, both which do end at
death, is the way to overcome the foresaid tentation; For, When he dies, he
shall carry nothing away, his glory shall not descend after him. It is not so
with the godly, whose glory and happiness meets him at death. 3. A man's own
self-deceiving heart, measuring all happiness by a man's present outward
condition in the world, and harkening to the flattery of fools about him, who
use to currie the favor of the wealthy, and love to have the like condition
themselves, is the cause why the miserable man is kept still in a golden dream,
as if he were happy: Though while he lived, he blessed his soul; and men will
praise thee when thou do well to thy self; that is, when thou take a life
of it while thou may have it; yet he and they are altogether deceived. 4.
The ungodly at their death shall go the way the ungodly went before them, to the
place of darkness and disconsolation, being separate from God and his Saints,
and from all blessedness, and shall never have comfort in their miserable estate
for ever; He shall go to the generation of his fathers: and what shall become of
such wretches? They shall never see light; that is, they shall never see the
meanest appearance of any joy or comfort. 5. It is not honor, but want of
understanding, want of saving faith and wisdom, to provide for eternal life,
that puts man down from his excellency, and debarreth him from blessedness; Man
that is in honor, and understaneth not, is the man here set at naught, and
declared to be far from true blessedness. 6. Whatsoever natural excellency be
in man above the beasts; yet sin has put him so far down, that except he get
saving knowledge of God, and be reconciled to him, he is in no better
condition, at least when he dies, then a beast; Man that is in honor, and
understands not, is like the beast that perishes.

PSALM. L.
This Psalm is a citing of the visible Church before God, the Judge of all the
earth, (who at last shall judge all flesh in the day of judgment, and shall take
vengeance on the wicked,) to compeare before the tribunal of God; now in time
while mercy may be had, and now then timeously to consider the Lords
controversy against the sinners in his Church, that they may repent and he
saved. And first, the dreadfulness of the judgment is set down, v. 1, 2, 3.
Secondly the citation of the party, that is, the visible Church, with the
witnesses, v. 4, 5.6. Thirdly, there is a challenge of
self-work-justisticiaries, legalists, and formal ceremonialists, who did rest
upon outward good behavior, and upon the outward discharge of the ordinances,
as if the sacrifices of the law or any performance of extetnal duties had been
sufficient to expiate sin, and justify a man, v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Fourthly, there is a direction unto them how to come off their legal
righteousness, and carnal way of worship, and to turn themselves to the right
way of worshipping God in spirit and truth, v^ 14, 15. Fifthly, there is a
challenge of those who were grossly wicked, v. 16, 17, 18, 19.20, 21. And
lastly, there is a direction also to them to repent, and to give God glory in
time, with an encouragement to the upright Believers to go on their way, verse.
22, 23.

Ver. 1. THe mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth, from
the rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof.

2. Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, God has shined.

3. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before
him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.

From the description of the terror of the Lord coming to judge his visible
Church, for the slighting of the means of salvation, and looseness of life and
conversation; Learn, 1. As the Lord is to judge the whole world one day, so in a
special and most exact manner will he judge those that draw near to him in the
profession of true Religion, as this whole Psalm holds forth. 2. This
advantage have they who live in the visible Church, they are warned of the
judgment ere it come: for, as many other places of Scripture, so this Psalm is
an express warning piece to the Church to prepare for judgment. 3. The terrible
process of the day of Gods severe judgment, being well meditated upon, is a
special means to waken men's consciences to take course about their sins in
time, that they may be pardoned, and their persons reconciled, which is the
scope of the whole doctrine delivered in this Psalm. 4. The mystery of the
great and terrible day of general judgment is to be learned from the
Scriptures, and express predictions thereof in Gods word: The authority,
weight, certainty and efficacy whereof flows from, and depends upon God
almighty only; The mighty God, even the Lord has spoken. 5. God Almighty the
Sovereign Judge of all the earth has appointed, that all who ever took life, in
whatsoever time or place they have lived in the world, shall compear befote his
Majesty in the appointed time, The Lord has spoken, and called the earth, from
the rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof. 6. The true visible Church
where Gods ordinances are set up, as he has appointed, where his word is
purely preached, is the most beautiful thing under heaven, and there is Gods
glory set forth, and manifested more clearly then in all the Lords handy work
beside in heaven or earth; Therefore is the place of the Lords Temple here so
highly commended; and Sion called the perfection of beauty, because of the
glory of God sundry ways revealed there; Out of Sion God has shined, says
he, in regard of the clear manifestation of his will, specially in the matter
now in hand about the day of judgment. 7. Men will take no heed unto what the
word of the Lord declares, til the authority, supremacy, omnipotency and
justice of God the Judge be apprehended by them, and the great day of his
terrible judgment be looked upon as a thing which shall most certainly come to
pass at the time appointed; Therefore is it said, Our God shall come and shall
not keep silence. 8. So many as are reconciled with God, and have closed
uprightly with him in the Covenant of Grace, may look upon the day of judgment
without terror or perplexity; yea, and with comfort and confident hope to find
the Judge gracious to them according to the Tenor of the Covenant, even their
God: Our God, says the Prophet shall come. 9. Look how fearful and terrible
the Lord did show himself at the giving out of the Law, no less terrible shall
he be in the execution thereof, in the day of judging all those whose sins shall
be found not pardoned before: A fire shall devour before him, and it shall be
very tempestuous about him.

Ver. 4. He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may
judge his people.

5. Gather my Saints together unto me: those that have made a Covenant with me
by sacrifice.

6. And the heavens shall d^clare his righteousness: For God is judge himself.
Selah.

In the second place, he sets down the citation, and summoning in of officers,
parties, and witnesses, to make all ready for the judging of all the world, but
in special of the people who have given up their name to God, and have made a
Covenant with him, and professed themselves to be his people; who shall find all
of them at last, that they have had to do with a righteous Judge. Whence
learn, 1. In the great day of the last judgment, Heaven and Earth, and all the
Elements shall be moved to render up all whom they have received in custody unto
that day; The Lord shall call to the Heavens from above, and to the Earth. 2.
We need not to question how all the dead shall be raised, how souls shall be
reunited to their bodies, how they shall all be gathered together, and how such
like great things shall come to pass, (...) resolves all; He shall call to the
Heavens, and to the Earth. For as at a word all were made: so at a word, so
soon as he shall call, and give out order for compearance, the dead shall be
raised, and all shall compear, good Angels, and wicked spirits, all men good
and evil, young and old, every reasonable and understanding creature in heaven
and earth by his almighty power shall be made quickly to present themselves; He
shall call, is sufficient to effect whatsoever he will. 3. What shall be the
course that the Judge shall follow about those who have not heard of him, or who
have heard of him, and lived without the Church, is not the main matter which
the Lords people should enquire for; but this is their part to know, to wit,
what concerns themselves; therefore does the Lord say no more here but, He
shall call to the heavens and to the earth, that he may judge his people. 4. All
who are in Covenant with God, every Member of the visible Church are Saints by
calling; God allows this style upon them, because they are dedicated and
consecrated to him, because they are all by special vow obliged to be Saints;
all make profession of their purpose to be such; all do esteem of themselves,
and will have allowed unto them by others the estimation of Gods people,
whatsoever be their deserving; therefore says he, Gather my Saints together
unto me. 4 At how great a distance soever, whether of time or place, Gods
people by profession have lived in this world, all of them shall be assembled
to together at length to the judgment of that great day; some to the judgment
of absolution, some to the judgment of condemnation, good and bad, all shall be
gathered before the Judge at once; Gather my Saints together unto me. 5. The
Lord shall not want Officers, Sergeants, and Servants sufficient for this work,
he has Angels innumerable, who shall effect what he gives order unto them for;
Gather ye my Saints together. 6. The external Covenant with God, is the ground
of the title and honor of Saintship, and church membership; whosoever are in
visible Covenant with God, are called by his allowance, his Saints; for so here
he does expound whom he calls his Saints, even all those who have made a
Covenant with him by sacrifice. 7. No Covenant can be made with God without the
interposing of, or professed respect unto a sacrifice, according as the Lord
did teach his people in the type and shadow of the ceremonial sacrificing; for
as God by appointing a sacrifice to be offered by his people would have every
Covenanter to acknowledge and profess that he was worthy to die for his sins,
and that it behoved him to fly to a surety to die for him* (even to the
promised Messiah Jesus Christ, that Lamb of God which was slain from the
beginning of the world, to take away the sins of the world;) and to
consecrate himself wholly to Gods service; so does the Lord require still the
same things of every Covenanter, from every one of his people; and whosoever do
profess their accepting of the conditions of the Covenant, are called those
that have made a Covenant with God by sacrifice. 8. In that general judgment,
the wise framing the world, the constant course of governing of it, the
appointing of the seasons of Summer and Winter, Spring time and Harvest, the
making of the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall upon all, and the furnishing of
all with food and good things, shall be witnesses for Gods part toward all men,
and so the heavens shall declare his righteousness. 9. No man shall be injured
nor suffer wrongfully that day; yea, all men shall have wrongs done to them
repaired, all rewards shall be given according as the word of the Lord has
said: For God is judge himself. Selah.

Ver. 7. Hear, O my people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify
against thee: I am God, even thy God. Having now foretold his people, that
there shall be certainly a great day of judging of all men, and specially of his
Covenanted people; he enters here in a friendly manner of controversy with
his visible Church or professed people, that they might repent and find mercy
in time, before they were brought to a tribunal of severe justice: And first,
he uses a preface directing his speech to such as were of a better outward
behavior then the worst, to wit, such as trusted in their own works, and
specially in the external sacrifices and ceremonies of the Law without looking
to the end and intent thereof; as if by those external sacrifices their sins
had been expiated, and God fully satisfied for them. Whence learn, 1. A people
settled upon the dregs of their carnal customs, in security and presumption,
cannot be moved to enter into conside^ation of their ways, or in suspicion of
their dangerous condition, except the Lord do show himself to them, and rip up
their conscience; therefore says he to them, Hear, O my people, and I will
speak. 2. Albeit the Lord does suffer such as are without the Church,
strangers to the Covenant and Commonwealth of Israel, to lie still in their
sins; yet will he debate his quarrel against his own people, which is no
small mercy; O Israel! I will testify against thee. 3. The Covenant made with
God, joined with his absolute Sovereignty, do lay double bonds upon Gods people
for the obedience of faith, obliging them not to seek salvation otherways then
he does teach us; but to worship and serve him as he appoints; for, I am God,
even thy God, says the Lord. 4. Whatsoever quarrel the Lord has against his
people for not keeping Covenant made with him; yet so long as there is hope of
repentance, he will not dissolve the Covenant, but will offer the benefit
thereof unto them; for when the Lord has said, I will testify against thee,
he adds, I am God, even thy God, ver. 11.

Ver. 8. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings, to
have been continually before me.

9. I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds

10. For every beast of the Forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand
hills.

11. I know all the fowls of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field
are mine.

12. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; for the world is mine, and the
fullness thereof.

13. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?

After the preface, the Lord passes by the reproof for much neglect, even in
the external performances of outward ordinances, and chall^^geth only their
relying upon the outward work, and their putting a sort of merit upon their
work, as if they minded to oblige God unto them by their outward performances.
Whence learn, 1. Albeit there be just reason to challenge men for coming short
of their duty in the discharge of outward ordinances; yet when that is not the
main fault, or when the mending of that fault will not satisfy God, he will
wave that challenge for the present, and fasten upon their chief sins, I will
not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings which should have
been continually before me. 2. As men are ordinarily little sensible of their
omissions of duties, so are they ready to overvalue their outward performances,
and to think that what they do in this kind shall be very acceptable to God, as
the carnal Israelites here challenged, did conceive their bullocks and goats
out of their houses or folds should have been esteemed by God of as much worth,
as they who offered them did put upon them. 3. That which is most esteemed of
by men, without allowance of God, is abomination to God: such were the external
sacrifices of carnal Israelities, who rested upon the offering of external
sacrifices, without looking to that only true sacrifice of the Mediator
represented thereby: I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goat out
of thy fold. 4. It is a disease of foolish man, to think with himself that God
is obliged to him when he offers unto God any part of his goods, when in the
mean time a man has nothing but what God has given unto him, and which is the
Lords by primitive right; Every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle
upon a thousand hills. 5. Albeit all men profess that they acknowledge God to
be owner of all the creatures, because he has made them all; yet their
practice many ways does bewray their heart-ignorance in this point, and that
they have need to be taught this lesson from God, I know all the fowls of the
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine. 6. Unrenewed men cannot
choose but have gross co nceptions of God, and to think of him after their own
fancy, as the carnal Israelites conceived that a fat sacrifice was as
acceptable to God, as a fat dinner was to themselves; but God is not like man,
and stands in no need of supply from man or from any of the creatures; all of
them have their being and dependence on God, to dispose of them, and bestow
them ^n whom he will at his pleasure, He is not hungry; and put the case he had
a mind to serve himself of any of the creatures, yet he needs not employ man
for that effect; for, The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. 7. The
Lord disdaineth the fleshly conceits which men have to satisfy his justice for
their sins by any thing that man can offer unto him, as imaginations
unbeseeming a reasonable man; Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood
of goats?

Ver. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High.

15. And call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.

In the third place, he exhorts them to forsake this carnal way of seeking
salvation, and sets them upon the right course of true blessedness and
spiritual service. Whence learn, 1. The way of salvation and of Gods worship is
spiritual, and may possibly be resembled and furthered by external bodily
exercises, but does not stand on things external; and to speak it more
particularly, God will have the man whose person and service he will accept, to
be sensible of his own want of every good thing, and inability to furnish to
himself any thing which he lacks, and to acknowledge God only to be the
all-sufficient fountain of grace and of every good donation, and to seek what
he has need of from God, and to depend upon his grace when he has sought it,
and to return the praise of Gods free and gracious gift unto him when he has
received it; for all this is presupposed and imported in this offering of
thanks, Offer unto God thanksgiving; to wit, for every point and passage of his
undeserved favor: and this he calls for, because this offering of the
sacrifice of praise and thanks, was more acceptable to God then their
Ceremonial sacrifices of slain beasts. 2. God will have the man, whose person
and service he will accept, to make conscience of all his lawful vows made
unto God, in special of his Covenant-vow made for giving God the obedience of
faith all the days of his life, which vow true worshippers use upon sundry
occasions solemnly to renew: Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto
the most high God. 3. Were a man never so faithful and upright in the Lords
service, yet he is not exempted from trouble, for reasons concerning Gods
glory, good of the person troubled, and benefit of others; this the Lord
holds forth in preparing their minds, by making mention unto believers of a
day of trouble. 4. Among other ends of the Lords sending trouble, this is one,
to make the believer in the sense of his need to make use of his Covenant with
God, and by faith to draw near to him in prayer for help and relief in due
time, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble. 5. The true believer and depender
upon the sure and rich grace of God, cannot possibly fall in any trouble out of
which he shall not be delivered, but whatsoever evil come, he may (by praying
to God) yea he shall be delivered, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee. What more absolute promise can be made to a believing supplicant?
6. A believing supplicant shall not only be graciously answered to his
petition, and so have cause of praising God; but also shall have grace in
effect to praise God, And thou shall glorify me.

Verse. 16. But unto the wicked, God says, What have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth,

17. Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee?

18. When thou saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been
partaker with the adulterers.

19. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit.

20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother: thou slanderest thine own
mothers son.

21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I
was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes.

In the fourth place, the Lord pleads mercifully with the gross sinner and
scandulous liver, for abusing this privilege of the Covenant by his lewd
conversation and secure Atheism, that he being convinced of his sin, might
repent, and eschew the wrath which is to come. Whence learn, 1. To such as
profess Religion, and observe the outward ordinances thereof, and do not live
scandalously; the Lord howsoever he lets them know he is not well pleased with
their way, yet he does speak unto them more mildly, because it is possible some
beloved Laodiceans, young and unskilful true converts may be guilty of no small
measure of dead formality; but to such as live in gross scandalous sins, the
Lord speaks more roughly, calling them by the name of wicked; But unto the
wicked God says. 2. Such is the deceivableness of sin, and the deceit of the
heart, and the power of Satan upon secure sinners, that they can without
remorse of conscience profess the true Religion, pretend to a Covenant with
God, and yet live loosly as Pagans or Atheists: They take Gods Covenant in
their mouth, and mean time do hate instruction, and cast Gods words behind
them. 3. Such as by their lewd conversation do give an open affront to their
Religion, are so detestable to God, that he accompteth them wicked haters of
reformation, contemners of Scripture, disgracers of their holy profession, and
such as he will take no Religious service of their hand: Unto the wicked God
says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take
my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words
behind thee? 4. Albeit men do profane the Covenant, and deserve to be thrust
out of it as unworthy to have the benefit of it, or to be suffered any more to
profess it; yet God will not give up with them hastily, but will after a friendly
manner declare to them their sin and misdeserving, that their conscience may be
moved toward repentance; What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy
mouth, seeing thou hate instruction? 5. The man that casts Gods word behind
him, cannot choose but serve a worse master, and be made slave to his lusts, and
be led away to every sin, as tentation does lead him; he will not stand to be a
greedy thief, and a filthy adulterer, ver. 18. and to loose his tongue to all
the evils whereunto the tongue can serve, ver. 19. yea and to become unnatural
to those with whom he is bound in nearest bonds of blood, ver. 20. 6. Such is
the Lords patience, that he does oft-times endure very long horrible
provocations of those that are in outward Covenant with him, in that by his
long-suffering he may lead them to repentance: These things thou did, and I
kept silence. 7. When men do not profit by the means which should lead them to
repentance, they grow worse for the means, more secure and hardened in their
ill ways, and more godless in all respects: Thou thoughtest I was altogether
such a one as thy self. 8. Such as live a loose life with a profession of
Religion under the shining light of Gods word, do not keep their consciences
quiet, otherways then by transforming God into an idol after their own fancy,
and by feigning him to be what he is not, and not to be what he declares
himself to be; Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self;
that is to say, No more displeased with thy ways then thou thy self was. 9.
Although the Lord keep silence for a time, yet he will at length let the sinner
know by his word and rods, how displeased he is at sin: But I will reprove thee,
says the Lord. 10. Sins forgotten cast behind back, and cast together in
confusion by the secure sinner, shall in the day of Gods reckoning be brought to
remembrance with time, place, and other circumstances, and so presented to the
conscience, as the sinner shall not be able to look aside from his fearful
accusation and ditty, I will set them in order before thine eyes.

Ver. 22. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver.

23. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me: and to him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

In the last place, the Lord being lo^th to dissolve the Covenant, or to
destroy those that are in the visible Church, how wicked soever, exhorts them
to repentance while it is time, before he cast them off utterly, and so shows
them the way of returning hom^ to him, as he does also encourage such as are
sincere worshippers of him to go on. Whence learn, 1. The Lords controversy
with his people, and threatening of wrath upon them, do carry much love and
mercy in their bosom; it is admirable that such offers of grace and
reconciliation are made by God after so just and fearful challenges, as here we
read. 2. As the affectionate remembrance of God is an aw-band to keep from sin,
and a spur to all duties; and as consideration of Gods word is a means to waken
the conscience, and affect the heart with high and right thoughts of God: so
the forgetting of God, and consideration of what is necessary, casts a man open
to all sin, and makes way for his destruction; Consider this, ye that forget
God, lest I tear you in pieces. 3. If they who have gone far away from God, do
not haste them home unto him, they are like to meet with judgment merciless,
and to find no opportunity or time granted as they could wish to repent,
Consider, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. 4 To set
men on work to endeavor the honor of God by worshipping him in spirit, and to
conform their outward actions of the body to the rule of Gods word, is the
scope of all Gods pleading with his own people; for his controversy is closed
with a direction to all, to glorify God, and to order their conversation
aright. 5. That man worshippeth God in spirit, who gives him the praise of his
justice, in acknowledging his sins against Gods law, and his ill deservings
in the course of daily renewed repentance, and who gives unto God the praise
of his grace and mercy, in flying to the refuge set before him in the Gospel,
in the course of daily renewed acts of faith in Christ* and he who gives God
the praise of his holiness in studying daily to mortify the lusts of the flesh
by his Spirit, and to be renewed in his mind and affections; and in a word, he
who in his heart and affections studieth to give God the honor of all his
attributes, titles, or name, by whatsoever occasion manifested to him: This is
the worshipper of God in spirit and truth, whom the Lord by all his dealing
with his people is seeking to form and gain to himself, Who so offers praise,
glorifieth me. 6. Sincere endeavor to worship God in spirit, is best seen in a
man's care to conform his life and bodily actions to the rule of Gods word; for
with glorifying of God he joyneth here, ordering his conversation aright. 7.
Whosoever shall set himself to be Gods servant in spirit and truth, shall find
God to be his Savior to the uttermost, how godless soever, how vile soever he
has been; If he shall prepare himself against the dreadful day of Judgment,
by receiving the offer of grace in Jesus Christ, with all the fullness of the
salvation of God in him, and in Christ's strength shall study to bring forth the
fruits of his faith in a blameless conversation, he shall undoubtedly be saved:
for God has said, Whosoever offers the sacrifice of praise, glorifies me, and to
him who orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.
Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

