TRUTHS VICTORY OVER ERROR.

OR,

An Abridgement of the Chief Controversies in Religion, which since the
Apostles days to this time, have been, and are in agitation, between those of
the Orthodox Faith, and all Adversaries whatsoever; a list of whose names are
set down after the Epistle to the Reader.

Wherein, by going through all the Chapters of the Confession of Faith, one by
one, and propounding out of them, by way of Question, all the Controverted
Assertions; and answering by Yes, or No, there is a clear Confirmation of the
Truth; and an evident Confutation of what Tenets and Opinions, are maintained
by the Adversaries.

A TREATISE.

Most useful for all Persons, who desire to be instructed in the true
Protestant Religion, who would shun in these last Days, and perilous Times,
the Infection of Errors and Heresies, and all dangerous Tenets and Opinions,
contrary to the Word of GOD.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by JOHN REID, Anno DOM. 1684.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE DRUMMOND Of Milnenab, Lord Provost,
John Iohnston, Thomas Douglas, Thomas Fairholm, and John Chanceler Bailiffs;
Charles Murray Dean of Gild, Thomas Young Thesaurer, and remanent Members of
the Honorable Council of the Ancient City of Edinburgh.
May it please your Lordship, And the Honorable Senate*
MY first Application is for Pardon, that I should adventure to prefix your
names to the Frontispice of this small Fabric, between which and your singular
Merits, there is no Proportion, save what flows from the Uniformity and
Delicacy of the Contrivance, and sincerity of his Respects who presents it. I
have sometimes appeared in public, though not with the Gold of Ophir, and
Tyrian Purpure, wherewith the Persians were accustomed to present their
Princes, and Benefactors, in testimony of their Obeisance and Gratitude; yet
with Oblations suitable to my Ability as now, though unsuitable to your Honor
and Dignity.

Your unstained Reputation, Candor, and Ingenuity, by which you are guided in
the Management of the weighty Affairs of the City. Your encouraging by your
Authority and good example the holy Ministry, Virtue and Learning in Schools
and Universities, within the Verge of your Jurisdiction. The commemoration of
Favors, which I have received from the Council, these many years bygone, have
had no small Influence upon me, to make this public, yet humble Address. And
though I have done but little by way of Remuneration, yet Somewhat, to be a
Remembrance of my hearty affection to the Good Town.

I have made some small attempts, during the twelve years I taught
Peripatetick, and Experimental Philosophy, and since, for the Advancement of
Learning among others, which have not wanted success, whereby the Author has
been encouraged; especially by the kind acceptance, his Writings have met with
from the greatest Philosophers and Mathematicians in this Age, in England,
Holland, Germany and France. It is yet recent in the minds of many Noble and
worthy Persons, what esteem His Royal Highness had of my Observations, of the
great Blazing Star, which appeared in December 1680, which since have been
published. I do not mention this for applause, or out of vanity, but for some
peculiar reasons hinted at below. But these studies being only Handmaids, and
Subservient to Divine Knowledge, and not so generally useful, I have now given
them a Manumission, unless I be animated by the benign, and favorable aspect
of those, who may and can. I move in a distinct Sphere from Masters of
Universities. They teach in Philosophy, the Causes and Reasons of Things. What
I write is but Practical and Mechanical, for the promoting of natural Knowledge
and Learning, as do the Virtuosi. But in stead of such I present your Honors
with a small bundle of Orthodox Truths confirmed by plain Scripture
Testimonies, wherewith the true Christian Church has in all Ages scattered the
swarms of dark Errors, and damnable Heresies, Locusts from the bottomless pit.

But least I seem too tedious upon one Subject, I shall beg your Lordships
liberty, to interpose for your Divertisement, this pleasant Interlude, the
contemplation whereof may recreate the mind, and have its own usefulness. That
brave Athenian Orator Demosthenes writes, that there was a standing Ordinance
among the Locrians a people in Greece, that whosoever desired a new Law to be
made he should make an overture thereof to the whole Assembly with a rope about
his neck. If it was Judged profitable for the Publick-Good, the Author was
assoild, and got the thanks of the house. If not, he was instantly strangled.
By this means for the space of 200 years and more, no new Law was made, save
this only that follows. It was a received custom there, that if any man should
strick out his neighbors eye; his on the other part was to be stricken out
likewise, in imitation of Lex Talionis. Neither was this crime to be expiated
by any sacrifice, nor redeemed by any sum of Money or Gold, how great soever.
A certain man who had but one eye, was threatened by his Adversary with the loss
of it. This man taking it grievously, and judging the want of his sight more
bitter than death, adventured with a halter about his neck to offer this new
Law to the Senate, viz. that whosoever should strick out his neighbors eye,
who had but one, he should be requited with the lose of both his, as a just
recompense; that the one might share equally with the other in the same
calamity. The Law was approven and Ratified by the whole meeting. Demosthenes
relates this, teaching that in a well ordered City; Magistrates should take
special care that new Laws be not rashly made or changed. But I return thither
whence the famous Orator has led me aside by this digression.

I cannot but now after these wieghty perswasives, make my next application for
Acceptance, and seriously entreat, that this little Book, if not for the value
of the thing offered, yet for its design, which is that Truth may have victory
over Error, and for the ingenuity and affection it flows from In magnis
voluisse satest.
, may be received into the tuition of your favor, and get a full protection
against the Champions of the uncircumcised Philistimes, and being enlightened
with the splendour of your Lordships name, and receiving the impression of the
Councils Authority upon it, may by the Lords blessing, be useful to young
Students in Religion, and others too. For which singular Favor, I shall
fervently pray the Almighty God to bless you in your Persons, and Government,
sub auspiciis Augustissimi regis Caroli a Carolo, the Ancient City may flourish
with Religion and Righteousness, Peace and Truth, that the Lord may be in it,
in the darkest night, a pillar of fire to enlighten and direct, in the hotest
affliction a pillar of cloud to overshadow and protect, and to us all both a
Sun and a Shield. And shall think my self very happy, while I live to be under
the Character of

Your Lordships and the Councils much Obliged Servant Geo. Sinclar.
Edin. January 2. 1684.
TO THE HONEST HEARTED READER
THE two great Pillars upon which the kingdom of Satan is erected, and by which
it is upheld, are Ignorance and Error. And the two great Pillars which support
the Kingdom of Christ, are Knowledge and Truth. Therefore our blessed Savior
resolving to subvert the kingdom of Satan among the Gentiles, tells the Apostle
in his first Commission, that he was about to send him to open their eyes
(namely their understanding) by the Preaching and Knowledge of the Gospel, and
to turn them from darkness to light, from natural blindness and worldly
ignorance, unto the right and true knowledge of GOD. This is the first step of
our Manumission from that spiritual thraldom. The Understanding is the Guide,
and Pilot of the whole man. It is that faculty which sits at the helm of the
Soul. But as the most skilful Pilot may mistake his course in the dark, so may
the Understanding when it wants the light of Knowledge. This is an
accomplishment so desirable, that the Devil knew not a more alluring bate to
tempt our first Parents in Paradise, Ye shall be as Gods (says he) knowing
good and evil. When the Lord had referred it to Solomon's option, what to choose,
he choose Wisdom and Knowledge. When once the Devil understood, that by the
Preaching of the Gospel, his kingdom was ruined, he invents two new stratagems
to overthrow Religion, even in the infancy and beginning of it, to wit
Persecution and Heresy. Open persecution began in Nero, a very imp and graff
of the Devil. When this Hirricano, and many others of that kind were past, and
when the Churches of Christ were once at rest, he sends in a Deluge of
Arianism, which in a short time so prodigiously spread, and overran the
Christian World, that it seemed to carry all before it, an assault, that did
not strike at the uppermost boughs of Religion, but at the Root and Being of
Christianity. But this second proved more sad than the first; for, where
Persecution kills one thousand, Heresy kills ten thousand. The one is the
Wild-Boar of the Forest, the other is the little Fox, that eats up the
Grapes of the Lords Vineyard. The one kills the bodies of Men and Women, the
other poisoneth the Souls of Christians.

In times of greater Light, as these and former times have been reputed to be,
Satan comes not abroad usually to deceive with his gross forgeries, and cloven
foot: for every one almost would discern his haltings, but with more mystical,
yet strongdelusions, and invincible chains of darkness, wherewith he binds his
captives the faster to the judgment of the great day. And therefore the Watch
word given in the bright and shining times of the Apostles was to try the
Spirits, and believe not every Spirit, and take heed of Spirits, who indeed
were only fleshly and corrupt men yet called Spirits, because they pretended to
have much of the Spirit, and their doctrine seemed only to advance the Spirit,
the fitest and fairest cobwebs to deceive and inveigle the world in these
discerning times, that possibly could be spun* out of the poysonful bowels of
corrupt and fleshly men: for Heresy is a work of the flesh.

The times are now come, wherein by the refined mystical divinity of the old
Moncks, all the ordinances of Christ in the New Testament are allegorized and
spiritualized out of the world. They reject the outward word, because of an
inward teaching. They reject the outward Baptism, because of the inward
Baptism. They reject the Lords Supper, because of the spiritual bread from
heaven the Lord Jesus. They abolish the outward Sabbath, because of a spiritual
and inward Sabbath of rest in the bosom of Christ. This is very consistent
with the observing the outward Sabbath. But they wickedly sever, and separat
what GOD has joined together.

But as to what relates to the present Treatise, I am not ignorant, that many
eminent and learned Divines, far beyond whatever I could profess, have beatten
this path, and traveled round the world of Polemick Divinity. But their
writings being so Voluminous and large, that he who desires to have a full
sight at one look of the chief controversies, can no more have it, than a man
from the Peak of Teneriff, can get a clear sight of the whole Globe of the
Earth. Which things, though they be principally worth the knowing,
nevertheless, for so much as their number, and variety are an impediment to
themselves, and the multiplicity of matter, makes the mind abruptly flit from
one thing to another. Therefore I have imitated Geographers, who after they
have surveyed the whole Globe of the Earth, draw Universal descriptions
thereof, and comprehend the the whole image of that great Terra-queous Body
within a narrow circumference of a Card or Mapp. In so doing, I may perhaps
contribute some what toward the satisfaction of some, who neither can nor are
able, to trace the wearisome foot steps, of those eminent Divines, who have
written fully.

This Treatise being Historical, none can expect, but I must have consulted
others, and gleaned off their writtings what things were needful. I cannot
here, as in writing Philosophy, or any such like Science, set up new Theorems,
or Axioms, which have not been heard of before. This were to make a new
Religion, a new System, and Body of Divinity, such as some giddy-headed
Heretics are thinking upon. I must confine my self to the good old way, and
follow the heatten path-road, wherein men of sound principles have walked
before me.

This Book is not designed for men of knowledge and learning, who are more
conversant in such matters than I am, but for the unlearned and newbeginners,
who need to be instructed with the sound principles of the true Protestant
Religion.

I hope none will think I have done amiss in mentioning so many Religions,
which had been better unnamed (some may think) than named. This might have some
weight, if there were no more Religions in the world at this time, but one
only, to wit, the true Protestant Religion. But seeing I cannot name so many
here, as there are this day owned and professed in the Christian Church, I
cannot be to blame.

This Book will be useful for understanding the Confession, and knowing the
design of it. For how many read it, and commend it, that never knew the nature
of it. Though there be a multiplicity of questions, and many in number, yet all
of them to my best remembrance, are taken word by word out of the Confession.
The answers are by Yes, or No. To which are subjoyned immediately the proofs of
the Confession. These words which are often repeated, Well then, do not the
Papists err, are nothing else but sure Conclusions drawn from two manifest
propositions.

The design of this Treatise is good. The method is plain and easy. The order
of the Questions, follow the order of the purposes in the Confession. The
probations are such, as are made use of in the Confession, and by the Orthodox
Divines, against the Adversaries. They are either the very words of the
Scripture in Terminis, or such as by good and necessary consequence, are drawn
from the Scripture. They pass reckoning for number. Let no man blame me for
speaking somewhat for the Truth, because another man has spoken better. If I
have said little in defense if it, I am sure I have said nothing against it; as
the Apostle says, We can do nothing against the truth, but for it. If I cannot
please all men, I shall endeavor at least to please some. And if I can please
none, I shall not displease my self. I hope my friends will censure favorably,
if my enemies censure maliciously. I expect as many Adversaries of one sort,
and of another upon my top, as a traveling man has midges and wasps about his
head in a warm summer evening. There are escapes in Authors, whose knowledge is
far beyond any thing I can profess. No marvel then, if a malicious Critic,
like a viper from the fire of contention fasten upon a man's hand. For the
Author being intent upon all, cannot lay out his whole industry upon every
line, which a snarling Cur will bark at. I shall take it as a favor to have
Learned and Judicious men to censure me. Reprove one (says Solomon) that has
understanding, and he will understand knowledge. Some perhaps may look awry
upon me, because I have meddled with some ticklish Questions, and been too
positive in my Judgment. If any such Questions are, they have occurred to me in
the Road, which I could not pass by, without a Salutation. But as all of them
have been weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, so these likewise, which
some may call ticklish. I durst not for a world have been positive, if I had
not judged them consonant to Truth, Therefore let all men, whatever persuasions
they be of, judge charitably: for I have said nothing upon the account of fead
or favor, nor any thing which may cause division or offense. For they that are
such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words,
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Romans 16. 18. But I wish all
who profess themselves to own the true Protestant Religion, were owning the
sound principles of the Confession, and were suitable and consequential to them
in their opinions and practices, and had not given too just cause and occasion
to others to reproach all honest hearted men, as being of seditions and
disloyal principles.

It is probable, I may be less noticed by the common Adversaries, than by some
who are so vain that they glory in injuring the Merit of a Book. For as a
Gentleman of great Parts and Learning says well in his reflections upon one of
his late pieces, the meanest Rogue may burn a City, or kill an Hero, whereas he
could never have built the one, or equaled the other.

As the method is plain and easy, so is the style. I use only the common and
plain Arguments. Some perhaps might have expected a dilution, or answering of
the Adversaries Reasons. It is hard to propose them to their Palate. They
complain their arguments are enervate and clipped. Neither is it expedient to
bring forth from the Devils Armory and Magazin his fiery darts. In confuting
the Adversaries, I use no worse language than Do not they err. Sometimes I
treat the Quakers with such language, as they use against others. Though they
look like Lambs, yet gall them but a little, and you will find them express the
Matulent and Teen of their heart. And as Cacus spouted fire against Hercules,
who persued him as a Theif, so will they against all who pursue them as
Heretics.

Anno 1662. I published a little Book entitled Tyrocinia Mathematica, for the
use of my Scholars, and young Students, which was dedicated to that great
Hero, John Duke of Lauderdail. Anno 1669, I had a large Book printed in Holland
dedicated to the Earl of Winton. In the year 1672, a third was published,
entitled the Hydrostaticks. Though some endeavored to ruin the reputation of
my Writings at home, yet they were not able to do it abroad. But least this
piece may meet with the like welcome into the world, I shall beg liberty to
cite one passage of a letter from a most intelligent Gentleman, in vindication
of that Book entitled Ars Nova and Magna, against which so many flate
contradictions were uttered, which the other two likewise met with.

Ostend, October 10. 1670. I must not forget to tell you a passage anent your
late piece. When we were at Breda, we had occasion to see Colonel Lauther, who
fell in regrating that Scots Spirits were not encouraged. And told he had seen
a Book lately published by one Sinclar, whereof he had a great esteem, and that
many others as well as he esteemed it highly. For example, he told of a
Dutchman* who is one of the French Virtuosi, that said he had seen nothing on
that subject comparable to it; and it was esteemed so in France. If you have
any other thing to publish, I pray you hasten it, for it will not want
acceptance. This testimony was homologate afterward by that famous Virtuoso,
and Mathematician, Christopher Sturmius, a German, in his Book entitled
Collegium Curiosum* which some here have seen. He has gone through the Book
diligently, and gleaned the finest purposes in it, and sent them abroad, not as
his own Inventions, but as mine, which he would never have done, if the
Experiments had been all of them either Untruths and Lies, or not New, and
unheard off. This testimony from a Stranger, vindicates sufficiently. The rest
of my writings are likewise commended by Mr. Boil, Sir Frances Hales, Doct.
Glanvil, and others, men of eminent skill and knowledge in such matters, as I
treat of.

In going through this Book, you will find the Papists confuted upon threescore
and fourteen several heads. The Quakers upon thirty and two. The Socinians upon
forty and seven. The Lutherians upon thirteen. The Antinomians upon as many.
The Anabaptists upon thirty and two. The Arminians upon twenty and seven. The
rest are confuted, some upon fewer; some upon more heads; and that only
according to their chief and grand Errors. For a man to confute all and every
one of their false and absurd Tenets, would be a task, like the cleanseing of
Augeas King of Elis his Oxstall, which none but Hercules was able to do.
Neither would it be worth the while, seeing by the confutation of those
mentioned, you may the more easily confute the rest. If any be too curious to
inquire, why the Author has touched so many controversies in Religion, and yet
has meddled nothing with the great controversy of the time. I answer, I had
been both officious and impertinent to have touched matters, which lay not in
my way. For in all the Confession, which is the only Road I walk in, there is
not one Mum or Syllable of the one Government, or of the other.

The Book for Paper and Character may compare with many from abroad. The
Printer a Person of special skill, has done his duty sufficiently in
correcting; so that I find it needless to prefix or subjoyn Errata Corrigenda.
If there be any Literal faults, which the most skilful Author, and best of
Printers cannot prevent, let the Reader impute them only to invincible
necessity.

Our good Lord, whose Prerogative it is to teach, to profit, bless this little
Book, that it may be to thee as a light shining in a dark place, until the day
dawn and the day star arise in thy heart, that thereby thou may grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

In Summarium hoc Theologieum, Tetrastichon.
Quisquis aves Sophiam Coelestem noscere paucis, Huc ades, hic breviter namque
Libellus habet.

Aureus est certe firmat quia Dogmata sana Codice Divino, falsa refellititem,

Upon Truths victory over Error.
Does thou desire this Treasure to be thine,
Of sacred Truths, and Oracles Divine.
A fiery Pillar radiantly bright:
Come: it will guide thee in the darkest night.
Through Seas, and Rocks, and Mountains, on each hand,
Through Wildernesses to Canaan's land.
By Holy Writ the Truth it verifies,
By Holy Writ confutes all Heresies.
Though short, yet clear, for both do well agree
To make thy path unerring unto thee.
As Ophirs Gold, which from Malacca came,
Made Solomon on Earth the richest Man.
So will this Book make rich thy heart and mind,
With Divine Wisdom, Knowledge of all kind.
Thee richer make than Croesus of great name,
Thee wiser make than Solon of great* fame.
Than all the seven wise Sages, Greeces Glory,
I do protest it is true, and is no Story.
An Alphabetical List of the Proper and Patronymick names of the Authors, of
the old and late Heresies, confuted in the following Treatise.
A.
ADamites, so called from one Adam the Author of their Sect, or from the first
man Adam, whose nakedness they imitate in their Stoves and Conventicles, after
the example of Adam and Eve in Paradise. Page. 172. Anthropomorphitans, so
called from two Greek words Anthropos a Man, and Morphe, a Form, Figure, or
Shape, because they maintained, that GOD had a Body, and was endued with Humane
shape. Page 21, 22. Arians, from Arius a Lybian by Birth, and a Presbyter of
Alexandria by profession. This Heresy brake out under Constantine 290. years
after Christ, and overran a great part of the World. It was condemned in the
first famous Council of Nice, gathered by Constantines appointment; anno 325.
page 23, 28. Arminians, so called from James Arminius, Divinity Reader in
Leyden, who 1605. published and maintained five Articles, which have occasioned
great troubles to the Church of GOD, being eagerly maintained by his followers,
called Remonstrantes. The five Articles are concerning Predestination,
Redemption, GODS Grace, Free Will, and Perseverance. Page 12, 13, 31, 36, 40,
41, 42, 43, 47, 65, 69, 70, 72, 74, 76, 79, 81, 86, 93, 115, 125, 130, 157,
228, 334. Anabaptists, so called from Re-baptising, had for their Author one
Nicholas Storck, who pretended familiarity with GOD by an Angel, promising him
a kingdom, if he would reform the Church, and destroy the Princes that would
hinder him. Page 12, 40, 45, 55, 66, 75, 89, 90, 104, 106, 110, 157, 175, 189,
198, 202, 212, 216, 226,* 239, 244, 246, 262, 276, 277, 283, 309, 314, 228,
334. Antinomians, so called from two Greek words, Anti, against, and Nomos, the
Law. They sprung up from one John Agricola, who affirmed, that the Moral Law
was altogether needless, and that Christians were not tied to the observation
thereof. This Sect sprung up about the year 1535. Page 66, 82, 83,, 88, 89, 98,
99, 106, 114, 127, 132, 133, 145. 155. Arabians, so named from Arabia, the
Country where their Heresy was broached, and maintained under Philip the
Emperor; 217. years after Christ. Page 40.
B.
Brounists, so called from their Author Mr. Robert Broun of North-hampton-shire
in England, sometimes a Schoolmaster in Southwork, hold there is no other pure
Church in the World, but among themselves; as did the Donatists of old. Page
317.
D.
Dominicans, one of the Popish Orders, so called from Dominicus a Spainard.
They were institute by Pope Innocent the third, Anno 1205. This man, with
twelve Abbots, were appointed to preach down the Doctrine of the Albigenses,
who by their preaching did so incense the Princes, that they took Arms, and
killed 100000. of them. They were of the same Religion with the old
Non-conformists in England, who were called Puritans. Page 46. 257. Donatists,
from Donatus born in Numidia in Africa, who because Cecilian was preferred
Bishop before him, to the Bishopric of Carthage, accused him, and all the
Bishops, which had ordained him, to be Traditores; that is, such as had
delivered up their Bibles to be burned by Idolaters, under the persecution of
Maximius. Page 239.
E.
Epicureans, from one Epicurus, an old Heathen Philosopher, who placed men's
chief happiness in the pleasure of the mind. He denied Providence, and taught
that the World was made by the concurse of Atoms. Page 40, 42. Eutychians, so
named from Eutyches an Abbot of Constantinople. This man's Heresies were
condemned by the fourth general Council held at Chalcedon, under the Emperor
Martianus; anno 451. page 58. Erastians, so called from Thomas Erastus, a
Physician in Heidelberg in Germany, who following this man's footsteps, have
taken away from the Church all Discipline and Government, and put it into the
hands of the Civil Magistrate. Page 214, 254, 315, 324. Enthusiasts, so called
from the Greek word Enthusiadso, or Enthusiao, in Latin, Fanatico, I am
inspired, or acted, with a Prophetical, or Divine fury. Page 4, 175, 232, 245,
305.
F.
Franciscans, another Popish order, so called from one Francis, an Italian
Merchant, who before his Conversion (as the Papists say) lived a wicked and
debauched life. He gathered many disciples, anno 1198. and appointed them to be
obedient to Christ and the Pope. Page 46. Familists, or of the Family of Love,
whose Author was one Henry Nicholas, a Hollander. Their first Founder was one
David George of Delph; who called himself the true David, that would restore
the kingdom to Israel. They maintained many dangerous opinions. Page 116, 226,
260.
G.
Greeks, are these who inhabit Greece, viz. Macedon, Epirus, Bulgaria,
Moldavia, etc. They place much of their Religion in the worship of the Virgin
Mary; and of painted, but not of carved Images. Pages 167, 228, 330.
H.
Hemerobaptists, so called from two Greek words, Hemera, a day, and Baptisdo,
to Baptize; because they maintained, that men and women according to their
faults committed every day, ought every day to be Baptized. Page 283.
I.
Jesuits, so called from our blessed Saviors name JESUS, which they falsely
assume to themselves. They were instituted anno 1540. by Ignatius Loyala, first
a Soldier; they are all well bred in Philosophy, and School Divinity, and in
many other Arts and Sciences; and therefore they are employed as Emissaries
from the Pope, and his Conclave, to advance the Popish Religion. Page 31, 46.
Judaisers so called, because they think that all the Jewish ceremonies are
still in force, and binding us who live under the Gospel. Page 141.
Independents, so called, because, they will have every particular Congregation
to be ruled by their own laws, without dependency upon any other Church. Page
236, 309, 317.
L.
Libertines, from the liberty and freedom they take and give to others to
commit sin. Their first Author was one Quintinus a Tailor in Picardy, who
taught, that whatsoever good or evil we did, was not done by us, but by GODS
Spirit in us; and many other blasphemous opinions. Page 44, 106, 114, 155, 175,
189, 245, 246. Lutherians, who so call themselves, lyingly and falsely from
Martin Luther, that eminent Man of GOD. Page 43, 65, 69, 86, 112, 139, 157,
244* 265, 269, 271, 280, 298.
M.
Manicheans, from one Manes a Persian by birth, and a servant by condition. The
Manichean sect was the sink of all former Heresies. p. 19, 55, 261 Macedonians,
so called from Macedonus Bishop of Constantinople 312. years after Christ.
Their Heresy was condemned in the second general Council held at
Constantinople by Gratian and Theodosius, anno 380. His followers were called
Pneumatomachians, fighters against the holy Spirit, from Pneuma, a Spirit; and
Machesthai, to fight. Page 28. Marcionites, from one Marcion a Paphlagonian,
near the Euxine Sea, who was Cerdons scholar, a grand Heretic. He maintained
Cerdons Heresies at Rome, about 133. years after Christ. Page 55, 283, 334.
N.
Nestorians, so called from Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople, who broached
his errors under Theodosius the younger, 400. years after Christ. They made
Christ to have two Persons, as he had two Natures. This Heresy was condemned
by the third general Council held at Ephesus, under Theodosius the younger,
anno 431. Page 57. Novatians, so called from Novatus, who lived under Decius
the Emperor, 220. years after Christ. He was an African by birth. P. 104, 108,
110, 230.
O.
Origenists, so called from famous Origin. His errors began to spread about the
year of Christ, 247. under Aurelian the Emperor, and continued above 334.
years. p. 332.
P.
Pneumatomachians. See the letter P. Pelagians, from Pelagius a Britain (as
they say) by birth. A Monk at Rome, afterward a Presbyter, under Theodosius the
younger. p. 45, 64, 91, 115. Puritans, otherwise called Kathari, because they
esteemed themselves purer, and holier than others. p. 66, 104, 230, 239.
Photinians, from Photinus, born in the lesser Galatia. He began to spread his
Heresies about the year 323. at Syrmium, where he was Bishop under Constantius
the Emperor. p. 334. Papists are too well known: They are to be found in every
other page almost of the book.
Q.
Quakers, so called, because sometimes they use to Quake and Tremble, when they
prophesy, or when they are in a rapture. p. 4, 5, 12, 18, 23, etc.
S.
Socinians, so called from one Faustus Socinus, an Italian of Siena, place all
Religion in the old condemned Heresies, following their Master a most vile
Heretic. p. 1, 12, 13, 21, 23, 28, 31, etc. Sabellians, so called from
Sabellus, an African by birth. His Heresies began anno Christi, 224. Page 23.
Separatists, so called, because they withdrew themselves from the Christian
Communion, and fellowship of others in the Worship of GOD. p. 257. Scepticks,
commonly called Seekers, maintain, that the whole universal Church, has
perished a little after the Apostles times, and are not to this day restored,
until Christ from Heaven shall send new Apostles, for raising up again the
Church Visible. p. 247. Sabbatarians, so called, because they observe the
Jewish Sabbath, imagining there is no precept or example in the New Testament,
for observing the first day of the week. p. 192.
T.
Tritheits, or Tritheitae, so called, because they divided the indivisible
Essence of the Godhead into three parts; the one they called the Father, the
other the Son, the third the Holy Ghost. p. 19, 23. Tertullianists, were so
called from that famous Lawyer, and Divine, Tertullian, who lived under Severus
the Emperor, about 170. years after Christ. p. 230.
V.
Vorstians, from one Vorstus an old Heretic, who taught, that GOD had a Body,
and was endued with parts, as the Anthropomorphitans affirmed. p. 21, 22.
Vaninians, from one Vaninus, a great promotter of Atheism. He was publicly
burned at Toulouse. p. 163.
CHAP. I. Of the Holy SCRIPTURE.
Question I.
IS the Light of Nature, and the works of Creation and Providence, sufficient
to give that knowledge of GOD, and of his Will, which is necessary to
Salvation? No. 1 Cor. 1. 21. and 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who mantain, That Men living according to
the Law, and Light of Nature, may be saved? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, none can be saved, unless they be born again, by the
incorruptible seed of the Word. 1 Pet. 1. 23. (2) Because, Christ is the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, and no man comes to the Father, but by the Son, John
14. 6. (3) Because, there is none other Name under Heaven, given among men
whereby we must be saved, but by the Name of Jesus, Acts 4. 12. (4) Because,
men cannot believe in Christ without supernatural revelation: and therefore
cannot be sanctified or justified; because all Justification, Sanctification,
and Remission of sins, are by GODS Grace, and Faith in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.
24, 25. Acts. 26. 18. Neither can men be so saved, viz. by living according to
the light of Nature, because Salvation is promised only to Believers in
Christ, Acts 16. 31. John 3. 16. (5.) Because, all that know not GOD, will be
punished eternally, 2 These. 1. 8. But men without supernatural Revelation
cannot savingly know GOD, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Matthew. 11. 27. (6.) Men destitute of
supernatural Revelation cannot know their own corruption and misery, by the
first Adam, nor the remedy which is offered by Christ, the second Adam. They
are without GOD, without Hope, without the Promises, without the Church, and
covenant of God: and the mysteries of Faith are hid, and unknown to them
allanerly, that perish, and are lost, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Romans 9. 4. 2 Cor. 4. 3.
Mat. 13. 11, 12. Matthew. 11. 25, 26, 27.

Quest: II.
ARE the holy Scriptures most necessary to the Church? Yes. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 2
Pet. 1. 19.

Well then, does not the Popish Church err, that affirms, the true Church to
be infallible in teaching and propounding Articles of Faith, both without, and
against the Scripture: and that their unwritten Traditions are of Divine, and
equal Authority, with the Canon of the Scripture? Yes. Do not likewise the
Libertines and Quakers err, affirming, that GOD does teach, and guide the Elect
into all truth, by the alone instinct and light of the Spirit, without any
written Word whatsoever? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, the Scriptures are the foundation, upon which the Church is
built. Ephesians. 2. 20. (2.) Because, all things are to be examined, by the Rule of
the Word; as the noble Bereans did, Acts 17. 11, 12. (3) Because, unwritten
Traditions, are subject and liable to many corruptions, and are soon, and
quickly forgotten. (4.) Because, we have Life Eternal in the Scriptures;
therefore they must be most necessary to the Church, John 5. 39. (5.) Because,
the Scriptures are given, that the Man of GOD, may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished to all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. And the Scriptures are written,
that men may believe, John 20. 31.

Quest: III.
ARE these former ways of GODS revealing his will unto his People now ceased?
Yes.

Well then, do not the Enthusiasts, and Quakers err, who maintain, *That the
Lord has not ceased yet, to reveal his Will as he did of old? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, GOD who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times
past unto the Fathers, by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. The Apostle calls the time of the New Testament, the
last days, because under the same, there is no more alteration to be expected,
but all things are to abide without adding, or taking away, as was taught, and
ordained by Christ, until the last day; See also Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17. The
Ways, and Manners of old, was first by Inspiration, 2 Chro. 15. 1. Isaiah 59.
21. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Secondly, by Visions, Numb. 12. 6. 8. Thirdly, by Dreams, Ioh
33. 14, 15. Genesis 40. 8. Fourthly, by Urim and Thummim, Numb. 27. 21. 1 Samuel 30.
7, 8. Fifthly, by Signs, Genesis 32. 24. Exodus 13. 21. Sixthly, by audible Voice,
Exodus 20. 1. Genesis 22. 15. All which do end in Writing, Exodus 17. 14. which is a
most sure and infallible way of the Lords revealing his Will unto his People.

Quest. IV.
DO the Books of the Old, and New Testament come under the name of the holy
Scripture, and Word of GOD? Yes.

Well then, do not the Quakers err, who maintain, That the Scriptures ought not
to be called the Word of GOD? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, Christ says, if he called them Gods, unto whom the Word of GOD
came, and the Scripture cannot be broken, Ioh. 10. 35. Here it is evident, that
the Word of GOD, and the Scripture, are the same. (2.) Because, the predictions
of the Prophets, are expressly called the Word of GOD. Now in the first year of
Cyrus king of Persia, that the Word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah
might be accomplished, 2 Chro. 36. 22. Here we see it is evident, that the
written Prophesies of Jeremiah, which are a part of the holy Scripture, are
called the Word of GOD. (3.) Because, what Christ calls the commandment of
GOD, He calls the Word of GOD, Mar. 7. 9, 10. compared with v: 13. (4.)
Because, the Apostle calls the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. This
sword, is the sword of the Holy Spirit, which he does, as it were, put into our
hand, to resist Satan, against all his temptations, Ephesians. 6. 17. Therefore, by
the sword of the Spirit, must be understood the Scripture, not the Spirit it
self, as some Quakers affirm. It is evident also, from the fourth chapter of
Matthew, where Christ being tempted by the Devil, with three different
temptations; resists him with three different places of Scripture. And being
asked by the Pharisees, why his Disciples did pluck the ears of Corn upon the
Sabbath day; answered by Scripture. Mat. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. Teaching us, that
Satan's temptations, must be carefully answered, and that by Scripture, as the
only mean to overcome him, and his Instruments. (5.) Because, the Word of GOD,
is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two edged sword, Heb. 4. 12. This
cannot be understood of Christ, because Paul in his other writings does not
call the Person of Christ by this name, and therefore must be understood of the
word of the Gospel, the power whereof is described, Romans 1. 16. (6.) See these
following places of Scripture, Psalm 119. 172. 1 Kin. 16. 12. and 2 Kin. 9. 36.
and 2 Kin. 23. 16. Isa. 28. 13. Hos. 1. 1, 2. Isa. 37. 22. Prove. 30. 5. By the
Scripture, or Word of GOD, we do not understand the bare letters, or the
several written words of the holy Scripture, which the Adversaries may imagine,
we call the Word of GOD. These are only the Vessels, which carry and convey
that Heavenly Light unto us. But we understand thereby, the Doctrine or Will of
GOD revealed unto reasonable creatures, teaching them, what to do, believe, or
leave undone, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Quest. V.
ARE the Scriptures given of GOD, to be the Rule of Faith and Life? Yes. Luke
16. 29, 31. Ephesians. 2. 20. Rev. 22. 18, 19. 2 Timothy 3. 16.

Well then, does not the Popish Church err, who maintain their Unwritten
Traditions to be the Rule of Faith? Yes. Do not likewise the Enthusiasts, and
the Quakers err, who maintain, the Spirit within, that teaches the Elect, to be
the only Rule of Faith.? And that the Dictates of the Light within, are of as
great authority as the Scriptures? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, the Scriptures are called a Rule, Gal. 6. 16. (2.) Because,
nothing is to be added to the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Prove. 30. 6.
Rev. 22. 19, 20. (3.) Because, we ought rather to follow the Scriptures in this
Life, than a voice spoken from Heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 21. (4.) Because, the
Scripture is written, that we may believe, John 20. 31. (5.) Because, the
Scripture is given for making the man of GOD perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 17. (6.)
Because, we must betake our selves in the whole of Religion to the Law, and to
the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20. (7) Because, Christ himself, refers the greatest
question, that ever was, whether he be the Son of GOD, or not, to the
Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 38, 39. Search the Scriptures (says he) for they testify of
me. (8) Because, the Holy Ghost did never give such a designation to his own
Word, as an Historical Rule, and dead Letter; or as some Quakers call them, not
the principal Fountain of Truth, and knowledge, nor the first rule of Faith and
Manners, but the Regula secundaria, subordinate to the Spirit; whence, as they
affirm, the holy Scriptures have all their true worth, excellency, and
certainty: whereas Paul says expressly, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of GOD, Romans 10. 14. (9.) Because, the spirits cannot be known, by any
other Rule, than by the written Word. It is certain, that the Devil transforms
himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. There is a spirit of the World,
1 Cor. 2. 12. A spirit that rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. There is a lying spirit, 1 Kin. 22. 22. And a Spirit
of error and delusion, 1 John 4. 6. How shall these be known to be such, or the
Spirit, which the Quakers obtrude upon us, not to be one of them, but by the
Rule of the Word?

Quest. VI.
ARE the Books commonly called Apocrypha, of Divine Inspiration? No. Luke 24.
27, 44. Romans 3. 2. and 2 Pet. 1. 21.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who affirm, That the books called
Apocrypha, are of divine Inspiration, and of equal authority with the undoubted
Word? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, they were never written in the Hebrew tongue, nor by any of the
Prophets (2.) Because, they are never cited in the New Testament by Christ, or
by any of the Apostles, as the books of the Canonical Scriptures are. (3.)
Because, they contain many fabulous, and impious Doctrines, and Histories.
First, in Tobit 5. 12. The Angel says, he was Azariah, the son of Ananias. This
was a manifest lie, which cannot be attributed to a good Angel; and therefore
the Spirit of GOD, has not dictated this History. (2.) It is reported, Tobit
6. 6, 7, 16, 17. that the heart, and liver of a Fish, was good to make a
perfume, to drive away the Devil, if any man was troubled with him, or with any
evil Spirit. And it is said, Tobit 12. 15. by the Angel, I am Raphael, one of
the seven holy Angels, that presents the prayers of the Saints. This is only
proper to Christ. (3.) Because, the fact of Simeon and Levi, condemned by
Jacob, acted by the Spirit of GOD, Genesis 34. 25. in killing the Shechemites, is
commended by Iudeth, 9. 2, 3. (4.) Because, you will read of an offering for
the dead, Prayers, and Reconciliation for the dead, that they might be
delivered from sin, 2 Maccab. 12. 43, 44, 45. See what contradictions are in
comparing together, 1 Maccab. 6. 8. 2 Maccab. 15. 16. 2 Maccab. 9. 5.

Quest. VII.
DOES the Authority of the holy Scripture, for which it ought to be believed,
and obeyed, depend upon the testimony of any man, or Church? No. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
21. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 1 These. 2. 13.

Well then, do not the Popish Writters err, who maintain, the Authority of the
Scriptures, to depend upon the testimony of the Church, as to us? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, the Word is to be received by us, not as the word of man, but as
the Word of GOD, 1 These. 2. 13. (2.) Because, the Doctrine of Christ, to be
received by Belivers, depends not upon man's testimony, Ioh. 5. 34. (3.)
Because, GOD only is true, and infallible, and all men are liars, Romans 3. 4.
Heb. 6. 18. He is of incomprehensible wisdom, Ps. 147. 5. Of great goodness,
Exodus 18. 9. Romans 11. 12. Ps. 34. 8. Of absolute power and dominion, Genesis 17.
1. Ps. 50. 1, 2. Of infallible truth, who can neither deceive, nor can be
deceived. To. 3. 4. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. Therefore ought he to be credited,
in all his Narrations, Promises, Threatenings, and Prophesies, and obeyed in all
his Commandments allanerly; because he himself has said so.

Quest. VIII.
IS the whole counsel of GOD, concerning all things necessary for his own
Glory, Man's Salvation, Faith and Life, either expressly set down in Scripture,
or by good and necessary consequence, may be deduced from it? Yes. 2 Timothy 3.
15. Gal. 1. 8, 9. 2 These. 2. 2.

Well then, does not the Popish Church err, who maintain, The Scripture to be
an imperfect Rule, and therefore to stand in need of a supply of unwritten
Traditions? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, all Scripture is given, that the Man of GOD may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished to all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. (2.) Because, the
Psalmist says expressly, the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul,
Psalm. 19. 7, 8. (3.) Because, nothing is to be added to the Word of GOD, Deuteronomy.
4. 2. Prove. 30. 6. Therefore the Scriptures, must be a complete, and perfect
Rule of Faith, and not an imperfect Rule, or but partly a Rule, as they teach.

Quest. IX.
IS it warrantable to argue in Articles, or Matters of Faith, by Consequences
natively deduced from Scripture? Yes.

Well then, do not the Socinians, Quakers, Anabaptists, and Arminians err, who
maintain, That all matters of Faith are set down expressly, and in so many words
in Scripture, and that no matters of Faith (at least necessary to Salvation)
can be built upon Consequences drawn from the Scripture? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, Christ himself proves, that necessary point of Faith, The
Resurrection of the dead, from the Scripture by a Consequence, Matthew. 23. 29,
31, 32. To be any ones GOD, is to give one eternal life, Psalm. 33. 12. Psalm.
144. 15. Whence follows, that those Patriarchs lived still with God, in
respect of their Souls, ( which these Sadducees also denied) Acts 23. 8. and
should also rise in respect of their Bodies, and live eternally: seeing he is
called a God, not of one part of them only; but of their whole persons. And in
that same chapter verse 43, 45. Christ proves his Deity by a consequence from
Scripture against the Pharisees. (2.) So does Apollos, Acts 18. 28. and Paul,
Acts 19. 22. prove from the Old Testament, Jesus to be the Christ: but it is
not expressly said in the Old Testament, that he is Christ. Is not that which
necessarly follows from Scripture, contained in it implicitly, and implicitly
revealed by God, and is infallibly true?

Quest. X.
IS the inward Illumination of the Spirit of GOD, necessary for the saving
understanding of such things, as are revealed in the Word? Yes. John 6. 45. 1
Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Well then, do not the Socinians and Armi^ians err, who maintain, That men
without the revelation of the Spirit, are able to understand the Scriptures for
their Salvation? Yes.

By what Reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, the Disciples of Christ, were not able to understand the
Scripture, before he opened their eyes, Luke 24. 45. (2.) Because, the Jews to
this day, cannot understand the Scriptures of the Old Testament, until the Vail
by the spirit of GOD be taken away, 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16, 18. (3.) Because, the
Psalmist David seeks from God, the opening of his eyes, that he may behold
wondrous things out of his Law, Psalm. 119. 18.

Quest. XI.
ARE all these things, which are necessary to be known, believed, and observed
for salvation, so clearly propounded, and opened, in some place of Scripture or
other, that not only the Learned, but the Unlearned, in a due use of the
ordinary means, may attain unto a sufficient understanding of them, for their
salvation? Yes. Psalm. 119. 105, 130.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, That things necessary to
salvation are obscurely, and darkly set down in the Scripture; and that without
the help of unwritten Traditions, and the infallible expounding of the Church,
the Scriptures cannot be understood? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, the Word is a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our paths,
Psalm. 119, 105. (2.) Because, the Scripture is a light, which shines in a dark
place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. (3.) Because, the Scripture enlighteneth the eyes, and
makes the simple wise, Psalm. 19. 7, 8.

Quest: XII.
Has the Lord by his singular providence and care, kept pure in all Ages the
Old Testament in Hebrew, and the New Testament in Greek? Yes. Matthew 5. 18.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, the Old Testament in Hebrew,
and the New Testament in Greek, which are the Fountains, to be corrupted; and
that their common Latin Version is authentic* Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, Christ says, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one title
shall in nowise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled, Matthew. 5. 18. (2.)
Because, there can be no urgent necessity shown, why the Fountains are
corrupted. (3) If any such corruption had been in the Scripture, Christ, his
Apostles, and the Orthodox Fathers had declared so much. (4) Because, they
never have nor can make out any manifest corruptions in the Fountains, albeit
most manifest and undeniable demonstrations, are given of the corruptions of
their Latin Version, which they make authentic.

Quest: XIII.
ARE the Original tongues, viz. the Hebrew and the Greek, to be translated into
the Vulgar Language of every Nation into which they come? Yes. Are we commanded
in the fear of GOD to read and search the Scriptures? Yes. John 5. 39. 1 Cor.
14. 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 24, 27, 28.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, There is no necessity of
translating the Original Tongues, the Hebrew, and the Greek, into the vulgar
Language of every Nation, unto which they come, but rather a very great hazard,
and danger of Errors, and Heresies? Yes.

Do not likewise the same Papists err, who forbid the reading of the Scriptures
in the vulgar tongues? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, the Scriptures were given long since to the Jews, in their own
vulgar Language, that they might be read publicly and privately by all, Deuteronomy.
31. 10, 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19, 20. (2.) Because, the New Testament was
written in the Greek Language, which at that time was most generally known to
all Nations. (3.) Because, Christ bids all promiscuously, search the
Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 29. (4.) Because, the Prophets, and Apostles preached their
Doctrines, to the People and Nations, in their known Languages: Ier. 36: 15,
16. Act. 2. 6. (5.) Because, immediately after the Apostles times, many
Translations were extant. (6.) Because, all things must be done in the
Congregation unto edifying, 1 Cor. 14. 26. but an unknown tongue does not
edify. (7.) Because, all are commanded to try the Spirits, 1 These. 5. 21. 1
Cor. 10. 15. (8.) Because, the Scriptures teach the way of Life, Prove. 2. 9.
Luke 16. 29. Acts 24. 14. (9.) Because, the Scriptures set forth the duties of
every man in his place, and estate of his life, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. Josh. 1.
8. Psalm. 119. 24. 2 Chronicles. 23. 11. (10.) Because, they are the ground of Faith,
Romans 4. 20. 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. (11.) Because, they are the Epistle of God sent to
his Church, Hos. 8. 12. Rev. 2. 1* 8, 12. (12) Because, they are his Testament,
wherein we may find what legacies, he has bequeathed unto us, 2 Cor. 3. 14,
16. Heb. 10. 16. Ioh. 14. 16. (13) Because, they are the sword of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6. 17. (14) Because, being embraced and known, they make a man happy,
Psalm 119. 97, 98. Luke 10. 42. Luke 16. 29. Psalm 1: 2: Rev: 1: 3. (15)
Because, when the Scriptures are neglected, or contemned, they plunge men into
all misery, Heb: 2: 3: Matthew: 22: 29: Psalm 50: 16.

Quest: XIV.
WHen there is a Question about the true meaning, and full sense of any
Scripture, must it be known and searched, by other places, which speak more
clearly? Yes. 2 Peter 1: 21: Acts 15: 15, 16.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, The Scriptures not to be a
sufficient Interpreter of it self, and that the sense of it cannot be gathered
infallibly, when the text is doubtful, from other places which speak more
clearly, but only from the Magisterial Traditions, and unwritten Opinions of
the Church of Rome? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the noble Bereans, compared Scripture with Scripture, for finding
out the true and sure sense of it, Acts 17: 11. (2) Because, the Apostle Paul
did the same, Acts 28: 23. (3) Because, the same was done by the council of the
Apostles and Elders, Acts 15. 15, 16, 17.

Quest. XV.
IS the holy Spirit, speaking in the Scripture, the Supreme Judge, by which all
controversies of Religion, are determined, and all Decrees of Councils,
Opinions of Ancient Writers, Doctrines of men, and private Spirits, are to be
examined, and in whose sentence we are to rest? Yes. Matthew: 22: 29: 31: Ephesians: 2.
20: Acts 28. 25.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, That the Church* of Rome, and
the Pope, are the supreme Judges of all Controversies of Faith: and that his
Decrees, and Determinations, are to be believed, without examination, and
implicitly to be believed by all Believers? Yes.

Do not likewise the Quakers err, who maintain, that the Light within, which
teaches the Elect, is the only Judge of all Controversies of Faith? Yes

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, God commands all men, to go to the Law, and to the Testimony, in
doubtful matters, Isaiah 8: 20: (2) Because, all doubts in Religion, are to be
examined by the Rule of the Word, Acts 17. 11. Galatians 6. 16. (3) Because,
Christ and his Apostles, did always dispute, and reason from the Scriptures,
against the enemies of the Truth: Matthew. 22: 31. Gal. 3. 13. (4) Because, the
Church of GOD is founded upon the Writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, Ephesians.
2. 20. (5) Because, we are commanded to prove all things, and to try the
Spirits, 1 These. 5. 2. 1 John 4. 1, 6.

CHAP. II. Of GOD, and of the Holy Trinity.
Question I.
IS there but one only the true, and living GOD? Yes. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1 Corinthians.
8. 4. 6. 1 These. 1. 9.

Well then, do not the Tritheitae err, who maintain, three GODS numerically
distinct, the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost? Yes.

Do not likewise the Manicheans err, who maintain, That there are two Gods,
being diverse, and opposite, as to kind, viz. One good, the Author, and cause
of all good things, and of things immaterial, being the God of the New
Testament. The other evil, to wit, the Devil, the Author, and cause of all evil
things, and of things material, being the God of the Old Testament? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because though there be a plurality of Persons mentioned in Scripture, yet
it is ever God as One, as is evident from the first chapter of the Revelation,
and the last. For if that one God have in himself all perfections, there can be
no perfection beside him, and so no God, but this one true God: for if there
were; He should not be God, because not infinite in perfection. And if God be
infinite in perfection, then surely there cannot be a multiplicity of Gods,
seeing that which is infinite, in that respect, cannot be multiplied. (2) It is
evident from Deuteronomy: 32: 39: where the Lord speaks of himself, I, even I am he,
and there is no God with me. (3) Because, God is Omnipotent, and so cannot be
hindered by any other, in his working. Rev: 15: 3: (4) It is evident from
Christ's words to the young man of the Gospel, there is none good but one, that
is God. (5) From the Words of Hanna in her Song, for there is none beside thee
(O Lord) neither is there any Rock; beside our God. (6) From the Testimony of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8: 6: to us, says he, there is but one God. (7) From what
Christ said to one of the Scribes, viz: the Lord our God is one Lord: Mark 12:
29: (8) Because, God is a most absolute, and most perfect Being, and so beyond
all other things, One: John 10: 29. Psalm 145: 3: 147: 5: (9) Because, this one
blessed God, is most absolutely sufficient, and furnished with infinite Power,
and Wisdom, for the production, conservation, and ruleing all things in Heaven
and in Earth. (10) Because, he is of all things without himself, the first and
supreme cause, from which all the Creatures visible, or invisible, have their
rise and beginning. (11) It is evident, lastly, from the testimonies of the
most wise Heathens, who have been necessitated to acknowledge, but one God only.

Quest. II.
IS GOD infinite in being and perfection, Yes, Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Job 26: 14.

Well then, do not the Vorstians, Socinians, and Anthropomorphitans err, who
maintain, that God is finite in being, and perfection? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, God has a being from himself, and all things have their
dependence from him: and therefore there can be nothing, by which he can be
limited, Romans 11. 36. (2) Because, GOD is every where present, in heaven, and
in earth, and beyond the Heavens, Ierem: 23: 24: Isaiah 66: 1. (2) Because, the
Scripture affirms, that the perfection of God, is the highest, is unmeasurable,
unchangeable, and infinitely great, beyond all creatures: Job 11. 7, 8, 9.
Psalm. 145. 3. Job 26. 14.

Quest. III.
IS the only living and true God, a most pure Spirit, invisible, without a body
and parts? Yes. John 4: 24: 1 Timothy: 1: 17: Deuteronomy: 4: 15, 16: Luke 24. 39.

Well then, do not the Vorstians, Anthropomorphitans, and Socinians err, who
maintain, God to have a body, and endued with parts, and an outward shape, and
form? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, God is the Father of spirits, Hebr. 12: 9. (2) Because, God is
invisible, 1 Timothy: 1: 17. (3) Because, God is like to no bodily thing, nor can
he be represented by any image, or corporeal likeness: Isa: 40. 18. Acts 17. 29.

Quest. IV.
ARE there in the unity of the Godhead, three Persons, of one substance, power
and eternity? Yes. 1 John 5. 7. Matthew. 3. 16, 17. Matthew. 28: 19. 2 Cor. 13. 14.

Well then, do not the Arians, and Socinians err, and others, Who deny the
Godhead of the Son, and holy Ghost? Yes.

Do not likewise the Tritheitae err, Who deny the Unity of the Divine essence?
Yes.

Thirdly, do not the Sabellians err, Who deny the real distinction of the
Persons? Yes.

And lastly, do not the Quakers err, who maintain, there are no Persons in the
Godhead? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From the places of Scripture already cited. (2) From the Apostolical
Benediction, in which the three Persons of the Godhead, are called upon
expressly: 2 Cor. 13. 14. (3) From, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. Where the three Persons,
are named Spirit, Lord, God. And from John 15. 26. But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth. (4)
Because, there are three, that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Spirit. 1 John* 5. 7. These three, must be either three Persons, or
three Gods. This last, is the hight of impossibility; therefore they must be
three Persons. Here they are put to silence, and have nothing to reply; such is
the strength, and power of Truth, which is able to stop the mouths of the
greatest rebels against religion and reason. But there is good ground for the
word Person, Heb. 1. 3. where Christ is said to be the express Image, or
impression of the Fathers Person. Because, the Person of the Son, perfectly
represents the Person of the Father, as an Impression does the Seal: wherefore
he is also called the image of the invisible GOD, Col. 1. 15. The Greek word is
(...), Subsistence, or Person, whereby is understood, the Person of the Father
as distinct from the Son, and subsists of himself, and in himself, and is, as
the Original of the Person of the Son, by an eternal and ineffable generation.
That there are three Persons in the Godhead; it is further evident, (1) from
all the Epistles, written to the seven Churches of Asia. For, as may be
gathered from Rev. 1. 1. it is the Father that sends, it is the Son that gives
John the Commission, and it is the holy Ghost in the close, that is mentioned
as a joint speaker. (2) Because, in that Epistle written to Thyatira, there are
three distinctly named, first, the Father and the Son, in these words, these
things says the Son of God. Next, there is named in the last verse of that
second chapter, the Spirit, he that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
says unto the Churches. (3) Because, in the beginning of that Epistle to the
Church of Sardis, they are all three put together, these things says He, (to
wit, the Son) that has the seven Spirits of GOD. Here, GOD, that is the
Father, is distinctly considered, as another Person. The seven spirits, are the
holy Ghost. (4) Because, these three Persons are most fully and clearly
distinguished in the fifth chapter. First, the Father sitting on the Throne.
Secondly, the Lamb, or the Son of GOD: And thirdly, the seven Spirits, or the
holy Ghost, so called from the pouring out of his Gifts upon the Churches, in
that abundant manner, as if he were seven Spirits, or a sevenfold Spirit.

It is evident also, that the Father, Son, and Spirit are really distinct from
one another, and are three Persons. They are indeed in respect of their
Essence, which is indivisibly communicable to them, One and the same GOD; but
considered Personally, they differ really, for the Father is not the Son,
neither is he, that sits upon the Throne, the Lamb. Neither the Father, nor the
Spirit were incarnate, but the Son, who died, and was buried, which can be said
of none, but of a Person. It cannot be said that the Father died, or that the
Spirit died. Next, is not the holy Ghost the spirit of GOD, as the Son is the
Son of GOD? And if that, suppose, a real distinct personality, this must do it
also. Now if the Father be God, and the Son be God, and the Spirit God also,
who have one, and the same divine nature, and essence indivisibly communicated
to them; and so, if there be but one God, and yet these three really distinct,
then they must be distinct persons, in respect of their Personal properties,
seeing they are Persons, and distinct. The Son, (as was said) is called the
express Image of the Fathers Person, which evidently shows, that the Father,
considered as distinct from the Son, is a Person, and subsists. If then, thus
it be, must not the Son, as distinct from the Father, and so lively and
expressly representing his person, be a person also, having this from the
Father? The same must be true likewise, of the holy Ghost, who is GOD equal
with both, yet different from both; for he who proceeds from the Father, and
from the Son, must differ from the Father, and from the Son; as he who is
begotten, must be distinct from him that begat him.

Some Quakers either ignorantly, or perversely, will have the word (...),
translated substance, (as it is Heb. 11. 1.) and thus they read, Heb. 1. 3. the
Character or Image of GODS substance, which is to be understood of Christ, (say
they) not simply as GOD, but as Man. But they might as well have said, it
signifies confident, or confidence, because it is so translated, 2 Cor. 9. 4.
and 2 Cor. 11. 17. But they speak here consequentially to their own Tenets, who
in effect deny the Trinity, and all distinction between the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, not only in words, but in very deed. The Apostle in this place, is
proving Christ the Son of GOD, to be Lord, and Heir of all things; because, GOD
created the Worlds by him; He is the brightness of his glory, the express Image
of his person, upholdeth all things by the Word of his power. These Titles are
here given to the Son of GOD, as a Creator, and a Preserver of all things,
which belong to him only, according to his Divine Nature: therefore these
Titles must be understood of Christ, forasmuch, as he is the eternal Son of
GOD, and a Light from the Eternal Light, of one Essence, and Glory with the
Father; nevertheless distinguished from the Person of the Father, by whom the
Father executes his Operations, and shows his Properties, even as the Sun by
its light does shine.

Quest. V.
IS the Son of God, of the same substance, Power, and Eternity with the Father?
Yes. 1 John 5. 20. Romans 9. 5. Isa. 9. 6.

Well then, do not the Arians err, who maintain, the Son to be a creature,
brought forth before the foundations of the World? Yes.

Do not likewise the Socinians err, who maintain, the Son to have had no
Existence, before he was conceived in the Womb of the Virgin Mary? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From the Scriptures above cited. (2) Because, the Son is Omnipotent, the
Creator and Preserver of all things, Rev. 1. 18. Col. 1. 16, 17. (3) Because,
he is Omniscient, and searcher of the heart, Matthew 9. 3, 4. John 2. 25. John
21. 17.

Quest. VI.
IS the Holy Ghost GOD? Yes. Acts 5. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.

Well then, do not the Macedonians, or, Pneumatomachians, Arians, Socinians,
and many of the Anabaptists err, who maintain, the Holy Ghost to be a Creature,
as do the Macedonians, or a Power, Virtue, or Efficacy of the Father, as many
Socinians, and others do? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, the Holy Ghost, is to be worshipped as God, Matthew. 28. 19. 2
Cor. 13. 14. Rev. 1. 4. (2.) Because, he is omniscient, and knows all things,
1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. (3.) Because, he is omnipotent, the maker, and preserver of
all things, the worker of miracles; and it is he, that sanctifies, and
justifies the Believers, Genesis 1, 2. Psalm 33. 6. Matthew. 12. 28. Compare Isaiah
6. 9. with Acts 28. 25, 26, 27. (4.) Because, Ananias is said to lie to the
holy Ghost, Acts 5. 3. and verse 4. he is said, not to lie to men, but to GOD.
(5.) Because, Believers, are said to be the Temple of God: 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
And they are said, (1 Cor. 6. 19.) to be the Temple of the holy Ghost:
therefore the holy Ghost is God, seeing to be the Temple of God, and the Temple
of the holy Ghost, are the same. (6.) Because, none can be properly sinned
against, but the true God: therefore the Holy Ghost is God: because many have
been said to have sinned against the holy Ghost, Matthew 12. 31.

Quest. VII.
Does not the Holy Ghost eternally proceed, from the Father, and the Son? Yes.
Iobn 15. 26. Gal. 4. 6.

Well then, does not the Greek Church err, who maintains, the holy Ghost to
proceed only from the Father? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, he is sent by the Son; John 15. 26. Acts 2. 33. (2.) Because,
all things, which are the Sons, are the Fathers, except the Personal
Properties, by which they are distinguished: and all things are communicated
from the Father, to the Son, and consequently the holy Ghost: John 16. 13, 14,
15. Matthew. 11. 27. John 17. 10. (3.) Because, Christ gave to his Apostles the
Spirit by breathing it upon them: John 20. 22. To show that he proceeded from
himself. (4.) Because, he is the Spirit of the Son, no less, than the Spirit of
the Father: Gal. 4. 6. (5.) Because, if the holy Ghost did not proceed from the
Son, as truly as from the Father, he would not be a person really distinct
from the Son, which is contrary to John 14. 16, 17. (6) Because, it is said,
John 16. 14. He shall glorify me ( namely by his testimony, gifts, and
miracles) for he shall receive of mine, ( that is, the doctrine of Salvation
which I have taught you, he shall also reveal it unto you, seeing he shall
receive the same from me:) and shall show it unto you. And Romans 8. 9. He is
called the Spirit, both of the Father, and of the Son. It is said, if any man
has not the Spirit of Christ; that is, the same Spirit, which in the foregoing
verse is called the Spirit of GOD, namely the Father, and is here also called
the Spirit of Christ, because he also proceeds from Christ, and is procured for
us by Christ, John 14. 26. John 16. 7.

CHAP. III. Of GODS Eternal Decrees.
Question I.
DId God from all eternity, by the most holy, and wise Counsel of his Will,
freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass? Yes. Ephesians. 1. 11.
Romans 11. 33. Heb. 6. 17. Romans 9. 15. 18.

Well then, do not the Socinians, Arminians, and Jesuits err, who maintain, the
things which come to pass in time, to fall out, and come to pass, without the
Decree of God? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) From the knowledge of God, whereby from all eternity, he has known all
things infallibly, which come to pass, or shall be in time. Acts 15. 18. John
21. 17. Heb. 4. 13. But all things, which come to pass in time, could not have
been infallibly known from eternity, but in the Decree of his divine Will. (2.)
From Gods natural way of working in time: 1 Cor. 12. 6. Romans 11. 36. whence it
is evident, that God works effectually, and immediately in time all things
which are done: but he works by his will those things, which he will have to
be in time (after that manner, and in that time, how, and when they come to
pass) Psalm. 115. 3. But that Act of willing, cannot happen to God in time, but
has been in him from all eternity, because God is unchangeable, James 1. 17.
(3) By enumerating several instances, concerning which, the Scripture affirms
particularly, that they have been decreed by GOD, as the sufferings and death
of Christ, Acts 2. 23. The glorifying of those, that are to be saved. Ephesians. 1.
4, 5. 1 These. 5. 9. And the foreordaining the rest to damnation to be punished
for their sin; Jude v. 4. The like may be said of other things, which come to
pass in time; see Psalm 33. 11. Psalm 115. 3. Isaiah 46. 10. Prove. 19. 21. That
the Liberty and Freedom of the will, and contingency of events, is consistent
with the Decree; is clear from Acts 2. 23. Acts 3. 17 (18. Acts 4. 27, 28. Genesis
45. 5.

Quest. II.
IS the Decree of Predestination, (namely the Decree of Election, and
Reprobation) absolute, from the mere good will, and pleasure of God? Yes.

And is it particular concerning a certain number of Persons? Yes. 2 Timothy 2.
19. John 13. 18.

Well then, do not the Lutherians, and Arminians err, who maintain, the Decree
of Predestination to be general, and conditional, depending upon persevering
Faith (which they affirm depends upon the will of man) and foreseen infidelity,
and want of faith? Yes.

Do not likewise the Papists, and Socinians, err, who maintain, the Decree of
Predestination to be general, and to depend upon good and evil works, with
Perseverance in them? Yes.

By what arguments are they confuted?

(1) From the Apostle Paul, who makes the good will and pleasure of God, the
only cause, why this man is chosen, and another, as worthy rejected, and casten
off; Romans 9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Where he moves an objection, against the
justice of God, and answers it. (2) Because, our blessed Savior assigns it,
to the good will and pleasure of God; that to some, the mysteries of Faith, for
their conversion are revealed, and that they are hid from many others, who are
nothing worse, but in some respect better; Matthew. 11. 25, 26. (3) Because, a
man of himself has no good thing in him, whereby he may be differenced from
another, but what he has freely gotten from God; 1 Cor. 4. 7. (4) Because, the
grace of Regeneration, justifying Faith, effectual Calling, and perseverance to
the end, are given to all the Elect, and to them only; according to the eternal
Decree of God: and therefore are Effects not Causes, or prerequired conditions
of Election; Romans 8. 30. Acts 13. 48. Matthew. 24. 24. 2 Timothy 1. 9. John 15, 16.
Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. Matthew. 13. 11. Romans 11. 6, 7.

Quest. III.
Has it pleased God, according to the unsearchable Counsel of of his own will,
whereby he extends, or withholdeth mercy, as he pleases, for the glory of
his Sovereign power, over his creatures, to pass by, and to ordain the rest of
mankind to dishonor, and wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious
Justice?

Yes. Romans 9. 17, 18, 21, 22. Jude verse 4 Matthew. 11. 25, 26. 2 Timothy 2. 19, 20.

Well then, do not many of the Quakers, and others err, who maintain, that God
never ordained any man to perish eternally? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1.) Because, Christ thanked his Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because he
had hid those things from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them unto
Babes; Matthew. 11. 25, 26. (2) Because, the Scripture faith to Pharo, even for
this same purpose, have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee,
and that my name might be declared throughout all the Earth. Therefore has he
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardneth. Has not the
Potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor,
and another unto dishonor? What, if God willing to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted
to destruction; Romans 9. 17, 18, 21, 22. (3.) Because, in a great house, there
are some vessels to honor, some to dishonor; 2 Timothy 2. 19, 20. (4.) Because,
the Apostle Jude says, there are some, who of old were ordained to this
condemnation, ungodly men. Note, that the cause of this reprobation, is not
man's sin, but the absolute will, and good pleasure of God. Man's sin indeed is
the cause, why God will punish, but no occasion, why he did ordain, to pass by,
or to punish man. This Decree is just, because God has power over man, as the
Potter has power over the clay. Neither is the end of this Decree the
condemnation of the creature but the manifestation of Gods Justice. Lastly, sin
is the effect of man's free will, and condemnation is the effect of Justice, but
the Decree of God is the cause of neither.

Quest. IV.
ARE any other redeemed by Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted,
sanctified, and saved, but the Elect only?

No: John 17. 9. Romans 8. 28. John 6. 64, 65. John 10. 26. John 8. 47. 1 John.
2. 19.

Well then, do not the Papists, Quakers, Socinians and Arminians err, who
maintain, That all men, even Reprobates are redeemed by Christ, and that many
Reprobates, are effectually Called, Justified, Sanctified, and Adopted? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From the Golden Chain, which cannot be loosed, mentioned by the Apostle
Paul, Romans 8. 30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
(2) Because, those and those only believe, whom GOD has ordained to Life
Eternal, Acts 13. 48. Titus 1. 1. (3) Because, Christ himself says to the Jews,
but ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep: My Sheep hear my voice, and
I know them, John 10. 26, 27, 28. Ye are not of my Sheep, that is, of the
Elect, which the Father has given me. (4) Because, Christ would not pray for
the World, but for the Elect only; John 17. 9. (5) Because, the Election, or
Elect, have obtained it, and the rest were blinded; namely, who are not
elected, and effectually called, Romans 11. 7. (6) Because, Christ says, greater
love has no man, than this, that a man should lay down his life for his
Friends. Such a love he never had to Reprobates, whom, he professes, he never
knew; John 15. 13. with Matthew 7. 23. (7) Because, according to the Scripture,
Christ died only for his own Sheep, to wit, intentionally, and Efficaciously;
John 10. 15. (8) Because, the Scripture often says, that Christ died for many;
Matthew. 26. 28. Matthew. 20. 28. (9) Because, there are many, who are living,
under the Gospel, as well, as those who lived under the Law, who have not been
so much as outwardly called, being nothing worse, than others who are called.
(10) Because, to all and every one, the Grace of Regeneration, which is simply
necessary to Salvation, is not offered: Neither do all, and every one get
remission and pardon of their sins; Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
Matthew. 11. 25, 28. with Matthew. 13. 11. (11) Because, the Grace of Regeneration,
is invincible, and of its own Nature, always Efficacious and Powerful; Ezekiel.
11. 19, 20. Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Ephesians. 1. 19. (12) Because, the Grace of
Regeneration, can never be lost, or fail totally, or finally; 1 Peter 1. 5. 1
John 3. 9. Whosoever are Called and Justified, are also Glorified, Romans 8. 30.

CHAP. IV. Of CREATION.
Question I.
DID GOD create, or make of nothing the World, and all things therein?

Yes. Genesis first chapter to the end, Heb. 11. 3. Col. 1. 16. Acts 17. 24.

Well then, do not the Socinians, and other Heretics, with many of the old
Pagan Philosophers err, who maintain, the World to have been made of some
pre-existent matter, not capable of production: And consequently, that
Creation, or making something of nothing, is simply impossible?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From the testimony of Moses, Genesis first chapter. (2) From the testimony
of Isaiah, Isa. 40. 28. and 45. 18. (3) From the testimony of the Author to the
Hebrews, Heb. 11. 3. Col. 1. 16, 17. Romans 11. 36. (4) Because, the Scripture
attributes to GOD only, Eternity, and Incorruptibility; Psa. 102. 26, 27. Genesis
21. 33. 1 Timothy 1. 17.

It is reported of Socinus, by a very learned Man, who had it from one of his
Disciples, that he privately denied the World to be made of nothing, lest
thereby he should be necessitated to acknowledge the Infiniteness of GODS
Power: which Tenet afterward was more publicly avowed, and maintained by some
of his Followers.

Quest. II.
DID GOD create all things, whether Visible, or Invisible?

Yes. Col. 1. 16. Acts 17. 24.

Well then, do not some Heretics err, who maintain, That the Angels were not
created by GOD? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From the Psalmist David, Psalm 33. 6. and 148. 2. 5, 6. Col. 1: 16. Romans
11. 36: Neh. 9. 6. (2) Because, they are the Servants and Sons of GOD,
Brethren, and Fellow Servants with us, willing and ready to obey the commands
of GOD their Maker; Rev. 19. 10. Rev. 22. 9. Psalm 104. 4. (3) Because, many of
the Angels left their first habitation, and did not continue in the Truth, and
so made defection from the obedience of their Creator, and are reserved in
everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day; Jude
verse 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Mat. 25. 41. John 8. 48.

Quest. III.
DID GOD make Man Male and Female, with reasonable and immortal Souls? Yes.
Genesis 1. 27. Genesis 2. 7. Eccl. 12. 7. Luke 23. 43. Matthew. 10* 28.

Well then, do not the Sadducees, and the Epicureans err, who maintain, The
Souls of all Men to perish, and die for ever? Yes.

Do not likewise, very many of the Socinians, and others err, who affirm, The
Souls of Men to be extinguished or put out, till the Resurrection, and then to
be brought to life again? Yes.

Do not likewise the Anabaptists, and many of the Arminians, and some called
Arrabians err, who maintain, The Souls of Men, after death, till the
Resurrection to fall asleep, (that is, to be without any sense, or motion,
thought, or vital operation,) whether it be in their body, or in some cavernes
of the Earth? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From our blessed Lord and Saviors words, fear not them, (says he) which
kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul: Matt. 10. 28. (2) From the
testimony of Solomon: then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was, and
the Spirit shall return to God, who gave it, Eccl. 12. 7. (3) Because, Paul
desired to be dissolved, trusting that his soul after death should have more
near communion with Christ: Phil. 1. 23. (4) They may be confuted from several,
and particular instances in the Scripture, as is clear from the souls of Dives
and Lazarus, Luke 16. 22. From these words of Christ to the Theif, verily, I
say unto thee, thou shall be with me, this day in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. From
the appearing of Moses, and Elias, upon the Mount with Christ; Mat. 17. 3.

Quest. IV.
DId God create man, Male and Female, with Righteousness, and true holiness,
after his own Image, as being connatural to him?

Yes. Genesis 1. 26. Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who deny this, and the Arminians, who
call this righteousness supernatural? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From these words spoken by God himself, let us make man, in our own Image,
Genesis 1. 26, 27. (2) From Gods own testimony, affirming the same thing; Genesis 9.
6. (3) Because, before the Fall, both Adam, and Eve walked naked and were not
ashamed: Genesis 2. 25.

CHAP. V. Of PROVIDENCE.
Question I.
Does God uphold, direct, dispose, and govern all Creatures, their Actions, and
all things from the greatest, even to the least?

Yes. Heb. 1. 3. Dan. 4. 34, 35. Psa: 135. 6. Acts 17. 25, 26, 28. Job 38, 39,
40, 41, chapters.

Well then, do not the Socinians, Arminians, and that great Philosopher
Durandus, with others called the Epicureans err, who deny, that God preserves
all things immediately: to be the immediate cause of all things, which fall
out: to govern things, which are contingent, and the free acts of the will of
man, and evil Actions?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, it is God, that works all in all. 1. Cor. 12. 5, 6. (2)
Because, he works all things, according to the counsel of his own will. Ephesians.
1. 11. (3) Because, of Him, and through Him, and to Him* are all things; Romans
11. 36.

Quest. II.
Does the Almighty Power, unsearchable wisdom and infinite goodness of God so
far manifest themselves in his Providence, that it extends it self, even to
the first fall, and all other sins of Angels, and Men; and that not by a bare
Permission, but such as has joined with it, a most wise, and powerful
bounding, and otherwise ordering, and governing of them, in a manifold
dispensation, to his own holy ends?

Yes. Romans 11 32, 33, 34. 2 Samuel 24. 1. and 1 Kings 21. 22, 23. 1 Chronicles. 10: 4.
13, 14. 2 Samuel 16. 10. Acts 14. 16. Psalm 76. 10. 2 Kin: 19. 28. Genesis 50. 20.

Well then, do not the Lutherians, Papists, Arminians, and Socinians err, who
maintain, that the Lord concurrs only to sinful actions, by a bare, naked, and
idle Permission? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Scripture says, GOD blinds their eyes, and hardens their
hearts, even actively, and judicially; John 12. 40. Exodus 7. 3. Deuteronomy. 2. 30.
Romans 9. 18. (2.) Because, God is said to punish one sin, with another. Romans 1.
24, 26, 28 1 These. 2. 11, 12. (3) From the practice of Job, and David, who,
when they were afflicted, and persecuted looked to God, and took it patiently;
Job 1. 21.

Quest. III.
Does the sinfulness of the action proceed only from the Creature, and not from
God?

I answer, from the Creature only; Iam. 1. 13. 14, 17. 1 John 2. 16. Psalm 50.
21.

Well then, do not the Libertines err, who affirm, God ( without blasphemy be
it spoken) to be the Author and Cause of all sin? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From David's testimony; Psalm 5. 4. (2) From Moses his testimony; Deuteronomy. 32.
4. (3) From Daniels testimony; Dan. 9. 14 (4) From the testimony of James 1.
13. (5) From the testimony of John; 1 John 2. 16. and 1 John 1. 5. (6) From the
testimony of Paul; Romans 3. 3, 4, 5. (7) From the testimony of Habukkuk; 1: 13:
From reason (1) because God is in the highest degree, essentially, and
infinitely Holy, and Good, and therefore pure, and free, from every spot, and
blemish, Isaiah 6: 3. Psalm 78: 41: 1 Peter 1: 15, 16: Lev. 11: 44: (2)
Because, God is absolutely perfect, and therefore he cannot fail, or be
deficient in working (3) Because, God is the Judge of the World? He is the
Forbidder, the Hater, and Revenger, of all sin, and unrighteousness, as
contrary to his holy Nature, and Law: Exodus chap: 20: Rom: 3: 5: 6: Gen: 18: 25:
Rom: 1: 17: Psalm 5: 4: (4:) Because, by his own most absolute, and most
supreme dominion, Sovereignty, and infinite perfection, He is in, and of
himself, above all Law whatsoever, and under the command of none, in Heaven; or
in Earth.

CHAP: VI: Concerning the Fall of Man, of Sin, and the punishment thereof.
Question I.
IS the guilt of the sin of our first Parents imputed, and the same death in
sin, and corrupted Nature, conveyed to all their Posterity, descending from
them by ordinary generation?

Yes. Romans 5: 12: 15, 16, 17, 18, 19: 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22, 45, 49. Psalm 51. 5.
Genesis 5. 3. Job 14. 4. Job 15. 14.

Well then, do not the Pelagians, and late Anabaptists, Quakers, and Socinians
err, who deny, original sin inherent? Yes.

Do not likewise the Dominicans, Franciscans* and Jesuits err, who maintain,
the Virgin Mary, not to be conceived in Original sin? Yes.

Does not lastly, a certain Ringleader of the Quakers err, who maintains, that
to Infants, this Original sin, is not imputed, until by actual sin, they join
themselves to it? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From that well known place of Scripture; Romans 5. chap. which is the very
seat, and foundation of this Doctrine, of Original sin. (2) Because, unless a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God; John 3. 3. (3) Because,
all men by Nature, and birth, are the children of wrath; Ephesians. 2. 3. (4)
Because, whatever is born of the flesh, is fleshly; John 3. 6. And who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one: Job 14. 4. Job 15. 14. (5)
Because, all the thoughts, and imaginations of the heart of man ( viz. of the
natural, and unregenerate man) are evil continually; Gen: 6. 5. (6) Because,
David confesses, that he was shapen in iniquity; and in sin, did his mother
conceive him; Psalm 51. 5. (7) Because, Infants, that are guilty of no actual
transgression, need a remedy against sin, to wit, absolution, by the blood of
Christ, a Seal whereof was given, according to Gods institution, under the Law
to Infants, namely Circumcision, to which Baptism, under the Gospel succeeds;
Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Romans 2. 29. Acts 22. 16. Mark 1. 4. Col: 2. 12. Gen: 17. 12.
Matthew. 28. 19. (8) Because, all the Elect, (among which are infants; Matthew. 18.
6. Mark 9. 42) are redeemed by Christ, and are set at liberty from slavery,
freed from the fault, and penal punishment; John 1. 29. John 10. 15. 1 Timothy: 2.
6. (9) Because, infants, are liable to death, and other miseries, and
calamities, which are the wages, and punishments of sin; Rom: 6. 23. Gen: 3. 19.

Quest. II.
IS this corruption of Nature, albeit pardoned, and mortified through Christ in
some measure in the Regenerate, both it self, and all the motions thereof
truly and properly sin?

Yes. Romans 7. 5, 7, 8, 25. Gal. 5. 17.

Well then, do not the Papists, Socinians, and Arminians err, who maintain,
that Concupiscence or Lust, and the first motions thereof, which have not
gotten the consent of the Will, are not properly and truly sin? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, they are forbidden by the Moral, and Natural Law, in the tenth
Command; Exodus 20. 17. Deuteronomy. 5. 21. Rom: 7. 7. (2) Because, Paul speaking of
himself while unregenerate, calls concupiscence and lust (of which the
controversy is) often times sin and evil; Romans 7: 5, 6. (3) Because, it is a
great part of the old Man, which we must lay down, and must be mortified; Col:
3. 5, 6, 9. Ephesians: 4. 22.

Quest. III.
Does every sin, both Original and Actual, being a transgression of the
Righteous Law of God, and contrary thereunto, bring in its own nature guilt
upon the sinner, whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and the curse of
the Law; and made subject to death, with all miseries Spiritual, Temporal, and
Eternal?

Yes. 1 Ioh. 3. 4. Rom: 2. 15. Romans 3. 9, 19. Ephesians: 2. 3. Gal: 3. 10. Rom: 6.
23. Ephesians: 4. 18. Rom: 8. 20. Lam: 3. 39. Matthew: 25. 41. and 2 These: 1. 9.

Well then, do not many of the Papists err, who maintain, That all sins are not
contrary to the Law of GOD, nor transgressions thereof? Yes.

Do not all Papists err, Who deny every sin to be mortal, or to deserve Eternal
punishment? Yes.

Lastly, Do not the Socinians err, Who deny that any sin can deserve Eternal
punishment? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, all sins deserve Eternal death; Rom: 6. 23. Esek: 18. 4. Rom: 8.
6, 13. (2) Because, every sin is a transgression of the law; 1 John 3. 4. (3)
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all; James 2. 10. 11. and therefore he deserves Eternal punishment. (4)
Because, those sins of Infirmity and Ignorance, which the Saints are subject
to, and which the Papists call Venial sins, will not suffer them to stand in
Judgment before GOD, nor can the Saints be justified from them, but by Faith:
and therefore in strick Justice, they merit, and deserve Hell; Psalm 143: 2.
Psalm 130: 3, 4, 8. (5) Because, GOD commanded Believers under the Law, to
offer typical Sacrifices, for making a propitiation for such sins; and Christ
did really by his own precious blood, purge them away, for by no less price,
could they be purged, he being made a curse for them, that he might liberate
those from the curse of the Law, which they had deserved for such sins, as well
as for others. Lev: 4. 2, 3, 14, 15, 20, 22, 24, 31. Lev. 5. 17, 18. Gal: 3.
13. Heb: 10. 10, 12, 14. Heb: 9. 14, 22. 1 John 1. 7, 9. Ephesians: 5. 25, 26, 27.
1 Peter 1. 18, 19. (6) Because, every sin is against the supreamest Lawgiver,
against his Holiness and Goodness, against his Infinite Majesty: and flows
from a Formal or Virtual contempt of GOD; and therefore the least sin, cannot
but deserve GODS wrath, and curse eternally; Iam: 2. 10, 11. Lev: 10. 3. Lev:
11. 44, 45. 1 Job: 3. 4. Ephesians: 5: 6.

CHAP. VII. Of GODS Covenant with Man.
Question I.
DId all these Sacrifices and other Types, and Ordinances by which the Covenant
of Grace was administerd before our Saviors Incarnation, adumbrate, and
foresignifie Christ to come?

Yes. Heb: 8, 9, 10, chapters; Rom: 4: 11: Col: 2: 11, 12: 1 Cor: 5: 7:

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, that the Legal Sacrifices
did not foresignifie the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, neither were Types nor
Figures of it; but that those Sacrifices, which the Jews offered for sin, did
really, and in very deed, purge away all the sins for which they were offered?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

There are here two parts to be considered; First, the Negative, That the Legal
Sacrifices did not foresignifie. The second, the Affirmative, that they did
truly make a real expiation and atonement. The first is evidently confuted
from Scripture Testimonies; for the Law having a shadow of good things to come,
and not the very Image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which
they offered year by year, continually, make the Comers thereunto perfect; Heb:
10: 4. The Apostle calls here, these Legal Sacrifices, a Shadow: and Heb: 9: 9:
he calls them a Figure: and verse 24, he calls them (...), Exemplaria verorum,
the Figures of the True; and Col: 2: 17: he calls them a shadow of things to
come, but the Body is of Christ, which is nothing else, but that the thing
signified is of Christ: that is to say, fulfilled in Christ. For all the
shadows of the Old Testament, had a respect to Christ, and his Benefits; by
whose coming they also have an end. And John 1. 17. it is said, That the Law
was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. By Grace,
understand the Grace of Redemption, from the curse of the Law; Gal: 3. 13. and
of Adoption for Children; John 1. 12. Rom: 8. 15. By Truth, understand the
fulfilling both of the Promises, 2 Cor: 1. 20. and of the Ceremonies, and
Types; Col: 2. 17. For this cause the Apostles have always pressed, the
Abrogation of the Legal Rites, and Ceremonies; because the Truth being
exhibited, by the coming of the Antitype, the shadows of the Type, ought
deservedly to cease, and be no more: according to that of Daniel 9. 27.

The second part is likewise evidently confuted; namely, that the Legal
Sacrifices did truly and really purge away all the sins, for which they were
offered. (1) Because, the Apostle says, the blood of Bulls, and Goats, cannot
take away sin; Heb: 10: 4. (2) Because, those Sacrifices were not able to make
him that did the service perfect; Heb: 9: 9. (3) Because, these Legal
Sacrifices did leave the sins of such as offered, unexpiated, until they were
purged away by the death, and blood of Christ; Heb: 9. 15. (4) Because, the
sins of Believers, under the Old Testament were forgiven and pardoned after the
same manner, that our sins under the New Testament are pardoned; Acts 15. 11.

Quest: II:
WAS the administration of the Covenant under the Old Testament, sufficient for
the time, and efficacious, through the operation of the Spirit, to instruct and
build up the Elect, in the Faith of the promised Messiah, by whom they had full
remission of sins, and eternal Salvation?

Yes: 1 Cor: 10: 1, 2, 3, 4: Heb: 11: 13: John 8: 56.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, That life Eternal, under
the Old Testament, was never promised to the Believers of that time, neither
had they any promise to expect it from GOD?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, there are promises extant in the Old Testament of life eternal;
Isaiah 45: 17: where it is said, Israel shall be saved with an everlasting
Salvation; see Dan: 12: 2: (2) Because, the Fathers under the old Testament,
believed and expected life Eternal; as Job 19: 25, 26, 27: David, Psalm: 17: 15:
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all of these waited for eternal life; Heb: 11: 9,
10: (3) Because, some at that time were put into actual possession of it; as
Enoch, Hebrews 11: 5. So was Elias taken up into Heaven, and put into actual
possession likewise; 2 Kings 2: 11. (4) Because, the Scripture of the Old
Testament points forth the way to Eternal life, as Christ witnesses; John 5:
39: and Paul, 2 Timothy: 3: 15: (5) Because, Believers under the Old Testament were
most happy; Psalm 144: 15. (6) Because, Temporal good things, were to them
pledges of Spiritual good things, and life eternal; Heb: 11: 8, 9.

Quest: III:
ARE there two Covenants of Grace, differing in substance; or but one and the
same, under various dispensations?

One only: Gal: 3: 14, 16: Acts 15: 11: Rom: 3: 21, 22, 23, 30: Rom: 4: 3, 6,
16, 17, 23, 24: Heb: 13: 8.

Well then, do not the Socinians err; who maintain; a Substantial; and not an
Accidental difference between the old Covenant and the new?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, in both the Covenants there is the same promise of Grace,
concerning remission of sins, and life Eternal freely to be given to Believers,
for Christ's sake; Genesis 3. 15. where the seed of the Woman, is promised to
bruise the head of the Serpent: and Genesis 17. 7. it is said, I shall be thy GOD,
and the GOD of thy seed after thee; and Genesis 22. 18. it is said, in thy seed
shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed: and John 3. 36. it is said, he
that believes, has Everlasting life: And Acts 15. 11. it is said, but we
believe, that through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved,
even as they. (2) Because, one, and the same Faith, and Obedience, on both
sides, is required; walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17. 1. and Mark
1. 15. Christ says, after he came to Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the
Kingdom, the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of GOD is at hand; repent ye,
and believe the Gospel.

CHAP. VIII. Of CHRIT the Mediator.
Question I.
DID the Son of GOD, when the fullness of time was come, take upon him Man's
Nature, with all the essential Properties, and common Infirmities thereof, yet
without sin; being conceived by the power of the holy Ghost, in the Womb of the
Virgin Mary, of her substance?

Yes. John 1. 1, 14. 1 John 5. 20. Heb. 2. 14, 16, 17. Luke 1. 27, 31, 35.

Well then, do not those Heretics called Marcionits, and the Anabaptists err,
who maintain, That Christ is not a true Man, but only the Appearance, Shape,
or Form of a Man?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Manicheans err, who maintain, That the Body of Christ, is
not of the substance of the Virgin Mary, but a heavenly Body, brought from
Heaven to the Womb of the Virgin?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ is said to be made of a Woman; Gal. 4. 4. (2) Because, the
Word was made Flesh; John 1. 4. (3) By an induction of the essential parts of a
Man, and sinless infirmities, which were found in him. First, He was endued
with a rational Soul; John 12. 27. Secondly, He had a real and substantial
Body, and denied he was a Spirit only; Luke 24. 39. Thirdly, Christ did hunger;
Mat. 4. 2. Fourthly, He was wearied, and thirsty; John 4. 6. Lastly, He was
sad* he groaned in Spirit, and was troubled; John 11. 33. and verse 15. He
wept. None of which sinless perturbations, can agree to an Appearance, Shape,
or Form of a Man. (4) Because, He was made of the seed of David, according to
the Flesh; Romans 1. 3. and descended of the Jews; Romans 9. 5. (5) Because, the
promises were made in the seed of Abraham; Genesis 12. 3. and Genesis 18. 18. (6)
Because, He took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed
of Abraham, wherefore in all things, it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren; Heb. 2. 16, 17. (7) Because, otherwise, he could not have satisfied
in our place, the Justice of GOD: seeing it had been unjust, for another Nature
to have suffered punishment, than that Nature which had offended and sinned.

Quest. II.
ARE there two whole, perfect, and distinct Natures in Christ, the Godhead,
and the Manhood, inseparably joined together, in one person?

Yes: 1 Cor. 8. 6. Ephesians. 4. 5.

Well then, do not the Nestorians err, who maintain, the Union between the
Divine and Humane Nature, not to be Hypostatical, but only by way of
Assistence: and that, as there are two Natures in Christ, so there are two
Persons, one proper to the Divine Nature, another proper to the Humane Nature?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, unless Christ-God-Man were but one Person, the Merit of his
Death, would not be of so great value, as to redeem the Elect from infinite,
and eternal punishment: seeing hence comes, all the value, and worth of his
death, that the same Person, who was God, did suffer, and die for us. (2)
Because, otherwise, Christ had been swallowed up, and devoured by the wrath of
God, against the sins of the Elect, which he himself undertook. (3) Because,
Christ, if he had not been both God and Man, in one Person, he could not have
been a Mediator: for a Mediator must be One; 1 Timothy 2. 5.

Quest. III.
IS the Godhead, and Manhood in Christ, united without Conversion,
Composition, or Confusion?

Yes. Luke 1. 35. Col. 2. 9. Romans 9. 5. 1 Peter 3. 18. 1 Timothy 3. 16.

Well then, do not those old Heretics, the Eutichians err, who maintain, that
as the Person of Christ is One, so his Nature is made One, by a composition, or
Confusion of the two Natures together?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, such a Composition, is impossible, seeing the Divine Nature, is
most perfect, and cannot lose any, of its own perfection, unless we would
affirm, the Divine Nature, to be mutable, and changeable. (2) Because, that
same Christ, who according to the Flesh descended of the Jews, is over all, God
blessed for ever; Romans 9. 5. (3) Because, this doctrine takes away all means of
Mediation: for, by taking away the distinction between the Natures, they take
away the Natures themselves: and so neither could Christ have suffered in our
place, because not Man: neither could he have given any virtue, value, or
worth, to his sufferings, because not God.

Quest. IV.
DID Christ endure most grievous* torments immediately in his soul?

Yes. Mat. 26. 37, 38. Luke 22. 44. Matthew. 27. 46.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that the soul of Christ, even
from its first creation, was never affected with any sadness, or sinless
perturbation of mind?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Scripture testifies, that his soul was sad unto death; Matthew.
26. 37. (2) Because, the Apostle John testifies, that when Christ saw Mary
weeping for her brother Lazarus, he groaned in Spirit, and was troubled; John
11. 33. John 12. 27. (3) Because, his soul, was exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death, as was cited before, Matthew. 26. 37. (4) The same thing is proven from
Christ's desertion, whereby the actual fruition, and enjoying of Gods favor, as
to his sense, was interrupted, and broken in the midst for a time, but in no
wise, altogether taken away, which made him cry upon the Cross: My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken Me. Matthew. 27. 46. Ephesians. 5. 2.

Quest. V.
HAD the Lord Jesus, by his perfect obedience, and sacrifice of himself, which
he through the eternal Spirit, once offered up unto God, fully satisfied, the
Justice of his Father?

Yes: Romans 5. 9. Romans 3. 25, 26. Heb. 9. 14, 16. Heb. 10. 14.

Well then, do not some, otherwise Orthodox err, who deny, Christ's Active
Obedience, to be a part of his satisfaction, performed in our place?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Active disobedience of the first Adam made us all sinners:
therefore we must be made Righteous, by the Active Obedience of the second
Adam; Romans 5. 19. (2) Because, Christ not only offered himself to the death for
us, but for their sakes (that is, for the Elects sake) he sanctified himself
(that is, he gave up himself, as a holy sacrifice) John 17. 19. (3) Because, it
behoved Christ to fulfill all righteousness; Mat. 3. 15. (4) Because, we stood
in need; not only of the expiation of sin, for saving us from eternal death,
but of the gift of righteousness, for obtaining eternal life, according to that
precept and demand of the Law, Do this, and thou shall live. And therefore
Christ is not only called our Ransom, but the end and perfection of the Law, to
every one, that believes Romans 10. 4. That is, the aim of giving the Law by
Moses, is that, thereby men being brought to the knowledge of their sin, should
fly for refuge unto Christ, and his righteousness, as he that has perfectly
fulfilled the Law for us. (5) Because, the passive obedience of Christ, was not
in it self merely and purely passive, but his active obedience did challenge
the chief, and principal part in it. Psalm. 40. 7. Then said I, lo, I come,: in
the volume of the book, it is written of Me. With these words, our Savior
Christ declares his willing Obedience, to accept of, undergo, and execute the
Mediatorship, by GOD imposed upon him. And ( Isaiah 53. 7.) he offered up
himself a sacrifice for sin, and by one Oblation, he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified; Heb. 10. 14. (6) Because, whole Christ was given to
us, with all his benefits: otherwise, if only his passive Obedience were
imputed to us, it would follow, that half Christ only were given; to wit,
Christ suffering, but not Christ doing those things which pleased the Father;
taking away our sin, and saving from death only, but not bringing
Righteousness. But Christ was not given, and born for himself, but for us, that
he might bestow himself wholly upon us, by doing for us, what we could not do,
and by suffering for us, what we could not suffer.

Do not likewise the Socinians err, who maintain, That this Orthodox Doctrine,
(namely, That Christ did merit Eternal Salvation, to the Elect, and has
satisfied Divine Justice for them;) is erroneous, false, and absurd?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Messiah does finish the transgression, and makes an end of
sins, and makes Reconciliation for iniquity, and shall be cut off, but not for
himself, as the Prophet Daniel has foretold; chap. 9. 24, 26. (2) Because, his
own self bare our sins in his own Body, upon the tree; 1 Peter 2. 24. (3)
Because, he has reconciled those to GOD, that were sometimes alienated, and
enemies in their mind, by wicked works, in the body of his Flesh through death;
Col. 1. 21, 22. (4) Because, now once in the end of the world, has he
appeared, to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself; Heb. 9. 26. (5)
Because, he has given his life, an (...), a pretium redemptionis, a price of
Redemption for many. (6) Because, the Prophet Isaiah says, that it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, and put him to grief; and that he was wounded for our
transgressions, and that he bare our iniquities; chapter 53. 5, 10, 11.

Quest. VI.
DID Christ, in the work of Mediation, act according to both Natures, by each
Nature, doing that, which is proper to it self?

Yes: Heb. 9. 4. 1 Peter 3. 18.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that Christ is a Mediator
only according to his humane Nature?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, it was needful, for perfecting the work of the Mediator, that
Christ should overcome death; which could not otherwise be done, than by his
Divine Nature; 1 Pet. 3. 18. Where it is said, he was put to death in the
Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. (2) Because, there are very many properties
of the Mediator, which cannot in any wise agree to the humane Nature of Christ,
as undertaking, and promising, that he will raise up all at the last day, whom
the Father has given him; John 6. 39. Again, he could not lay down his life,
and take it up again, by the alone strength of his humane Nature: but all these
are works proper to the Mediator; as is clear from the tenth chapter of John v.
18. And (3) the application of those good things, which he has merited, is the
proper work of the Mediator, which can only be done, by the Divine Nature. (4)
Because, Christ is a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, according to both his
Natures. A Prophet; Matt. 11. 27. No man knows the Father, save the Son. A
Priest; Romans 5. 10. Heb. 9. 14. He is a King; Luke 1. 32. All which Offices, he
executes according to both his Natures.

CHAP. IX. Of FREE WILL.
Question I.
HAS Man by his fall, into an estate of sin, wholly lost all ability of will,
to any supernatural good, accompanying salvation: so as a Natural Man being
altogether averse from that Good; and dead in sin, is not able, by his own
strength to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto?

Yes: Romans 5. 6: John 15. 5. Romans 3. 10. 12. John. 6. 44, 65.

Well then, do not the Pe^lagians, and Socinians err, who maintain, that the
Natural Man, without supernatural, and divine grace, is able to convert himself
to God, by his own strength?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Semipelagians, Papists, Arminians, and Lutherians err, who
maintain, That fallen Man, and corrupted with Original sin, is partly able by
his own strength (the Grace of GOD assisting him) to prepare himself, and turn
himself to GOD?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of GOD,
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
Spiritually discerned; 1 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8. 7, 9. (2) Because, all that the
Natural Man does, is sin, and cannot in any wise please GOD: because, his works
are not of Faith, nor to the Glory of GOD, as the Law requires; Romans 14. 23.
Heb. 11. 6. Titus 1. 15. Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. Psalm 14. 3. Romans 8. 8. (3)
Because, a man has no good in himself, whereby he may be differenced from the
most flagitious, nor any good thing which he has not received; 1 Cor. 4. 7.
(4) Because, Conversion, Grace, and Salvation, are not of him, that runs, or
wills, but of GOD, that shows mercy, and whom he will, be hardneth; Romans 9.
15, 16, 18. Romans 11. 7, 8. Matthew. 11. 21, 22, 25. (5) Because, the Conversion
of a Natural Man, is the quickening of one dead; Ephesians. 2. 5. Col. 2. 13. It is
a Regeneration, or bearing again; Ioh. 3. 5, 6: It is the creating of a new
heart; Psalm 51. 10. It is the taking away the heart of stone, and the giving
of a heart of flesh; Esek. 11. 19. Esek. 36. 26. And therefore as God raised
Christ from the dead, so also he raises us from the grave of sin, by his own
proper power; 1 Cor. 6. 14. And (6) because, GOD converts and calls men, not by
works of Righteousness, which they have done; Titus 3. 4, 5, 5. but according
to his own Purpose and Grace, which is given us in Christ Jesus; 2 Timoth. 1. 9.

Quest. II.
Does a Regenerate Man, after his Conversion, perfectly and only will that
which is good?

No. Gal. 5. 17. Romans 7. 15, 18, 19, 21, 23*

Well then, do not the Puritans, (I do not mean the old Non-conformists)
Antinomians, Anabaptists, and many Quakers err, who maintain, That all the
Saints of GOD are free from every spot, and blemish of sin?

Yes.

Do not likewise some of the Popish Church and Socinians err, who maintain,
That some Christians, that are more advanced, may come that length to be
without any spot, blemish, and act of sin: Nay that some have really win that
length?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, in many things we offend all, James 3. 2. (2) Because, Christ
commands us to seek daily remission of sins; Matthew. 6. 12. Luke 11. 4. (3)
Because, there is not one just man, upon the Earth, who does not sin; 1 Kings
8. 46. Eccles. 7. 20. (4) Because, there is a continual war, between the Flesh
and the Spirit; so that they (namely the Regenerate) are not able to do that,
which they are willing, and ought to do; Gal. 5. 17. (5) Because, the
Regenerate are not able to fulfill the first Command, namely, to love GOD with
all their Heart, with all their Soul; Matthew. 22. 37, 38. For we know here but
in part, and therefore we love but in part: 1 Cor. 13. 9. Neither are the
Saints free of all those inordinate motions of concupiscence, forbidden in the
tenth Command, as is evident from Gal. 5. 17. and from the experience of Paul,
and of all the other Saints. (6) Because, if we say, we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us; 1 John 1. 8, 9. But when that same
Apostle says, whosoever is born of GOD, does not commit sin, for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because, he is born of GOD; he must mean in
the first Text, of sin dwelling in the best of Saints here-away; and therefore
he expresses it by Hamartian Echein, peccatum habere, which signifies, to have
sin. In the second Text, he means of sin, not only dwelling, but reigning in
us, and made a trade of, and gone about, with the full and hearty consent of
the will, and is expressed by the words Hamartian poiein, to work sin, and to
make a trade of it, as men do in any employment, they take delight in. (7) We
see it from the grievous falls of the most eminent Saints; as Noah, Lot,
Abraham, Jacob, David, Solomon, Asa, Iehoshaphat, and the Discsples of Christ.

CHAP. X. Of EFFECTUAL CALLING.
Question I.
ARE all those whom GOD has predestined to life, and those only, in his
appointed, and accepted time, effectually called, by his Word and Spirit, out
of the estate of sin and death, in which they are by Nature, to Grace and
Salvation, through Jesus Christ?

Yes. Romans 8. 30. Romans 11. 7. Ephesians. 1. 10. 11. 2 These. 2. 13, 14. Romans 8. 2.
Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 3. 36.

Well then, do not the Papists, Arminians, and Lutherians err, who maintain,
That men not Elected, are sometimes effectually Called?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Faith belongs to the Elect only; Titus 1. 1. (2) Because, whom he
did predestinate, those only, and no other has he called; Romans 8. 30. (3)
Because, though many hear the Gospel, yet none believe, but such as are
ordained for everlasting life; Acts 13. 48. (4) Because, the Apostle testifies,
that the Elect have obtained it, and the rest were blinded; Romans 11. 7. (5)
Because, Christ manifested his Fathers name, to those only whom he choised out
of the world, and gave to him; Joh. 17. 6

Quest. II.
Does GOD, whom he effectually Calls, Enlighten their minds Spiritually, and
Savingly, to understand the things of GOD?

Yes. Acts 26. 18. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 12. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.

Well then, do not the Arminians err, who maintain, That no supernatural light
infused into the intellective Faculty, and thereby elevating it, is requisite
to the saving understanding of these things, which are needful (in the
Scripture) to be believed, done, and hoped for?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of GOD;
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned; 1 Cor. 2. 14. (2) Because, the carnal mind is enmity
against GOD, for it is not subject to the Law of GOD, neither can it be; Romans
8. 7. (3) Because, all unregenerate men are darkness; Ephesians. 5. 8. And darkness
cannot comprehend the light; John 1. 5. (4) Because, Christ says, I thank
thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes; Matthew. 11. 25.

Quest. III.
Does GOD take away from them, whom he effectually Calls, the heart of stone,
and give unto them an heart of flesh, renewing their wills, and by his Almighty
power, determining them, to that which is good, and effectually drawing them to
Jesus Christ?

Yes. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Ezekiel. 11. 19. Phil. 2. 13. Ezekiel. 36. 27.

Well then, do not the Arminians err, who maintain, that the will of man, when
he is regenerate, is not renewed, nor furnished with any new and Spiritual
qualities?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Moses says, GOD shall circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
seed, to love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
that thou may live; Deu. 30. 6. (2) Because, the Lord says, A new heart also
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh; and I will give you an heart of flesh: and I
will put my Spirit within you; and cause you to walk in my statutes, and cause
you to keep my judgments, and do them; Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. (3) Because, It is
GOD, that works in us, both to will, and to do, according to his good
pleasure; Phil. 2. 13. (4) Because, all the faculties of the Soul are renewed;
2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new crearure: old things are
past away, behold, all things are become new.

Do not likewise the same Arminians err, who maintain, That when the Grace of
GOD begins to make an Infall upon the heart, in order to a man's conversion, it
is indifferent, and may be resisted, and withstood; so that a man may be
converted, or not converted by it? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, if this Doctrine were true, a man's conversion, would be of him
that runs, and of him that wills, but not of GOD, that shows mercy;
which is contrary to the Apostle, Romans 9. 15, 16. (2) Because, by this way, it
should not be GOD, that works in us both to will and to do; Phil. 2. 13. (3)
Because, by this way, a man himself should make the difference, and GOD should
not make one man to differ from another, which is contrary to the Apostle; 1
Cor. 4. 7. (4) Because, if so, a man might glory, that he had in himself, what
he had not received; which contradicts 1 Cor. 4, 7. (5) Because, it is GOD,
that draws a man, before he comes to Christ; John 6. 44. (6) Because,
Conversion is a new Creation; 2 Cor. 5. 17. (7) Because, it is a resurrection
from the Dead; Ephesians. 2. 5. (8) Because, conversion is no less, than to be born
over again; John 3. 3.

Quest. IV.
IS this Effectual call, of GODS free and special grace alone, and not from any
thing at all foreseen in man?

Yes. 1 Timothy 2. 9. Titus 3. 4, 5. Ephesians. 24, 5, 8, 9.

Well then, do not the Papists and Arminians err, who maintain, That an
unregenerate man, may by the strength of Nature, and his Freewill do some good
works: nay, often times has actually done such good works, as may prepare him,
and dispose him, for the receiving of the Grace of God?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit; Matthew. 7. 17. (2)
Because, the carnal mind is enmity against GOD: for it is not subject to the
Law of GOD, neither indeed can it be; Romans 8. 7. (3) Because, we have nothing
in our selves, which we have not received, whereby we may differ from others; 1
Cor. 4. 7. (4) Because, whatever is not of Faith, is sin; Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11.
6. (5) Because, we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, but all
our sufficiency is of GOD, 2 Cor. 3. 5. (6) Because, before conversion we were
dead in trespasses and sins; Ephesians. 2. 2, 5. (7) Because, not by works of
righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost; Titus 3. 5. (8)
Because, we were sometimes, that is, before conversion, darkness; Ephesians. 5. 8.
(9) Because, Christ says, without me, ye can do nothing; John 15. 5.

Quest. V.
IS a Man in effectual calling only passive, until being quickened, and renewed
by the holy Ghost, he is thereby enabled, to answer this call, and to embrace
the Grace offered, and conveyed in it?

Yes. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Rom: 8. 7. Ephesians. 2. 5. John 6. 37. John 5. 25. Ezekiel. 36.
27.

Well then, do not the Papists and Arminians err, who maintain, That a Man in
his conversion is not passive, but active?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

Before I do this, it is to be observed, that when I say a man is passive in
his Conversion, I do not think he is physically passive, as a stock or a stone;
while an Artist is about to make a Statue of them: but Morally, or rather
Spiritually, as a Man is Spiritually dead, which is a true and real death,
though he be naturally living. The (1) Reason, by which they are confuted is
this, because we are dead in trespasses and sins; Ephesians. 2. 1. (2) Because, we
are the servants of sin, until we be made freemen by the Son of GOD; John 8:
34, 36. (3) Because, we are by Nature, under the power of Satan, and of
darkness; Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 26. (4) Because, it is God, that
works in us, both to will, and to do, of his own good pleasure; Phil. 2. 13.
(5) Because, the Flesh lusts against the Spirit; Gal. 5. 17. (6) Because, tho
Scriptures ascribe that whole work to God, and no part of it to Man; Ephesians. 2. 8,
9, 10.

Quest. VI.
ARE Elect Infants, dying in infancy Regenerated, and saved by Christ, through
the Spirit, who works when and where, and how he pleases?

Yes. Luke 18. 15, 16. Acts 2. 38, 39. John 3. 3, 5. 1 John 5. 12.

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who maintain, that no Infants are
Regenerated?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, John the Baptist, was filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his
Mothers Womb; Luke 1. 15. (2) Because, the Propher Jeremiah, was sanctified,
from his mothers Womb; Ier. 1. 5. (3) Because, the promise is made to believing
Parents, and to their Children conjunctly; Genesis 17. 7. Acts 2. 39. (4) Because,
of such, says Christ, is the kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 19. 14. (5) Because, the
Apostle calls Children, which are descended, but of one Parent, in covenant
with God, holy; 1 Cor. 7. 14. (6) Because, God has promised in the second
Command, that he will show mercy, unto thousands, that are descended of
believing Parents; Exodus 20. 6.

Quest. VII.
CAN any not elected, although called by the Ministry of the Word, and having
some common operations of the Spirit, truly come to Christ, and so be saved?

No. Matthew. 22. 14. Matthew. 7. 22. Matthew. 13. 20, 21. Heb. 6. 4, 5. John 6. 64,
65, 66. John 8. 24.

Well then, do not the Arminians err, who maintain, that there is sufficient
Grace given to all Men, for their conversion, to whom the Gospel is preached?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Quakers err, who maintain, that every man has so much
grace given of God, as if he would improve it, would bring him to heaven?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ says to his Disciples, to you it is given, to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them, it is not given; Mat. 13. 11.
(2) Because, it is said, of the Jews, they could not believe because God had
blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts; John 12. 39, 40. (3) Because,
Christ said to his Disciples, there are some of you, that do not believe:
therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given
unto him of my Father; John 6: 64, 65: (4) Because, the Prophet Isaiah
complains, who has believed our report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? cap: 53: 1. (5) Because, many are called, but few are chosen; Mat.
22. 14: (6) Because, men in nature, do not discern, neither can they know the
things of the Spirit of God; 1 Cor: 2. 14. (7) Because, the most part of the
World, are buried in gross darkness, and have their understanding darkened, and
are alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance, that is in them,
because of the blindness of their hearts; Ephesians. 4: 18.

CHAP. XI. Of JUSTIFICATION.
Question I.
DOES GOD freely justify those, whom he effectually calls, not by infusing
righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting, and
accepting their persons, as righteous, not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone?

Yes: Rom: 9: 30: Rom: 3: 24:

Well then, do not the Papists, Socinians, and Quakers err, who maintain, that
the righteousness, whereby we are justified before God, is not without us, but
within us, and inherent?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, if inherent righteousness, did justify us, then good Works would
justify us, but the Scripture denis that; Rom: 3: 20: Therefore, (says the
Text) by the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight: And
verse 28: therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith without the
deeds of the Law. See Rom: 4: 6: Gal: 2: 16: Ephesians. 2: 8, 9, Titus 3: 5: In all
which places, works are secluded expressly from our justification. (2) Because,
the Righteousness, whereby we are justified, is not our proper own; 2 Cor: 5:
21: For he (to wit God) has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him; Phil: 3: 8, 9: and be found in
him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. (3)
Because, we are not justified by the Law; Acts 13: 38, 39. (4) Because, our
Justification, is given to us freely; Romans 4: 4, 5. Romans 11. 6. (5) Because,
our inherent righteousness, is imperfect, 1 Kings 8: 46: For this Scripture
says, there is no man that sins not. See that parallel place; 1 John 1: 8:
Where it is said, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us. (6) Because, if we were justified by inherent
righteousness, we would have matter to boast of, which is contrary to Paul's
doctrine, Ephesians. 2: 9: Not of works, least any man should boast. (7) Because, the
righteousness of a Christian man, is the justifying of the ungodly. Rom: 4: 5.

Quest: II:
DOES GOD justify men, by imputing Faith it self, the Act of believing, or any
other Evangelical obedience, to them, as their righteousness?

No. Romans 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor: 5: 19, 21: Rom: 3: 22, 24, 25, 27, 28: Tit: 3:
5: 7: Ephesians. 1. 7. Ier: 23: 6. 1 Cor 1. 30, 31: Rom: 5: 17, 18, 19.

Well then, do not the Arminians err, who maintain, that Faith it self, and the
Act of Believing, is imputed to us for righteousness?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Faith is that by which, we receive righteousness; Acts 26: 18.
Therefore if it be that by which, we receive righteousness, it cannot be
righteousness it self: because, that which is received, is far different, and
another thing from that, whereby we receive it. (2) Because, we are not
justified by inherent righteousness, as is proven evidently against the Papists
in the last foregoing Question, all which reasons do clearly evince, that we
are not justified by the imputation of Faith it self, or by the act of
believing, as our righteousness.

Quest. III.
IS Faith, which is the alone instrument of justification, alone in the person
justified?

No.

Is it ever accompanied with all other saving graces, and is no dead Faith, but
works by Love?

Yes. James 2: 17, 22, 26. Gal. 5. 6.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, That justifying Faith, may be
truly, and really separated from Love, saving Hope, and all the rest of the
Christian virtues?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without works is
dead also; James 2. 26. (2) Because, Faith works by Love; Gal. 5. 6. that is,
by showing forth the works of Love in us, toward GOD, and our neighbor. (3)
Because, Faith purifies the heart; Acts 15. 9. (4) Because, he that has Faith,
is in Christ: but he that is in Christ brings forth much fruit; John 15. 5.
(5) Because, those who have Faith, are buried with Christ, and walk in newness
of life; Romans 6. 4. that is, in holiness and purity, which accompany Faith. (6)
Because, he that says, I know GOD, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him; 1 John 2. 4.

Quest. IV.
DId Christ by his Obedience, and Death fully discharge the debt of all these,
who are thus justified, and did he make a proper, real, and full satisfaction
to the Fathers justice, in their behalf?

Yes. Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6. Dan: 9: 24, 26: Heb: 10: 10, 14: Isa:
53: 4, 5, 6, 10. 11, 12.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, That Christ has not made a
full satisfaction, to Divine Justice, for the sins of those who are justified:
and that Humane satisfactions do in part, satisfy the Justice of GOD for sin?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Socinians err, who deny, all true and proper satisfaction
to Christ's sufferings?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Prophet says, he has born our griefs, and carried our
sorrows, was wounded for our transgressions, was bruised for our iniquities;
Isaiah 53: 4, 5. (2) Because, by one Offering, he has perfected for ever, them
that are sanctified; Heb. 10. 14 (3) Because, Humane satisfactions, being
finite, can never satisfy in part or in whole, the infinite Justice of GOD, for
the punishment of sin; Job 35. 6. (4) Because, he has blotted out the hand
writting of Ordinances, which was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross; Col. 2. 14. (5) Because, there
is nothing more frequent in Scripture, than that Christ was a propitiation for
our sins; Rom: 3. 25. (6) Because, Christ says, I lay down my life for my
sheep, and no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; John 10. 15,
18. (7) Because, the Son of man came to give his life, a ransom for many;
Matthew. 20. 28. see the first of Tim. 2. 6. Ephesians. 5. 2. Gal 3. 13. Rev. 5. 9. 1
John 2. 2.

Quest. V.
ARE the Elect justified, until the Holy Spirit, in due time, actually apply
Christ to them?

No. Col. 1. 21, 22. Titus 3. 4, 5, 6, 7.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, That the Elect are
justified from eternity; or when the price of Redemption was paid?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, all that are justified, have been strangers and enemies to GOD,
and children of Wrath; Ephesians. 2. 3. Col. 1. 21. Titus 3. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11.
(2) Because, none are justified, until they believe in Christ; Gal. 2. 16.
knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith
of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ.

Quest. VI.
CAN those who are justified, by reason of their sins, fall under Gods Fatherly
displeasure, and not have the light of his countenance restored unto them,
until they humble themselves, confess their sins, beg pardon, and renew their
faith and repentance?

Yes. Psalm 89. 31, 32, 33. Psalm 32. 5. Psalm 51. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Matthew.
26. 75. 1 Cor. 11: 30, 32.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, that GODS love, and
favor, toward those, that are once-justified, cannot consist with his anger
and chastisement toward them?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ says, as many, as I love, I rebuke and chasten; Rev. 3.
19. (2) Because, David was chastened, for his Adultery, and Murder; 2 Samuel 12,
10. (3) Because, the Lord says, if my children forsake my Law, and walk not in
my judgments, then will I visit their transgressions, with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes; Psalm 89. 30, 31. (4) Because, God was provoked, with
the sins of the Corinthians, for which he punished them; 1 Cor. 10. 22. And 1
Cor. 11. 30.

Quest: VII.
IS the Justification of Believers, under the Old Testament, one and the same
in all respects with the justification of Believers, under the New Testament?

Yes. Gal. 3. 9, 13, 14. Romans 4. 22, 23, 24. Heb. 13. 8.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, that the manner of
justification, is not one, and the same, under both the Testaments?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Abraham was justified by Faith in Christ; Genesis 15. 6. And he
believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for righteousness. That is, God
of his mere Grace, held him righteous, and justified that had no righteousness
in himself, whereby to subsist and stand before his justice seat, and that
through Faith in his promises, and in the promised Mediator, (2) Because Isaiah
teaches, that both himself and other Believers; were justified by the
knowledge of Christ, Chap. 53 11. (3) Because, the holy Ghost expressly
testifies, that Christ died for the Believers under the Old Testament; Heb. 9.
15. (4) Because, the justification of believing Jews under the old Testament,
and believers under the New, are compared between themselves as equal; Acts 15.
11.

CHAP. XII. Of ADOPTION.
Question I.
ARE those who are taken into the number, and enjoy the liberties, and
privileges of the Children of God, and have his Name put upon them, and
receive the Spirit of Adoption, are they (I say) ever cast off?

No.

Are they sealed to the day of Redemption, and inherit the promises, as heirs
of everlasting Salvation?

Yes. Lam. 3. 3. Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

Well then, do not the Lutherians err; who maintain, that the Chlidren of God,
some of them, may be cast off, for a time totally, though not finally?

Yes.

Do not likewise, the Arminians, Quakers, and Socinians err, who maintain, that
those who have received the grace of Adoption, may be cast off totally and
finally?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, all the children of God are kept through faith unto Salvation;
1 Peter 1. 5: (2) Because, Christ has prayed, for the preseverance of all
Believers; John 17: 20: John 11: 26: And all those, that are adopted, are the
children of God by faith; Gal. 3: 26: (3) Because, no man, that is born again,
as are all the children of God, does sin; that is, he* suffers not sin to reign
over him, for his seed remains in him; that is, Gods seed, whereby he is born
again, namely the Word of God; 1 Peter 1: 23: John 3: 5, 6: Remains in him,
that is, does not totally perish, but abides thence foreward, working the
fruits of regeneration once begun in them; Phi: 1, 6: See 1 John 3, 9: (4)
Because, all the children of God, request the Father, by the Son, that he may
grant them perseverance to salvation; Matthew: 6: 13: which perseverance is most
needful to them, for that end; Matthew: 24: 13. But Believers, when they seek
things needful to Salvation, in the name of Christ, according to his promise,
are always heard; John 14: 13, 14: John 16: 23. (5) Because, the Gifts and
Calling of GOD are without Repentance; Rom: 11: 29. (6) Because, all those who
are justified are glorified; Rom: 8: 30: But all who are Adopted, are endued
with Faith, and are justified; Gal: 3: 26. (7) Because, Christ keeps all his
Adopted Ones, that none can pluck them out of his hand, or his Fathers hand;
John 10: 27, 28, 29. (8) Because, perseverance is a gift promised by GOD to all
the Elect, in the covenant of Grace; Ezekiel: 36: 26, 27, 28. Ezekiel: 11: 19, 20:
Ierem: 31: 31, 32, 33. (9) Because, justifying Grace is a Well of Water
springing up into everlasting life, in every man, to whom it is given; John 4:
14. And the Saints are like unto trees, planted by the rivers of waters, which
bring forth their fruit in their season; Psalm 1. 3.

CHAP. XIII. Of SANCTIFICATION.
Question I.
ARE they who are effectually Called, and Regenerated, having a new Spirit
created in them, farther sanctified, really and personally, through the virtue
of Christ's death, and resurrection, by his Word and Spirit dwelling in them?

Yes. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Acts 20: 32. Phil: 3: 10* Rom: 6: 5, 6. John 17. 17.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, That those who are
justified, are sanctified only, by the imputed holiness of Christ; not by
infusing inherent holiness, or any Spiritual qualities into them, by the help
of which, they are enabled to live holily?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Apostle says, follow peace and holiness with all Men, without
which no man shall see God; Heb. 12. 14. (2) Because, the fruit of the Spirit,
is Love, Joy, Peace, long-suffering, Gentleness, and Faith; Gal. 5. 22. (3)
Because, they who are in Christ, bring forth good fruit; John 15. 5. (4)
Because, they who belong to Christ, have crucified the Flesh with the
affections, and lusts; Gal. 5. 24, 25. (5) Because, the Apostle commands us, to
work out our salvation, with fear and with trembling; Phil. 2. 12. (6) Because,
we ought to purify our selves, from all filthiness of the Flesh, and Spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God; 2 Cor. 7. 1. (7) Because, we ought to
grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; 2
Pet. 3. 18. (8) Because, the Lord circumcises the hearts of the Elect, that
they may love the Lord their God, and takes away the heart of stone; Deuteronomy. 30.
6. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.

Quest. II.
IS Sanctification imperfect in this life, there being some remnants of
corruption abiding in every part?

Yes. 1 John 1. 10. Romans 7. 18, 23. Ps: 3. 12.

Well then, do not the Antinomians, and many of the Quakers err, who maintain,
That those who are justified, are perfectly sanctified?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Papists, Socinians, and Anabaptists err, who maintain, the
same, but differ in the manner?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

But first consider, that the Antinomians defend, that the most perfect
holiness of Christ is imputed to us, and is made ours, there being no inherent
holiness in us, nor required of us.

But the Papists, Socinians, Quakers, and Anabaptists affirm, and maintain a
perfect inherent holiness, in this life.

They are confuted?

(1) Because, there is no man that sins not; 1 Kings 8. 46. (2) Because, if
we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1
John 1. 8* (3) Because, in many things, we offend all; James 3. 2. (4) Because,
there is not a just man upon the earth, that does good, and sins not;
Eccles. 7. 20. (5) Because, we are all, as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags; Isaiah 64. 6. (6) Because, the Psalmist
prays, that GOD would not enter into judgment with him, for in thy sight
(says he) shall no man be justified; Psalm. 143. 2. (7) Because, no man can say,
I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin; Prove. 20. 9. (8) Because,
the Apostle complains heavily, concerning indwelling sin; Romans 7. 18, 23. (9)
Because, the Saints are obliged, to seek pardon of sin every day; Matthew. 6. 12.
(10) Because, the Lord says, he that is holy, let him be holy still* Rev: 22.
11.

CHAP. XIV. Of SAVING FAITH.
Question I.
IS the grace of Faith, whereby the Elect are enabled to believe, to the saving
of their Souls, the work of the Spirit of Christ, in their hearts?

Yes. Heb. 10. 39. 2 Cor. 4. 13. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19.

Well then, do not the Pelagians err, who maintain, Faith to be a thing
natural; who attribute the being thereof to our selves, and to the strength of
our corrupt Nature?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Arminians err, Who though they grant Faith to be the gift
GOD, yet they deny Faith to be given according to the precise will of GOD, for
the saving of some men?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) I confute the Pelagians; for Christ says, no man can come to me (that is,
believe) unless the Father that has sent me draw him; John 6. 44. (2) Because,
the Apostle says for unto you it is given, in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe in him; but also to suffer for his sake; Phil. 1. 29. (3) Because,
that which is natural, is proper to all; but all men have not Faith; 2 These. 3.
2. (4) Because, Faith is reckoned up among the fruits of the Spirit; Gal. 5.
22. (5) Because, the very desire it self of believing is from GOD, and not from
our selves; Phil. 2. 13. (6) Because, Christ, is the Author and Finisher of our
Faith; Heb. 12. 2.

By what reasons do you confute the Arminians?

(1) Because, Faith is given to the Elect only, and to such, as are ordained
to life eternal; Titus 1. 1. Acts 13. 48. (2) Because, he that believes, shall
be saved; Mark 16. 16. John 3. 15, 16, 18, 36. (3) Because, GOD wills
precisely, the glorifying of all those whom he justifies; Romans 8. 30. But they
who have Faith, are justified; Romans 5. 1. (4) Because, GOD wills precisely, the
gloryfying of all those, whom he inwardly, and efficaciously calls; Romans 8.
30. But all that believe in him, are powerfully called; 2 These. 2. 13, 14. (5)
Because, all the Children of GOD, are heirs of GOD, and joynt-heirs with
Christ; Romans 8. 17. But how many soever believes in his Name; to them he gave
power to become the Sons GOD; John 1. 12.

Quest. II.
IS Faith the Fruit of Christ's purchase?

Yes. Titus 3. 5, 6. Titus 2. 14. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26.

Well then, do not the Arminians err, who deny Faith, and other saving Graces
to be Christ's purchase, or the fruits of his death?

Yes.

Do not likewise others of the same kind err, who granting the gift of
believing, not to flow from man's free will, or from any sufficient grace
bestowed upon all, maintain, That it flows from GODS Sovereign good will,
thinking fit to bestow that gift upon some whom he has elected, and not upon
others; without respect to the merits of Christ's death?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, if this be all, that Christ has purchased by his death, that GOD
might save fallen man, upon condition he believe; then Christ might attain his
end in dying, and yet not one soul be saved by his death. (2) Because, it makes
Christ a Titular Savior only, purchasing salvation to all, without any full
and certain intention of applying it to any. (3) Because, it is promised to
Christ the Mediator, as a satisfaction to him for his sufferings, that not only
many through Faith in him, shall be justified, but that certainly, he shall see
his seed, and the fruit of his Soul; Isaiah 53. 10. (4) Because, the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; under which all particular graces
may be comprehended, are said to be shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ; Titus 3. 5, 6. (5) Because, the Lord has promised to remove from us,
the heart of stone, and to give us a new heart; to cleanse us from all our
idols, and wash us with clean water. But these promises are in one bundle, with
the promises of his pardoning our iniquity, and remembering our sins no more;
Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. Ierem. 31. 33, 34. (6) Because, Christ is made unto us
Wisdom, Sanctification, and Redemption, no less, than righteousness, under
which, Faith and all saving graces needful to the working out of our Salvation
are comprehended; 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. (7) Because, we are said to be blessed,
with all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, (Ephesians. 1. 3.) which by his merit
are communicated to us. And is not Faith and saving Grace to be accounted among
the Spiritual blessings? (8) Because, it is not a mere possibility of
Redemption, but actual Redemption, that the Saints in Heaven praise and extol
Christ for; Rev. 5. 9, 12. An Arminian, cannot well sing a part of this song,
while he thinks in his heart, he is no more beholden to the Lamb for his
Redemption, than Cain and Judas.

Quest. III.
Does a Christian by Faith, believe whatsoever is revealed in the Word, for the
Authority of GOD speaking therein?

Yes. John 4. 42. 1 John 5. 10. Acts 24. 14. 1 These. 2. 13.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who commend and extol Implicit Faith; and
who define Faith, rather by Ignorance, than by Knowledge?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; and
therefore, there can be no Faith, without knowledge; Romans 10. 17. (2) Because,
all believers, are taught of God; Isaiah 54. 13. John 6. 45. (3) Because,
Christ says, this is life eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom thou have sent; John 17. 3. (4) Because, the Prophet Isaiah says,
by his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify many; chap. 53. 11.

Quest. IV.
ARE the principal Acts of saving Faith, Accepting, Receiving, and Resting upon
Christ alone, for Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life, by virtue of
the Covenant of Grace?

Yes. John 1. 12. Acts 16. 31. Gal. 2. 20. Acts 15. 11.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, Faith to be nothing, but a
naked assent, to the truth revealed in the Word; it being placed by them, in
the understanding only?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Sccinians err, who put no difference between Faith, and
the Obedience of Works?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, to believe, is to receive Christ, which is an Act of the Will;
John 1. 12. (2) Because, Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen. Or Faith, is a firm ground, or a firm confidence;
that is, which causes to subsist, or stand firm, the things which are promised
by God in Christ, and which therefore are expected by hope, which is not done
only by an assent, to Gods promises in our understanding, but also by a
trusting to the same in our will. I say faith, is a firm ground of the things,
which are hoped, and an argument of things not seen. Or a conviction, in Greek
Elegchos: for Faith respecting GODS Revelation and Promise, convinces and
assures the heart of man, more strongly of the truth of a thing, than any
other argument brought from natural Reason, can do; Heb. 11. 1. (3) Because, we
are justified before GOD by Faith; Romans 5. 1. but we are not justified by a
bare and naked assent to the truth; otherwise the Devils should be justified;
Iam. 2. 19. Neither are we justified by the Socinians Faith, which is every
where condemned in Scripture; Romans 3. 20, 28. Gal. 2. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Phil.
3. 9. Titus 3. 4, 5.

CHAP. XV. Of REPENTANCE.
Question I.
IS Repentance unto life, an Evangelical Grace, the Doctrine whereof is to be
preached by every Minister of the Gospel, as well as that of Faith in Christ?

Yes. Ezekiel. 12. 10. Acts 11. 18. Luke 24. 47. Make 1. 15. Acts 20. 21.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, That repentance is not an
Evangelical grace; and that it ought not to be preached by any Minister of the
Gospel, seeing it leads us away from Christ, and is many ways hurtful and
dangerous to us?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, GOD has promised in the Covenant of Grace, that he will pour
upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of
Grace and Supplication, which shall cause Christians under the Gospel, to
repent and mourn for their sins; Zech. 12. 10. (2) Because, Repentance is
numbered among the saving graces, which shall be bestowed and conferred upon
Converts, under the Gospel, and is sometimes put for the whole Conversion of a
man to GOD; Acts 11. 15, 16, 17, 18. (3) Because, the Ministers of the Gospel
ought to instruct those with meekness; who oppose themselves; if GOD
peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth; 2 Timothy 2. 25. (4) Because, Repentance from dead works, is among the principles of
the Doctrine of Christ; and is a foundation, which ought to be laid, before
the Hearers of the Gospel can go on into perfection; I say, laid by the
Ministers of the Gospel; Heb. 6. 1. (5) Because, Christ himself appointed
Repentance, no less to be preached, through the world, than Remission of sins;
Luke 24. 47. (6) Because, Christ and his Apostles preached Repentance, no less
than Faith; Mar. 1. 15. Mat. 3. 2. Nay, the whole sum of the Gospel is placed
in preaching Faith and Repentance; Acts 20. 20, 21.

Quest II.
Does a sinner. (namely by Repentance) out of the sight, and sense, not only of
the danger, but also of the filthiness, and odiousness of his sins, as contrary
to the holy Nature, and righteous law of God, and upon the apprehension of his
mercy in Christ, to such as are penitent, so grieve for, and hate his sins, as
to turn from them all unto God?

Yes. Ezekiel. 18. 30: Ezekiel. 36, 31. Isai. 30. 22. Ier. 31. 18, 19. Joel 2. 12,
13. Amos 5. 15. Psalm 119. 6. 59. 106.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, we ought not by
Repentance, to hate our sins, to mourn for them, and turn from them to God: but
only to believe, that Christ in our stead and for us, has Repented? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Repentance, being a turning from our sins, and evil ways, and a
turning to God, and Christ being without sin, could not be capable to repent in
our stead; 1 King. 8. 35. Heb. 7. 26, 27. Joel 2. 12, 13. (2) Because, they
that repent, confess their sins, and are grieved for them; Ezra 10. 1. Mark 14.
72. They hate their sins; 2 Cor. 7. 11. They are ashamed, and confounded for
them; Ier. 31. 19. (3) Because, Repentance, is a sorrow after a Godly manner,
in the same very Persons, that Repent, wrought by God, by the preaching of the
Word; 2 Cor. 7. 9. Acts 11. 18. (4) Because, Repentance, is called a renting of
the heart; Joel 2. 12. And they that Repent, hate and loath themselves for
their abominations; Ezekiel. 36* 31. They are ashamed, and confounded; Ier. 31.
19. They are grieved, and pricked in their Reins; Psalm. 73. 21 (5) Because, God
promising Repentance, to the people of the Jews, being converted to Christ,
after their backsliding, says, I will pour out upon the house of David, and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and
they shall look upon me, whom they have peirced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for his only Son; Zech. 12. 10, And shall be in bitterness for
him, as one that is in bitterness, for his first born. But is any man so
foolish as to affirm, that when a man does mourn, for his first born, he
believes only, that another man, has mourned in his stead? (6) Because, Faith
is one thing, and Repentance specially so called, is another thing; Mark. 1.
15. Acts 20. 21. Heb. 11. 6. In which places, Faith and Repentance, are numbered
two diverse things. And it is evident likewise, that Faith is the cause of
Repentance, but nothing can be the cause of it self.

Do not likewise, the Papists err, who maintain, that we are not by Repentance
converted from our sins to God; which they only make an endument, or quality
fitting, and disposing us for conversion, and meriting it: which (say they)
consists in heart contrition, mouth confession, absolution, and satisfaction.
By the first, They have heart sorrow for sin. By the second, They confess their
sins to the Priest. By the third, (Which can be no part of Repentance; seeing
it is not a thing done by the sinner) they are absolved by the Priest, from
theirsins. By the fourth* they make satisfaction for former sins, in performing
some good work willingly undertaken, or enjoined by the Priest after
absolution; as Fastings, Chastising of their own bodies, Pilgrimages, and
hearing of many Masses Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Word of God asserts no meritorious Work in us, to go before
our conversion. Not by Works of righteousnss,, which we have done, but
according to his mercy, he saved us; Titus 3. 4, 5, 6. (2) Because, the only
merit of Christ, is the meritorious cause of our Conversion; Heb. 9. 14. 1 Cor.
6. 11. (3) Because, true Repentance, is the infallible Antecedent, and
forerunner of life; 2 Cor. 7. 10. Acts 11. 18. And they who truly Repent have
all their sins pardoned; Acts 2. 38. Acts 3. 19. Nay, Repentance is a piece of
the exercise of the life of Grace here, and works unto life, and salvation
hereafter. But of no foregoing disposition, or qualification previous to
Repentance, can these forecited places of Scripture be understood. (4) Because,
Repentance, and turning to God, are sometimes put, for the same thing: and the
Prophets, while they study to excite, and stir up the people to Repentance,
they signify it, by the word Conversion and turning to GOD; Acts 11. 15, 16,
17, 18, 21. Joel 2. 12, 13, Esek. 18. 31, 32. (5) Because, Whatsoever goes
before our conversion to God, it cannot be of Faith; and therefore, it must
displease God; Romans 8: 8: Romans 14. 23. But true Repentance is of Faith, and God
delights in it; Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20. (6) Because, in very many places of
Scripture, Repentance is described, by a departing from evil, and a turning to
God. Isa. 1. 16, 17. Isaiah 55. 7. Psalm 34. 14. Hos. 6. 1. (7) Because, heart
contrition, mouth (confession, and satisfaction for) former sins which they
call Penance, as they are explained by the Papists, may be found in
Hypocritical Repentance, as is evident from the example of Judas, and Abah;
Matthew. 27. 4, 5, 6. 1 Kings 21. 27. There may be true Evangelical Repentance,
without Confession of the mouth made to a Priest, and without Penance. If the
mouth and heart confess to God only, it is sufficient, unless their be a
public scandal, committed against the Church of God. As for Absolution, it can
be no part of Repentance, for it is not a thing done by the Sinner, but (as I
said) conferred by the Priest.

Quest. III.
IS Repentance to be rested on, as any satisfaction for sin, or cause of the
pardon thereof?

No. Ezekiel. 36. 31, 32, Ezekiel. 16. 61, 62, 63.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that Repentance, is a
satisfaction for sins (to wit, an imperfect satisfaction) and that it deserves
the mercy of God, and pardon of sin?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because; Christ did satisfy the justice of God to the full: and it is his
blood only, that purges us from all sin; Isai. 53. 4, 5, 6, 8. 11. 1 John 1.
7. (2) Because, to satisfy for sin, is a part of the Priestly office of
Christ, which cannot be communicated to any; Heb. 2. 17. compared with Heb. 7.
23, 24. (3) Because, the Lord pardons our sins, not for our sake, but for his
own sake; Isai. 43. 25. Ezekiel. 36. 25. 31. 32. (4) Because, pardon of sin, is an
Act of the free favor of God; Hos. 14. 2. Ephesians. 1. 7. But if it be of the free
favor of God, then it is no more of works, and of Repentance* as a
satisfaction for sin; Romans 11. 6.

Quest. IV.
IS there any sin so great, that it will bring damnation upon those, who truly
repent.

No. Isaiah 59. 7. Romans 8. 1. Isaiah 1. 16. 18.

Well then, do not the Novatians, Anabaptists, and Puritans called Kathari err,
who maintain, that if any after Baptism, and Grace received, fall into grievous
sins, offend willingly, there is no pardon remaining for them, even though they
should repent?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, God under the Law, appointed daily sacrifices even for sins, that
were committed willingly; Number. 28. 3. Lev. 6. 1. to the eight verse. (2)
Because, God in the Covenant of Grace has promised, that he will not utterly
take from them (with whom he is in Covenant) his loving kindness: even though
they have broken his statutes, and not kept his commandments; Psalm 89. 30,
31, 32. (3) Because, GOD invites the Galatians, and Corinthians, who were
guilty of Apostasy, and of very many gross scandals, to Repentance, from the
hope of pardon, Gal. 3. 1. Gal. 1. 6. Gal. 4, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. and 1 Cor.
5. 1, 2, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 12. 21. (4) Because, the Apostle John says, even to such
as have sinned willingly, after Baptism, and Grace received, if we truly
Repent and confess our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins;
1 John 1. 9. see, 1 John 2. 12. (5) Because, David after murder, and Adultery:
and Peter, after denying of his Master, obtained pardon, when they repented; 2 Samuel 12. 13. John 21, 19. Therefore there remains pardon to such, as after
Baptism, and Grace received, have fallen and repented.

Quest. V.
IS every man bound to make private confession of his sins to God, praying for
the pardon thereof?

Yes. Psalm 51. 4, 5, 7, 9. Psalm 32. 5, 6.

Well then, do not the Antinomians, Libertines, and Anabaptists err, who
maintain, that those, who are once justified, are not any more obliged, to
confess their sins, to be grieved for them, or to Repent of them?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, whosoever does call upon God the Father, in their pravers, they
ought to seek daily remission of sins; Luke 11. 2, 3, 4 (2) Because, God does
commend, the serious confession of sins, and grief for them* in justified
persons, and delights therein; Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20. Luke 7. 44. Isa. 66. 2.
(3) Because, pardon of those sins, which justified persons shall confess, is
promised; Prove. 28. 13. Psalm 32. 5. 1 John 1; 9. (4) Because, such are
declared blessed, that mourn. Matthew. 5. 4. (5) Because, in whom the Spirit
dwells, it works in them, being greatly weighted, with the burden of their
sins, a continual groaning: and sorrow for the same; Romans 7* 23, 24. Romans 8.
26. (6) Because, true repentance, is a renewing of the image of God lost, at
least greatly defaced, by the committing of sin, which in sanctification is not
perfected, but only begun, and does daily increase through the virtue of
Christ's death, and resurrection; Ephesians. 4. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. (7) From the
example of justified persons, as David, Iosia, Peter and others, who after
justification confessed their sins, grieved for them, and begged pardon; 2 Samuel
12. 13. Psalm 51. the 2 Kings 22. 19: Neh: 9. from the beginning; Mark 14. 72.

Quest: VI:
DO those, who confess their sins privately to God, who pray for the pardon
thereof, and forsake them, obtain mercy?

Yes. Prove: 28: 13: 1 John 1: 9:

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that besides confession of
sins made to God, and forsaking of them, an Auricular confession, and
enumeration of all particular sins, committed after Baptism, must be made to
our own proper Priest, as a necessary mean, for obtaining remission of them?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Psalmist says, who can understand his errors; Psalm 19: 12:
and they being more, than the hairs of our head, how can they be mumbled over to
a Priest? Psalm: 40. 12: (2) Because, Christ gave an absolution, without an
enumeration of every sin; Mat. 9: 2: Neither does he demand, an enumeration, of
all our several sins, though we be obliged to reckon, and rehearse, all that we
are able to remember; Luke 7. 48. Luke 18. 13, 14. (3) Because, there is no
command, or example in Scripture, for any man to whisper, and round his sins
into the ear of a Priest: and therefore, it not being of Faith, it is sin; Romans
14. 23. (4) Because, whosoever turns from his sin to God, and confesses
them, he finds mercy presently; Ezekiel. 18. 21. 28. Prove. 28. 13.

Quest. VII.
OUght he who scandalizeth his Brother, or the Church of Christ, to be willing,
by a private, or public conconfession, and sorrow for his sin, to declare his
Repentance to those who are offended?

Yes. James 5. 16. Luke 17. 3, 4. Josh. 7. 19. Psalm 51. throughout; 2 Cor. 2.
8.

Well then, do not the Novatians err, and others too, who maintain, that those,
who have offended their Brother, or the Church of Christ, are not obliged to
declare their repentance, to the parties offended; and that those, who are
offended, ought not to require any such thing, as private, or public
confession, and acknowledgement, but that presently, they ought to be received,
without doing any such thing?

Yes.

Do not likewise some Churchmen err, who connive, and wink, at the public
scandals, especially of the richer, and better sort?

Yes.

And lastly, do not many in these times err, who jear, and make a mock, at all
public confession of sins.

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, he that offends his Brother, ought to return to him, saying I
repent; Luke* 17. 3, 4. (2) Because, Christ did even value so much a private
man's offense, that he was not to be admitted to the Altar with his gift, until
he was reconciled to his Brother; Matthew. 5. 23, 24. (3) Because, the incestuous
person, was not received into the communion of the Church of Corinth, before he
had evidenced his repentance, by satisfying the Church; 2 Cor. 2. 6. (4)
Because, public confession of sin, glorifies God; Josh. 7. 19. (5) Because,
those who sin, must be rebuked before all, that others also may fear; 1 Timothy 5.
20.

Quest. VIII.
ARE those, who are offended, bound to be reconcilled to the offending party*
he declaring his Repentance, and ought they in love to receive him?

Yes. 2 Cor. 2. 8.

Well then, do not the Novatians and Anabaptists err, who maintain, that
Professors of Religion, falling into public scandal, especially in denying the
Truth, in the time of persecution, are no more to be received into the Church,
even though they Repent?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ says, if they Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him;
and if he repent, forgive him, and if he trespass against thee seven times in a
day, and seven times in a day, turn again to thee, saying I repent thou shall
forgive him; Luke: 17. 3. 4. (2) Because, for a Heathen, and Publican (that is
one casten out from the communion of the Church) he only is to be esteemed, who
neglects to hear the Church; Matthew. 18. 17. (3) Because, such as have
offended the Church, after submission, to the churches censure, ought to be
comforted; the Church ought to make their love known to them; and receive them
again into communion, least happly their grief, and sorrow increasing, they be
swallowed up; 2 Cor. 2. 7, 8. (4) Because, if a man be overtaken in a fault,
they who are Spiritual, ought to restore such an one, in the Spirit of
meekness; considering themselves, least they also be tempted; Gal. 6. 1. (5)
Because, if men, repenting of their faults committed against their Brethren,
and fellow Christians, be not received into the communion of the Church, both
they and the Church are in hazard, lest Satan by his devices, gain an advantage
of them; 2 Cor. 2. 10. 11. (6) Because, Miriam, who for her sedition, against
Moses, was shut out from the Camp seven days, was brought in again; Number. 12.
15. So was the incestuous person, received into the communion of the Church; 2
Cor. 2. 8.

CHAP. XVI. Of GOOD WORKS.
Question I.
ARE Good Works only such, as GOD has commanded in his holy Word, and not
such as without the warrant thereof, are devised by men, out of blind zeal,
upon any pretense of good intention?

Yes. Micah 6. 8. Romans 12. 2. Heb. 13. 21. Matthew. 15. 9. with 1 Samuel 15. 21,
22, 23. Isa. 29. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 18. Romans 10. 2.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, That not only such works are
good, which are done according to the Will and Law of GOD, but others also,
which are commanded by the public Authority of the Church; though over and
above, what the Law of GOD requires. And that those also are good Works, which
are done out of a good intention, to advance GODS Glory, or to perform Worship
to Him, though they be not commanded by GOD?

Yes.

Do not likewise the old and late Libertines err, who maintain, That the
difference between good Works, and evil, depends only upon the private and
particular Opinion of every man. For they think, that no work ought to be
called evil, but in so far, as he that does it, thinks it evil?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Good works are described by the Apostle to be such, as GOD before
has ordained, that we should walk in them; Ephesians. 2. 10. (2) Because, GOD
expressly commands, that every man must not do that, which seems good in his own
eyes, but only such works, as he has commanded, and must neither add thereto,
nor diminish from it; Deuteronomy. 12. 8, 32. Josh. 1. 7. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18.
(3) Because, the Lord openly testifies that in vain they do worship Him,
teaching for Doctrines, the commandments of men, not requiring that
Will Worship, which Fantastic men would give him; Isaiah 1. 13. Matthew. 15. 9.
Micah 6. 6, 7, 8. Col. 2. 23. (4) Because, the Scribes and Pharisees are
severely rebuked by Christ, that made the Commandment of GOD of no effect, by
their Traditions; Matthew. 15. 6. And it is often mentioned in the Books of the
Kings, and Chronicles, as a fault in the Kings of Judah, that the High Places
were not taken away. And how severely were the Israelites punished, for their
worshipping of the Golden-Calf? Exodus 32. And for worshipping the Calves, which
Jeroboam set up at Dan, and Bethel, all know; 1 Kin. 12. 28. (5) Because, the
Law of God, is the perfect Rule and Square of good works; To the Law, and to
the Testimony: if they speak not according to this Word, it is, because there
is no light in them; Isaiah 8. 20. (6) Because, without Faith, it is impossible
to please God; Heb. 11. 6. But Faith has always a respect to the Word of God.

Quest. II.
ARE good works done in obedience to Gods commandments, the fruits, and
evidences of a true, and lively Faith?

Yes. James 2. 18, 22.

Well then, do not the Antinomians, and Libertines err, who deny, That
Believers, ought to make evident to themselves, and others, the truth of their
Justification, by good works, as fruits of a true, and lively Faith?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ says, by their fruits, ye shall know them: for a good
tree brings forth good fruit; Matthew: 7. 16, 17, 18. (2) Because, we are
commanded, to make sure our Calling and Election by good Works, as by the
fruits of Faith; 2 Peter 1: 5, 6, 10, 11. (3) Because, in Scripture there are
delivered many undoubted, and sure marks of Regeneration, taken from the fruits
of Faith, and good Works; 1 John 1: 6, 7: and 1 John 2: 3: and 1 John 3: 9, 10,
14.

Quest. III.
IS our ability to do good Works, wholly from the Spirit of Christ, and not at
all from our selves?

Yes.

And that we may be enabled thereunto, besides the Graces already received, is
there not required an actual influence of the same holy Spirit, to work in us,
both to will and to do, of his good pleasure?

Yes. John 15. 4, 6. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. Phil. 2. 13. 2. Cor. 3. 5.

Well then, do not the Pelagians err, who maintain, That Good works done by the
strength of our free will, are conform to the Law of God, and worthy of the
Kingdom of Heaven?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Papists err, who maintain, that good works may be done, by
a mere general and common influence from God?

Yes.

Do not lastly the Arminians err, who maintain, that good works flow only from
God, as a Moral Cause?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ says, ye can do nothing without me; John 15. 5. (2)
Because, of our selves, we are not able to think a good thought; 2 Cor. 3. 5.
(3) Because, it is God, that works in us, both to will, and to do, of his
good pleasure; Phil. 2. 13.

Quest. IV.
ARE they who are Regenerated, to grow negligent, as if they were not bound, to
perform any duty, unless by a special motion of the spirit?

No.

Ought they to stir up diligently the Grace of GOD which is in them?

Yes. Phil. 2. 12. Heb. 6: 11, 12. 2 Peter 1. 3, 5, 10. Isa. 64. 7. 2 Timothy 1.
6. Acts 26. 6, 7. Jude verse 20. 21, 22.

Well then, do not the Quakers, Familists, and other Giddy-headed Persons err,
who maintain, that Believers ought not to perform, any duties in Religion,
unless the Spirit within, move and excite them, to those duties: and that we
ought to forbear, when this is wanting?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Holy Ghost forbids us, to be slow in performing such
duties: nay, commands us to stir up the gift, which is in us, and use all
diligence to perform duties commanded by himself; Phil. 2. 12. Jude verse 20.
(2) Because, the Prophet confesses that, as the great sin, of the Lords
people, that there is none that calls upon his name, that stirs up
himself, to take hold of him; Isaiah 64. 7. (3) Because, to neglect the
worshipping of GOD, is an evident sign, and token of an Atheist; Ps: 14. 4. Ps.
53. 4. (4) Because, the Lord has threatened to pour out his fury upon the
Heathen, that know him not, and upon the Families that call not on his Name;
Ierem. 10. 25. (5) Because, the twelve Tribes, which hoped to come to the
promise made to the Fathers, instantly served GOD day and night; Acts 26. 6, 7.
And the Apostles gave themselves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of
the Word; Acts 6. 4. (6) Because, Christ himself who had always the Spirit, was
very frequent, in all those Exercises and Duties, as all the Histories, of the
four Evangelists do testify. Those Fanatic Recusants, either have the Spirit
of God in them; or they want it. This last they will not grant. If then they
have it, why do they refuse to perform duties of Religion, more then our
blessed Savior did, when opportunity, and occasion, did call him. They have
the Spirit but want the Impulse. But contrariwise, this impulse; is never
wanting when there is a call. But the Spirits call is never wanting, when
opportunity is offered. (7) Because, Christ will have the Gospel preached to
every creature; Mark 16. 15. And has commanded the administration of the Lords
Supper, even to his second coming; 1 Cor. 11. 26. And will have the work of the
ministry to continue in his Church, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the Faith,
etc. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. (8) Because, we are commanded, to pray without
ceasing; 1 These. 5. 17: That is, upon all opportunities, and in all our
necessities. (9) Because, we are commanded, to trust in him at all times; Psalm
62. 8. (10) if we shall forbear outward duties, as prayer, and such like, then
ought we to forbear inward exercises, as Acts of Faith, Love, and Fear, till we
be moved thereunto, which is most absurd, for we are commanded (as was cited)
to trust in him always. (11) What assurance can men have, the next hour, or to
morrow, more than in the present time, of the Spirits motion on their souls: or
that they shall be thus, at a greater advantage, by putting off the duty, till
they have some inward motion, and impulse thereunto, than by waiting on the
ordinary call of the Word, or of Providence?

Quest. V.
ARE they, who, in their obedience, attain to the greatest hight, which is
possible in this life, so far from being able to supererogate, and to do more,
than God requires, that they fall short of much, which in duty they are bound
to do?

Yes. Luke 17. 10. Neh. 13. 22. Gal. 15. 17. Job 9. 2, 3.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, That a man regenerated can
not only fulfill the Law of God perfectly, but may do also more good, than the
Law of God requires of him? This is their mad fancy, of the works of
Supererogation. Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, no man living, is able to fulfill the Law of God; Psalm 143. 2.
Isaiah 64. 6. 1 John 1. 8. Far less is any man able to do more than the Law
requires. (2) Because, we are obliged to seek remission of sins every day;
Matthew. 6. 12. But to seek pardon for sin every day, and to perform works of
Supererogation, are inconsistent together. (3) Because, Christ says, when you
shall have done all things, which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants; we have done that which was our duty to do; Luke 17. 10. (4) Because,
according to this Doctrine of works of Supererogation, we must accuse the
Scripture, and Law of God, of imperfection, as if they were not a perfect Rule
of life, and manners, which is contrary to the Psalmist 19. 8. And contrary to
2 Timothy 3. 15, 17. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. (5) Because, whatsoever things are true, honest,
just, pure, lovely, of good report, these are commanded, as things necessary to
all men: therefore, either the Works, which the Papists call works of
Supererogation, are true, honest, just, and pure: and if they be such, they are
commanded by God in Scripture, and not works of Supererogation: or they are
unhonest, impure, unjust: and if such, then no man is so mad, as to call them
Good-works, much less Works of Supererogation; Phil. 4. 8.

Quest. VI.
CAN our best works, merit pardon of sin, or eternal life, at the hands of God?

No. Romans 3. 20. Romans 4. 2, 4, 6. Ephesians. 2* 8, 9. Titus 3. 5, 6, 7. Romans 8. 18.
Psalm 16. 2. Job 22. 2, 3.

Well then, do not the Papists, and some of the Quakers err, who maintain, that
the Good works of Regenerate men, do truly, and properly Merit, and deserve
eternal life?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, there is no proportion, between our imperfect works. and life
eternal, between the work and the Reward; 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light
afflictions works for us, that is brings forth, not of any Merit, but of mere
Grace for Christ's sake, see Romans 8. 18. Rom 3. 28. (2) If by our good Works, we
deserved the pardon of sin, we might have whereof to boast; for if Abraham were
justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God; Romans 4. 2,
But the Scripture says, he that glories, let him glory in the Lord: 1 Cor.
1. 31. (3) Because, no creature, performing the most excellent Works, can
deserve any favor from God, or oblige him, to give any thing as due. And
according to the order of Gods justice, he can receive no favor from us; nor
can any creature, confer any benefit on him; Ps. 16. 2. Job 22. 2, 3. Truly,
where there is no favor done, there can be no Merit: for merit presupposes a
benefit accepted. (4) Because, our works are imperfect, as well, as to Parts,
as to Degrees; Gal. 5. 17; Is. 64. 7. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. A Perfection of parts is,
when we have a Part of every Grace, and are renewed in some measure in every
power, and faculty of the whole man, though we be not come to the just and due
measure in any of them. A perfection of Degrees, consists in the complete
measure of our conformity, and our exact correspondence to the Law of God, in
respect of all whatsoever it requires. (5) Because, Christ says, so likewise
ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do; Luke 17. 10.
(6) Because, the Good Works, which we do, are not ours, but it is God that
works in us, both to will, and to do; 1 Cor. 4. 7. Gal. 5. 22. Phil. 2. 13.
(7) Because, that heavenly blessedness, to be given to the saints, is expressly
attributed to the mercy and pity of God; Plalm 103. 4. Matthew. 5. 7. Titus 3. 5.
Ephesians. 4. 6, 7, 8. (8) Because, when the Apostle proclaims death to be the wages
of sin, he does not affirm life eternal to be the reward of Good Works, but the
free, and gracious gift of God, which we obtain by Christ, even in our
sanctification, whereof the Apostle here; Romans 6. 23. Which free Gift has for
its end, eternal life. Not that it merits this (for then it should not be a
gracious gift) but because Christ, has merited this for us, and shall of free
Grace give it to us, as the following words, through Jesus Christ our Lord
show. (9) Because, God will have us to buy without money or price, Wine, Milk,
Honey: that is, to receive all things requisite, and necessary for our
spiritual life, for Nothing; and eternal life it self; Isaiah 55. 1, 2, 3. (10)
Because, Christ should not be a perfect Savior, if any thing from us were to
be added, to the righteousness of his Merit. But Christ is a perfect Savior;
Ephesians. 1. 7. Ephesians. 2. 7, 8, 9. 1 John 1. 7. Acts 4. 12. (11) Because, our best
works, have such a mixture of corruption, and sin in them, that they deserve
his curse, and wrath, so far are they from meriting; Isa. 64. 6. But we are
all, says the Prophet, as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses, are
like filthy rags. (12) If the works of regenerated men, did deserve eternal
life, then should the whole contrivance of the Gospel be subverted, and the
same very way of Life laid down, which was in the Covenant of works, as is
clear from 2 Cor. 5. 21. The Gospel is so contrived, by the infinite Wisdom,
and Goodness of God, that there is a judicial transferring of our sin, as a
debt on Christ, the Cautioner, and a translation of his righteousness, and
merit, to be imputed to us, for our justification, without the least respect to
our works.

Quest. VII.
ARE Works done by unregenerate men, although for the matter of them, they may
be things which God commands, and of good use, both to themselves, and others,
are they (I say) sinful, and cannot please God?

Yes. Hag. 2. 14. Titus 1. 15. Amos 5. 21. 22. Hos. 1. 4. Romans 9. 16. Titus 3.
5.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that not only, all the works
of unregenerate men are not sinful, but also that some of their Works do indeed
Merit, and deserve somewhat from God, namely (as they speak) by Merit of
Congruity, that is, as they are agreeable to the Law of God?

Yes.

There is also (as they say) a Merit of Condignity, by which the works of the
Regenerate, which follow justification, deserve eternal life, not from the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, but from their own intrinseck worth, and
proportionableness to the Reward?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, as a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a
corrupt, rotten tree, bring forth good fruit; Matthew. 7. 18.

(2) Because all unregenerate men are dead in Trespasses and sin; Ephesians. 2. 1.
(3) Because, all the works of unregenerate men are done, without Faith, and so
cannot please God; Heb. 11. 6. Romans 14. 23. (4) Because, if unregenerate men
were able to do Good Works, or perform any duty which deserved somewhat from
God, than would it follow, that a man were able to do some good of himself,
which is contrary to John 15. 5. Phil. 2. 13. (5) Because, it is clear from
Scripture, that before renewing grace, all are the children of wrath; who of
themselves cannot have a good thought, nor any active concurrence, or putting
themselves forth to the utmost, for their own Conversion; 2 Cor. 3. 5.
Therefore no plea for merit, by any improvement of men's natural abilities; see
Romans 9. 15.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the SAINTS.
Question I.
CAN they whom GOD has accepted in his beloved, effectually called, and
sanctified by his Spirit, either totally or finally fall away from the state of
Grace?

No.

Shall they certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved?

Yes. Phil. 1. 6. 2 Pet. 1. 10. John 10. 28, 29. 1 John 3: 9. 1 Peter 1. 5. 9.

Well then, do not the Papists, Socinians, Arminians, and some Ringleaders
among the Quakers err, who maintain, that the Saints may totally and finally
fall away?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Saints, are built upon the Rock, and not upon the Sand:
therefore when temptations of any kind assault, they can never fall, nor can
the gates of hell prevail against them; Matthew. 7. 24. Matthew. 16. 16, 18. (2)
Because, he that has begun a good work in the Saints, will finish it, until
the day of Jesus Christ; Phil. 1. 6. (3) Because, Paul says, nothing can
separate us from the love of God; Romans 8. 35, 38, 39. (4) Because, they that
fall away, have never had true justifying Faith; Luke 8. 13, 16. 1 John 2. 19.
(5) Because, it is impossible for the Elect to be seduced; Matthew. 24. 24. I say
impossible, not in respect of the will, and power of the Elect themselves, but
in respect of the immutability of Gods Decree, concerning them, and of his
purpose of keeping them powerfully against seduction, according to his
promises, of which he cannot repent; see John 10. 28. Romans 8. 38, 39. 1 Peter
1. 5. (6) Because, they that believe in the Son of God have life eternal; 1
John 5. 13. John 6. 47, 54, 58. And they have passed from death, unto life, and
shall never thirst, nor hunger any more; John 6. 35. (7) Because, God has
promised in his Covenant, that though he chastise his own children for their
faults, yet he will never take away his mercy, and loving kindness from them;
Psalm 89. 30, 31, 32, 33* 34. Ier. 32. 38, 39, 40. (8)* Because, that Golden
chain, that Paul speaks of, cannot be broken; Romans 8. 30. Whom he did
predestinate, them also he called, etc. (9) Because, Christ's says, this is the
Fathers will, which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should
lose nothing; John 6. 39. (10) Because, we are kept by the power of God
through Faith, unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time; 1 Peter
1. 5. (11) Because, he has prayed for us, that our Faith fail not; Luke 22.
32. John 17. 20.

Quest. II.
CAN Believers by reason of their sins, and failings incurr GODS displeasure,
and grieve his holy Spirit, come to be deprived of some measure of their
Graces, and Comforts, have their hearts hardened, and their consciences wounded,
hurt, and scandalize others, and bring temporal judgments upon themselves?

Yes. Isaiah 64. 5, 7, 9. Ephesians. 4. 30. Psalm: 51. 8, 10, 12. Rev. 2. 4. Cant.
5. 2, 3, 4, 6. Isa 63. 17. Psalm 37. 3, 4. 2 Samuel 12. 14. Psalm. 89* 31, 32.
Mark 16. 14. 1 Cor. 11. 32.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, That the sins of the
Regenerate, do not displease GOD, and cannot grieve his holy Spirit: and that
Believers are not chastised in any wise for their sins?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Prophet says, thou art wroth, for we have sinned; Isai. 64.
5. (2) Because, it is said, that the thing which David had done (namely his
Murder, and his Adultery) displeased the Lord; 2 Samuel 11. 27. (3) Because, the
Scripture testifies, that the sins of Believers grieve his holy Spirit; Ephesians. 4.
30. (4) Because, the Saints by reason of their sins, are deprived of some
measure of grace and consolation; Psalm 51. 8, 9. Rev. 2. 4, 5. (5) Because,
the Lord has inflicted temporal punishments upon Believers for their faults;
Psalm 89. 31, 32. 2 Samuel 12, 11. and 24, 15. 1 Cor. 11. 30.

CHAP. XVIII. Of assurance of Grace, and Salvation.
Question I.
MAY they who truly believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him in sincerity, and
endeavor to walk in all good conscience before him; May they (I say) be
certainly assured in this life, that they are in the state of Grace, and being
enabled by the Spirit to know the things, which are freely given them of GOD,
may they without extraordinary revelation attain thereunto?

Yes. 1 John 2. 3. 1 John 3. 14, 18, 19, 21, 24. 1 John 5. 13. 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Heb. 6. 11, 12. Ephesians. 3. 17, 18.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that no man can be sure
(namly sure by divine Faith) of Gods peculiar favor, toward himself, without
extraordinary revelation?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Apostle commands us, saying, Brethren, give all diligence, to
make your calling and election sure; for if you do these things, ye shall never
fall; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ; 2 Peter 1 10. 11.
Heb. 6. 11. (2) Because, the Apostle commands the Corinthians, to examine
themselves, whether they be in the Faith; 2 Cor. 13. 5. (3) Because, the
Scripture proposes, and sets forth, sure Marks, and Tokens, by which a
Believer, may be infallibly assured, that he is one of the number of Christ's
sheep; John 10. 4, 5, 27, 28. And that he is one of Christ's Disciples; John 13.
35. Nay, it is the scope, of the whole first Epistle of John to propose such
sure Marks to Believers, whereby they may know, that they have life eternal: 1
John. 5. 13. (4) Because, the true Believer may be persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor any other thing can separate him, from the love of Christ;
Romans 8. 38. 39. Where the Apostle not only speaks of himself, but of them, to
whom he writes. (5) Because, Believers have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby they cry Abba Father, and he himself witnesses with their Spirit, that
they are the children of God; Romans 8. 15. 16. (6) Because, Believers have
received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that they
might know the things that are freely given to them of God; 1 Cor. 2. 12.

Quest. II.
IS this certainty, a bare conjectural, and probable persuasion grounded upon a
fallible hope?

No.

But is it an infallible assurance of Faith?

Yes. Heb. 6. 11. 19. Heb. 6. 17, 18.

Well then, do not the Papists, and Arminians err, who maintain, that the
assurance of salvation, is only conjectural, or at the most, only probable,
which has for its foundation, a failling, and fadeing Faith?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, assurance is from the testimony of the Holy Spirit, witnessing
with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God; Romans 8. 16. (2) Because,
this assurance is founded upon the promises of God, who cannot lie; Isai. 54.
10. John 3. 36. (3) Because, Believers are sealed with the Holy Spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of their inheritance: but he that receives the
earnest, not only has right to the possession, but knows assuredly, that he
has that right, and shall be put in the actual possession thereof; Ephesians. 1. 13,
14. (4) Because, God willing more abundantly, to show unto the heirs of
promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible to God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation; Heb. 6. 17, 18.

Quest. III.
IS the infallible assurance of Faith, founded upon the divine truth of the
promises of Salvation, and upon the inward evidence of those Graces, unto which
these promises are made?

Yes. Heb. 6. 17, 18. 2 Peter 1. 4, 5. 1 John 2, 3, and 1 John 3. 14. 2 Cor. 1.
12.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, that none ought, or can
gather any comfort, or assurance of Salvation from his own works of holiness;
but that a Believer ought to lean and rest upon the alone testimony of the
Spirit, without any Marks, or Signs: from which testimony he may (say they) be
fully assured of the remission of his sins, and of his own salvation?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From the example of the Saints, who gathered their comfort from the fruits
of Faith, and works of holiness, as David did Psalm. 119. 6. And as Paul did; 2
Cor. 1. 12. (2) From the reckoning up of Marks, which are held out in
Scripture, by which Believers may be known from unbelievers, as mutual love;
John 13. 35. Observing and keeping his Commandments; 1 John 2. 3. Doing of
righteousness; 1 John 3. 14. And loving the Brethren; (3) Because, unless Faith
be proven by Marks, true Faith cannot be discerned from presumption; neither
can assurance rightly founded, be discerned from a delusion of Satan; 1 John 4.
2. (4) Because, reason requires, that from the knowledge of the effect, we
should come to the knowledge of the cause, according to that of Matthew. 7. 16.
(5) Because, marks of Grace have so much clearness in themselves, that they
will even beget in others, a judgment according to charity concerning the
Election of others; therefore much more in those same very Persons, who are
able to discern, and know better their own hearts; 1 These. 1. 3, 4.

Quest. IV.
DOES this infallible assurance, belong to the essence of Faith?

No.

May a true Believer wait long and conflict with many difficulties, before he
be partaker of it?

Yes. 1 John 5. 13. Isai. 50. 10. Mark 9. 24. Psalm 88 throughout. Psalm 77, to
the 12. verse.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, That the assurance of
Salvation, is Faith it self? And that Faith is nothing else, but the Eho of the
Soul, answering the holy Spirit, my sins are forgiven me?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the sealing of the Holy Spirit which is the Earnest of our
inheritance, is given to Believers, after they have believed; Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
(2) Because, Believers may sometimes not know, that they have eternal life; 1
John 5. 13. And he that fears the Lord, obeying the voice of his servant, may
walk in darkness; Isaiah 50. 10. (3) Because, if this assurance, which takes
away all doubting, (as the Antinomians affirm) were of the Essence of faith,
there should not be any degrees of faith, which is contrary to Mark 9. 24.
Matthew. 8. 10. Matthew. 15. 28. (4) Because, there are evident examples in
Scripture, from the Experience of the Saints; as that of faithful Heman, who
thus complained; Psalm 88. Why casts thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy
face from me? And of faithful Asaph, under very sad exercise; Psalm. 77. to the
10 verse.

Quest. V.
DOES this assurance of Salvation, incline men to looseness?

No. 1 John 2. 1, 2. Rom: 8: 1, 12: 1 John 3: 2, 3: 1 John 1: 6, 7: Rom: 6: 1,
2: Titus 2: 11: 12, 14: 2 Cor: 7: 1:

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, That the Doctrine of
Assurance of Salvation, is, of its own nature, hurtful to true Piety, and
inclines men to sin and wickedness?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because; the Apostle Peter argues the contrary way, and infers a far other
conclusion; namely, because Believers know, they are redeemed, by the precious
blood of Christ, they ought to pass, the time of their sojourning here in fear;
1 Peter 1. 17, 18, 19. (2) Because, the Apostle Paul, who was certainly
persuaded of his interest in Christ, rejects, and abominats that conclusion,
with indignation, and wrath; Romans 6. 1, 2. (3) Because, from the promise that
God is the Father of Believers, the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians, by
consequence, to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh, and
Spirit, and to perfect holiness. in the fear of God; 2 Cor. 7. 1. (4) Because,
they who are in Christ, (to whom there is no condemnation, and are assured of
it) walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; Romans 8. 1. 12, 38, 39. (5)
Because, a Believer knowing God to be merciful, concludes that God ought to be
feared; Psalm 130. 4. (6) Because, whosoever has that hope (namely that he
shall see Christ, and be made like unto him) he purifies himself, as he is
pure; 1 John 3. 3. (7) Because, it is evident from the example of those, who
were persuaded of their salvation, who yet lived piously, and holily. As Paul;
Romans 8. 38, 39. compared with 2 Cor. 1. 12. Acts 24. 16. Next, we have the
example of Abraham; Genesis 17. 1. compared with Romans 4. 18, 19, 20.

Quest: VI:
ARE true Believers, when they fall into some special sin which wounds the
Conscience, and grieveth the Spirit, destitute of the seed of GOD, and life of
Faith?

No. 2 John 3: 9: Luke 22: 32:

Well then, do not the Quakers and others err, who maintain, That true
Believers falling into some special sin, can have nothing of the life of faith,
and seed of GOD in them?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God; 1 John 3. 9.
For his seed remains in him; that is, does not totally perish, but abides
thenceforeward; working the fruits of regeneration, once begun in them; Phil.
1. 6. (2) Because, although Peter fell into that grievous sin of denying his
Master thrice, yet he still retained, that seed of God, and life of Faith, and
love to Christ; because Christ had said to him, I have prayed for thee that thy
Faith fail not; Luke 22. 32. The like may be said of David, and others of the
Saints of GOD, who by falling into some special sins, have wounded the
Conscience, and grieved the holy Spirit.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of GOD.
Question I.
DID GOD give to Adam a Law as a Covenant of Works, by which he bound him and
all his Posterity, to Personal, Entire, Exact, and Perpetual obedience?

Yes.

Did he promise life upon the fulfilling; and did he threatten death, upon the
breach of it?

Yes.

Was Adam endued with Power and Ability to keep it?

Yes. Gen: 1: 26, 27: Gen: 2: 17, Rom: 2: 14, 15: Rom: 5: 12, 19: Gal: 3: 10,
12: Eccl: 7: 29: Job 28: 28:

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, that God made no Covenant
with Adam in his integrity, in which he promised to him, and his posterity life
eternal?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From those places of Scripture, where the righteousness of the Law is
described; Lev. 18. 5. Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. Ezekiel. 20. 11. 13. Whosoever,
therefore keeps my Statutes and Judgments, says the Lord, shall live in
them. And to whom life is promised for ever, upon their perfect obedience, and
continuance in all things, written in the Book of the Law. And from those
places, in which death is threatened to them, that in the least transgress the
Law of God; Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. Ezekiel. 18. 4. (2) From the words of our
Savior, who spoke to the Young man, according to the Covenant of Works, in
which the Lord promises life eternal, to such as shall fulfill the Law; Matthew.
19. 17. Luke 10. 28. Observe, that Christ answers here, according to the
question, and opinion of this young man, who thought he was able to obtain
salvation, by his own good works: and therefore Christ directs him to the Law,
thereby to bring him to the acknowledgement, of his own imperfection, and
afterward to Faith, in himself. (3) Because, man was created by God, in
righteousness, holiness, and immortality, according to the similitude, and
image of God; Genesis 1. 26. Genesis 9. 6. Eccl. 7. 29. Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 9, 10.
And received from him, the Law of Nature, naturally engraven upon his heart;
Romans 2. 14. 15. And besides this Law, a positive Law was superadded to it, that
Adam should not eat of the Tree, of the Knowledge of Good, and Evil; that by
obeying the same, he might give a Specimen, or proof of his obedience to the
Law of Nature, in the perfect obedience whereof, so long as he should continue,
he should live for ever. For the Lord threatened death to him only, if he should
sin: and death is the wages of sin, which by sin entered into the world; Genesis
2. 17. Romans 6. 23. Romans 5. 12. 13. (4) From those places of Scripture, in which
it is denied, that believers, under the Covenant of Grace, are justified by the
Law; but by Faith, and the righteousness of Christ, manifested in the Gospel.
For that the Law is weak, powerless, or impotent, through the corruption of our
Nature, to justify us, and give us life; Romans 3. 20, 21, 28. Gal. 2. 16. Gal.
3. 10, 11, 12, 13. Phil. 3. 9. Romans 8. 2, 3.

Quest. II.
DO the first four Commandments contain our duty toward GOD, and the other
six, our duty toward man?

Yes. Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40.

Well then, do not the Papists, and Lutherians err, who maintain, that three
only belong to the First Table, and seven to the Second: and that, thou shall
not make unto thee any graven image with the foregoing, thou shall not have any
other Gods before me, are but one Command. And that, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors Wife, nor his
manservant, etc. are two distinct Commands? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the two first Precepts, command diverse things. The one teaches
us, who is to be worshipped, to wit, the true and living God, and no other. The
second instructs us, how he is to be worshipped, namely according to his own
appointment, and not according to the appointment, and pleasure of men, as by
Images and such like. (2) Because, it is one, and the same Concupiscence, which
is forbidden in the tenth Command, the sum whereof, Thou shall not covet, is
cited by the Apostle Paul; Romans 7. 7. and which is summarly expressed, in the
close of the tenth Command, nor any thing which is thy neighbors. (3) If the
tenth Command ought to be two, because these words, thou shall not covet, are
twice repeated, then would it follow, there should be as many Commands, as
there are things desired, forbidden: because it is evident, that these words
Thou shall not covet, are to be repeated with every part.

Quest. III.
ARE all the Ceremonial Laws now abrogated under the new Testament?

Yes. Col. 2. 14, 16, 17. Dan. 9. 27. Ephesians. 2, 15, 16.

Well then, do not the Judaisers err, who maintain, that all the Ceremonial
Laws remain in their former strength, and vigor, and are obliging to Believers
under the Gospel, and not abrogated, or disanulled by Christ?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ has abolished the Law of Commandments, contained in
ordinances, that he might gather together, both Jews, and Gentiles, into one
new man; Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Col. 2. 14. Note, that the Apostle here speaks of all
Believers, both of Jews, and Gentiles, as of one man: because, they being all
under Christ the Head, as members of one spiritual Body, are made up, as one
renewed man. (2) Because, the Apostle says, let no man judge you, in meat, or
in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the sabbath
days: all which are shaddows of things to come, but the body is of Christ;
Col. 2. 16, 17. This ver. is a conclusion of the Apostles foregoing discourse,
against Ceremonies, and things commanded by the Ceremonial Law, which by the
coming of Christ are abolished. He calls them in the 17 verse, a shadow of
things to come, but the body (says he) is of Christ. That is, the thing
signified is of Christ: for all the shaddows of the Old Testament, had respect
to Christ, and his benefits, by whose coming they also have an end; John 1.
17. Gal. 4. 3, 4, 5. (3) Because, the Apostle says, Believers are dead with
Christ, from the Rudiments of the World: that is, from the Ceremonial Commands;
as is evident from the Context. Why says he, as though living in the World, are
ye subject to ordinances? That is, as if your life, and happiness, consisted in
these outward worldly principles: but suffer your selves to be burdened, by
such Teachers, with humane institutions, and ordinances. The Apostle indeed; in
these last words, is reasoning against the institutions, and ordinances of men,
from this Medium, which is an argument from the greater, to the lesser: if ye
be dead with Christ from the Ceremonies of the Law instituted in the Old
Testament, by God himself, much more are ye free, from the institutions, and
ordinances of men, which are only grounded upon their own good pleasure; Col.
2. 20, 21. Gal. 4. 10, 11. (4) Because, the Apostle affirms, that the
Observation, and useing of Circumcision, cannot consist, with true Faith in
Christ, now after the Gospel is fully published. And he exhorts the Galatians
to abide in their liberty purchased by Christ, and not to submit themselves, to
the yoke of Mosaical Ceremonies; Gal. 5. 1, 2. (5) Because, those Teachers, who
pressed the believing Gentiles to be circumcised, and to observe the Law of
Moses, (I mean the Ceremonial Law,) were condemned by the Council of Apostles;
Acts 15. 24. (6) Because, Ceremonial Commands, are neither of the Law of
Nature, nor are they enjoined to Believers under the Gospel as things Moral.
(7) Because, these appointed Ceremonies, were figures only of things to come,
imposed on the Jews, until the time of Reformation; but taken away by Christ;
Heb. 9. 9, 10, 11, 12. and Heb. 10. 9. Where it is said, he takes away the
first, namely all sorts of Propitiatory Offerings which were used in the Old
Testament, to settle the second, namely his obedience to the will of his
Father. (8) Because, they were given to the Israelites, to foresignifie, and
represent Christ, and his death, and to be marks of difference between them,
and the unbelieving Nations; Col. 2. 17. Ephesians. 2. 14. Where it is said, who has
made both these, namly Jews, and Gentiles, one: and has broken down, the
middle wall of partition, whereby the Ceremonial Law is understood, which made
a difference between the Jews, and the Gentiles. Now, since Christ has
suffered death, and the Gentiles are called, all these Ceremonies, which did
foresignifie his death, and made that difference, must of necessity cease. (9)
Because, the Temple of Jerusalem, to which the Ceremonies were restricted, is
destroyed, and could never since be rebuilded.

Quest. IV.
DId the Lord by Moses give to the Jews, as a Body Politic, sundry Judicial
Laws, which expired together with their state?

Yes.

Do they oblige any other now, further than the general equity thereof may
require.

No. Exodus 21. from the first to the last ver. Exodus 22. 1. to verse 29. Genesis
49. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9, 10. 1 Peter 2. 13. 14. Matthew. 5. 17. 38. 39.

Well then, do not some err, though otherwise Orthodox, who maintain, that the
whole Judicial Law of the Jews; is yet alive, and binding all of us, who are
Christian Gentiles?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Judicial Law, was delivered by Moses to the Israelites to be
observed, as to a Body Politic; Exodus 21 chapter. (2) Because, this Law, in
many things, which are of particular right, was accommodated, to the
Commonwealth of the Jews, and not to other Nations also; Exodus 22. 3. Exodus
21. 2. Lev. 25. 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 24. 1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 25. 5, 6, 7. (3) Because, in
other things, which are not of particular right, it is neither from the Law of
Nature, obliging by Reason; neither is it pressed upon Believers under the
Gospel, to be observed. (4) Because, Believers are appointed under the Gospel
to obey the civil Laws, and commands of those under whose Government they live,
providing they be just, and that for Conscience sake. Romans 13. 1. 1 Peter 2.
13, 14. Titus 3. 1.

Quest. V.
DOES the Moral Law for ever bind, as well justified persons as others, to the
obedience thereof, and that not only in regard of the matter contained in it,
but also in respect of the Authority of God, who gave it?

Yes. Romans 13. 8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 6. 2. 1 John 2. 3, 4, 7, 8. James 2. 10. 11.

Well then, do not the Antinomians err, who maintain, that Believers under the
Gospel are not obliged to the obedience of the Moral Law?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ says, he came not to destroy the Law, and the Prophets;
that is, to alter, or disannul the doctrine of the Law, or of the Prophets;
Matthew. 5. 17. (2) Because, he says in the following verse; I say unto you, till
heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title, shall in no wise pass from the Law
till all be fulfilled; Matthew. 5. 18. (3) Because, whosoever, shall break, one of
these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in
the Kingdom of Heaven* that is, shall not at all be esteemed there, or shall
not enter thereinto, verse 19. (4) Because, that after the Apostle Paul, has
concluded the justification of Believers, to be of free Grace, he subjoines, Do
we then make void the Law, through faith, God forbid: yea we establish the Law;
Romans 3. 31. (5) Because, all the Precepts of the Moral Law, belong to the Law
of Nature, naturally engraven, upon the hearts of men, which cannot be
abrogated, but oblige all men perpetually, and necessarly from Natural Reason
it self; Romans 2. 15. (6) Because, all the Precepts of the Moral Law, are
repeated in the Gospel and enjoined to all Believers by Christ; Matthew. 19. 17,
18, 19, 20. Romans 2. 13. (7) Because, Paul adjoyneth, and proposes to Believers
under the New Testament, both a command, and a promise of the Decalogue, as
properly belonging to them; Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. (8) Because, the Apostle James
sets forth to Believers the moral law, as a Rule of life, which they are
obliged to observe, and by breaking of which they are convinced of sins; James
2. 8, 9, 11. (9) Because, whosoever commits any sin against the Moral Law,
shall never enter into the kingdom of God: 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 21. (10)
Because, this Tenet of the Antinomians, turns the Grace of God into wantonness;
overturneth the end of Christian liberty, and of the coming, and death of
Christ, and paveth a way leading to all impiety, and the indulging of the lusts
of the flesh, and fostering the Dominion of sin, contrary to these Scriptures;
Jude verse fourth 1 John 2. 16. 2 Peter 2. 18, 19, 20. Romans 6. 14, 15, 16. Luke
1. 74, 75. Tit. 2. 11. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 9. Romans 6. 21. 22, 23. (11) Because,
Believers ought to study good works Titus 3. 8, to which they are created in
Christ, that they should walk in them; Ephesians. 2. 10. (12) Because, Christ will
render to every man, at his last coming, both to the good, and the bad,
according to their works; Rev. 22. 12. Matthew. 25. 34, 35, 41, 42.

Quest. VI.
ARE true Believers under the Law, as a Covenant of Works, to be thereby
justified, or condemned*

No. Romans 6. 14. Gal. 2. 16. Gal. 3. 13. Gal. 4. 4, 5. Acts 13. 39. Romans 8. 1.

Well then, do not the Papists and Socinians err, who maintain, that Believers
under the Gospel, are justified, by their obedience to the Law of God (the Law
(I say) either Moral, or Evangelical) and condemned for the transgression
thereof? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, by the Law is the knowledge of sin; Romans 3. 20. (2) Because, for
as many, as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse; Gal. 3. 10. (3)
Because, there is not a Law given, which could have given life to fallen man;
Gal. 3. 21. (4) Because, Christ is not dead in vain: for if righteousness be by
the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, that is, without cause, reason, need, or
fruit; Gal. 2. 21. see John. 15. 25. (5) Because, it was promised by God, about
430 years before the promulgation of the Law, that all the Nations of the earth
should be blessed in the seed of Abraham; Genesis 22. 18. Genesis 12. 3. with Gal. 3.
16, 17, 18. (6) Because, Christ is become of no effect, to them, that are
justified by the Law: they are fallen from Grace; Gal. 5. 4, (7) Because,
Believers ought to wait, through the Spirit, for the hope of righteousness by
Faith; Gal. 5. 5. (8) Because, the Apostle (though a strick Observer of the
law) counted all his works but loss, and dung, that he might be found in
Christ, not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which
is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith;
Phil. 3. 8, 9. (9) Because, Christ is made of God to Believers righteousness; 1
Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21. (10) Because, they that seek righteousness, not by
Faith, but by their works, do not attain to it. And contrariwise, they that
seek their righteousness, by Faith, and not by their works, do attain to it;
Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. (11) Because, Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness, to every one that believes; Romans 10. 4. (12) Because, the
justification of men under the Law, or Covenant of works is by the law and by
the works of the law: but the justification of men under Grace, or the Covenant
of Grace, is by Faith; Romans 10. 5, 6, 8, 9. 10. Gal. 3. 11, 12. Lev. 18. 5. But
Believers now are not under the Law, or the Covenant of works, but under Grace,
or the Covenant of Grace, Romans 6. 14, 15. Gal. 5. 18. (13) Because, Believers
under the New, and Old Testament, are saved by the Grace of Jesus Christ, and
not by the Law, Whose yoke none were able to bear. That is, none were able
perfectly to keep, nor to be justified thereby; Acts 15. 10, 11. (14) Because,
whosoever transgresses the Law, in the least, is under the curse of it; Gal.
3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. And deserves death, and a curse; Romans 6. 23. Ezekiel. 18. 4,
20. But all men, even the Regenerate sin daily, and transgress the Law of God,
and so are guilty of all; Iam. 1. 13, compared with James 2. 10, and with 1
John 1. 8. (15) Because, Good works, do not go before justification, but follow
after it; Titus 1. 15. Heb. 11. 6. Romans 14. 23. Romans 3. 9, 10, 23. (16)
Because, the righteousness of God, which is by Faith in Jesus Christ, is
manifested unto all, and upon all by Moses and the Prophets. For all the
Apostles do witness, that whosover believes in Jesus Christ, shall have
remission of sins; Romans 3. 21, 24, 25. Acts. 10. 43. (17) Because,
Justification is from the free Grace of God; Romans 3. 24. Not by the Works of
the Law, otherwise Grace, should be no more Grace; nor work any more work; Romans
11. 6. (18) Because, the good works of Believers are unclean, and defiled; Isa.
64. 6. Gal. 5. 17. (19) Because, it is said, by the Spirit of God, the just
shall live by Faith; Hab. 2. 4. Gal. 3. 11. (20) Because, it is written, that
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness; Genesis 15. 6.
Romans 4. 3. But to him that works not, but believes on him, that justifies
the ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness; Romans 4. 5. (21) Because,
believers must not glory in themselves, but in God only; Romans 4. 2. Romans 3. 27.
(22) Because, by the obedience of ONE, many shall be made righteous, as was
foretold, by the Prophet; Isaiah 53. 11. And is asserted by Paul; Romans 5. 17.
(23) Because, Justification by Faith, and not by Works, is expressly taught, at
large by the Apostle, in that third to the Romans, and third to the Galatians.

CHAP. XX. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience.
Question I.
IS GOD alone Lord of the Conscience, and has left it free from the Doctrines,
and Commandments of men, which are in any thing contrary to to his Word, or
beside it, in matters of Faith, or worship?

Yes. Iam. 4. 12. Acts 4. 19. Acts 5. 29. Matthew. 23. 8, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 1. 24.
Matthew. 15. 9.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who contradict this, both in doctrine
(because they teach, that the Pope of Rome, and Bishops in their own Diocesses,
may by their own authority, praeter Scripturam, beside the Word, make Laws,
which oblige and bind the Conscience, under the pain of everlasting death) and
in practice (because, they have obtruded, and do obtrude, many Ecclesiastical
Rites and Ceremonies, as necessary in worship, without any foundation in
Scripture.)

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, there is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy;
James 4. 12. Therefore no Pope, no Prelate, nor any mere man, can be a
Lawgiver. (2) Because, Christ rejects the Commandments of men, from the
worship of God; Matthew. 15. 9. (3) Because, the Apostles refused, to obey the
orders of the Council, since they were contrary to the Commands of God; Acts 4.
19. Acts 5. 29. (4) because, the Lord threatens to do a mavelous work among
his people, because they drew near to him with their mouth (as the most part of
the Ceremonial service, is but a drawing near to God with the mouth,) but had
their hearts removed far from him; Isaiah 29. 13, 14. (5) Because, Christ
expressly forbids such subjection and obedience to the Commands of men; Matthew.
23. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 7. 23. (6) because, the Apostles themselves forbids all
will worship, such as the Popish Ceremonies are; Col. 2. 18, 21, 22, 23. (8)
Because, the Apostle Paul, withstood these false Brethren, unawars brought in,
who came in privily, to spy out his liberty, which he had in Christ Jesus,
that they might bring him into bondage, to whom he gave place by subjection, no
not for an hour; that the truth of the Gospel, might continue: where he lays so
much weight upon Christian liberty; that, if that were taken away, the truth of
the Gospel, would perish likewise; Gal. 2. 4, 5. (9) Because, the Apostle
commands Believers, to stand fast in their liberty, wherewith Christ has made
them free, and not to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage; Gal. 5. 1.
(10) Because Ceremonies are superstitious, being a vice opposite to Religion in
the excess, commanding more in the Worship of God, than he requires in his
Worship.

Quest. II.
IS not the requiring of an implicit Faith, and an absolute, and blind
obedience, to the Church, or any Man, a destroying of liberty of Conscience,
and Reason also?

Yes. Romans 10. 17. Romans 14. 23. Isaiah 8. 20. Acts 17. 11. John 4. 22. Hos. 5.
11. Rev. 13. 12, 16, 17. Ier. 8. 9.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who require, an Implicit Faith, to all the
Decrees and Ordinances of their Church and Pope: and a blind obedience to their
commands without a previous judgment of discretion?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, no man performing any duty, out of blind obedience, can be
persuaded in his mind, of the will of God therein: and so he that doubts is
damned, because it is not of Faith; Romans 14. 23. (2) Because, all things must
be examined, and proven by the Rule of the Word; Isaiah 8. 20. 1 John 4. 1, 2.
(3) Because, the Apostle says, prove all things and hold fast that which is
good; 1 These. 5. 21. (4) Because, blind obedience makes us the servants of Men,
which is contrary to 1 Cor. 7. 23. And against the command of Christ,
forbidding us to call any man Father on earth; Matthew. 23. 9. (5) Because,
absolute obedience, is only due to God, whose commands are all most just:
himself being the alone Lawgiver; James 4. 12. (6) Because, every man ought to
be ready to render a reason of the hope which is in him; 1 Peter 3. 15. This no
man can do, who receives the Commands of Superiors, with an Implicit Faith.

Quest. III.
DO they, who upon pretense of Christian Liberty, practice any sin, or cherish
any lust, destroy thereby, the end of Christian Liberty?

Yes. Gal. 5. 13. 1 Peter 2. 16. 2 Peter 2. 19. John 8. 34. Luke 1. 74, 75.

Well then, do not the Libertines err, who maintain, that the true Christian
Liberty, which we ought to follow, and use, is to take away all difference,
between Good and Evil: to esteem nothing of sin; nor to be touched with any
Conscience, or sense of it: that every man ought to follow the swing of his own
lust?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Antinomians err, who maintain, almost the same very Tenet,
and opinion?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, we being called to liberty, ought not to use our liberty, for an
occasion of the flesh; Gal. 5. 13: And that with well doing, we ought to put to
silence, the ignorance of foolish men; 1 Peter 2: 15: (2) Because, they that
follow, the liberty of sinning, and promise liberty to others, are truly the
servants of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage: 2 Peter 2: 19. (3) Because, the end of that liberty, which
is purchased by Christ, is that, being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, we might serve him without fear, in holiness, and righteousness, all
the days of our life; Luke 1 74, 75: (4) Because, whosoever commits sin, is
the servant of sin; John 8: 34: (5) Because, the Moral Law obliges Believers
to perform obedience, out of gratitude, and thankfulness: for Christ came not
to destroy the Law but to fulfill it; Matthew: 5: 17: (6) Because, whosoever shall
break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be
called the least in the kingdom of Heaven; Matthew. 5. 19:

Quest: IV:
MAY such men be lawfully called to an account, and proceeded against, by the
Censures of the Church, and by the power of the Civil Magistrate, who publish
such opinions, or maintain such practices, as are contrary to the Light of
Nature, or to the known principles of Christianity, whether concerning Faith,
Worship, or Conversation, or to the power of Godliness, or such erroneous
opinions, and practices, as either in their own Nature, or in the manner of
publishing, or maintaining them, are destructive to the external peace, and
order, which Christ has established in his Church?

Yes. 1 Cor. 5, 1, 5, 11. 13, 2 John v: 10, 11: 1 Timothy 6: 3, 4: Titus 1: 10,
11, 13: Titus 3: 10. 1 Timothy 1: 19, 20: Matthew: 18: 15, 16, 17: Rev: 2: 2, 14,
15, 20: Rev: 3: 9:

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who maintain, there should be no
Ecclesiastical Censures?

Yes.

Do not others also err, who maintain, that Church Censures, should not be
inflicted upon Heretics?

Yes.

Do not lastly the Lutherians, Anabaptists, Arminians, Quakers, and all sort of
Heretics, and Sectaries err, who maintain, (under the pretext of Christian
Liberty) that the Civil Magistrate, is not obliged in duty, to punish any man
with the sword, for errors in doctrine, but that they ought to be tolerated,
and suffered, providing such persons as own them, do not trouble, or molest the
Commonwealth!

Yes:

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, are for this end delivered to
the Ministers of the Church, that with Censures, they may pursue Scandalous,
and offending Persons, who will not obey admonition; Matthew. 18. 15, 17, 18. But
such also are Heretics; Gal. 5. 20. Tit. 1. 10. 12. (2) Because an Heretic
after the first and second admonition, is to be rejected, avoided, or shuned.
That is, let him not remain in the external Communion, of the Church; Titus 3.
10. (3) Because, Paul did excommunicat Hymeneus, and Alexander, who had made
shipwreck of the Faith; 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. (4) Because, if any man obey not our
Word, by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may
be ashamed; 2 These. 3. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. Titus 1. 11: (5) Because, Christ
approves, and commends the Pastors of the Church of Ephesus, because they could
not suffer them, that are evil, but had tried them, which say they are
Apostles, and were not, and had found them Liars; Rev. 2. 2. And Christ in that
same chapter, accuses the Pastors of the Church of Pergamus, and Thyatira, and
threatens them, because they had suffered Heretics to be in the Church.

The Lutherians, Anabaptists, Arminians, and other Sectaries are confuted?

(1) Because, it is evident, from many examples of Godly Magistrates, who did
extirpat Idolatry, and inflict punishment upon Idolaters, as did Jacob the
Patriarch, who at least purged his family of strange Gods; Genesis 35. 2, 3, 4.
Moses likewise took punishment with the sword, upon those, who did worship the
Golden-Calf; Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28. We have (2) the examples of Hesekia; 2 Kings
18. 4. Of Iosia; 2 Kings 23. Of Asa, who decreed that whosoever would not seek
the Lord God of Israel (according to the law of God; Deuteronomy. 13. 9.) should be
put to death, whether small or great, whether man, or woman; 2 Chro. 15. 13. Of
Iehosaphat; 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. Of Nehemia 13. 15, 17. (3) Were not good kings
reproved, and was it not imputed to them, as a fault, that they did not take
away the High Places? 2 Kings 12. 3. 2 Kings 14. 4. 2 Kings 15. 4. 2 Chronicles. 15.
17. Far more is it a fault to suffer Heretics. (4) It is evident from the
office of the Magistrate, who is the Minister of God against them, that do evil,
and bears not the sword in vain: Romans 13. 3, 4. (5) Because, it is expressly
commanded in Scripture, that punishment be inflicted upon Idolaters, even by
the nearest Relations. If then, the Father may kill the Son, may kill the
Daughter, the Husband the Wife of his bosom: and if one brother may stone
another brother with stones, that he die, for being Idolaters; much more may
the Civil Magistrate do this; Deuteronomy. 13. 6. to the 13 verse; Deuteronomy. 17. 2. to the
7 verse; Lev. 24. 16. (6) Because, it is foretold, that under the New
Testament, Kings shall be nursing Fathers to the Church, and Queens nursing
Mothers, and that Heretics, that were about to be hurtful, to the Church,
shall be removed, and taken away; Isaiah 49. 23. Zech. 13. 2, 3. And it shall
come to pass, in that day says the Lord of hosts, that I will cut off the
names of the Idols, out of the land (that is, all Idolatry whatsoever, so that
the same shall not be so much as named, any more among you) and they shall no
more be remembered. And I will also cause the Prophets, (the false Prophets) and
the unclean Spirit, to pass out of the Land: that is, the false Teachers who
teach impure doctrines, through the inspiration of the unclean Spirit the
Devil. Compare with this 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. For confirmation, consider what is
foretold by John; Rev. 17. 12, 16, 17. That the Kings of the Earth, shall eat
the flesh of the Whore, and burn her with fire. All which are foretold, as
blessings to be confered upon the Church. (7) It is evident from the Epithets,
whereby the pernicious, and destructive nature of Heretics, is set forth in
Scripture. They are called Wolfes, not sparing the flock, Thieves, Robers,
Troublers of the Church, and Seducers, or Beguilers of poor souls. They are
like unto a Gangren, or Canker in the body. They are as leaven, or sour dough,
which leaveneth the whole lump; Acts 20. 29. John 10. 8. Acts 15. 24. Gal. 5.
12. 2 Timothy 2. 17. Gal. 5. 9. (8) Because, Ezra did esteem it, a great favor
and blessing of God, conferred upon the Church; for which he thanked God, that
had inclined the heart of Artaxerxes, to publish a Decree, for the punishment
of those, that did not observe the Law, whether it be, (says the Text) unto
death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment; Chap.
7. 23, 25, 28. (9) Because, we ought to pray for Kings, and all in Authority,
that under them, we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness, and
in Honesty, which end cannot be attained, unless the Civil Magistrate bridle and
ty up Heretics; 1 Timothy 2. 12. These words, in all Godliness, concerns
Religion. or the first Table of the Moral Law, as the following word honesty,
or civility, has a respect to the commands of the second Table, and the duties
which we owe to our neighbor, and to one another. For true Magistrates, are
keepers and defenders of both Tables of the ten Commandments. (10) Because, the
toleration of Heretics, as we may read of the Anabaptists in Germany, Thomas
Muntzer, John of Leidden, and their followers, first by railling against the
Ministry, as the Quakers do, and raging against Magistracy, brought both Church
and State into confusion, put the country into burning flames, wherein
themselves at length were consumed to Ashes.

CHAP. XXI. Of Religious Worship, and the Sabbath day.
Question I.
DOES the Light of Nature show, that there is a GOD, who has Lordship, and
Sovereignty over all?

Yes. Romans 1. 20. Acts 17. 24. Psalm 119 68. Ier. 10. 7. Psalm 31. 23.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, that there is no knowledge
of God, implanted naturally in the minds of men?

Yes.

Do not secondly, the Vaninians, and many of the Cartesians err, who under the
pretext of maintaining a Godhead, have in effect taught men to deny, there is
a God?

Yes.

Do not thirdly, some Bee-headed Men err, who dispute against the Being of a
Godhead, because they cannot find a Demonstration for it called Dihoti?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood, by the things which are made, even his eternal
power, and Godhead: so that they are without excuse; Romans 1. 20. (2) Because,
the Psalmist says, the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy work. That is, they give us matter and occasion to speak and
discourse of his Omnipotency, Wisdom, and Goodness; Psalm 19: 1, 2, 3. (3)
Because, the knowledge of the Law of Nature, is naturally implanted in the
minds of all men; Romans 2. 14. Therefore, some knowledge of the lawgiver, must
be implanted in the minds of all men. (4) Because, in the most wick ed, and
ungodly there are terrors and tortures of conscience, wherewith, nil they, will
they, they are haunted and possessed: whence it is evident, that in the minds
of all men, there is some lively knowledge of God. (5) Because, men had rather
worship a stock, or a stone, than they should think, there were no God; Acts
17. 23. (6) What a brave order, and comeliness, shines forth, with so much
wisdom, and power, in the government and preservation of things above and
below; that no man can be in doubt, but there must be a God, who rules and
preserves all those things. (7) Because, nothing can be the cause of it self:
because then, it should be both the Cause, and the Effect, both before and
after it self: therefore all things have their beginning, from one first and
supreme Cause, which is God. (8) Because, the existence of a Godhead, may be
evinced from the foretelling of things to come; Isaiah 41. 23. And as Cicero
says, si est divinatio, sunt Dii, if there be a foretelling, there must be also
a God that foretells. (9) From the assaults, and suggestions of Satan, we
find there is a devil, may we not then certainly conclude that there is a God?
The Devil labors by all means to extinguish the light of the Gospel, to lead
men on in ignorance, error, and prophanness, and to turn them out of the path
of holiness. Now, why should Satan thus war against God, his word, and his
Saints? Why should he seek Gods dishonor, and man's destruction, if there were
not a God, a Law, and an everlasting life? (10) Because, the mind of man is not
satisfied with the knowledge of all things; nor the will of man, with the
enjoyment of all things in this world, but still they seek and thirst
earnestly, after some higher good. There is therefore, a sovereign* Truth, and
Chief Good, which being perfectly known, and enjoyed, will give contentment,
and satisfaction, to the Soul. In vain should the Powers, and Faculties of the
Soul, be capable of happiness, or of the Chief Good; if there were not a Chief
Good to be possessed, and enjoyed. (11) From the wonders, and miracles, which
have been wrought, visible, and apparent works, extraordinarly wrought, not
only above the ordinary course of Nature, but simply above the power of Nature.
These effects do convince, that there is an infinite power, which is above, and
overruleth all things. For every principal, and primary cause, is more
excellent, than the effects thereof. (12) From the being of man, the curious
workmanship of his body in the womb, which is wrought most artificially; namely
with sinews, veins, arteries, muscels* and other parts of the body, even as an
Embroiderer sits, and joyneth many parcels* stuff, and dyed work of various
colors, very artificially, and curiously together, until there comes forth
some goodly Pourtraiture, or other dainty workmanship; Psalm. 139. 15. Job 10.
10. But especially from the being of a man's soul, which is immaterial,
invisible, rational, immortal, and which cannot be ^ traduce, from the power of
the matter (as the sensitive souls of Bruits) neither does depend on the body
in many of its operations. These, and all the works, which our eye does see, or
the mind does apprehend do prove, that there is a God, who has given a Being
to them, and continues them therein. (13) Because, seeing God is the the first
cause, there cannot be any thing Prior to him, by which, as a cause, his
existence can be Demonstrated.

Quest. II.
IS the acceptable way of worshipping the true GOD, instituted by himself, and
so limited to his own revealed Will, that he may not be worshipped according to
the imaginations and devices of men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any
visible representation, or any other way not prescribed in the holy Scripture?

Yes. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Matthew. 15. 9. Acts 17. 25. Col. 2. 23. Exodus 20. 4, 5, 6.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who teach that the Images of Christ, and
the Trinity ought to be worshipped, and that not improperly, but even properly,
and Per se, with that same sort of worship, wherewith Christ, and the blessed
Trinity are adored?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Greeks err, who maintain, that the painted Images of God,
may be adored, but not the engraven, or carved images of God?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, it is expressly against the second command; Exodus 20. 4, 5. (2)
Because, God is infinite, unmeasurable, incomprehensible, and spiritual: and
therefore nothing can represent him, as the Prophet well infers; Isaiah 40. 18,
25. (3) Because, every representation of God, by graven images, or pictures, is
a most disgraceful changing of the glory of the incorruptible God; Romans 1. 23.
(4) Because, images, and pictures of this kind, are lies and vanities, which
the Lord abhores, and mocks at with an holy scorn; Isaiah 44. from verse 9. to
18. (5) Because, the Lord expressly forbids the Israelites to represent him
under any form or shape, for (says the Text) ye saw no manner of similitude,
on the day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire;
Deuteronomy. 4. 15. to verse 20. (6) Because, though the Israelites worshipped the
true God, by an image (for Aaron built an Alter, and made proclamation, and
said, to morrow is a feast to the Lord) yet are they accused of the sin of
idolatry, and for that cause severely punished; Exodus 32. 21, 27: 35 (7)
Because, Jeroboam, and the ten Tribes, who worshipped the true God, by the
Golden-Calves, set up at Dan and Bethel (for the worship of false gods by
images, was afterward brought in by Achab, who is therefore said to have
provoked the Lord more than all the Kings of Israel before him; 1 Kin: 16: 31,
32.) are accused for the sin of Idolatry, and are severely threatened; 1 King.
12. 29, 30. and 1 Kings 13. 2. which threatening was put in execution by Josiah;
2 Kings 23. 15, 16, 20. (8) Because, the Apostle says, we ought not to think
that the Godhead, is like unto Gold or Silver, or Stone graven by art and man's
device; Acts 17. 29.

Quest. III.
IS Religious worship to be given to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
to him alone?

Yes.

Is Religious worship, to be given to Angels, Saints, or any other Creature?

No. Matthew, 4. 10. John 8. 49. 2. Cor. 13. 14. John 5. 23. Col. 2. 18. Rev. 19.
10. Romans 1. 25.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that not only God, but good
Angels, and Saints departed, being Canonized by the Pope, ought to be
worshipped, and called upon, even after a religious manner: but chiefly the
Virgin Mary, and that there is a Divine Power in the Relics of Saints, which
therefore ought to be worshipped?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Lord our God, and he only is to be worshipped; Matthew. 4. 10.
Deuteronomy 6. 13. (2) Because, the Object of invocation, and religious Adoration, is
he only who is Omnipotent, Omniscient, and searcher of the heart. For there is
none that knows our necessities and wants, but he that is Omniscient: and none
can succor and help us, but he that is Omnipotent. But Angels are not
Omniscient; Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Peter 1. 12. Neither are the Saints departed
Omniscient, as is clear from Isa. 63. 16. Abraham is ignorant of us. (3)
Because, they that are dead, know nothing of our condition; Eccl. 9. 5. (4)
Because, no man ought to call upon him, in whom he does not believe; Romans 10.
14. But no man ought to believe in Saints, or Angels, but in God alone; Isaiah
26. 4. Ier. 17. 5. (5) Because, neither Saints alive, nor Angels would suffer
adoration, and worship to be given to themselves; Acts 10. 25. Rev. 22. 8, 9.
(6) Because, the worshipping of Angels does derogate from the honor of Christ,
in whom we have boldness, and access with confidence by the faith of him, Ephesians.
3. 12. (7) Because, the worshipping of Saints and Angels, is like a
Polytheismus, the having of many Gods. For the Papists attribute to each one of
their Saints, and Angels, a proper divine power, as the Heathens did of old, to
their Idols, and false gods.

Quest. IV.
IS any Religious worship given to God, since the fall, without a Mediator?

No.

Nor in the mediation of any other, but of Christ alone?

No. John 14. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Ephesians. 2. 18. Col. 3. 17.

Well then, does not the Popish Church err, who maintain, that Saints departed,
but chiefly the Virgin Mary are Mediators and Intercessors between God and Man?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Scripture affirms expressly, that there is but one Mediator
between God and Man, namely the Man Jesus Christ; 1 Timothy 2. 5. (2) Because, no
man comes to the Father, but by Christ; John 14. 6. And by him, we have access
to the Father; Ephesians: 2. 18. (3) Because, the Scripture promises that they shall
be heard, that in the name of Christ, seek such things, as are according to the
will of God: but there is no promise in all the Word, that they shall be heard
that pray to Saints or Angels; John 14. 13, 14. 1 John 5. 14. (4) Because, the
Apostle says, whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, not in the name of Saints; Col. 3. 17. (5) Because, Christ who is called
the propitiation for our sins, is also called our Advocate with the Father; 1
John 2. 1, 2. (6) Because, Mediation is a part of the Priestly office of
Christ, which is only proper to himself; and which cannot be divided, between
him and the Saints. (7) Because, the Saints are not to be called upon, as was
proven in the foregoing Question.

Quest. V.
IS prayer with thanksgiving, one special part of Gods worship, required by God
of all men?

Yes. Phil. 4. 6. Psalm. 65. 2.

Well then, do not the Adamites, and others long since err, who denied, that
God was to be called upon. For (say they) God is Omniscient, and bestows all
things upon us freely without our prayers?

Yes.

Do not likewise some late Heretics err, who maintain, that unregenerate men
ought not to call upon God?

Yes.

Do not also the Quakers err, who will not move, in the commanded duties of
prayer, and thanksgiving, unless there be some inward call, and motion on their
Spirit?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, there are extant many universal precepts in the Word, by which
the duty of prayer is commanded; Phil. 4. 6. 1 These. 5. 17. John 16. 24. Matthew.
7. 7. (2) Because, God is the hearer of prayer, and to him shall all flesh
come; Psalm. 65. 2. (3) We have the example of David; Psalm 55. 17. Of Daniel,
chapter 6. 10. The example of those many, who were gathered together, praying
in the behalf of the Apostle Peter; Acts 12. 12. The example of Christ himself;
John 17. chapter. (4) Because, the Apostle Paul, bids Simon Magus, who was in
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, to repent and call upon God; Acts
8. 22. As to the Quakers, what assurance can they have the next hour, or the
next day, more than now, of the Spirits moving on their souls? And are we not
commanded to pray without ceasing; 1 These. 5. 17. That is, upon all
opportunities, and in all our necessities.

Quest. VI.
IF Prayer be Vocal, ought it to be in a known tongue?

Yes. 1 Cor. 14. 14.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that it is not needful, that
public prayers be in a known tongue; but that it is oftentimes expedient,
that prayers be performed, in a tongue-unknown to the Common People?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Apostle teaches expressly the contrary; 1 Cor. 14. 9, 12. (2)
Because, prayers celebrated in an unknown tongue, are not for edification? 1
Cor. 14. 14. (3) Because, he that occupies the room of the unlearned (that is,
who understands not strange tongues) cannot say Amen; 1 Cor. 14. 16. (4)
Because, the Lords prayer which is the special Rule of all our prayers, was
prescribed in a tongue, at that time best known.

Quest. VII.
MAY we pray for the dead, or for those of whom it may be known, that they have
sinned, the sin unto death?

No. 2 Samuel 12. 21, 22, 23. Luke 16. 25, 26. Rev. 14. 13. 1 John 5. 16.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that prayers, alms, and
masses ought to be appointed, and made for souls departed, as these, which will
really profit them?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Dead are either happy; and so they need not our prayers; Rev.
14. 13. Or they are damned, and so our prayers cannot profit them: for out of
hell there is no redemption; Luke 16. 26. (2) Because, we read that David
mourned, and fasted for the Child, so long, as it was alive: but when once the
Child was removed by death, wherefore (says he) should I fast? can I bring him
back again? 2 Samuel 12. 22, 23. (3) Because, all our requests, and prayers are
either founded upon a precept, or promise of God, to hear our prayers. But
there is neither a promise that God will hear us, in order to the dead, nor a
command to pray for them. (4) Because, we are altogether ignorant of the state,
and condition of the dead: and therefore we cannot pray for them in Faith; Romans
14. 23.

Quest. VIII.
IS the reading of the Scriptures, with Godly fear, the sound preaching, and
comfortable hearing of the Word, in obedience to God, with understanding,
faith, and Reverence, are they (I say) parts of the ordinary Religious worship
of God?

Yes.

Are these with the due administration of the Sacraments, to wit, Baptism and
the Lords Supper; to continue in the Church of God, till the end of the world,
and the day of Christ?

Yes. Acts 15. 21. Rev. 1, 3. 2 Timothy 4. 2. Mat. 13. 19. James 1. 22. Heb. 4. 2.
Isaiah 66. 2. Acts 10. 33.

Well then, do not the Enthusiasts, Libertines, Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries err, who under a pretext, of being inspired by the Holy Ghost, that
teaches them all things, despise and contemn all reading of the Scripture, and
public hearing of the Word preached?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Quakers err, who are downright enemies, to all the
public ordinances, which Christ has appointed to continue in his Church to
the end of the world?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ commanded his Apostles, and in them, all the Ministers of
the Gospel, to whom he has promised his presence, to the end of the World, to
teach all Nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature; Matthew. 28. 19.
Mark 16. 15. (2) Because, the public preaching of the Word, by a Minister
sent, and called, and the hearing of it, is a mean ordained, and appointed by
God, and according to the ordinary manner, necessary for begetting Faith; and
therefore needful to salvation; Romans 10. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 1. 21. (3) Because, God
has promised to his Covenanted ones, to bring them to his holy mountain, and
make them joyful in his house of prayer; that is, in the public meetings of
his Saints, and People; Isaiah. 56. 7. (4) From the example of those Believers;
Acts 2. 42. who continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine. (5) Because,
the word of God, is the perfect Rule of life and manners. And all Spirits, are
to be tried by it; 1 Timothy 3. 15. 1 John 4. 1. Isaiah 8. 20. Neither ought we to
follow, or hear any man, no not an Angel if he teach any thing contrary to the
Word, or Heterodox from it; 2 These. 2. 2. Gal. 1. 8. (6) Because, the Word of
God, is that incorruptible seed, by which we are born again; 1 Peter 1. 23. (7)
Because, God forbids expressly separations from public assemblies (I mean so
long as the Word is truly and purely taught, by those who enter in by the
right door, that is Christ, and the way appointed by him in his Word; John 10.
7, 8.) Heb. 10. 25. (8) Because, the Lord has joined together these two, his
faithful servants, for teaching his people publicly, and the promise of the
Spirit to guide them, and assist them in their work; Matthew. 28. 20 John 14. 16,
17, 26.

For confutation of the Quakers, two things must be made out: the one that the
office of the Ministry, is of divine institution.

(1) Because, God has particularly designed some persons to the work of the
Ministry. For if God appointed some persons to be judges over Israel, then must
the office of judgeing Israel be of divine institution. Christ appointed not
only Apostles, the seventy Disciples, Evangelists, Prophets, whose call and
gifts were extraordinary, but other ordinary Pastors, and Teachers, whose
Spirits were not infallible, whom the Scripture affirms to be as truly by
Divine institution* as the former; 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. (2) Because, GOD
has given peculiar names and titles, to the persons designed for this office,
which he has not given to other Saints. The only wise GOD will not
distinguish* where he himself has made no distinction* or difference. These
are called Pastors, Teachers, such as rule well, Stewards of the Mysteries of
GOD, Preachers, Bishops or Overseers of the Flock, Stars in Christ's right hand,
Angels of the Churches. Christ evidently puts a difference between the Churches
and the Angels, set over them; Rev. 2. 1, 8, 12, 18. Rev. 3. 17, 14. (3)
Because, the Lord has taken a special care to bestow peculiar gifts and
qualifications upon these persons, so designed for the Ministry; and that for
the good of the Souls of his People, above what is required in other Saints.
Would ever the Lord have bestowed such qualifications, if he had not appointed
some for such an Office? Though gifts as gifts do not alone invest into such an
office, yet when they are strictly required, they argue, that there is an
Office. They must be apt to teach others; 1 Timothy 3. 2. And not only so, but
able to teach others; able to convince them that oppose themselves; Titus 1. 9.
They must be such as study to show themselves approven unto GOD; workmen that
need not be ashamed; 2 Timothy 2. 15. And the Apostle in admiration of the
difficulty of this employment, cries out, Who is sufficient for these things?
2 Cor. 2. 16. (4) Because, the Lord requires peculiar duties of his Ministers,
which he does not require of Believers; therefore, there must be such a
distinct office, by divine institution. They must take special care of the
Church of GOD; 1 Timothy 3. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 2. 3. They are not to neglect the gift
which is in them; 1 Timothy 4. 14. They are to meditate on these things, and to
give themselves wholly to them; 1 Timothy 4. 15. Acts 6. 2. 4. They are to preach
the Word, to rebuke, to instruct gainsayers; 2 Timothy 4. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 25. To
administer the Sacraments; Matthew. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 13. To ordain others for
the Ministry, by imposition of hands; 1 Timothy 4. 14. To watch over the flock, as
those that must give an account; Heb. 13. 17. (5) Because, Christ requires
peculiar distinct duties in the people, in reference to their Ministers;
therefore the office of the Ministry must be of divine institution. They must
know and acknowledge those that are over them in the Lord; 1 These. 5. 12.
Highly to esteem them in love for their works sake; 1 These. 5. 13. To obey
them, to encourage them; Heb. 13. 7. To maintain them; Gal. 6. 6. To pray for
them; 2 These. 3. 1. (6) Because, GOD has made peculiar promises to his
Ministers; as, Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world; Matthew.
28. 20. The promise of special assistance; 2 Cor. 3. 5. 6. Of protection and
defense in all aslaults; Rev. 1. 20. The promise of the power of the keys,
which promise was not limited to the Apostles, as Apostles, but was given to
the Apostles, as Ministers of the Gospel, as is evident from Mat. 18. 17, 18.
The promise of special sympathy with them; Matthew. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. John 13.
20. 1 These. 4. 8. Now, would ever the Lord have promised to keep up, and
maintain that office in his Church which he had not set up and instituted.

The other thing to be made out, is that the office of the Ministry, is
perpetually necessary?

(1) Because, the ordinances are perpetually necessary, by divine institution:
therefore the office of the Ministry, to dispense these ordinances, is
perpetually necessary, by divine institution. For if God had only appointed the
ordinances, to continue in his Church, then would preaching, and administration
of the Sacraments fail: because, that which is every man's work, is usually and
effectually no man's work. The Lord does not immediately administer them himself:
neither are Angels employed for this work. But he has committed this service
to men, who are Stewards, and dispensers of the mysteries of God. It is evident
that the preaching of the Word, shall continue to the end of the world, from
Matthew. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4 11, 12, 13. It is evident of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, which are conjoined in the institution of Christ, with the Ministry of
the Word. For to whom, he gave commission to preach, to them also he gave
commission to administer the Sacraments. Baptism is an ordinance of the New
Testament, appointed by God himself. For John was sent to baptize. God was the
Author, John was only the Minister. This was to continue perpetually, as is
evident from Christ's promise, and his precept; Matthew. 28, 20. The ends for
which Baptism was ordained, are not temporary, but moral, and so perpetual. Do
not all Christians, now need these means as the Christians during the age of
the Apostles? Are not Christians to be baptized into his death, buried with him
by Baptism, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the Glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. It is called by the
holy Ghost, a saving Ordinance, and is unto believers, and their seed in the
New Testament, as the Ark was to Noah, and his family in the old World, who
being in the Ark, was saved from perishing in the waters, when the rest were
drowned: so Baptism does now save us, not only or mainly, the outward part of
it, the putting away the filth of the flesh, (which is yet an Ordinance to
further our salvation) but when the Spirit of Regeneration effectually concurs,
so that we find there is a renewing of the holy Ghost, and thereby the answer
of a good conscience toward God; 1 Pet. 3. 21. It is evident, that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to continue to the end of the world. It was
not only appointed for Apostles, to whom it was first administered, but unto all
believers, both Jews, and Gentiles. And not only for that age, but for all
generations succeeding, for Believers, are commanded, to show forth the Lords
death till he come, by eating this bread, and drinking this cup. Therefore, if
these ordinances, be appointed by God, to continue to the end, it follows
evidently, that he has designed the office of the Ministry to hold up, and
hold forth his Ordinances to the end of the world. (2) Because, the promises,
which Christ has made to uphold the Ministry, are perpetual; therefore the
office must be perpetual; Matthew. 28. 20. Go teach, and baptize all Nations, and
lo I am with you to the end of the world. This promise cannot be limited to the
particular age, during the lives of the Apostles; because the Holy Ghost, uses
three expressions, to declare the perpetuity of this promise, Aion, that this
promise, shall continue so long as the world continues. Secondly, Synteleia;
Heos tes synteleias tu Aionos, that this promise shall have no end, till the
world be consummat, or brought to a Period. Thirdly, Pasas tas Hemeras, all
days, and successions of times. Not only Meth hymon hemeras hymon, not only
with you, during your own days, but all the days of the Gospel, till time
shall be no more, And this promise was made not to the Apostles, as Apostles,
nor to the Apostles as Believers, but to the Apostles, as ministers and
Stewards, of the Mysteries of God. (3) Because, the Elect require, the office
of the Ministry perpetually. Our Natures are as bad, as Jews, and Pagans; Ephesians.
2: 3. Our judgments full of darkness, and ignorance; 1 Cor. 2. 14. Our wills
stuborn and rebellious, and so alienated, that we rebel against the light. The
delusions of Satan are strong. The multitude of false Teachers are very
numerous, so that they are ready to seduce the Elect themselves, if it were
possible. (4) Because, the ends for which Christ, has appointed a ministry are
perpetually necessary. The Elect must be called and gathered, for there will be
some still in every age, to be added to the Church, of them that shall be
saved. There are many sheep, which are not yet brought into his fold: many who
belong to the Election, who are not yet effectually called, them also will
Christ bring in, both Jews, and Gentiles, that there may be one fold, as there
is one shephers. Now, God has revealed no other ordinary way to convert, and
bring these into his fold, but the Ministry of his word; for how shall they
believe without a Preacher? Therefore, if there be some Elect, continually to
be brought into fellowship with Christ, and this end not fully attained, till
the end of the World, then the Ministry assigned to this end, must be
perpetually necessary.

Quest IX.
IS singing of Psalms with grace in the heart, a part of the ordinary worship
of God?

Yes. Col. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19. Iam. 5. 13.

Well then, do not the Quakers, and other Sectaries err, who are against the
singing of Psalms, or at least, ty it only to some certain persons, others
being excluded? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From the practice of Christ, and his Apostles; Matthew. 26. 30. From the
example of Paul and Silas; Acts 16. 25. From Moses, and the Israelites; Exodus
15. (2) Because, the singing of Psalms was commanded under the Old Testament,
and that, not as a Type of any substance to come, nor for any ceremonial cause.
Neither is it abrogated under the New Testament, but confirmed; Psalm 30. 4.
Psalm 149. 1. (3) From the general and universal commands in the New Testament;
Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 14. 15. (4) Because, the Apostle James says, is
any man afflicted, let him pray, is any man merry, let him sing Psalms; Chap.
5. 13. The meaning is not, that none should sing, but such as are merry: for
then none should pray but such as are afflicted. (5) Because, by singing of
Psalms, we glorify God, we make his praise glorious. We edify others with whom
we sing, as well, as we edify our selves. So the end to be proposed in singing,
is teaching and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
songs; Col. 3. 16. Lastly, we cheer and refresh our selves, by making melody in
our hearts to the Lord; Ephesians. 5. 19. Which arises first from our conscientious
going about it, as a piece of worship to God, and in so doing we are accepted
in that. Secondly from its being a part of Scripture, appointed for his praise,
whether it agree with our case or not. That being the end wherefore it was
designed to be sung, is a sufficient warrant for our joining in the singing
thereof.

Quest. X.
IS prayer, or any other part of Religious worship now under the Gospel, either
tied unto, or made more acceptable, by any place, in which it is performed, or
toward which it is directed?

No. John 4. 21. Mal. 1. 11. 1 Timothy 2. 8.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who consecrate Churches, and ascribe
holiness to them, and appoint Peregrinations to Christ's grave, and to other
places far off, where they mumble their preachings, and mutter their prayers?

Yes.

Do not likewise many ignorant persons err, who think their private prayers,
will be more acceptable to God, being said in the Kirk, than in their own
private Closet?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Lord says, by the mouth of his Prophet, that prayers shall be
offered up to him in all places, under the time of the Gospel: Mal. 1. 11. (2)
Because, Christ commands us when we pray, to enter into our Closet, and the
door being shut, to pray to our Father, which is in secret, least we should
seem to desire praise, and approbation from men: which rite and ceremony of
praying publicly, when we should pray privately, Christ clearly condemns,
Matthew. 6. 5, 6. (3) Because, Paul wills that men pray every where, lifting up
holy hands, without wrath and doubting; 1 Timothy 2. 8. (4) Because, Christ says
the hour comes, when we shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the Father; John 4. 21.

Quest. XI.
Has GOD in his Word, by a positive, moral, and perpetual Commandment, binding
all men in all ages, particularly appointed, one day in seven, for a Sabbath to
be kept holy unto himself?

Yes. Exodus 20. 8, 10, 11. Isaiah 56. 2, 4, 6, 7.

Well then, do not some men err, who maintain, that God has not under the
Gospel determined any certain day, for his own worship, but only has
commanded, that some indefinite time, be destined for public worship, which
time (say they) is left to be determined, by the Church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the determining of an ordinary and sufficient time, for divine
worship, and as a Sabbath, belongs to God only, and not to man. For we do not
read, that any such power or authority, is granted to man, either by the Law of
Nature, or Scripture. Is it not a thing of very great moment? Is it likely,
that the wisdom of God, would leave it uncertain? This might accuse the
Scripture of imperfection. It is not suitable to the love of God, and his care
toward his Church. By such men's doctrine, the Church Universal, and all
Oecumenick Councils, should be guilty of a dreadful sin, which for so many
ages, have been deficient in their duty. Therefore, it behooves that there be
one day of seven by virtue of the fourth Command, seeing no where else another
necessary day, is appointed, or prescribed in the Word. (2) Because, it is just
and equitable (as the adversaries grant) that one day should be set apart for
GOD, who has freely given us six. (3) Because, in six days, God made the
Heavens, and the Earth, and rested on the seventh: not out of necessity, but to
give us an example, to do the like. (4) Because, one day of ten, twenty, or
thirty, cannot be thought convenient. Neither is such a thing commanded, in any
place of Scripture. And would it not argue a neglect of divine worship, and the
care of souls, if one day of twenty, thirty, or forty were appointed? Neither,
can the fifth, fourth, or sixth day be appointed, seeing God has commanded us
to work six days. This would make our yoke more heavy than the Jewish yoke,
which the Adversaries will not grant. (5) Because, it is the principal, and
chief scope of the fourth Command, that one day of seven, in respect of us, be
set apart, and consecrated to divine worship. Not truly that some indefinite
time, be set apart. If this were true, the fourth Command, should differ
substantially, from the other Precepts of the Decalogue; and so there behoved
to be an useless Precept, or at least a Tautology ought to be committed.

Do not likewise the Anabaptists, Socinians, and Libertins err, with whom we
may take in the Quakers, ( and other Antisabbatarians, that disown the Sabbath,
as being carnal, and a Command of the Letter) who teach, that whatever is
contained in the fourth Command, is Ceremonial, and so properly, as to the
matter, and substance, which it holds out, abrogated wholly. And therefore (say
they) by virtue of this fourth Command there is no day to be set a part, for
public divine worship? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the fourth Command, which appoints one day of seven to be set
apart for God, is a positive, and moral Command, as to substance; seeing it was
given to Adam in his integrity, before ever there was need of any Types, and
Ceremonies shaddowing forth Christ; Genesis 2. 2, 3. (2) Because, it was repeated,
before the promulgation of the Ceremonial Law; Exodus 16. 23. Thirdly, because
it was written, with Gods own hand, and inserted into the midst of the rest of
the moral precepts, and was put into the Ark of the Testimony, with the other
nine, which honor, was never conferred upon any precept merely Ceremonial. (4)
Because, all the reasons of this Command, are entirely Moral. He rested after
six days, and allowed us six days to work, therefore in all equity we ought to
rest after so many days work, and give God a seventh. (5) Because, Christ
confirms this Command, in saying, pray that your flight be not in the winter,
neither on the Sabbath day, where the Lord insinuates that as traveling is
troublesome to the body in winter, so would it be to the minds of the Godly to
travel on that day, specially and solemnly set apart for Gods worship. Now, if
there were no sabbath to continue after Christ's ascension, or if it were not to
be sanctified, there would be no occasion of this grief and trouble, that they
behoved to travel on the Sabbath, and durst not tarry till that day were
bypast; and so no cause to put up this prayer which yet by our Lords
exhortation seems to infer that the Sabbath was to be as certain in its time,
as the Winter. And doubtless this cannot be meaned of the Jewish Sabbath; for
that was to be abolished shortly. Next, traveling on the Jewish Sabbath was to
be no cause of grief unto them, if indeed all days were alike, neither would it
be scroupled in such a case by the Apostles to whom he is now speaking.

Quest. XII.
WAS this one day in seven, from the beginning of the World, to the
Resurrection of Christ, the last day of the week*

Yes.

And was it, from the Resurrection of Christ, changed into the first day of the
week?

Yes.

And is it to be continued, to the end of the World, as the Christian Sabbath?

Yes. Genesis 2. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. Acts 20. 7. Rev. 1. 10. Matthew. 5. 17, 18.

Well then, do not the Sabbatarians err, who maintain, that the Jewish Sabbath,
or the seventh day from the Creation, is to be observed?

Yes.

Do not others likewise err, who maintain, that the observation of the Lords
Day, is only of Ecclesiastic and Apostolic institution?

Yes.

These Authors, (you see) do confound, and make two things really distinct, to
be but one, namely Ecclesiastic and Apostolic institution?

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the fourth Command standing, wherein one day of seven is
appointed, the numbering is left free to God himself, that the right, and power
may be reserved to Christ the Lawgiver, and to his Spirit, for the change of
the day, and continuing the worship, prescribed in the fourth Command. (2) From
the name it self; for our Sabbath is called the Lords Day, Rev. 1. 10. I was in
the Spirit on the Lords Day: or on that Lords Day, or Dominick Day, or day
which is the Lords; pointing out a day singularly, and a day, which in a
particular, and special manner is called His day; even as the Lords prayer and
the Lords Supper are so called, because appointed by Christ the Lord. (3)
Because, God only can abrogate the Lords day (the Adversaries granting so much)
therefore, he that has power to rescind has power likewise to establish. (4)
Because, there is an implicit Command, concerning the observation of the Lords
day; 1 Cor. 16. 2. As I have (says Paul) given order to the churches of
Galatia, even so do ye the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by
him. From which place, we reason thus; that not the seventh, but the first day,
is the chief solemn day for worship after Christ's Resurrection, because, the
Apostles did pitch particularly and eminently upon that day, and that in
diverse Churches, as the fittest time, for expressing their Charity. He does
not think it indifferent, what day it be done on, nor that all days are alike,
but pitcheth on the first day, not in one Church only, but in many. Next, this
command, supposes them to be already acquainted with some special privileges
of the first day beyond others; and that there must be some peculiar thing in
this day making it fit, yea more fit for such a purpose, rather than any other
day. (5) Because, as the seventh day, was instituted, in remembrance of the
works of Creation, so the first day, after the work of redemption was finished,
succeeded as most convenient, for collating, and comparing both Mercies
together. (6) Because, Christ on the first day of the week, appeared most
frequently to his Disciples, and blessed it with his presence; Matthew. 28. 9.
Acts 1. 3. John 20. 19, 26. (7) Because, on that day, the holy Ghost descended
upon the Apostles. And on the same day Peter baptized three thousand; Acts 2.
1, 2, 3, 4, 41. (8) Because, the Church, in the time of the Apostles did
observe the first day of the week, as holy; Acts 20. 7. But the practice of the
Apostles, approven in Scripture, is equivalent to a Divine Institution. (9)
Because, Christ was seen of his Apostles forty days after his Resurrection,
and spoke to them of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, during which
time he has taught them all things needful to be known, and among the rest (it
is probable) the change of the Sabbath, and the institution of the first day of
the week, and that immediately after his resurrection: he has either immediately
by himself institute that day, or has inspired his Apostles to observe it,
from that same very time. (10) Because, the Lord has remarkably owned this
Christian Sabbath, in being remarkably avenged, upon the breakers, and
profanners thereof, as it is clear from several Histories.

Quest. XIII.
IS this Sabbath then kept holy unto the Lord, when men after a due
preparation, of their hearts, and ordering of their common affairs before hand,
do not only observe an holy rest, all the day from their own works, words, and
thoughts, about their worldly employments, and recreations, but are also taken
up the whole time, in the public and private exercises of his own worship,
except what is spent in the duties of necessity and mercy?

Yes. Exodus 16. 23, 25, 26, 29, 30. Exodus 31. 15, 16, 17. Isa. 58. 13. Neh. 13.
15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22.

Well then, do not some err, who think, that after public worship is ended,
the rest of the Lords day, may be spent, in ordinary exercises, recreations,
and such like sports as are not unlawful on other days, unless they be
forbidden, by the Church, or Commonwealth wherein men live?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Lord says in the fourth Commandment, in it thou shall not do
any work. But ordinary recreations, games, and sports, are our own works. (2)
Because, Nature it self requires, that we bestow, as much of the Sabbath day on
God, who is the Lord of Time, and of all things which we have, as we can, and
use to bestow upon our own affairs, on other days. (3) Because, the Lord says,
if thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy
day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, and shall
honor him, not doing thy own ways, nor finding thy own pleasure, nor speaking
thy own words, then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause
thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with the heritage
of Jacob thy Father for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; Isaiah 58. 13,
14. See Ierem. 17. 22. Deuteronomy. 5. 12, 13, 15. Numb. 15. 32, 33, 36. And Neh. 13.
15. to verse 23. In those days saw I in Judah, some treading Wine-presses on
the sabbath, and bringing in Sheaves, and lading asses, as also winegrapes, and
figes, and all manner of burdens which they brought into Jerusalem, on the
sabbath day; and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals.

CHAP. XXII. Of Lawful Oaths and Vows.
Question I.
IS the name of GOD, that only by which men ought to swear?

Yes. Deuteronomy. 6. 13.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who in their swearing, join with their
calling upon the name of GOD, the calling on Saints departed, and their
Relics?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, swearing is a part of divine worship, which is only due to God;
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Isaiah 65. 16. (2) Because, God only is the judge of
hidden and secret truth; and the Avenger to take vengence on them, that do not
swear in truth. Therefore he only is to be called on as witness of those things,
which are asserted, and promised, which was the practice of the Apostle Paul,
Romans 9. 1. Romans 1. 9. Phil. 1. 8. (3) Because, God condemns swearing by them,
that are no Gods; Ier. 5. 7.

Quest. II.
IS an Oath warranted by the word of GOD, under the New Testament, as well, as
under the Old, in matters of weight, and moment?

Yes. Heb. 6. 16. Isaiah 65. 16. Gal. 1. 20. Romans 1. 9. Romans 9. 1. 2 Cor. 1.
18. 23. and 2 Cor. 11. 31. with 2 Cor. 12, 19. 1 These. 5. 27. Rev. 10. 6.

Well then, do not the Quakers and Anabaptists err, who maintain, that there is
no lawful use of an Oath under the New Testament?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Papists err, who make it a degree of perfection, to
abstain from all Oaths?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) From Isaiah 65. 16. where it is promised, under the time of the Gospel,
that the Nations to be converted to Christ, shall swear by the name of God, as
is clear also from Ierem. 4. 2. (2) Because, the calling upon the name of God
with due fear and reverence in swearing, is commanded in the third Command, as
the profanation of his name is forbidden: but Christ came not to abolish the
moral Law. (3) From the approven examples of the Saints, which occurr in the
New Testament; Gal. 1. 20. Romans 1. 9. and 2 Cor. 1. 13, 18. Rev. 10. 6. (4)
Because, the end of an Oath, is approven by God, and is in all ages, necessary
to all men, being the end of all controversy; Heb. 6. 16. (5) Because, an oath
rightly taken, is an Act of Religion, whereby we glorify God, and adore his
attributes. We thereby, first, solemnly acknowledge his Being and Existence.
Secondly, his Ubiquity that he is present in all places, and at all times, and
within our hearing; Psalm 139. 7. His Omniscience, that he is the searcher of
the heart. The Apostle calls him Kardiognostes; Acts 15. 8. We acknowledge,
fourthly, his Truth and Veracity: he is a witness brought into the Court, that
cannot lie, nor be imposed upon, as says the Apostle, be not deceived God is
not mocked; Gal. 6. 7. Fifthly, his Supremacy over all creatures, for verily
men swear by the greater; Heb. 6. 16. We acknowledge, sixthly, his vindictive
justice, as he is a Revenger of Perjury. Seventhly, we acknowledge his
Providence, and Fatherly care of the concerns of mankind, owning the cause of
the Righteous.

(6) Because, there being an express law for swearing (to wit rightly; Deuteronomy. 10
20.) it must either belong to the Moral Law, to the Judicial Law, or Ceremonial
Law. The Adversaries will not call it, a part of the Judicial Law, which was
given to the Jews, as a Body Politic, which expired together with the state
of that People. It is no part of the Ceremonial Law: for what was purely
Ceremonial, was purely Typical: but the Law concerning an oath was not a Type
of any thing to come. And if it was a Type, where will you find its Antitype in
all the Gospel, or the thing represented by it? Therefore, it must be a part of
the Moral Law; Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Ier. 4. 2, and consequently perpetual, which Christ
came not to destroy. It is confirmed hence, that it was of Authentic use, and
held sacred among the Patriarchs, before the delivery of the Levitical Law, as
it is clear from Abraham the father of the faithful, and Abimelech; Genesis 21.
23, 24, 31. Consider also that other instance in Abraham; Genesis 24. 2, 3, 9. who
would not give his servant an oath rashly, nor exercise his authority to impose
on his conscience. It is evident also from the example of Isaac, who made a
Covenant, and swore to Abimelech; Genesis 26. 28, 31, And from the example of
Jacob, who made a Covenant with, and swore to his Uncle Laban, by the fear of
his Father Isaac; Genesis 31. 53. That is, by God, who is called our fear, by
reason of the filial awe, and fear we ought to stand in before him; Isaiah 8.
13. (7) Because, the reasons and usefulness of Oaths, are perpetual, and the
same to us under the Gospel, as they were to them under the Law. There is as
much need of oaths for ending of strife in this litigious age, as there could
be in former times. (8) Because, oaths were once lawful, therefore they are
lawful still; unless the Adversaries prove them repealled; which they must do,
not by stealing out of the Scripture single words by themselves, making one
part contradict another. (9) Because, we need not fear to imitate any thing,
which is done in Heaven. Our Lord has taught us to pray, thy will be done in
Earth, as it is done in Heaven. But the Angel (says John; Rev. 10. 5, 6.) which
I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, lifted up his hand to Heaven, and
swore by him that lives for ever and ever. That Angel, calls himself our
fellow servants, and of our brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the
sayings of this Book; Rev. 22. 9. And therefore the Angels being of the same
fraternity with us, do not act under different dispensations from us.

Quest. III.
IS an Oath to be taken, in the plain and common sense of the words, without
Equivocation, or Mental reservation?

Yes. Psalm. 24. 4. Exodus 20. 7. Lev. 19. 12. Ier. 4. 2.

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who maintain, that it is lawful in
swearing, to use words of Equivocation?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Papists err, who maintain Mental reservation, to be lawful
in swearing?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Scripture requires from all men in their common dealing one
with another, in their discourse, and conferences, Verity, and Simplicity;
Matthew. 5. 37. Ephesians. 4. 25. Much more are these things required in Swearing,
wherein God is called to be witness of the truth of those things, which are
asserted. (2) Because, the Lord threatens such as use guile, and deceit in
their words; Psalm 15. 4. Psalm 24. 4. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. (3) Because, the
Lord requires in every Oath, truth, righteousness, and judgment; Ier. 4. 2.
(4) Because, Equivocations, and Mental Reservations, are against the very end
of an approven Oath; which is to put an end to all debate, and controversy.
(5) Because, if Equivocations, and Mental Reservations were lawful, in vain
should the Lord have made laws against lying: for a lie may be excused by
Mental Reservation. (6) If Equivocations, and Mental Reservations were allowed,
they would take away all commerce among men, and would make Bonds, Contracts,
and Charter-parties of none effect.

Quest. IV.
IS a Religious Vow to be made to GOD alone, and not to any creature?

Yes. To GOD alone; Ier. 44. 25, 26. Psalm 76. 11.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, Vows may be made to Saints
departed, and to Cenobiarchs, that is, to Priors of Monasteries, or Abbeys?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Vows are a part of our gratitude, and thankfulness due to God
only, for his favors and mercies conferred upon us; Psalm 50. 14. Psalm 66.
13, 14. (2) Because, we are commanded in the Word to make our vows to God, and
perform them. But no where are we appointed to make our vows to Saints
departed; Psalm 58. 14, (3) Because, God only is the trier, and searcher of the
heart: and it is he only that knows the sincerity of the man's mind, that
voweth, and is able to punish such as violate, and break their vows; Deuteronomy. 23.
21. (4) Because, the Lord threatens those severely, that had vowed to any
other Gods, but to himself alone, and accuses them of a very great sin; Ierem.
44. 25, 26.

Quest. V.
ARE Popish Monastical Vows of a perpetual single life, professed poverty, and
regular obedience, so far from being degrees of higher perfection, that they
are superstitious, and sinful snares, in which no Christian, may entangle
himself?

Yes. Matthew. 19. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 7. 2, 9. Ephesians. 4. 28. 1 Peter 4. 2.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain Monastical Vows of perpetual
single life, professed poverty, and Regular Obedience, to be degrees of higher
perfection?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, a Vow of a perpetual single life, is unlawful. For no man ought
to Vow the performance of that, for which he has not a promise of strength to
perform. But no man has a promise of perpetual Continency which is necessarly
required to a perpetual single life. Nay Christ says expressly, that the gift of
Continency, is not given to all men; Mat. 19. 11. (2) Because, marriage is
honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled; Heb. 13. 4. (3) Because, the
Apostle bids every man take his own wife, for shuning of Fornication; 1 Cor. 7.
1, 2, 9. (4) Because, the forbidding of Marriage, is a Doctrine of Devils; 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3.

Next, the Vow of professed Poverty is unlawful.

(1) Because, the Lord did not allow Beggars to be among his people of old;
Deuteronomy. 15. 7. (2) Because, Agur wished, that the Lord might not give him
poverty, least he should steal, and take the name of God in vain; Prove. 30. 8,
9. (3) Because, the Lord will have every man to eat his bread, in the sweat of
his face; Genesis 3. 19. (4) Because, the Apostle commands the Thessalonians to
work with their own hands; 1 These. 4. 11. (5) Because, professed poverty,
hinders a greater good, to wit, our charity, and benevolence toward the
poor, and indigent members of Christ, which is contrary to the Apostles Rule;
Ephesians. 4. 28.

The Vow of Regular Obedience is likewise unlawful.

1) Because, it makes us the servants of men, which is contrary to the Apostle.
Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of Men, viz. to do any thing
for the service, or obedience of men (Superiors) which should be repugnant, to
the Commands of the service of God. Or suffer not your selves, in spiritual
things, to be brought in bondage by any men, that you should not freely use
that which the Lord has made free to us; 1 Cor. 7. 23.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Civil Magistrate.
Question I.
HAS GOD armed the Civil Magistrate, with the power of the Sword, for the
defense, and encouragement of them that are good, and for the punishment of
evil doers?

Yes. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Peter 2. 13. 14.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, that it is not the duty of
the Civil Magistrate, to punish the guilty with death?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, GOD has expressly commanded, that transgressing Idolaters be put
to death; Deuteronomy. 17. 7. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. (2) Because, it appertains to the office,
and duty of the Magistrate, to punish the guilty with death; Romans 13. 4. 1
Peter 2. 14. (3) Because, the capital punishment of evil doers makes others
stand in awe, and fear to offend; Deuteronomy. 13. 11. Deuteronomy. 19. 20: (4) Because, if
the Magistrate shall neglect, to inflict due punishment, the Lord himself will
be avenged on that Magistrate; 1 Kings 20. 42. Number. 25. 4. (5) Because, he that
smitteth a man so that he die, shall surely be put to death; Exodus 21. 12. (6)
Because, all that take the sword, shall perish by the sword; Matthew. 26. 52.
Namely without a lawful call, or order for it. They shall perish, by order and
command of the Magistrate, to whom the Lord has given the sword, for this same
very end to punish evil doers with death; Genesis 9. 6. Romans 13. 4.

Quest. II.
IS it the duty of the Civil Magistrate, to take order, that all Blasphemies,
and Heresies be suppressed, all the ordinances of God, duly settled,
administered, and observed; all abuses in worship, and discipline reformed, all
Idolaters, Gainsayers, and other obstinate dissenters, be obliged and forced to
quite their tenets and opinions, and conform themselves to the true worship,
and service of God, according to his Law?

Yes. Isaiah 49. 23. 2 Chro. 15. 12, 13. 2 Chro. 34. 33. 2 Kings 18. 4. 2 Kings
23. 1, to the 26 verse. Ezra 7. 23, 25, 26, 27, 28. Lev. 24. 16.

Well then, do not the Quakers, and other Sectaries err, who judge it
Antichristian, and the practice of the Church of Rome, that the Civil and
Supreme Magistrate, with the assistance of the Church, and her Censures, should
by his coactive power, force, and oblige all his subjects, to a Reformation of
Religion, and to a conformity to the true worship, sound doctrine, and
discipline, of the Church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, it is foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, that in the days of the
Gospel, Kings shall be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers, to the
Church of God; Chap. 49. 23. (2) Because, Artaxerxes, who was but a Heathen
King, was very careful to make a decree, that whatsoever was commanded by the
God of Heaven, should be diligently done for the house of the God of Heaven.
And that whosoever would not obey the Law of GOD, and the King, judgment was
to be executed speedily upon him, whether by death, banishment, confiscation of
goods, or imprisonment. For which singular mercy, Ezra blessed the Lord GOD of
his Fathers, who had put such a thing in the Kings heart; chap. 7. 23, 25, 26,
27, 28. So did Nebuchadnezzar make a decree, that if any People, Nation, or
Language, should speak any thing amiss against the GOD of Heaven, they should
be cut in pieces, and their houses made a dunghill; Dan. 3. 29. The like we
read of Darius, who made a Decree, that all men should tremble and fear before
the GOD of Daniel, chap. 6. 26. (3) From the example of Hezekiah, who removed
the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake in
pieces the brazen Serpent, to which the Israelites did burn incense; 2 Kings
18. 4. (4) From the example of Josiah, who made a through reformation; and made
all Israel to serve the LORD their GOD. The word in the Original imports,
that he in a manner forced, and compelled them to the pure worship, and service
of God, as a servant is forced, and compelled to his work. He by his Royal
Power, and Authority kept them in order, forbidding Idolatry, and commanding
them to serve God no otherwise, than according to his Word; 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.
and 2 Chro. 15. 12, 13. They entered into a Covenant, to seek the Lord of their
Fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul: that whosoever would
not seek the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether great or small,
man or woman. (5) Because, whosoever blasphemed the name of the Lord, was
surely put to death; Lev. 24. 16. This blaspheming, was a peircing through, or
stabbing the name of the Lord, as the original word properly signifies: which
may be done not only after this manner, but by maintaining blasphemous errors,
and heresies. (6) Because, the supreme Magistrate is Custos utriusque Tabulae,
a Keeper of both Tables of the Law of God. As well of the first Table, which
relates to Religion, and our duty to God; as of the second which relates to
righteousness, and our duty to our neighbor. If then, he may punish evil
doers, who offend against the second Table, and force and compel them to
obedience, by the sword of justice, which God has put into his hand, much more
may he punish Idolaters, and blasphemers, who offend against the first Table,
and force and compel them to obedience: seeing there are many* sins against
the first Table, which are more heinous, and odious, than the sins against the
second Table. And though it be the sinful practice of the Church of Rome, to
force men, and women, to be of their Religion, which is superstitious, and
Idolatrous, yet it is not so to others, who have the true religion among them.
And though our blessed Savior, and his Apostles did not use such means for
propagating the Gospel, reserving the Glory of conquering of souls, to himself,
and the power of his Spirit; yet he has taught nothing to the contrary, but
that Kings and Magistrates, whom he has made nursing Fathers to his Church, may
according to the laudable examples of the good Kings of Judah, improve their
power for Reformation, and maintenance of his own Religion. And though
Religion, has been much advanced by suffering, yet it will not infer, that a
Christian Prince has not power to reform his own subjects, or extirpate
blasphemers, and Heretics.

Quest. III.
IS it lawful for a Christian, to accept and execute the office of a
Magistrate, when called thereunto?

Yes. Prove. 8. 15, 16. Romans 13. 1, 2, 4.

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who maintain, that it is not lawful for
Christians to carry the office of a Magistrate?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, there is no power but of God, and the powers, which are, are
ordained of GOD; Romans 13. 1. (2) Because, Solomon says, by me (that is by the
Lord) Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; Prove. 8. 15. (3) Because, the
Magistrate exercises, and executes Gods judgments; Deuteronomy. 1. 17. (4) Because,
the Magistrate receives all things from GOD, which are necessary, for the
performance of his office; Numb. 11. 17. (5) Because, the Lord has promised,
that Magistrates under the Gospel, shall be nursing Fathers to his Church;
Isaiah 49. 23. And shall make the Whore desolate, naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire; Rev. 17. 16.

Quest. IV.
MAY the Civil Magistrate, now under the New Testament wage war upon just and
necessary occasion?

Yes. Luke 13. 14. Matthew. 8. 9, 10. Rev. 17. 14, 16. Acts 10. 1, 2.

Well then, do not the Quakers, Anabaptists and Socinians err, Who maintain,
that it is altogether unlawful, now under the New Testament, to wage war?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, GOD appointed, and commanded lawful war; Numb. 31. 2. For it is
said, the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, when he was to fight the battles
of the Lord, against the Midianites, and Amalekites; Judges 6. 34. Nay, the
Lord himself, prescribes the manner, and way of making of War; Numb. 10. 9.
Numb. 31. 27. Deuteronomy 20. 2. And gives knowledge, and skill, to his Generals, and
Heroes, to fight his own battles; Psalm 18. 34. Psalm 144. 1. All which are in
no wise abrogated, and taken away, under the New Testament. (2) Because, the
Centurion, that was converted to the Faith, did not lay down his office of a
Captain of a hundred; which surely, he would have done, if to war under the New
Testament, had been unlawful; Acts 10. 1, 2, 47. The same may be said of the
believing Centurion; Matthew. 8. 8, 9, 10. (3) Because, the office of a Soldier,
is not reprehended, and reproved, by John the Baptist, but rather approven:
Luke 3. 14. (4) Because, opposition, and defense, against unjust violence which
often times cannot be done, without war, is the very law of nature. (5)
Because, it is foretold, that the kings of the Earth, shall make war against
the Beast; Rev. 17. 14, 16.

Quest. V.
MAY the Civil Magistrate, assume to himself, the Administration of the Word,
and Sacraments, or the power of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven?

No. 2 Chronicles. 26. 18. Matthew. 18. 17. Matthew. 16. 19. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. Romans 10.
5. Hebr. 5. 4.

Well then, do not the Erastians err, who maintain, that the Civil Magistrate
has in himself all Church power; and so may administer the Sacraments, and
preach the Word, and may exercise the power of the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ has given no such power to Magistrates: as evidently
appears, from all those places of Scripture, where mention is made of the
keys. There is not in them, one syllabe, of the Civil Magistrate; Matthew. 18.
17. Matthew 16. 19. (2) If the power of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, agree
to the Magistrate, as a Magistrate, then ought it to agree, to every
Magistrate, though the Magistrate were an Infidel, or a Woman, which is absurd.
(3) A Magistrate, as a Magistrate is not a Minister of the Church, as is
evident, from all the Catalogues of the Ministers of the Church. For in them,
you will not find any mention of the Magistrate; Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 7. 8. 1
Car. 12. 8, 9, 10. (4) Because, before ever there was a Christian Magistrate in
the World, the Church exercised all Acts of Church Jurisdiction, and
Government. The Church ordained Ministers and Pastors; 1 Timothy 4. 14. And
inflicted the Censure of Excommunication; 1 Cor. 5. 5. And Relaxed the Penitent
from this Censure. Called a Synod, and stigmatized Heretics; Acts 15. (5)
Because, GOD has put a difference, between the Church Government and the
Civil, and has appointed distinct Governors to them; 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 9, 10,
11. (6) Because, God did severely punish Saul, and Uzzia for presuming to offer
sacrifice, which was proper to the Priests only; 1 Samuel 13. 9, 10, 13. 2 Chronicles.
26. 16, 19.

Quest. VI.
HAS the Civil Magistrate power to call Synods, to be present at them, and to
provide, that whatsoever is transacted in them be according to the mind of GOD?

Yes. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 9, 10, 11. and 2 Chronicles. 29, 30. chapters, Matthew. 2. 4, 5.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that the judgment and care
of Religion does not belong to the civil Magistrate?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the custody and keeping of the divine law, is committed by GOD to
the Civil Magistrate; Deuteronomy. 17. 18. (2) Because, it was foretold, that Kings
should be nursing Fathers to the Church; Isaiah 49. 23. (3) Because, it is the
duty of the Magistrate, to take care, that subjects may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness, and honesty; 1 Timothy 2. 2. (4) From the
commendable examples of the good kings of Judah; 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. chapters.

Quest. VI.
Does infidelity, or difference in Religion make void the Magistrates just and
legal authority?

No.

Does it free the people from their due obedience to him?

No. 1 Peter 2. 13, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. Titus 3. 1.

Well then, do not the Papists, Anabaptists, and others err, who maintain, that
subjects ought not to suffer a King that is an infidel, or obey that King in his
just commands, that differs from them in Religion? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, we are commanded to submit our selves to every ordinance of man;
1 Peter 2. 13. Namely in all that they command us, if it be not contrary to God
and his command; otherwise, (according to Acts 4. 19.) it is better to obey GOD
than man. And it is said, for the Lords sake, that is, because it is GODS will
to govern us by them. (2) Because, the Christians, which were at Rome, were
commanded by the Apostle to subject themselves to the higher powers, and that
without exception of Religion and Piety, and even to that heathen the Roman
Emperor; Romans 13. 1. (3) Because, the same Apostle writing to Titus, bids him
exhort the Cretians his hearers, to obey Magistrates, what manner of ones
soever they be, not only believing ones, but also those, that are unbelieving,
as then, they were yet most of them; Titus. 3. 1. (4) Because, when the Apostle
Paul was persued for his life, and charged with matters criminal, he appealled
unto Caesar; Acts 25. 10, 11. (5) Because, the Prophet Jeremiah did own the
power of Zedekia, who had turned aside to a false worship, and had despised the
oath, which he had made to the King of Babylon; Ezekiel 17. 16, 17. Now hear I
pray thee, (says the Prophet) O my Lord the King, let my Supplication I pray
thee be accepted before thee; Ierem. 27. 20. (6) Because, Christ himself paid
tribute to Caesar, though he was free, being both the Son of GOD by nature, and
the Son of David by birth; Matthew. 17. 26. And he commanded and allowed others
to pay; Matthew. 22. 21. Romans 13. 7. (7) Because, Paul did own and acknowledge
the power of King Agrippa; Acts 26. 2.

Quest. VII.
IS it the duty of people to pray for Magistrates and honor their persons?

Yes. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. and 1 Peter 2. 17.

Well then, do not some err, who deny this?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Samuel at the request of Saul, whom he knew the Lord had
rejected, returned again after him, and honored him before the people; 1 Samuel
15. 31. (2) Because, the Lord having appointed Magistrates to administer
justice and judgment in his name, is so far pleased to honor them, as to call
them Gods, and the Children of the high; Psalm 82. 1, 6. (3) Because, the
Apostle Peter says, fear God and honor the King, parallel to what Paul says,
render to all men their dues; honor to whom honor is due; 1 Peter 2 17. Romans
13. 7.

(4) Because, even heathen Magistrates, are called the Lords anointed; Isaiah
45. 1. And the Lord calls Nebuchadnezzar, his servant; Ierem. 27. 6. If then
such Magistrates ought to be honored upon that account, much more Christian
Magistrates. (5) Because, if we be obliged not to speak evil of dignities; 2
Peter 2. 11, nor revile the Gods; Exodus 22. 8; we are obliged to honor
dignities, for where a sin is forbidden, the contrary duty is commanded. (6)
Because, God commanded his people the Jews to seek the peace of the City (that
is, the welfare and prosperity of Babylon) whither he had caused them to be
carried away captives; Ierem. 29. 7. (7) Because, the Prophet, the man of God,
besought the Lord in behalf of Jeroboam, and prayed for him, a man that had
made Apostasy from the true worship of God, and had made Israel to sin; 1 Kings
13. 3. (8) Because, our blessed Savior says, render to Caesar, the things that
are Cesars; Matthew. 22. 21. But prayers and supplications are as due to Caesar,
as custom and tribute; 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. (9) Because, the Apostle commands us to
pray for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life; which is the cause wherefore we must pray for Magistrates. For in the
Apostles times, and long after, Magistrates were persecutors of the Church of
GOD, and hindered the members of Christ to live in peace and godliness; 1 Timothy
2. 1, 2. (9) Because, Moses cried unto the Lord in behalf of Pharaoh; Exodus 8.
12. Abraham prayed unto God for Abimelech; Genesis 20. 17. Jacob blessed Pharaoh;
Genesis 47. 7, 10. (10) Because, many blessed Martyrs going to death have prayed
for their persecuting Magistrates, following the example, and command of our
blessed Savior; Luke 23. 34. Matthew. 5. 44.

Quest. VIII
OUght any man at his own hand, or at the instigation of other men, to
assassinate or kill a Magistrate, or any private or public person, under the
pretense, they are Heretics, and Persecutors of the truth?

No. Exodus 20. 13: Prove. 1. 10. 11.

Well then, do not those men of the Romish-Church err, and others too, who own
this dangerous Tenet? Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, all sort of murder is expressly forbidden in the sixth command,
thou shall not kill; Exodus 20. 13. Where there is a clear distinction made by
Thou, between a private man and a public Magistrate, that does it by divine
authority. (2) Because, though Saul was a man rejected of God (1 Samuel 15. 26.)
yet David says to the Amalekite, how wast thou not affrayed to stretch forth
thine hand, to destroy the Lords anointed; 2 Sa. 1. 14. see 1 Samuel 24. 5. 1 Samuel 26. 9. (3) Because, whatever may be alleged from Phineas his fact; Number.
25. 8. from Ehuds fact in stobbing Eglon; Judges 3. 21. from Samuels fact in
killing Agag, 1 Samuel 15. 33. and from Elijahs fact in killing the Priests of
Baal; 1 Kings 18. 40. they will not by any means favor private men's
assassinations; for certainly Phineas had a divine motion, as Ehud had;
stirring him up, which was evident by the Lords approving the fact, and
rewarding it. Samuel (no doubt) was moved hereunto by an inward motion and
instinct of God, and the conduct of his Spirit, as was Elijah; so that their
facts, and suck like were altogether particular, and cannot be abused by
imitation, and followed by every one, as rules, whose calling is not properly
to use the sword of justice. (4) Because, it would bring a Mass of confusion,
to the utter ruin of all Societies, if every man at his own hand might execute
vindictive justice upon offenders, who deserve it, or upon pretense they do
deserve it, which is to fight against God, who is the God of order politic, as
well, as Ecclesiastic, and not of confusion. (5) Because, the wrath of man
works not the righteousness of God; Ia. 1. 20. (6) Because, it is a contempt
of public laws, and public order. It is an usurpation of the Magistrates
sword, which God has put into his hand for punishing and protecting, It is an
invasion of Gods right and prerogative of executing vengeance, which he has so
expressly reserved to himself; Psalm 94. 1. Romans 12. 19. Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Prove. 25.
21, 22. (6) Because, Solomon says, my son, if sinners entice thee, consent
thou not, if they say come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk
privily for the innocent, walk not thou in the way with them. Prove. 1. 10, 11.
(7) Because, a righteous man regards the life of his beast, much more ought a
righteous man to regard the life of his neighbor; Prove. 12. 10. The sin of
murder may be many ways aggravated. First by the quality of the person
murdered, whether he be a superior, as a Magistrate, or Minister, or parent,
or whether he be of a near relation, as a brother, or near kinsman. Secondly,
from the manner, extreme cruelty being used, or sudden and unexpected death,
putting a man into eternity in the twinkling of an eye. To which we may add
deliberation and premediate murder, of which Solomon speaks in the forecited
place.

Quest. IX.
ARE Ecclesiastic Persons exempted from due obedience to the Magistrate?

No. Romans 13. 1, 1 Kings 2. 26. Acts 25 9, 10, 11. 2 Peter 2. 1, 10, 11. Jude
verse 8. 9, 10, 11.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that the Clergy (as they call
them) and their goods are altogether free, by the Law of God from Secular
Powers?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the command of obedience is general, and universal. let every
soul be subject; Romans 13. 1. (2) Because, Christ commanded the Pharisees, who
were of the Clergy, to render unto Caesar, the things which are Cesars; Matthew.
22. 21. Nay Christ himself, paid tribute money, to wit, a Stater, in value two
shillings, and three pence, which Peter found in the fishes mouth, when he
opened it; Matthew. 17, 27. (3) Because, Paul did acknowledge himself subject to
the Magistrate, when he appealled unto Caesar; Acts 25. 11. (4) From the example
of the Priests who were subject to their Kings. Did not Abiather at Solomon's
command, go to Anothoth? 1 Kings 2. 26.

Quest. X.
Has the Pope any Power, or Jurisdiction over Magistrates, in their dominions,
or over any of their people?

No. Rev. 13. 15, 16, 17. 2 These. 2: 4:

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that the Pope of Rome, as
Pope, has full power by divine right, over the whole World, as well in matters
Civil as Ecclesiastical?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ expressly discharges his Disciples, from taking to
themselves, any such power or dominion, Matthew. 20: 25; Mark 10: 42: (2)
Because, the Kingdom of Christ is not of this World* John 18. 36. Neither ought
the Popes Kingdom to be of this World who calls himself the Vicar of Christ.
That is, one who supplieth Christ's room, and takes pains for him, his Depute
here on Earth. (3) Because, when the people would have made Christ a King, he
departed again into a mountain himself alone; John 6. 15. (4) Because, the
Apostle Peter discharged this Dominion; 1 Peter 5. 1, 2, 3. (5) Because, its
never heard, that any of the Apostles did ever use any civil power, or command;
or sat as judges in civil matters, but stood always to be judged, by Civil
powers, as is evident from the History of the Acts. (6) Because, GOD has put a
difference, between the Government of the Church, and the Civil Government; and
has given to each, their own proper, and distinct Officers. Neither can the
one invade the other without very great sin; 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 9, 10, 11. (7)
Because, it is the mark of Antichrist, to exalt himself above all, that is
called God; 2 These. 2. 4.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Marriage and Divorce.
Question I.
IS Marriage between one man and one woman?

Yes.

Is it lawful for a man, to have more than one wife, or for a woman, to have
more than one husband at the same time?

No. Genesis 2. 24: Matthew: 19: 5, 6. Prove: 2: 17:

Well then, do not the Anabaptists, and Familists err, who maintain, that it is
lawful for a Christian, not only to have more wives at the same time, but as
many as he desires?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the having of two wives, or many wives, is contrary to the first
institution of Marriage, for the Lord gave to Adam, one wife only; Genesis 2. 24.
(2) Because, the Law of God forbidds expressly Bigamie, or two wives; Lev. 18.
18. (3) Because, the Lord does find fault sharply, with Polygamie, many wives;
Mal. 2. 14, 15. (4) Because, Christ says, he that puts away his wife (except in
the case of Adultery) and marries another, commits adultery; Matthew. 19. 9.
But if it were lawful to have at one time, more wives than one, he should not
be guilty of adultery in marrying another, whether he put away the former wife
or not. (5) Because, Bigamie and Polygamie, take away the true peace of a
wedded life, as is evident from the examples of Jacob; Genesis 30. And of Elkana;
1 Samuel 1. 6. (6) Because, the invention of Bigamie; was the device of a wicked
man Lamech; Genesis 4. 19.

Quest. II.
IS it lawful for all sorts of people to marry, who are able with judgment to
give their consent?

Yes. Heb. 13. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 36, 37, 38. Genesis 24. 57, 58.

Well then, does not the Popish-Church err, that forbids, and discharges
marriage to their Church men?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled; Heb.
13. 4. (2) Because, the Apostle commands, for avoiding fornication, every man
to have his own wife, and every woman to have her own husband; 1 Cor. 7. 2. (3)
Because, the Apostle reckons up the forbidding of marriage, among the doctrines
of devils; 1 Timothy 4. 3. (4) Because, a Bishop must be the husband of one wife;
1 Timothy 3. 2. 4. Titus 1. 6. (5) Because, the Apostle reckons over the
qualifications which are requisite for Bishops wives; 1 Timothy 3. 11.

(6) Because, it can be gathered from Scripture, that some of the Apostles, and
other Ministers of the Gospel, have been married persons. Concerning Peter, the
matter is evident: Matthew. 8. 14. Mark 1. 30. And we read that Philip the
Evangelist, had four daughters, all of them Prophetesses; Acts 21. 9. And says
not the Apostle, have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well, as
other Apostles, and all the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas; 1 Cor. 9. 5.

Quest. III.
OUght marriage to be within the degrees of consanguinity, or affinity
forbidden in the Word?

No.

Can incestuous marriages ever be made lawful, by any law of man, or consent of
parties, so as these Persons, may live together, as man, and wife?

No. 1 Cor, 5. 1. Amos 2. 7. Mark 6. 18. Lev. 18. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

Well then, does not the Popish-Church err, that speaks in the decrees of the
Council of Trent, after this manner. If any man affirm, that these degrees only
of Consanguinity or Affinity, which are set down in Leviticus, may hinder a
contract of Marriage to be made, or may dissolve a marriage contract already
made; and that the Church has not power to dispense with some of these degrees
(that is to say to permit incest) or may not make new Laws, and constitute far
more forbidden degrees, than are expressed in Leviticus, let him be an Anathema,
and accursed?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

Before this be done, take notice, that there are here two heads to be
considered.

First, Whether or not we must stand, to the forbidden degrees of Consanguinity
and Affinity expressed in Leviticus: Secondly, Whether, to these degrees set down
as forbidden in Leviticus, new degrees may be added by the Church of Rome,
which will render a marriage incestuous?
To which we answer, that it is not in the power of any creature to dispense
(that is to say, to suffer that to be used, which is forbidden by the Law of
God) with any of these Laws in Leviticus, which forbid incestuous marriages.

And next, we affirm, neither is it in the power of any creature, to add to
these degrees forbidden in Leviticus, any other which are not forbidden,

(1) Because, such a power of dispensing, is not to be found in all the
Scripture. (2) Because, the Lord says expressly, what thing soever I command
you, observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it; Deuteronomy.
12. 32. But the Lord himself has made these Laws, and established these
Marches so sure, that no Council, no Pope, no Creature, can either dispense
with any of them, or add new ones to them. See Leviticus 18. (3) Because, these
Laws are of common, and perpetual right; and therefore cannot be dispensed
with. For the breach of them is reckoned up, amongst the abominations wherewith
the Nations about polluted and defiled the land; Lev. 18. 24. 25, 27.

Quest. IV.
IS it lawful to marry a second wife, after the first is dead?

Yes.

Is it lawful after divorce to marry another, as if the offending party were
dead?

Yes. Matthew. 5. 31, 32. Romans 7. 2. 3. Matthew. 19. 9.

Well then, do not the Novatians, the Puritans of old, truly so called: and
the Tertullianists err, who absolutely condemned second marriages?

Yes.

This absurd tenet is confuted from Romans 7. 2, 3. and from 1 Cor. 7. 39.

Do not likewise the Papists err, who deny, that after divorce, second
marriages are permitted to Christians?

Yes.

But here by two distinctions they explain their mind.

First, They distinguish between Cohabitation, the Bed, and the Ty.

The first is, the dwelling together of man and woman, in one family.

The second is, the right of giving, and requiring due benevolence.

The third is that, whereby both are made one: whereby the one cannot but be
the others while they are both living.

They distinguish next, between persons that are believers, and that are
unbelievers. If then both parties, or one of them be unbelievers, they grant
that the marriage is valide, both as to Cohabitation, to the marriage bed; and
to the Ty, or Bond.

But if both parties be Christians, they think that the marriage may be
dissolved, as to bedding together, and Cohabitation, yet the Bond stands
sure, and abides unloosable: especially, if the marriage be contracted after
Baptism: and therefore a second marriage after divorce is unlawful to any of
them.

But this is easily confuted?

(1) Because, Christ permitted marriage after divorce; Matthew. 5. 31, 32. Matthew.
19. 9. Here Christ forbidding a man to put away his wife, and to marry another,
in express words, excepts the case of Fornication. Therefore he suffers a man
to put away his wife in the case of Fornication, and to marry another. (2)
Because, the Apostle says, but if the unbelieving depart, let him depart: for a
brother, or sister, is not under bondage in such cases; 1 Cor. 7. 15.
Therefore, if a brother or sister, when there is such a wilful and obstinate
desertion, be not under bondage, then surely the Bond is dissolved: and all
remedies being tried in vain, for bringing back the obstinate party, I doubt
not, but the innocent party may marry another without blame. If this be, then
much more may the innocent party marry another, when a Divorce is obtained.

Quest. V.
IS nothing but Adultery, or such wilful desertion, as can no way be remedied,
by the Church, or Civil Magistrate, a sufficient cause of dissolving the bond
of Marriage?

Nothing. Matthew. 19. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 7. 15. Matthew. 19. 6.

Well then, do not the Enthusiasts, and Familists err, who maintain, that it is
free to a man, to put away his wife when he pleases?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the God of Israel hatteth putting away; Mal. 2. 16. (2) Because,
whosoever puts away his wife, except in case of Fornication, he causes her
to commit Adultery; Matthew. 5, 32. (3) Because, the Apostle says, art thou bound
to a wife, seek not to be loosed; 1 Cor. 7. 27.

Do not likewise the Papists err, who maintain that there are other causes of
divorce, than Adultery and wilful desertion?

Yes.

They first tell us, that marriage contracted, but not consummated, may be
dissolved; to wit, by a Monastic Vow of a perpetual single life.

They tell us secondly, that infidelity, and heresy are just causes of
divorce. So say the Anabaptists.

And thirdly, they tell us that murder committed upon the hope of getting such
a Match, is a sufficient cause of divorce.

That coldness, perpetual impotency, and such like fancies are causes?

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ says, what God has joined together, let no man put
asunder, Matthew. 19. 6. But marriage contracted, and ratified, though not
consummated, is made by God: therefore it cannot be dissolved by man. Neither
ought any man once married, to turn a Monck; for a single life is only fit for
those, that have the gift of Continency; for God commands them, that have it
not, to marry; 1 Cor. 7. 9. (2) Neither can infidelity, or heresy, be a ground
of divorce, as is clear from 1 Cor. 7. 12, 13. If any brother has a wife that
believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
And the woman that has an husband, that believes not, if he be pleased, to
dwell with her, let her not leave him.

CHAP. XXV. Of the CHURCH.
Question I.
DOES the Catholic, or Universal Church which is invisible, consist of the
whole number of Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one under
Christ, the head thereof?

Yes. Ephesians. 1. 10, 22, 23. Ephesians. 5. 23, 27. Col. 1. 18.

Well then, does not the Popish-Church err, who deny any Catholic invisible
Church, consisting of the Elect only, effectually called: who maintain, the
Catholic Church, to be absolutely visible, and as visible a Society, as the
Republic of Venice, or the kingdom of France: and that it consists no less of
reprobates, unbelievers, great and manifest sinners, void of all inward and
true grace, than of the Elect effectually called?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, we profess to believe, according to the Creed, that there is a
Church Universal, namely such a one, as we have now described: but what we
believe must be invisible; Heb. 11. 1. (2) Because, the internal form of the
Church (namely her effectual calling by the Word and Spirit; 1 Peter 2. 9.) is
invisible; 2 Timothy 2. 19. 1 Cor. 2. 11. (3) Because, the glory of the Kings
daughter (that is of the Universal Church, as the Adversaries themselves
confess) is internal, and therefore hidden and invisible; Psalm 45. 13. (4)
Because, the Word tells us, that there is a Church, even the number of those,
whom Christ has loved; for whom he gave himself to the death; whom he has
sanctified, and washen and cleansed, and redeemed, with his own blood, and whom
at last, he will glorify; Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. (5) Because, the Scripture
tells; that there is a Church, which is the mystical body of Christ (and
therefore invisible to the eyes) which by a most mystical, and most marvelous
union, is conjoined, and united straightly with him; Ephesians. 1. 10, 22, 23. (6)
Because, the Church Universal, as to its internal form, is a spiritual house,
built of lively stones, in Christ; 1 Peter 2. 5. (7) Because, the members of
the Church Universal, considered as to their internal state, and condition, are
united, and conjoined together in one body, by one Spirit, and by one Faith; 1
Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. (8) Because, the members of the Church Universal,
considered the former way, are the lively members of Christ, which he himself
does cherish with a lively, and quickening nurishment; Ephesians. 5. 29, 30.

Quest. II.
IS the Visible Church, under the New Testament, Catholic and Universal?

Yes. 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Psalm. 2. 8. Rev. 7. 9. Romans 15. 9,
10, 11, 12.

Well then, do not the Independents err, who maintain, there is no Visible
Church, under the New Testament, except what may meet in one place, and may
perform all their holy services in a private Church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, in very many places of the New Testament, the word Church (to wit
Visible) is so largely taken, that it cannot be restricted, to any particular
Congregational Church; Acts 8. 3. Gal. 1. 13. Acts 2. 47. 1 Cor. 10. 32. Ephesians.
3. 10. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 15. (2) Because, it has been foretold, in many
places of the Old Testament, that the Catholic Church shall be Visible; Psalm
22. 22, 23, 25, 27, 28. Psalm 72. 8, 9, 10, 11. Psalm 86. 9. Isaiah 2. 2, 3, 4.
Zech. 14. 9. (3) Because, the Donation, or the gift of the kingdom (that is of
the Church Universal) made by the Father to the Son, is Universal, and of all
the World; Psalm 2. 8. Psalm 72. 8. Isaiah 49. 6. Dan. 7. 14. (4) Because, the
Gospel of the Kingdom, is Universal; and according to the style of the
Scripture, works the visible conversion of the whole world, and therefore the
Church visibly converted, and gathered together, is Catholic and Universal;
Matthew. 26. 13. Mark 14. 9. Col. 1. 16. (5) Because, the Visible Charter, which
constitutes the Church is Universal: and therefore since one Charter,
constitutes one Polity, or Government, all the Visible particular Churches,
which are constitute by that one Catholic Charter, are one Church Universal;
Matthew. 28. 19. Ephesians. 3. 6. (6) Because, if there be Officers of a Church Visible
Universal, there must be a Church Visible Universal it self: but the first is
true, since the Donation of the Ministry, and the giving of it in a gift, is
made to the Catholic Church; 1 Cor. 12, 28. Matthew. 28. 19. (7) Because, there
is a general outward call, and a general outward covenant into which all
Christians enter outwardly, by virtue whereof all of them, are knit, and tied
together; Acts 2. 39. (8) Because, that same individual System, and Body of
external Laws, proceeding from that same Authority, in which all particular
Churches are equally concerned, and by which they are ruled, is Universal; 1 Timothy chap. 3. and Titus 3 chap. (9) Because, that external union of
brotherhood, which is amongst all the Visible Christians in the world, is
Catholic, and Universal; Acts 15. 23. Acts 24. 14. Gal. 5. 14. (10) Because,
the initial Visible seal, admittance, and enrowlment, are things Catholic, and
Ecumenical. For he that takes up his freedom in a whole Corporation or
Kingdom, is free of the whole, and in every part thereof, and has right to all
the general privileges and immunities thereof. There is a Patent for Baptism
Go and baptize all Nations. And by virtue of the Privileges thereof, they that
are baptized in any one Church, are accounted visible subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, in all places of the Christian world. Matthew. 28. 19. (11) Because, all
Churches are one Body; Romans 12. 5. (12) Because, Peter writting to the
strangers scattered abroad throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia calls them all one Flock; 1 Peter 5. 2. (13) Because, all the
Churches of the World are one sheepfold; John 10. 16. (14) Because, the Visible
Church is one great house; 2 Timothy 2. 20.

Quest. III.
DOES the Visible Church consist of all those thorowout the world that profess
the Christian Religion, together with their Children?

Yes. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Psalm 2. 8. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Well then, do not the Donatists, Anabaptists, and Puritans of old so truly
named, err, who affirm the visible Church to consist of those only, that are
pious and holy?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Independents err, who think, none ought to be members of
the Visible Church, save those, who in the judgment of men very spiritual, and
discerning are esteemed true believers, and saints: who have given sufficient
proof of their knowledge in the fundamentals of Religion: who have reported in
order, and given a good account of the experimental work of their conversion,
and effectual calling; who have showed their conversation in the world, to have
been without the omission of any known duty, or commission of any known fault,
and that for a considerable length of time.

Yes.

Do not lastly the Quakers err, who think the only visible Church of GOD on
earth, to be themselves; and all others not of their profession, and practice,
to be unregenerate, and wanting the Spirit?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the visible Church, is compared to a Garner, in which there is
not only Wheat, but Chaff mixed with it. To a Field, in which Tares, and Darnel
are mixed among the good Corn. To a Net, in which both good Fishes, and bad are
taken; Matthew. 13. chapter. To a great House, wherein are not only vessels of
Gold, and Silver, but of Wood, and of Earth; 2 Timothy 2. 20. (2) Because, Christ
will answer some at the last day; who will say to him, Lord, have not we
Prophesied in thy name, and in thy name casten out Devils, and have we not
eaten and drunken at thy table, I know you not. This evidently shows, that many
have been members of the Visible Church, whom Christ will not own at the last
day; Matthew. 7. 22, 23. (3) From the Parable of the ten Virgins, five whereof
were foolish, five wise; Matthew. 25. 1. (4) From the Parable of the Banquet,
where one was found at the Table, without a Wedding Garment; Matthew. 22. 11. (5)
Because, many are of the Visible Church, who are not of the invisible Church; 1
John 2. 19. (6) Because the Apostle, calls the Church of Corinth, the Church of
Christ, notwithstanding of their gross enormities; 1 Cor. 1. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 3. 1
Cor. 5. 1. 1 Cor. 6. 7. (7) Because, Moses did acknowledge, even those then to
be members of the Visible Church, to whom yet he knew, the Lord had not given
ears to hear, nor eyes to see, nor a heart to understand, the great and
wonderful miracles which he wrought in their sight; Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13.
compared with the verses 2, 3, 4. (8) Because, John the Baptist did admit many
thousands into the communion of the Visible Church, without making a narrow
search of their true grace, and conversion; Matthew. 3. (9) Because, the Apostles
did instantly, and without the delay of one day, baptize all those that
professed the Christian Religion; Acts 2. 38, 41. Acts 8. 12. John 3. 26. (10)
Because, the preaching of the Gospel, is appointed by God, as an ordinary mean,
no less for the Conversion of men, and women, than for the advancement of those
in grace that are converted; Prove. 9* 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. 20, 2 Timothy 2. 24,
25 (11) Because, we are forbidden by the Apostle, to judge the spiritual state
and condition of our neighbor; Romans 14. 4. (12) Because, Christ did
acknowledge Judas the Theif, and Traitor, as a member of his Visible Church,
whom yet he foresaw to be the son of perdition; Matthew. 26. 23. (13) Because,
Christ had a visible church on earth many hundred of years before ever there
were such cattle as Quakers in the World. Unless they will allege that the
primitive Christians and all the Saints, since the Apostles days, have been
their Predecessors, and claim kin to them, as the Samaritans did to Jacob, who
were truly descended of the heathen; who were brought thither out of Assyria,
as the Quakers are descended from the Enthusiasts in Germany, about 160 years
since, as Nicolas Strokins, John Matthias, and John of Leyden, notorious
Heretics, blasphemers, and bloody Murderers.

But how quite different, the Quakers are to the primitive christians, and holy
men of God then, and since, will evidently appear hence, that they did not
contemn these two great ordinances of the Gospel instituted by Christ, to wit,
Baptism and the Lords Supper. They had Bishops and Deacons to govern, and
instruct them, who were ordained to their functions by prayer and imposition of
hands, whom they did not revile, with the ugly names of dumb dogs, and
hirelings. These primitive christians, had not in their assemblies
Women-preachers as the Quakers have, which is down right contrary to Paul's
injunctions; 1 Cor. 14. 35. Neither were silent meetings ever heard of among
the primitive christians. Nor did they ever out of contempt call churches,
places appointed for the public worship of God, Steeple Houses, but resorted
to them for performing their devotions, and service to God, as did our blessed
Savior, and his Apostles; John 18. 20. Luke 4. 16. Acts 3. 1. Acts 13. 5.

Do not likewise the Papists and Lutherians err, who will have none members of
the visible Church that are unbaptized?

Yes.

Do not lastly the Anabaptists err, who will have no infants members of the
visible church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, that God commanded infants, and little ones, should stand before
him; should enter into covenant with him; Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. (2) Because,
infants are called the people of God, no less than men and women come to age;
Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12, 13. (3) Because, the promise of Grace belongs to children as
well as to the parents; Acts 2. 39. (4) If children be not members of the
visible church, they must be members of the visible kingdom of the devil, for
there can be no midst; Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. And so there shall be no difference
between the children of Believers, and the children of Turks and Pagans. (5)
Because, infants under the Old Testament, had right unto the Covenant of Grace;
Genesis 17. 7, 12. And children of Believers under the New Testament have lost no
right to that covenant of Grace, which children under the Old Testament had;
seeing the covenant of Grace, now under the Gospel, is not more strickly, and
sparingly administered, than long since under the law; Heb. 8. 6. Romans 11. 12.
(6) Because, infants are commanded to join themselves to Gods ordinances; Joel
2. 16. (7) Because, if Christ, while an infant, was head of the visible church;
then infants may be his members. But the first is true, from Isaiah 9. 6.
Therefore the second must be true also. (8) Because, they whom the false
Apostles would have to be circumcised, after the manner of Moses (and therefore
infants) were called Disciples; Acts 15. 10.

Quest. IV.
IS there any ordinary possibility of Salvation out of the Visible Church?

No. Acts 2. 47.

Well then, do not the Enthusiasts, Quakers, and Libertines err, who affirm,
that any man, may be a true christian, and be saved, though he live within no
Visible Church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Lord JEHOVAH, in his visible Church (ordinarily) commands the
blessing, even life for evermore; Psalm 133. 3. (2) Because, the visible
church, is the mother of all Believers; Gal. 4. 26. By Jerusalem which is
above, I understand the true Christian Church, which seeks its salvation; not
by the first covenant of the law, namely by the works of the law, but by the
second of the Gospel; namely by the merits of Christ, embraced by a true Faith,
which has its orginal from heaven, by the powerful calling of the Holy Ghost.
(3) Because, they that are without the visible church, are without Christ; Ephesians.
2. 12. (4) Why are men and women joined to the visible church but that they may
be saved? Acts 2. 47.

(5) Because, they that are without the visible church, are destitute, of the
ordinary means of life and salvation; Psalm 147. 19. 20.

Quest. V.
HAS Christ given to this Catholick-church-visible, the Ministry, Oracles, and
Ordinances of God, for the gathering, and perfecting of the Saints in this
life, to the end of the World?

Yes.

Shall there be always a church on earth, to worship God according to his
will?

Yes. 1 cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Matthew. 16. 18. Psalm
72. 17. Psalm 102. 28. Isai. 59. 21.

Well then, do not the Socinians, Anabaptists; and Libertines err, who affirm
that the visible Church may fail, and perish out of the world?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Scepticks commonly called Seekers err, who affirm, that
the whole universal church, which has been upon the earth: and all religious
worship, all external and outward preaching of the Word, all administration of
Sacraments, and the use of all other religious things have perished a little
after the Apostles times, and are not to this day restored, until Christ from
Heaven, shall send new Apostles with an extraordinary commission, for
restoring, and raising up again the visible church?

And that in the mean time, no man has right or power, to dispense the Word,
or administer the Sacraments, or perform any Ecclesiastical duty: and that they
who are now called the preachers of the Gospel are not so?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Lord has promised, that his church shall endure, so long as
the ordinances of heaven shall continue; Isaiah 66. 22. (2) Because, Christ
has promised that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his church;
Matthew. 16. 18. (3) Because, there is no end to be put to the kingdom of Christ;
Luke 1. 33. And therefore no end to his church; Isaiah 9. 7. (4) Because* glory
will be to him, in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all Ages, world
without end Amen; Ephesians. 3. 21. (5) Because, Christ who has given power to his
Ministers, to teach his church, and to administer the Sacraments, has promised
to be with them to the end of the World; Matthew. 28. 19, 20. (6) Because, the
Lord has promised to preserve a people to himself, to the end of the world
which he shall rule, and govern, by his Word and Spirit; Isaiah 59. 20, 21.
Isaiah. 9. 6, 7. (7) Because, the Lord has chosen Zion: he has desired it for
his habitation, where he will rest, and dwell for ever; Psalm 132. 13. 14. (8)
Because, Christ has given some to be Pastors, and Teachers for the perfecting
of the Saints, till we all come into the unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God; Ephesians. 4. 11. And he has appointed a Ministry to
continue even after the Apostles days, as is evident from 1 Timothy 3 chapter.
From Titus first chapter, where the Apostle sets down the ordinary
qualifications of Ministers, and the Rules for calling them to the Ministry.
(9) Because, there is a general Rule set down, for the government, and
discipline, of Christ's church: which discipline and order, is to continue in
it, to the end of the world; Matthew. 1 18. (10) Because, the Lord commands, that
we forsake not the assembling of our selves together: and has promised to
bless after a special manner, any that are gathered together in his name, any
where, but our assembling for hearing the word of God, is done in the name of
Christ; Heb. 10. 25. Matthew. 18. 20. Matthew. 28. 20. (11) Because, the death of
Christ, in the last supper, is to be showed till he come; 1 Cor. 11. 26. (12)
Because, by the Word (even preached Romans 10. 17.) we are born again; 1 Peter 1.
23. James 1. 18. By Baptism we are ingrafted into Christ; Romans 6. 3, 4. Gal. 3.
27. In the Lords Supper, we have communion with Christ; 1 Cor. 10. 16. See more
to this purpose; chap. 21. Question eight.

Quest. VI.
Has the Catholic church been sometimes more, sometimes less Visible?

Yes. Romans 11. 3, 4. Rev. 12. 6, 14.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who affirm, that the church has been, is,
and shall be most gloriously Visible to all the whole world far and nigh?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the church of GOD, in the Prophet Elijahs time was brought to
that pass, that he thought none remained but himself; 1 Kings 19. 10. Romans 11.
2, 3, 4. (2) Because, for a long time Israel was without the true GOD, and
without a teaching Priest, and without the Law; 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. (3) Because,
the Lord often complains, that his church and people have forsaken him, have
not known him: that the faithful city has become a harlot, that scarce a man
could be found to do justice, and follow truth; all which is inconsistent with
that glorious condition of the visible church, which the Papists dream of;
Isaiah 1. 3, 4. Ierm. 2. 29. Ierm. 5. 1. (4) Because, in the time of the ten
Persecutions, the visible church was much obscured, and darkened. And after
these storms were over, arose the Arians, who did much trouble the church of
Christ, as is clear from History. (5) Because, two wings were given to the
Woman, that is to the Church of GOD, two wings (I say) of a great Eagle, that
she might fly into the wilderness, to hid her self; Rev. 12. 14. (6) Because,
the Apostle Paul did foretell that general defection, and apostasy of the
visible church mentioned; 2 These. 2, 3. (7) Because, Christ has foretold, that
before his second coming, he shall scarce find Faith on the Earth; Luke 18. 8.

(8) Because, the church of GOD is always liable to trouble, and persecution
while it sojourneth in this world. But troubles and persecutions do much
obscure the brightness, and splendor of a visible church; Luke 21. 17. John
16. 2. Psalm 129. 1, 2, 3.

Quest. VII.
ARE the purest churches under heaven subject both to mixture and error?

Yes. 1 Cor. 13. 12. Rev. 2. and 3. chapter Rev. 18. 2. Romans 11. 18, 19, 20,
21, 22.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who affirm, that the church cannot err,
neither in matters absolutely necessary, neither in other things, which it
proposes to be done and believed by us?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the visible church, under the Old Testament, oftentimes made
defection to Idolatry; Exodus 32. 8. Judges 3. 7. (2) Because, as long as we are
here, we know but in part; and therefore we are subject, and liable to
mistakes; 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12. (3) Because, the seven churches of Asia to which
John did writ, are accused of mixture, and errors; Rev. 2. 4, 5. (4) Because,
while Christ was on earth, the Disciples dreamed of a worldly kingdom* and for
a time, even after his resurrection they did believe it; Acts 1. 6. (5)
Because, before the day of Christ be at hand, there shall be a falling away of
the visible church, from the true Orthodox Faith to Antichristianism, which in
great part is already come to pass, and more than is to come between this time
and his second coming: 2 These. 2. 3. Rev. 13. 3. (6) Because, one of the chief
differences between the Church Militant, and the Church Triumphant is this,
that the one can err, but not the other; 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 12. (7) Because,
Christ has foretold, that there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, in so much, if it were possible they
shall deceive the very Elect; Matthew. 24. 24. (8) Because, when the Son of man
comes, he shall scarce find Faith on the earth; Luke 18. 8. (9) Because, the
converted Jews erred, in being zealous for the Law; thinking that the
Ceremonial Law, ought yet to be observed, not understanding that the same was
abolished by Christ; Acts 21. 20. So did the Galatians err, in admitting
circumcision; Gal. 1, 6. And the Corinthians, in their abuse of the Lords
Supper; 1 Cor. 11. 18.

Quest. VIII.
IS there no other head of the Visible Church, but the Lord Jesus Christ?

No.

Can the Pope of Rome, in any sense be the head thereof?

No. Col. 1. 18. Ephesians. 1. 22.

Well then, does not the Popish-Church err, who maintains, that not only
Christ, is the universal head of the Church, but that there is another visible
head under him, who (say they) is the Pope of Rome, Christ's Vicar, or Deputy
under him?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, as not many husbands, but one only, is head of the wife, so
Christ only is head of the Church; Ephesians. 5. 23. (2) Because, the Church is
espoused to one only namely to Christ; 1 Cor. 11. 3. (3) Because, the Church is
the body of Christ only; Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. (4) Because, among all the
Ecclesiastic orders instituted, and appointed by Christ, we do not read of
such a creature, as an Universal Vicar* of Christ; Ephesians. 4. 11. (5) Because, the
Church is one body only (unless it be a monster) but one body, cannot have two
heads; Romans 12. 4, 5. (6) Because, Christ only, can inspire, or breath in
vigor, sense, motion, and spiritual life into his members; Ephesians. 5. 29, 30.
John 6. 48, 50, 51. John 15. 1, 2. (7) Because, there must not be Lordship, and
sovereignty among them, that are under Christ their head and Lord; Luke 22. 25.
1 Peter 5. 2, 3.

(8) If the Pope be not so much as a Bishop of a particular Church, he cannot
be universal Bishop. The first is true, because he does not perform the office
of a Bishop, which is set down; 1 Timothy 3, 2, Titus 1, 7. 8, 9.

Do not likewise the Erastians, and others as Arminians err, who make the
Supreme Magistrate head of the Church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Protestant Religion, as it is contained in the Harmony of
Confessions, especially in the Confession of Faith, recorded in the first
Parliament of King James the sixth, laitly ratified, and confirmed, does not
acknowledge any Supreme Head, or Governor in the Church, neither Angel, Man,
Pope, Prince, nor Potentate, save the Lord Christ, from whom alone, all
subordinate power and authority is derived, to the officers, of his own Church.
(2) Because, if the Supreme Magistrate be a church officer he must derive his
power from Christ, and must be a Spiritual, and Ecclesiastic head and
Governor, and not a civil only. And if such then Christ has devolved his own
place and office upon him, which is without Scripture proof. (3) Because, if
the Supreme Magistrate be head of the church, he must have a right to this
Title, either by humane Law, or by a divine warrant. Laws of a Nation, cannot
make him head of the church, because such laws cannot make him an
Ecclesiastic, and Spiritual officer. There is no divine warrant, or commission
from Christ, as is clear from Matthew. 18. 17. From the Epistles to Timothy, and
Titus. From Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 7, 8. And from 1 Cor. 11. 28.

Quest. IX.
IS the Pope that Antichrist, that Man of sin, and Son of perdition, that
exalts himself in the church of God against Christ, and all that is called
God?

Yes. 2 These. 2. 3, 4, 8, 9 Rev. 13. 6. Matt. 23. 8, 9, 10.

Though this be denied by the church of Rome, yet the true description of
Antichrist agrees to him.

(1) Because, he is not one single man, but an order, and race of men,
succeeding to one another, in that same state, and office, which you will see,
by comparing; 1 John 4. 3. 2 These. 2. 7, 8. together. (2) His coming, is after
the manner of Satan; 2 These. 2. 9. (3) As to his name, he calls himself a
Christian, but in very truth an Adversary to Christ: and by consequence, one
that denis Jesus to be the Christ; Rev. 17. 14. Rev. 19. 19. 2 These. 2 8. 1
John 2. 23. (4) he sits in the Temple of GOD, as GOD; 2 These. 2. 4. (5) He
rules in the great city, and exercises dominion over the Kings of the earth.
6) He deceives them, that dwell on the earth, with lying wonders, and
miracles; 2 These. 2. 9. Rev. 13: 14, 15: (7) He causes all sorts of Persons to
receive his mark, on their right hand, or on their forehead; Rev: 13: 16, 17:
(8) To him agrees, what Paul says: and now ye know what withholds (namely
the Roman Emperor) that he might be revealed in his time; 2 These: 2: 6, 7:

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Communion of Saints.
Question I.
ARE the Saints bound by profession, to maintain an holy fellowship, and
communion in the worship of GOD, in performing such other spiritual duties, as
tend to their mutual edification?

Ye,. Heb. 10. 24, 25. Acts 2. 42. 46. Isa. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 11. 20.

Well then, did not the Donatists of old, and Separatists now err, who
maintain, that Hypocrites and wicked men, do pollute, and defile the worship of
God, not only to themselves, but also to others that worship with them: and
that therefore, we must separate from Communion in the worship of God, because
of them?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Church of the Jews in Christ's time was very corrupt; Matthew.
15. 7. Mark 6, 7, 8. And yet both by his practice, and his command, he would
not have his hearers to separate from it. For he both observed the feasts, and
preached in their Synagogues; John 8. 1. Luke 4. 15. John 10. 22. And he
commands his hearers to observe what the Scribes, and Pharisees bad them do;
Matthew. 23. 2, 3. (2) Because, the Apostle is so far from commanding separation
from the Church of Corinth, that he praises their meetings; (1 Cor. 5. 4. 1
Cor. 11. 20. 1 Cor. 14. 23.) notwithstanding of the many gross scandals, which
were among them; 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2. And 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13.
(3) Because, the Apostles calls the Galatians, the Church of Christ, brethren,
and the children of God, who were yet in some measure removed from GOD, to
another Gospel. Nay, says Paul, O foolish, (or senseless) Galatians, who has
bewitched you, (that is, so blinded the eyes of your understanding, that ye
cannot see the right truth; as the Iuglars bewitch the outward eyes, that men
think they see that which they see not) that ye should not obey the truth; Gal.
3. 1. And yet since it was a constitute true Church, it was his judgment,
there should be no separation from it, notwithstanding of all the foresaid
faults. (4) Because, the Church of Ephesus was a true Church, though they made
defection from their first love. So was the Church of Pergamus, though there
were in it who held the doctrine of Balaam. So was the Church of Thyatira,
notwithstanding that they suffered Iesebel, that called her self a prophetess,
and taught the servants of Christ to commit Fornication, and to eat things
sacrificed to Idols. (5) If we must separate from the Communion of the Church
in things lawful, for the faults of others, of for the faults of Ministers, and
if their sins pollute the worship of God to others, than, we must not keep
communion with any Church: seeing there can hardly be a Church where there are
not some hidden Hypocrites. Nay, where there are not some, who are known to be
such by the Minister. Yet such are not to be excluded, as Christ himself
teaches; Matthew. 13. 24. to 31. See the 47. and 48. verses of that same chapter.
(6) If the worship be polluted to some, for the faults of others, with whom
they worship, then must the Word and Sacraments, have their efficacy and worth
from the Persons, that worship, and from the dispensers of them, which is
absurd. (7) Because, wicked and evil men, do not pollute the worship to others,
but to themselves only; as it appears from the man, that wanted the wedding
Garment; Matthew. 22. 11. And from those who did eat and drink unworthily at the
Lords Table. Such do not eat and drink damnation to others, but to themselves;
1 Cor. 11. 27, 29.*

Quest. II.
Does this Communion, which the Saints have with Christ, make them in any wise
partakers of the Substance of his Godhead, or equal with him in any respect?

No.

Is there a mixture of the Divine Essence, with the Substance of all the
Creatures, because the Divine Essence is infinite, and every where present?

No.

Does every regenerate man, that is united with God, by virtue of this union,
become God the maker of Heaven and Earth?

No.

Are all the Acts of a man's will, and all his actions, even his most cursed,
and wicked actions, wholly Divine, which to resist, and contradict is rebellion
against God?

No. John 1. 14. Col. 1. 18, 19.

Well then, do not the Familists err, who teach, that the Saints are made God,
and Christ, by an Essential and Corporal Union with them?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Manicheans err, who blasphemously taught, that the Divine
Essence, was mingled with soul and body of every man, and that therefore all
his Actions were wholly Divine?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the personal union is given to none, but to Christ only; John 1.
14. The Word was made Flesh, that is, a true man like unto us in all things,
yet without sin. (2) Because, in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. Namely by an essential inhabitation of the Son of God in the humane
nature, by the uniting of his Divine Nature with the Humane, in the unity of
his Person. Bodily, that is Personally, Essentially, and Truly. (3) Because,
the union of the Saints with Christ is by Faith, not indeed by a personal
Union; Ephesians. 3. 17. (4). Because, there is no man that sins not; 1 John 1. 8,
10. (5) Because, Gods Essence, is most simple, and single, and infinitely above
and beyond all creatures; Exodus 3. 14. (6) Because, holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord God of Hosts; Isaiah 6. 3. (7) Because, Solomon in his prayer says, behold
the heaven of heavens, cannot contain thee, how much less this house which I
have builded to thy Name; 1 Kings 8. 27. (8) Because, the Prophet Isaiah says,
behold the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are as the smallest dust of
the balance esteemed; chap. 40. 15. (9) Because, the Manichean error, is the
outmost stretch of Satan's invention, beyond which he is not able to go. They
deserve not confutation, but to be looked upon, as Devils incarnate.

Quest. III.
Does the Communion of Saints, which they have one with another, take away or
infringe the Title, or propriety which each man has in his own goods, and
possessions?

No. Acts 5. 4. Exodus 25. 14. Ephesians. 5. 28.

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who affirm, that the goods and
possessions of the Saints ought to be common?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, in the time of the primitive Church, no man was obliged out of
necessity to deliver his goods. Neither did believers loss their right and
propriety which they had to them; Acts 5. 4. (2) Because, the eight command,
which is of perpetual use to all men, supposes a distinction, and propriety of
Goods. For if all Goods were common, it were impossible to steal. (3) Because,
there should be no giving of Alms: there should be no Hospitality, which is
contrary to the Apostle; Ephesians. 4. 28. Heb. 13. 2.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Sacraments.
Question. I.
ARE the Sacraments holy signs and seals of the Covenant of Grace, immediately
instituted by GOD, to represent Christ, and his benefits; and to confirm our
interest in him?

Yes.

Do the Sacraments put a visible difference, between those that belong unto the
Church, and the rest of the World?

Yes.

Do the Sacraments solemnly engage men and women to the service of God in
Christ, according to his word?

Yes. Romans 4. 11. Genesis 17. 7, 10. Matthew. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
1 Cor. 11. 25, 26. Gal. 3. 7. Romans 15. 8. Exodus 12. 48. Genesis 34. 14. Romans 6. 3,
4. And 1 Cor. 10. 16, 21.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, with the Anabaptists, who maintain, that
the Sacraments, are not seals of the Covenant of Grace, instituted by God, to
represent Christ and his benefits: but only bare tokens, and Tests of our
Christian profession?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Circumcision is expressly called a sign, and seal of the
righteousness of Faith; Romans 4. 11. Now, if Circumcision was a seal, and sign;
why ought not Baptism, and the Lords Supper to be signs, and seals also? (2)
Because, the names, and properties of the things signified, are given to the
Sacramental signs. Thus Circumcision is called the Covenant; Genesis 17. 10. The
bread is called the Body of Christ; Matthew. 26. 26. And Baptism is called the
washing of regeneration; Titus 3. 5. For no other reasons, but because they
represent and confirm things spiritual to Believers. (3) Because, the cup of
blessing in the Sacrament, is the communion of the blood of Christ; and the
bread is the communion of the body of Christ; 1 Cor. 10. 16. (4) Because, the
Sacraments bring into our memories, Christ and his benefits; and therefore, as
it were, they set him before our eyes, and so increase and confirm our faith: 1
Cor. 11. 24, 25.

Quest. II.
IS the Grace, which is exhibited in, or by the Sacraments, rightly used;
conferred by any power in them?

No. Romans 2. 28, 29. 1 Peter 3. 21.

Well then, do not the Papists and Lutherians err, who maintain, that the
Sacraments of themselves are true, immediate, and effectual causes of our
Justification, and give life?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the holy Scripture attributes our Justification to Faith only, as
an instrumental cause, and to no other thing; Romans 1. 17. Romans 3. 28. Gal. 2.
16. And therefore the Sacraments cannot be the efficient causes of our
Justification, and life. (2) Because, the Scripture makes an express
difference, between the work of a man dispensing the Sacraments, and the work
of the holy Ghost; Matthew. 3. 11. (3) Because, signs and seals of Grace cannot
confer, and effectuat Grace. But the Sacraments, are but signs and seals of
Grace; because to signify, and to have virtue, and power to do differ in
nature and in kind. (4) Because, many are partakers of the Sacraments, who yet
are not partakers of the Grace of GOD, as Simon Magus; Acts 8. 13. Ananias, and
Saphira; Acts 5. 4, 9. And how many thousands do eat and drink unworthily,
drinking and eating damnation to themselves; 1 Cor. 11. 29. (5) Because, many
have been justified, before ever they did partake of a Sacrament, as Abraham;
Romans 4. 11. And Cornelius with his fellows; Acts 10. 46.

Quest. III.
DOES the efficacy of a Sacrament depend upon the piety or intention of him,
that does administer it?

No. Matthew. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 13.

Well then, do not the Donatists, and Anabaptists err, who maintain, that the
Sacraments dispensed by a wicked, and graceless Minister are of no virtue, or
efficacy?

Yes.

Do not also some others now a days err, who are not far from the same opinion?

Yes.

Do not lastly the Papists err, who maintain, that to the perfection of a
Sacrament, the actual intention of the Minister, at least his vertual intention
of doing that, which the Church does, is necessary?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Judas who was a Thief, and a Traitor, did according to the
command of Christ baptize, as well as the rest: yet Christ, never called in
question his Baptism. (2) Because, the efficacy of the Word, does not depend
upon the piety, goodness, worthiness, or good intention of the Instrument;
Phil. 1. 16: Therefore, neither does the efficacy of a Sacrament depend upon
the intention of him, that does administer it. (3) If the efficacy of Baptism
depended upon the good intention of the Minister, then no Christian could be
sure, that he is baptized: seeing no man can be sure of, or know the Ministers
intention. (4) Because, the operation, and efficacy of the Sacraments, depend
upon the operation of the Holy Ghost, and the Word of institution; Matthew. 3.
11. 1 Cor. 12, 13. (5) Because, the Papists themselves (which is argumentum ad
hominem) cannot be sure, that the bread in the Eucharist is Transubstantiat
into the Body of Christ. And therefore in their Adoration, and falling down to
the Host, they commit most damnable Idolatry in worshipping that which is
neither GOD, nor any divine thing. I say, they cannot be sure, because the
Priests intention, may be deficient, while he is consecrating the Bread.

Quest. IV.
ARE there only two Sacraments, ordained by Christ, in the Gospel? I answer two
only, namely Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Matthew. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 20, 23.

Well then, do not the Romanists err, who make seven Sacraments, by adding to
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, Confirmation, Penance, Extreme Unction,
Ordination, and Matrimony?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, no other Sacraments, save Baptism and the Lords Supper are
instituted by Christ, in all the holy Scripture. (2) Because, the description,
and definition of a Sacrament, as you will find it in the first Question; does
agree only to Baptism, and the Lord, Supper, (3) Because, Christ was a
Copartner, and sharer of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which in his own
person, he did sanctify, and by them did testify and profess his communion
with his people of the New Testament, but never was a sharer of any of these
five Bastard Sacraments.

Quest. V.
MAY Baptism and the Lords Supper, be dispensed by any but by a Minister of the
Word, lawfully ordained?

No. Matthew. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 20, 23. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Heb. 5. 4.

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who maintain, that the Sacraments may
be dispensed, and administered by any Believer?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Papists and the Lutherians err, who maintain that it is
lawful for Laics, or Women, to administer the Sacrament of Baptism, in case of
necessity?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ gave the power of dispensing the Sacraments to them only,
to whom he gave the power of Preaching; Mat. 28. 19. But the power of preaching
is not given to all men; Heb. 5. 4. (2) Because, all that ever did dispense the
Sacrament of Baptism in the New Testament, were either called Ordinarily, or
Extraordinarly: as is evident from the examples of John the Baptist, and the
disciples of Christ. From the example of Peter; Acts 2. 41. From the example of
Philip, Acts 8. 38. From the example of Ananias; Acts 9. 18. From the example
of Paul and Silas; Acts 16. 15. 33. (3) Because, it is unlawful for any man, to
affix the Kings seal to a Charter, or Letterspatent, unless he be a person
authorized, and deputed by the King for that use. But the Sacraments are seals,
of the Covenant between God and his people; Romans 4. 11. (4) Because, women are
not permitted to speak publicly in the Church: therefore they have no power,
to dispense the Sacrament of Baptism; 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 12. (5) Because,
the Adversaries grant that it is unlawful to women, or Laics to administer the
Lords Supper: therefore it is as unlawful for them to administer Baptism. No
just cause of reason, or disparity can be given. (6) Because, the benefit of
regeneration is not tied (as the Adversaries may dream) to the outward Baptism,
as is clear and evident from the conversion of the Thief upon the cross. And
from 1 Peter 3. 21. Therefore, there is no such necessity of Baptism, as the
Papists, and Lutherians do fancy.

Quest. VI.
ARE the Sacraments of the Old Testament, in regard of the spiritual things,
thereby signified, and exhibited, the same for substance with those of the New?

Yes. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Well then, do not the Papists and Lutherians err, who maintain, that the
difference between the Sacraments of the Old Testament, and the New, consists
in this, that those did deliniate and shadow forth Grace; these contain,
offer, and confer Grace?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Apostle (1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3.) expressly says, that the Cloud,
and the passing through the Red Sea, did signify these same things to the Jews,
which Baptism signifies to us. And that the Manna, and the Water from the Rock,
did signify the same thing to them; which the Lords Supper signifies to us.

(2) Because, the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament, did obsignate and
seal up the same righteousness of Faith; Romans 4. 11. (3) Because, the Scripture
applies to Believers, under the Old Testament, the Sacraments of the New; 1
Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. And on the other hand, the Scripture applies the Sacraments
of the New Testament, to Believers under the Old; which is not done by reason
of the sign, for the signs are diverse and different: therefore it must be
done, by reason of the thing signified; and by consequence the Sacraments of
the Old Testament must agree in the thing signified with the Sacraments of the
New. (4) Because, the Sacraments of both Testaments agree in the Word of
Promise; Genesis 17. 7. Acts 2. 38, 39. Romans 4. 11, 12, 13. Gal. 3. 29.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of BAPTISM.
Question I.
IS the Sacrament of Baptism with Water by Christ's appointment, to be continued
in his Church to the end of the World?

Yes. Matthew. 28. 19, 20.

Well then, do not the Quakers err, who maintain, that Baptism with Water, is
not an Ordinance of Divine institution, and that there is no Gospel precept for
it?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ taking his farewell of his Disciples, gave them this
Commission, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptising them in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Or according to the Original Word, make all
Nations Disciples, by your Doctrine, Baptising them, in the Name of, etc. All
which words are spoken with one breath. Whence it is clear, that the same very
persons that were commanded to make all Nations Disciples by their Doctrine,
were commanded to baptize them. But it was not in their power to administer the
Inward Baptism; that is, to baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Men may
well administer the Water, or external sign; but it is Christ that bestows the
inward Grace, and thing signified; as is clear from Matthew. 3. 11. where John
the Baptist, says, I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance, but he
that comes after me, shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. If
any man had received this power of Baptising with the Holy Ghost, then surely
John should have received it, whom Jesus so highly commends, as, that there was
not a greater than he born of women; Matthew. 11. 11. And though our Savior
subjoyns, he that is least in the kingdom of Heaven, is greater than he, yet
this will not infer, that any among the Teachers of the Gospel, had the power
of baptising with the holy Ghost, which he had not; but only, that they did
show Christ more clearly, as having most perfectly accomplished whatsoever was
requisite to our salvation; and did publish this, not only to the Jews, but
also to the Gentiles. And so Christ as the Master employed only the Disciples,
as his servants to dispense and act ministerially in his service, reserving the
blessing of their employments to himself. Now, baptizing with the holy Ghost,
is the greatest blessing of the Gospel, and so cannot flow but from Christ
himself. (2) Because, the Disciples of Christ acted only ministerially under
him in working of miracles: therefore they could not administer baptism, with
the holy Ghost, seeing this is a greater power, than the other. The cureing of
the soul is a far greater work, than to cure miraculously the body. The work of
Conversion, and regeneration, is a work beyond the creating of heaven and
earth. There was only here, the introducing of a new Form, but no contrary
Form, or quality to be expelled. But in this, the heart of stone must not only
be taken away, but a heart of flesh must be given. That they acted only
Ministerially under Christ, it is evident from what Peter says, ye men of
Israel, why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power and
godliness, we made this man to walk; Acts 3. 12. And the same Peter says,
Eneas, Jesus Christ makes thee whole; Acts 9. 34 See Mark 16. 17. 1 Cor. 12.
10. (3) Because, if this commission, empowred the Apostles to baptize only
with the Holy Ghost, and not with water; then they in the exercise of this
Commission, would only have baptized men and women with the holy Ghost, and
not with water, but the contrary is manifest. ( Acts 2. 38.) where Peter makes
a distinction between being baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, and receiving
the gift of the holy Ghost: namely the gifts and graces of the holy Spirit,
which are common to all believers, and necessary to salvation. (4) Because, if
baptism with the holy Ghost be here meant, then all whom the Apostles did
baptize, were baptized with the holy Ghost, which is false: for Ananias and
Saphira could not have been Hypocrites, if they had been baptized with the holy
Ghost. And Simon was baptized and yet not with the holy Ghost, as appears by
Peter's answer to him verse 21, 22. of the fifth chapter. (5) Because, if
Christ's commission carry not a warrant for baptizing with water, whence then
had the Apostles a warrant for baptizing with Water? Either they must produce
and let us see another commission for it, or else they must acknowledge, that
the Apostles did warrantably baptize with Water. But another commission the
Quakers cannot show us from Scripture.

Quest. II.
IS dipping of the person (to be baptized) into Water necessary?

No.

Is Baptism rightly administered by pouring, or sprinkling water upon the
person?

Yes. Acts 2. 41. Acts 16. 33.

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who maintain, Dipping to be an absolute
and necessary ceremony in Baptism?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Greek word in the original signifies, as well to pour, and
sprinkle water, as it signifies to dip; Mark 7. 4. Where it is said, and when
they come from the market, unless they wash, or be Baptized, they eat not. (2)
Because, we read of three thousand baptized in one day, in the streets of
Jerusalem, by twelve Apostles at the most, where there was no river to dip them
into; Acts 2. 41. And was not Jerusalem, and all Judea, and the region round
about Jordan, baptized by John the Baptist himself alone, which could not be
done to all and every one by Dipping? Matthew. 3. 5, 6. (3) Were not many
baptized in private houses, as we read in the History of the Acts, chapter 10.
47. and 18. 8. with 9. 17. and 16. 33. (4) Because, Dipping of Infants into
water in these cold Countries, would be hurtful and dangerous to them. But GOD
will rather have mercy than sacrifice; Matthew. 9. 13.

Quest. III.
ARE the Infants of one, or both believing Parents to be baptized?

Yes. Genesis 17. 7, 9. Gal. 3. 9. 14. Col. 2. 11. 12. Acts 2. 38. 39. Romans 4. 11,
12.

Well then, do not the Anabaptists err, who maintain, that no Infants though
born of believing Parents ought to be baptized?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, to covenanted ones (of which number the Infants of Believers are
no less than their Parents; Acts 2. 38, 39. Acts. 3. 25. Romans 11. 16. Genesis 17.
7, 22.) that seal of the covenant, of which they are capable, is not to be
denied; Genesis 17. 7, 10, 11. (2) Because, the outward Sacrament of Water, cannot
be denied to such, as have received the Spirit of Christ, and to whom the
promises of the New Covenant, sealed up in Baptism do belong; Acts 10. 47. Acts
11. 15, 16, 17. But to some Infants of Believers, as well as to others come to
Age, the Spirit of Christ has been given; Ierem. 1. 5. Luke 1. 15. Matthew. 19.
14. Mark 10. 13, 14. And to them do the promises belong; Acts 2. 39. (3)
Because the Infants of Believers are members of the Church, which is sanctified
and cleansed, with the washing of water by the Word; Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Joel 2.
16. Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 7. 14. (4) Because, Infants no less than others
come to Age, were Baptized, in the Cloud and in the Sea; 1 Cor. 10. 2. (5)
Because, Christ commanded that all Nations should be baptized, a great part
whereof were Infants; Genesis 22. 18. Matthew. 28. 19. (6) Because, Christ commanded
Baptism to be administered to Disciples, (Infants also are here to be taken in;
Acts 15. 10.) Matthew. 28. 19. The word in the Original is Matheteusate, Teach,
Instruct, or make Disciples all Nations, or make Disciples among all Nations,
baptising them. The signification of this Greek word may be gathered from John
4. 1. where it is said, that the Pharisees had heard, that Jesus made
Disciples. So that Matheteuein and Mathetas poiein, are both one thing. (7)
Because, the children of Believers, were by a Divine right circumcised, under
the Old Testament: therefore, the children of Believers under the New
Testament, ought to be baptized; because the one has succeeded to the other.
That Baptism succeeds to Circumcision, is evident first, because, they both
seal up, the same very thing. Next, as Circumcision was the initiating Seal,
under the Old Testament, so is Baptism under the New: because the Apostles did
administer it so early to the Disciples at the first appearing of their new
birth, and interest in the Covenant. Moreover, because by Baptism, we are said
to put on Christ; Gal. 3. 27. That they both seal up the same thing, is evident
by comparing Romans 4: 11: with Mar: 1: 4: Acts 2: 28. Where Circumcision is
declared to be a seal of the righteousness of Faith, and Baptism is held forth
to be a pledge of the remission of sins, as also may be seen; Romans 4. 6, 7, 8.
see Col. 2. 11. 12. Where the Apostle teaches, that our being buried with
Christ in Baptism, is our circumcision in Christ; which shows that Baptism has
succeeded to us in the room of Circumcision. (8) Because, the Apostle says,
that the Infants but of one believing Parent are holy; 1 Cor. 7. 14. that is,
are comprehended in the outward Covenant of GOD, and have access to the Signs,
and Scals of GODS Grace as well as they are, that are born of both believing
Parents.

Quest. IV.
ARE Grace and Salvation so inseparably annexed unto Baptism, as that no person
can be regenerated, or saved without it?

No.

Are all that are baptized, undoubtedly regenerated?

No. Acts 8. 13, 23.

Well then, do not the Papists and Lutherians err, who maintain, that Baptism
is simply necessary to Salvation; and that all, and those only, who are
baptized, are most surely regenerated, in that same very moment of time,
wherein Baptism is administered?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Thief upon the Cross, and others were saved, that were never
baptized; Luke 23. 43. (2) Because, persons unbaptised have had saving Faith;
Acts 10. 22, 44. (3) Because, Infants that are predestined unto life, though
they die in their mothers belly, yet they cannot perish; Matthew. 18. 14. (4)
Because, some children before their Baptism, have been beloved of GOD, whose
love is unchangeable; Romans 9 11, 13. Others have been Regenerated by the Holy
Ghost; Luke chap: 1: ver: 15: and some have also been comprehended within the
Covenant of Grace; Acts 2. 39. (5) Because, that Baptism, without faith, and
the inward operation of the holy Spirit, has no efficacy to Salvation; Mark
16. 16. 1 Peter 3. 21. (6) Because, the Baptism of the Spirit, at one time goes
before, at another time follows Baptism with water; Acts 10. 37. Matthew. 3. 11.
(7) Because, very many that are baptized within the visible Church, are damned;
Matthew. 7. 13, 14. (8) Because, in those that are come to age, Faith, and
Repentance, are pre-required to Baptism; and therefore before they be baptized,
they have the beginning of regeneration; Acts 2. 38. (9) Because, not all that
are baptized are elected; Matthew. 20. 16. But all that are elected by GOD, are
in time regenerated; 1 Peter 1. 2. (10) Because, the Holy Ghost, is a most Free
Agent, and Worker: and therefore his operation (whence the efficacy of Baptism
depends) whereby we are regenerated, is not tied to any one moment of time;
John 3. 8. (11) Because, Baptism is not a converting, but a confirming
Ordinance, even as the Lords Supper is.

The Papists do otherwise contradict the second part, in affirming, that the
virtue and efficacy of Baptism (as to the abolishing, and sealing up the
remission of more grievous sins and faillings, which they call Mortal) does not
extend it self, to the time to come, but to the time past: so that if the
person baptized, fall into some deadly and dangerous sin, which wounds the
conscience, there is need of another Sacrament, to wit, Penance, whereby the
remission of that Mortal sin, as they call it, is sealed up unto him?

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Sacrament of Baptism, after the administration thereof does
not cease to be a Sacrament, of the blood of Christ which purges us from all
our sins; Mark 1. 4. 1 John 1. 7. (2) Because, justification by faith (which is
sealed up to us by Baptism; Romans 4. 11. Col. 2. 11, 12.) is for all sins
committed before and after baptism; Acts 13. 36. (3) Because, our Savior says,
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved; Mark 16. 16. (4) Because, not
only the beginning of our Salvation, is referred to baptism, but also
salvation it self, and eternal life; 1 Peter 3. 21. (5) Because, the Scripture
brings Arguments from the use and remembrance of baptism, by which we that
have been baptized, are stirred up to holiness, and newness of life, and to put
off the old man, and consequently all those sins, which the Adversaries call
Mortal; Romans 3. 2, 3. Gal. 3. 27. Col. 2. 11. 12.

Quest. V.
IS the Sacrament of Baptism, but once to be administered to any person?

Once only; Gal. 3. 27. Titus. 3. 5.

Well then, do not the Marcionites err, who maintain, that men after grosser
faillings ought to be rebaptized?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Hemerobaptists err, who maintain, that men according to
their faults every day, ought every day to be baptized?

Yes.

Do not lastly, the Anabaptists err, who maintain, that children baptized,
ought to be rebaptized, when they come to age?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Baptism is a Sacrament of Admission into the visible Church, and
of Regeneration, (which is one only, 1 John 3. 9.) 1 Cor. 12, 13. Tit. 3. 5.
Ephesians. 5. 26. (2) Because, there is a command for repeating, and frequent using
the Lords Supper; 1 Cor. 22. 25, 26. But no Precept, or command for repeating
Baptism. (3) Because, Circumcision (to which succeeded Baptism) was never
repeated, as the Passover was. (4) Because, Baptism is a seal of Adoption; Gal.
3. 26, 27. But whom GOD loves, and has once adopted, those he never casts
off afterward; Romans 11. 29. (5) Because, the Apostle says, there is but one
Baptism; Ephesians. 4. 5. namely, not only in number, but also in the administration
upon us all; Romans 6. 3, 4.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the LORDS Supper.
Question. I.
IS the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, called the Lords Supper, an
Ordinance of GOD, to be observed in the Church, unto the end of the World?

Yes. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 21. Matthew. 26. Luke 22.

Well then, do not the Quakers err, who maintain, the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to be no Gospel Ordinance, and that there is no Gospel precept, for the
administration thereof, until his second coming?

Yes.

They look upon this Ordinance, as a Type only and Figure, or shadow of
Christ's Body and Blood, which was commanded for that time, and for some time to
come, but not unto his second coming. Thus they abandon that most precious
Ordinance of taking and eating the Bread and drinking the Wine, as they do
baptism with Water, and all other Ordinances, to the introducing of black
Atheism into the World. They pervert the true meaning of the Scripture for the
defense of their damnable Tenets, as by this one instance Till he come, which
is meant (say they) not of his second coming at the last day, but of his coming
to dwell in his disciples and Apostles, as if Christ had not been in them, both
before, and after his ascension; even as they deny baptism, in Christ's
commission ( Matthew. 28. 19.) to his Disciples, to be meant of Baptism with
Water, because water is not expressed; they deny either wilfully, as their
Ringleaders do, or ignorantly, or by a delusion from the Devll, as the most
part do, the most sure and evident Truths in Scripture, prattling and gagling in
their discourse, sense, and nonsense, being oftener out of purpose, than in a
purpose, skipping from one subject to another, to save themselves from the
strength of reason, like subtle Foxes, which when they are beaten from one
hole, fly into another. But while they are obstinate, and pertinacious, in
maintaining Lies, and Untruths, they ought to be confuted, as the man was, that
denied Snow to be white. For it is not so much a blindness of mind, or a
weakness of judgment, as many well meaning people are misled by, as a wilful,
obstinate resisting of the Truth, as the perverse Jews did, or as, Iannes and
Iambres withstood Moses. They that are against commanded Gospel Ordinances, and
the Ministers of Christ, whom they look upon as the Priests of Baal, would (if
they durst) shake off the very Scripture, and Word of GOD. And it is more than
probable, that if they could shun the odium of open Blasphemy, and the hazard
of standing Laws against blasphemers, the most part of them would disown the
Scriptures, as many of them have done. For what kindness or respect can they
have for the Scriptures, but such as men carry to Topics or common places,
whence they draw Arguments to impugn others, or defend themselves with. For
they do not look upon the Word as their Rule, seeing (as they dream) they have a
Light within them, beyond that more sure Word of Prophecy, which the Aopstle
Peter prefers to a voice from Heaven. Nay, they have so little veneration for
the Scriptures, that they will not suffer them to be called the Word of GOD,
contrary to many express places of the Scripture; as John 10. 35. 2 Chr. 36.
22. Psalm 119. 172. Mark 7. 9, 10, 13. 1 Kings 16. 12. 2 Kings 9. 36. Ezra 1.
1. 2 King. 23. 16. Isaiah 28. 13. Ephesians. 6. 17. Isaiah 37. 22.

Quest. II.
IS Christ offered up to his Father in this Sacrament?

No.

Is there any real sacrifice made at all, for remission of sin, of the Quick
or Dead?

No. Heb. 9. 22, 25, 26, 28.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that in this Sacrament there
is performed a true and real Sacrifice (commonly called the Mass) wherein
Christ under the forms of Bread and Wine, without sheding of blood, is offered
unto GOD, by a Priest, and sacrificed for the living, and for the Dead, to
obtain remission of sins?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the sacrificing and offering up of Christ, is a part of his own
Priesthood; Heb. 9. 14. But the Priesthood of Christ cannot be transferred from
himself to any other; Heb. 7. 24. Therefore, no Priest can offer him up under
the forms of Bread and Wine unto GOD. (2) Because, the offering of the Body of
Christ, is once for all. It is but one single offering, and cannot be repeated?
Heb. 10. 10, 12, 14. (3) Because, the sacrificing and offering up of Christ, is
one only, and of a most perfect Merit, and Efficacy; Heb. 9. 14. Heb. 10: 14.
But the repeating of the same Sacrifice, and the multitude of Priests, are a
token of an imperfect Sacrifice, Heb. 9. 25, 26. Heb. 10. 10, 11. (4) If Christ
be often offered, he must often die and suffer; Heb. 9. 25, 26. But Christ
being now raised from the Dead, cannot any more suffer and die; Romans 6. 9. (5)
Because, that one and most perfect Sacrifice of Christ, did abrogate and take
away all those external Sacrifices, and caused them to cease; Daniel 9. 27. (6)
Because, there can be no propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, without shedding of
blood; Heb. 9. 22. Neither does he die any more, but is now in Heaven to appear
in the presence of GOD for us, and to interceed in our behalf; Heb. 1. 3. Heb.
9. 24. Heb. 10. 12. (7) Because, in every Sacrifice there is required (and
really is) a dying, and destruction of the thing sacrificed. But Christ still
lives, Romans 6. 9. (8) Because, no man can offer Jesus up to GOD, but Christ
himself; Heb. 7. 27. (9) Because, in all external sacrifices, properly so
called, there is necessarly required, a visible external Host, or thing
sacrificed, as the Adversaries grant. But the thing which is said to be offered
up by the Mass-Priest, namely the Body of Christ, is neither external nor
visible here, it being in Heaven and not on Earth with man; Acts 3. 21.

Quest. III.
ARE private Masses, or the receiving this Sacrament by a Priest, or any other
alone; as likewise the denial of the cup to the People; worshipping the
Elements, the lifting them up, or carrying them about for adoration, and the
reserving them for any pretended Religious use; are all these (I say) contrary
to the nature of this Sacrament, and to the institution of Christ?

Yes. Mark 14. 23. 1 Cor: 11. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Matthew. 15. 9.

Well then, does not the Romish Church err, whose Mass-Priests standing in the
Altar, celebrate private Masses, (the People eihter being absent, or standing
idle) who take the Cup to themselves only, and drink thereof. That administer
the Lords Supper privately to sick persons, and Bedridden; That teach to
administer the Communion to Laics, under both the forms of Bread and Wine, is
not only not necessary, but unlawful: Who teach, that for Adorations-cause, the
Elements are to be lifted up, and carried about, and reserved for Religious
uses?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ did institute the last Supper not for one a part, but for
many together; Matthew. 26. 27, 28. (2) Because, Christ in celebrating the last
Supper, did not eat and drink himself alone, but the Disciples did also eat and
drink with him; Matthew. 26. 27, 28. (3) Because, the Apostle commands the
Corrinthians, that when they come together to eat, they tarry one for another;
1 Cor. 11. 33. (4) Because, the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of Brotherhood,
and communion of the Saints; 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17: 1 Cor. 11. 33. (5) Because, in
the days of the Apostles, the Disciples and Brethren met together for breaking
of bread; Acts 20. 7. (6) Because, Christ when he had taken bread, and
distributed it, is said, to have likewise taken the Cup; 1 Cor: 11: 23, 24, 25,
26, 27. (7) Because, it is expressly said, and commanded (Christ foreseeing this
black error, which is now in their Church) drink ye all of it; Matthew: 26: 27.
(8) Because, the common People, which are Communicants, gather more Fruit from
both the Forms, than from one only; 1 Cor: 10: 16: and 1 Cor. 11: 26: (9)
Because, the Blood of Christ, the sign whereof is the Wine in the Cup, is not
only shed for Apostles, Preachers, and Pastors, but also for Laymen, and
those that are not of the Clergy, as the Popish Church speaks; John 3: 16. (10)
Because, the Apostles and Christians of the Primitive Church, did communicate
under both Forms; Mark 14: 22: 23: 1 Cor: 10: 11, chapters. (11) Because, it is
a Villainy to detract and withdraw any thing from Christ's Testament: and
therefore the Cup (which is left to us by Legacy; Matthew: 26: 27, 28:) is not to
be denied to any Communicant; Gal: 3: 15: (12) Because, Christ did not
institute any Adoration of the Elements: therefore this Adoration is to be
condemned, as Will Worship, Matthew. 15: 9. (13) Because, the Adoration is
founded upon the Corporal presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, which is
blasphemous, seeing Christ now is at the Right Hand of GOD; Heb: 1: 3. (14)
Because, this Popish Adoration of the Elements, is a worshipping of the
creature together with the Creator, a most abominable Idolatry; Daniel 11: 38:
Matthew: 23: 16: to verse 23. (15) Because, if the Elements ought to be adored,
because Christ is Sacramentally present in them; then ought believers (in whom
Christ dwells; John 14. 20.) to be adored, which is absurd. Nay the water of
Baptism, ought to be worshipped, seeing the whole Trinity is no less present
there, than in the Supper. (16) The worshipping of the bread, since no man (as
the Adversaries confess) is able to know certainly, that the Host is
consecrated, is a work done without Faith, therefore a sin; Romans 14. 23. (17)
Because, Christ commanded the Element of bread to be broken, eaten, and
distributed. But no where does Christ command the bread to be Reserved; 1 Cor.
11. 23, 24. (18) Because, the bread which is the communion of the body of
Christ, is the bread which we break; 1 Cor. 10. 16. (19) Because, the bread and
the wine, are not Sacramental Symbols, but in the very action; 1* Cor. 11. 26.
Here it is said, for as often, as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup; but
not, as often as ye reserve this bread. (20) Because, GOD commanded, that
nothing should be Reserved, of the Pasehal-Lamb (to which bread and wine in the
Lords Supper have succeeded) till the morning; Exodus 12. 10. That it might not
be put to any other use, whether for Idolatry, or common food.

Quest. IV.
DO the outward Elements in this Sacrament, in substance, and nature remain
still, truly, and only bread and wine, as they were before?

Yes. Matthew. 26. 29. 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that the Bredd and Wine, by
the power of the words of consecration This is my Body, are truly
Transubstantiat into the very body and blood of Christ; nothing remaining but
the outward forms, and Accidents of the Bread and wine?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation makes Christ's body every where
present, invisible, that cannot be handled, without shape, and figure, without
humane quantity, which is contrary to Matthew. 26. 6. Here Christ is only present
in Bethany. And John 20. 27. Thomas touches Christ. And according to Acts 3.
21. the Heavens must receive Him; and therefore cannot be every where. See Heb.
2. 14, 17. (2) Because, before and after consecration, the bread is called the
communion of the body of Christ: but nothing is said, or can be the communion
of its own self; 1 Cor. 10. 16. (3) Because, afrer consecration, the Apostle
calls not the bread, a Species or form of Bread; 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28. And
after consecration, Christ calls the wine the fruit of the vine; Matthew. 26. 29.
(4) Because, Christ did institute the Supper to be a memorial of himself until
he come again. But a memorial, is not of things corporally present, but of
things absent; 1. Cor. 11. 25. (5) Because, that which is properly broken, is
not the body of Christ, but the bread is properly broken, therefore the bread
is not the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16. (6) Because, Christ went up to heaven
bodily, and is to tarry there until the end of the world; Acts 3. 21. (7)
Transubstantiation destroys the very Essence, and being of the Lords Supper.
First, It destroys the sign, because it takes away the substance of the bread
and wine; the Accidents, and outward Forms only remaining. Secondly, It
destroys the thing signified, for it robes and spoils the body of Christ, of
its true quantity and dimensions (for according to that infallible
Philosophical Maxim, sublatis dimensionibus corporis, tollitur ipsum corpus.
That is, by taking away the length, breadth, and thickness of any Physical or
Natural body, you destroy consequentially the very essence and being of that
body) and introduces instead of one body, many bodies. (8) Because,
Transubstantiation takes away the Sacramental Analogy: and so, when the sign
is turned into the thing signified, all similitude between them is gone, and
cease. (9) From this doctrine do follow many great Absurdities inconsistent
with Religion, Sense, and Reason. As first, that Christ in the Supper, did both
eat and drink himself: that he was wholly in his own mouth: that he had a
double and twofold body; one Visible, another Invisible: That a Mouse, or Rat,
may eat Christ's Body: That his body being reserved, and laid up into a
Cupboard, in a short time may turn into Vermin. Must not Christ's body be in
many places at once? Must not his body, and all the parts thereof, his head,
hands and feet be in the smallest, and least crumb of the Host? Must not
Christ's body, having now that bigness in Heaven, which he had upon Earth, be
biger, than it self; longer, and thicker?

If Christ's Body may be in diverse places at once, why may not a man's body be
in diverse places at once? this is granted by the Adversaries) but a man cannot
be in diverse places at once.

Can Peter, for example, be both at Edinburgh and London, in the same moment of
time? He may then be both a man and not a man, at the same time: he may be a
man, because living at Edinburgh; and not a man, because dead at London. May
not Peter at Edinburgh go to York, and meet Peter there from London? And what a
mirry meeting must it be, when Peter shakes hands with Peter, and takes a glass
of Wine from him? May not Peter from London be killed there at York, and Peter
from Edinburgh be left alive? May not Peter alive be re-produced in a thousand
Cities at once, and marry there a thousand wives, and beget in one night a
thousand Sons, and Daughters? May not Peter be so many times re-produced, till
he make up an hundred thousand fighting men? May not one candle by
re-production be made as many; as may give light to the whole Universe? May not
one bottle of water be made so many, as may serve an Army of an hundred
thousand? May not one Guiney be reproduced as many times as may amount to five
and twenty hundred thousand pounds sterling? A brave invention for paying five
or six hundred thousand merks of debt: Next, as the Adversaries are engaged to
maintain that one body may be in many places a, once, so are they under a
necessity to affirm that many bodies may be in one place together, by way of
Penetration, for in every crumb of the Host, is Christ's Body. From which
position, it follows that a man's body may be contained within a Nut-shel. That
a Snuff Box may contain Athurs Seat: the hollow of an Ox eye, the whole Globe
of the Earth. That a Sparrow may swallow, one by one, the seven Planets, seeing
each one of them, may occupy no more bounds, or space, than a grain of barley
corn does: and yet the Sun which is swallowed, will be as big as at present:
for Christ's body in the Host, is as big and tall, as when he was on the Cross,
as the Adversaries confess. (10) We never read of a miracle wrought by GOD, but
what was evident, and conspicuous to all, and evidently seen to be such. As
when Moses his rod was turned into a Serpent, and became a rod again; Exodus 4.
2, 3. Such were the wonders of Egypt. Such was the dividing of the Red Sea: the
stricking of the Rock: and the flowing out of the waters; Numb. 20. 11. The
destruction of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, was evident to all the Israelites;
Numb. 16. 31, 32. So were the miracles, which were wrought by the holy
Prophets, such were the miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought. Was not
the water most evidently turned into wine; John 2. 7, 8, 9. But after the Words
of consecrationn uttered by the Mass Priest, the bread as to sense, is the same
thing it was. The bread has the same taste, the same smell, that same touch,
that same outward form, and figure, that same color, that same weight. It
occupies that same space and bounds, and has the same quantity in all its
dimensions. But the rod was seen a serpent, and the serpent was seen a rod. The
water was seen wine: it was known to be wine by the taste, by the smell, by the
color. Christ never wrought such a miracle as the miracle of
Transubstantiation. In all his miracles he appealed to our outward Senses. And
was it ever heard that Christ wrought miracles without a necessity?

Quest. V.
IS the Body and Blood of Christ in this Sacrament corporally, or carnally in,
with, or under the bread and wine?

No. 1 Cor. 10. 16.

Well then, do not the Lutherians err, who maintain, that the body and blood of
Christ, are corporally in, with, and under the bread and wine: and that (as the
Papists also teach) his body and blood, are taken corporally by the mouth, by
all Communicants, believers, and unbelievers?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ was sitting with his body at the Table. (2) Because, he
himself did eat of the bread, and drink of the wine. (3) Because, he took bread
from the Table: he took not his own body: he break bread, and did distribute
it, he break not his own body: so he took the Cup, and not his own blood. (4)
Because, Christ said, the Cup was the New Testament in his blood: but the Cup
is not in, with, and under the Wine. (5) Because Christ said, the bread was his
body, which was broken; the Wine was his blood, which was shed. But neither was
his body broken under the bread, nor his blood shed under the Wine, seeing
Christ as yet, was not betrayed, crucified, and dead.

In the next place, the end of the Lords Supper is, that we may remember
Christ, and declare his death until be come; Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25,
26. Therefore if Christ be now present with his body, in, with, and under the
bread, the Sacramental remembrance of Christ, and the declaring of his death,
ought to cease.

This Doctrine of Consubstantiation, is contrary to the Articles of our Faith.
It is against the Truth and Verity of his Humane Nature, which is visible,
palpable, and in a certain place circumscriptive. It is against the Article of
his ascension: for it makes his body, which is now in Heaven, until the last
day, to be in, with, and under a piece of bread. It is against the spiritual
communion of the Saints with Christ the Head, which the Lutherians makes by
this doctrine a corporal and carnal communion, contrary to 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
Ephesians. 1. 22. Ephesians. 4. 4. Romans 8. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 17. 1 John 4. 13. John 15. 5.

It brings with it many and great absurdities; as that the body of Christ, Non
habeat partem extra partem; has not one part of it without another; but as if
all the parts of his Body, were in one part, which is contrary to the Nature of
a true and real Quantum, which consists essentially in three dimensions,
length, breadth, and thickness. It makes in effect his Body to be no body. It
brings down the glorious Body of Christ from Heaven, and puts it under the base
Elements of this Earth. It makes as many bodies of Christ, as there are pieces
of Eucharistical bread. It makes his body to be broken in, with, and under the
bread, and bruised with the teeth: It sends his Body down to the stomach, where
it is turned into a man's substance, and afterward thrown out.

Moreover, all true Eating brings life and Salvation; John 6. 50, 51. but
eating by the mouth profits nothing; John 6. 63. Again, our union with
Christ, (and therefore our eating of his Body, from whence arises this union)
is not corporal but spiritual; Ephesians. 3. 17. And the Body and Blood of Christ,
are meat and drink; not carnal but spiritual; even as the hunger, whereby we
long for this meat is spiritual: and the life to which we are nourished, is
spiritual, and the nutriment is spiritual. Lastly, according to this Doctrine
of Consubstantiation, stiffly maintained by the Lutherians, it follows, that
Christ did (...) his own body, while he did eat the bread of the first supper.
That his Disciples did eat their Lord and Masters Body. That Christ before he
was crucified, was dead: That his Disciples were more cruel and inhumane to him
than the Jews were that crucified him: That he is often buried within the
intrals of wicked men.

Quest. VI.
IS the Body and Blood of Christ as really, but spiritually present, to the
faith of Believers, in that Ordinance, as the Elements themselves are to the
outward senses?

Yes. 1 Cor. 10. 16.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, that the Body and Blood of
Christ, in the Sacrament of the Supper, are not really present?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the body of Christ in this Sacrament, is spiritually eaten by
Believers; and his blood is spiritually drunken. But a spiritual presence, is a
true and real presence; because, it comes and flows from true and real causes,
namely from Faith, and the Holy Spirit. (2) Because, in the right use of this
Sacrament, Christ is united to a man by faith, and by the Holy Spirit; 1 Cor.
10. 16. (3) Because, the body of Christ, in so far as, it was given to the
death, and was broken for us on the cross, and in so far, as his blood was shed
for the remission of our sins; all these (I say) are the internal matter of
this Sacrament; Luke 22. 19. Mat. 26. 28. 1 Cor. 11. 24. (4) Because, those who
eat and drink unworthily, are said, not to discern the Lords body: and
therefore to such as eat and drink worthily, the body and blood of Christ must
be truly present, according to their spiritual sense, namely Faith; 1 Cor. 11.
24. (5) Because, length of time does not hinder, but that Faith may make things
past, and things to come spiritually present: and therefore distance of place
does not hinder, but that things most distant, as to place, may be made
spiritually and truly present; Heb. 11. 1. John 6. 56. Phil. 3. 10. Heb. 11. 9.

Quest. VII.
ARE all ignorant and ungodly persons, as they are unfit to enjoy Communion
with Christ, unworthy of his Table?

Yes.

Can they without great sin against Christ, while they continue such, partake
of these holy Mysteries?

No.

And are not therefore Church Officers to debar those who appear grossly
ignorant, and scandalous?

Yes. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29. and 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. and 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 13.
Matthew. 7. 6.

Well then, do not some men err, in their Practice, if not in their Opinion,
who suffer many ignorant, scandalous, and ungoodly persons, to come to the
Lords Table?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, ignorant and wicked men eating and drinking unworthily, are guily
of the body and blood of Christ, and so bring judgment upon themselves; Cor.
11. 29. (2) Because, all were not admitted to eat of the Passover, neither was
it for all promiscuously to partake thereof; Numb. 9. 6, 7. and 2 Chronicles. 23.
19. Esek. 22. 26. (3) Because, it was not lawful for any man to come to the
Marriage feast that wanted the Wedding garment; Matthew. 22. 11. (4) Because,
Pearls are not to be casten before Dogs and Swine: men manifestly ungodly, and
wicked; Matthew. 7. 6. (5) Because, they who deserve to be excluded from the
Fellowship and Society of Believers, ought not to be admitted to the Sacrament
of intimate Communion and Familiarity with GOD: but such are all these who walk
inordinatly; 2 cor. 6. 16. (6) Because, if the Church willingly and wittingly
admit such persons, they stir up the wrath of God, against themselves, for
suffering Gods Covenant, and his holy Symboles, to be openly profaned; 1 Cor.
11. 30. (7) Because, the Lord will not suffer such as are manifestly and
contumaciously wicked, to take his Covenant in their mouth: and therefore to
such persons, the seals, and symboles of his Covenenat, ought not to be
offered; Psalm 50. 17. (8) Because, ignorant, profane, and godless persons,
ought to be esteemed as Heathens, and Publicans; Matthew. 18. 17.

CHAP. XXX. Of CHURCH CENSURES.
Question I.
Has* the Lord Jesus as King, and Head of his Church, appointed therein a
Government, in the hands of Church Officers, distinct from the Civil
Magistrate?

Yes. Isaiah 9. 6, 7. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 These 5. 12. Acts 20. 17, 18. Hebr. 13. 7,
17, 24. 1 Cor. 12. 28, Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20.

Well then, do not the Erastians, and others err, who maintain, that in the
Holy Scripture there is no particular form of Church Government set down, and
appointed by Christ?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Lord Jesus Christ has delivered to the Ministers of his
Church, as to his own Delegates and Ambassadors (and therefore according to
his own laws) the whole power of Governing the Church, which he himself
received from the Father, to be managed, and put in execution in his own name
and authority; John 20. 21. Matthew. 28. 19. Acts 1. 2. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 11. (2)
Because, all the substantials of Church Government, under the New Testament,
which either concern Ministers, Ordinances, Censures, Synods, Councils, and
their power, are proposed, and set down in Scripture, namely in the third
Chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy; Acts 15. chapter. And 1 Cor. 14. 26,
40. (3) Because, the Lord Jesus Christ, has looked to the good of his Church,
no less under the New Testament, than under the Old. Therefore, since the
Church under the Old Testament, had a most perfect form of Government
prescribed to it: and since there is as great need and necessity of Church
order, and discipline, under the New Testament, as was under the Old, it must
follow, that there is a Pattern and Form of Church government no less set down,
and prescribed under the New Testament, than was under the Old; Heb. 3. 1, 2,
4, 5. Heb. 13. 8. 1 Cor. chap. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 20. And 1 Timothy 1. 20. (4) The end
of the Church Government is spiritual namely the gaining of men's souls to
Christ. But nothing that is merely of humane authority, can reach this end;
Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. (5) Because, all the parts of Church Government, are
particularly set down in Scripture. As first, those things which concern the
key of doctrine, as public prayer, and giving of thanks; 1 Timothy 2. 12. 1 cor.
14. 14, 15, 16. Singing of Psalms; Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Col. 3. 16. Public reading
of the Word, Preching, and Expounding the same; Acts 6. 4. Acts 13. 15, 17.
Acts 5. 21. 2 cor. 3. 14. Matthew. 18. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 4. 11. Heb. 6. 1. Gal. 6.
6. Secondly, those parts likewise, which concern the key of Discipline; namely
the ordination of Presbyters, with the imposition of the hands of the
Presbytrie; 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 1 Timothy 5. 22. Titus 1. 5. Acts 14. 21, 23.
Thirdly, the Authoritative giving of Judgment, and sentence concerning
doctrine; and that according to the Word; Acts 15. 15, 24, 28. Fourthly,
Admonition and public Rebuking of those who have offended; Matthew. 18. 15, 16,
17. 1 These. 5. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Fifthly, The excommunicating of those who are
contumacious, and ungodly, and who are convicted of manifest crimes, and
scandals; Matthew 18. 17. Titus 3. 10* 1 Timothy 1. 20. 1 cor. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Lastly, the receiving again into the fellowship of the Church persons cast out
by excommunication, having testified their Repentance; 2 cor. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Do not the same Erastians err, who make no distinction between Church power
and the Secular power?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ has committed the keys of the kingdom of Heaven to the
Officers of his Church which are Governors distinct from the civil Magistrate;
Matthew. 16. 18, 19. Matthew. 18. 19. John 20. 21, 22, 23. (2) Because, Church
power, and civil power differ specifically. The church, and the commonwealth
are Polities formally, and essentially different. They are not, as such, powers
subordinate, at least in a right line, but coordinate; Acts 4. 19, 20. 2 chronicles. 26. 18. Next, God the Creator and Governor of the World; is the
Efficient of the power of the civil Magistrate; Romans 13. 1, 2, 4. But
God-Christ, our blessed Mediator, and Lord of his church, is the Efficient of
the church particularly, and of its Government. The matter ( materia ex qua) of
the civil Government, is the secular sword: but the matter of the church
Government, are the keys of the kingdom of Heaven. The matter of the civil
Government ( materia in qua) may be a Senate, many people, the Person of one
king, of a child. (...) woman. But the matter of the church government, is not
of this kind; Heb. 13. 22. 1. Tim. 3. 15. 1 cor. 14. 34, 35. The matter of the
civil Government (materia circa quam) are men and women, as members of the
commonwealth, without, as well as within the church: but as christians and
members of the church, they are not such; 1 cor. 5. 13. The formal causes of
both are distinct; the one inflicts punishments merely spiritual; the other
inflicts punishments merely civil. Lastly, the end of this, is the corporal and
external good of a society; but the end of that, is the spiritual good of the
church and its edification; Matthew. 14. 15. 1 cor. 5. 5. 2 cor. 10. 8.

Do not likewise the Socinians, Anabaptists, Quakers, many Independents, and
others err, who maintain, that the key of Doctrine, or the public preaching of
the Word, is proper to any man furnished with suitable gifts, though not called,
and sent to that employment?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, no man can believe in Christ of whom he has not heard, and how
shall he hear without a Preacher; and how shall he preach unless he be sent; Romans
10. 14, 15. (2) Because, Women may have suitable, and competent gifts for
Preaching, and yet they are forbidden to speak in the Church; 1 Timothy: 2. 12. (3)
Because, the Scripture blames such, as have run, and yet have not been sent;
Ierem. 23. 21, 32. (4) Because, no man takes this honor to himself (that is,
he ought not to take it) but he that is called of GOD, as was Aaron; Heb. 5. 4.
(5) Because, the Scripture mentions, that GOD has set apart certain peculiar
Ministers, for the preaching of the Word; Romans 1. 1. Ephesians: 4. 11. Titus 1. 3.
(6) Because, no man can take the office of a civil Magistrate, or of a Deacon
of the church upon him, unless he be called thereunto; Luke 12. 14. Acts 6. 5.
1 Timothy 3. 10. And therefore no man ought to take upon him the public preaching
of the Word, unless he be called thereunto likewise. (7) Because, he that
takes upon him this office, without a call, he usurpeth Authority in the
church, seeing Preaching is an Act of Authority; 1 These. 5. 12. (8) Because, the
Titles which are given to the Preachers of the Gospel, are names of Office;
they are called the Ambassadors of Christ; 2 cor. 5. 20. Stewards of the Word;
Titus 1. 7. The Men of GOD; 1 Timothy 6. 11. and Angels; Rev. 2. 1. (9) Because,
there is not one approven example, in all the Word of GOD, for a gifted brother
to Preach without a call; and therefore seeing it is not done in Faith, it must
be Sin. Must every Fellow that takes a laxit in his tongue, go up to the Pulpit
and ease himself? (10) Because, there are Precepts and Rules set down in
Scripture, for all the Ages of the church, to the end of the world, anent the
calling of men to be Ministers of the Gospel; 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 6, 7. and 1 Timothy
5. 21, 22.

Do not likewise the Independents, Brunists, and Anabaptists err, who maintain,
that the Right and Power of Governing the church, belongs no less to the
multitude and community of Believers, than to the Officers of the church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Scripture expressly teaches, that GOD has committed the
Government of his church, and the care of his people, to certain chosen
Persons, and not to all, and every one; Ephesians. 4. 11. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
(2) Because, if the power of the keys were given to believers, in common;
either they are given to them as believers, or as they are gifted by GOD, with
gifts, and qualifications above others, for Governing the church, and chosen
out of the rest, for performing that office. If the last part be affirmed, it
follows, that the power, and right of the keys, is committed not to a
community of believers, but to some select persons, which we own, and maintain:
but the Independents deny. If the first be asserted, then it follows first,
that the care of Governing the church is committed to Women, and children,
being believers; and so they must necessarly have the power of seeing, as being
eyes, and watch men to the church: the power of hearing, as being the ears of
the church: and the body of the church must be deformed; because the whole body
is the eye, and the whole body is the ear, and whose many members are made one
member; 1 cor. 12. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. (2) It follows, that the
power of the keys, it not only given to all, but to Believers only: but it is
evident by the example of Judas, and other Reprobates, that many in Christ's
name have preached, who were not Believers; Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Phil. 1. 16, 17,
18. (3) Because, to whom Christ has given the power of Governing the church; to
them also, he has promised to give gifts, and enduments largely for performing
that office; John 20. 21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 4. 6, 7. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. But to a
community of Believers, God has never promised a Spirit for the Ministry, nor
gifts for that employment. Nor did he ever bestow, or confer any such
enduments. (4) Because, Christ our Mediator, appointed Ecclesiastical Officers
and Church Governors, before ever there was a formal church, under the New
Testament gathered, and set up; Luke 9. 1. Luke 10. 1, 2, 3. John 20. 21, 22,
23. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. This was all done before his death. And before his
ascension he did the like; Ephesians. 4. 8. 11, 12. Acts 2. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Now it
is evident, that there was no formal gathering together of a church, before the
Feast of Pentecost; Acts 2. Ecclesiastic Ministers, and Officers were
appointed for calling in, and gathering together the Mystical body of Christ,
to wit, his Members: therefore it was needful, that Ministers baptizing, ought
to be before Persons baptized. That Gatherers of the church ought to be before
Persons gathered. That callers and inviters to Christ, ought to be before
Persons called and invited. (5) This Democracy or popular Government, cannot
but bring in great confusion, whence many absurdities will follow. As the
church of GOD should not be an organical body. That Women who are forbidden to
speak in the church, most have the keys of the kingdom of Heaven hanging at
their Belt, forsooth. All must govern, and none must be governed. All must
attend the government of the church. All must be rendered incapable for going
about their particular callings, which God calls them to every day. Therefore
seeing this sort of Government, brings so much confusion with it, it is most
probable, that it is not of God who is a God of Order, and not of confusion; 1
Cor. 14. 33.

Quest. II.
ARE Church Censures necessary for reclaiming, and gaining of offending
brethren; for deterring of others from the like offenses; for purging out of
that leaven, which might infect the whole lump, for vindicating the honor of
Christ; and the holy profession of the Gospel, and for preventing the wrath of
GOD, which might justly fall upon the church, if they should suffer his
covenant, and the seals thereof to be profaned by notorious and obstinate
sinners?

Yes. 1 Timothy 5. 20. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 1 cor. 11. 27. to the end; Jude 23. verse.

Are the Officers of the church for the better attaining of these ends to
proceed by Admonition, by Suspension from the Lords Table, for a season, and by
Excommunication from the church according to the nature of the crime or
scandalous offense, and demerit of the Person?

Yes. 1 These. 5. 12, 1 cor. 5. 4, 5, 13. Matthew. 18. 17 Titus 3. 10.

Well then, do not the Socinians, Anabaptists, Quakers; and other Sectaries
err, who deny that any church censures should be inflicted upon offenders?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Erastians err, who maintain, there should be no suspension
from the Lords Table or excommunication from the church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the power of the keys, is given to the Ministers of the church,
wherewith not only by the preaching of the Word, but also by church censures,
they open and shut the kingdom of heaven; as will appear by comparing these
places of Scripture together; Matthew. 16. 19. Matthew. 18. 17. (2) Because, he
that offends publicly, and after Admonition, persists pertinaciously in his
sin, should be esteemed as a Publican and Heathen; Matthew. 18. 17. (3) Because,
the Apostle says, if any man obey not our Word by this Epistle; note that man,
and have no company with him. Note him, that is, either by excommunication, or
some other note of church censure; 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. (4) Because, the Apostolic
church, being moved by the same reasons (which now are) used the power of the
keys, and excluded from the Sacrament, men that were manifestly contumacious,
and wicked; 1 Cor. 5. 2, 3. And 1 Timothy 1. 20. 2 These. 3. 6. 14. (5) Because,
the Apostle says, them that sin (to wit publicly) rebuke before all, that
others also may fear; 1 Timothy 5: 20. (6) Consider the various ends of
Ecclesiastical censures, as the reclaiming of offending brethren, and the rest
of them, which are set down in the Question.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Synods and Councils.
Question I.
OUght there to be such Assemblies for the Government and further edification
of the Church, as are called Synods and Councils?

Yes. Acts 15. 2, 4, 6.

Are the decrees and determinations of Councils, and Synods, if consonant to
the Word of GOD, to be received with reverence, and submission, not only for
their agreement with the Word, but also for their power, whereby they are made,
as being an ordinance of GOD appointed thereunto in his Word?

Yes. Acts 15: 15, 19, 24, 27, 28, 29; 30, 31. Acts 16, 4. Matthew. 18. 17, 18,
19, 20:

Well then, do not the ^^^unists and Independents err, who maintain; that every
particular Congregation, or church has in it self, the full power of church
Government for exercising the whole power of the keys, without subordination,
or subjection to any Classical or Synodical Meeting: and that Presbytries, and
Synods, have only a power of counselling, advising, and exhorting, but no power
of Jurisdiction, to command or enjoin any thing in the Lord, to particular
churches or congregations?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Apostolic church referred all weightier matters, which did
equally concern many Congregations, to the free suffrages, and votes of the
Apostles, Pastors, and select Brethren, and not to the determination of any one
particular church, or congregation; Acts 15. 23, 24, 25. Acts 6. 2, 3. (2)
Because, it is evident from Scripture, that there have been many particular
churches, and congregations subordinate to one Presbytrie. For, in the church
of Jerusalem, it is manifest, that there were more than one congregation.
First, from the multitude of Believers, who were of a greater number than could
be of one Congregation, for hearing the Word, and communicating; Acts 2. 41,
42. Acts 5. 14. Acts 6. 1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Acts 21. 20. (3) From the multitude
of Pastors, and Ministers, whose pains and labors many churches required; Acts
1: 12. 13, 14, 26. Acts 2. 1, 14, 37, 42. Acts 4: 31, 34, 35, 37. Acts 6. 2.
Acts 8: 14: (4) From the diversity of Tongues among the Disciples at Jerusalem,
which were given, not only for the edification of those that were of that
Church; but also for signs and wonders to others, who were without, and not of
that Church. (5) It is manifest from this, that in those days, they had no
churches, or meeting houses built, but only met and conveened in private
houses, and upper rooms.

The same is also true of the church of Antioch, Ephesus, and Corinth, from the
Acts of the Apostles; and other places of Scripture. But all these
congregations were ruled and governed by one College of Pastors.

(1) Because, all these particular Congregations, are called but one church;
Acts 18: 22: Acts 12, 5: (2) Because, in that one church, there were church
Presbyters, who were called Governors, not of any one particular congregation,
but of the church, which was made up of many particular churches; Acts 20. 17:
Acts 15: 2: 3: Acts 13: 1, 2, 3: (3) Because, these Presbyters did meet
together for governing the church, and performed Acts of Jurisdiction, which
concerned the whole church in common; Acts 11: 30: compared with chapter 4: 35,
37: And Acts 21: 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25: and Acts 13: 1, 2, 3: (4) Because,
there is a particular example of a Synod, which had the power of Jurisdiction,
and which consisted, and was made up of members, out of diverse Classical
Conventions: For when the Question about circumcision, and the keeping of Moses
Law, which troubled the Churches of Syria, Cilicia, Antioch, and Jerusalem,
could not be determined in their own particular churches, the matter was
referred to a Synod of Apostles and Presbyters, who met at Jerusalem, which
decided the controversy, and appointed their decrees to be obligatory, and
binding to all these foresaid churches; Acts 15. Acts 16. 4. Acts 21. 25. (5)
Because, the Jewish church, which was a politic body, had in every city
Synagogues subordinate to one supreme council, or great Synagogue which was at
Jerusalem* Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 12. 2 chronicles. 19. 8. 11. Exodus: 18. 22, 26. Seeing
therefore, dangers and difficulties for the preventing, and healing of which,
the Lord has appointed and set up, in that church such a government, may be as
great, if not greater in his church, under the New Testament than was then: and
seeing the Lord has no less consulted the good of his church now, than he did
of old; it follows, that there must be councils, no less under the New
Testament than under the old, to which, particular churches ought to be
subordinate. (6) From the Light of Nature, and right Reason: for the Law of
Nature directs to a diversity of courts; namely, where there is any Rule or
Government in a city or commonwealth, and orders the inferior courts to be
subordinate to the superior, the lesser to the greater, and Appeals to be made
from them to the greater. And in bodies both Natural and Politic the parts
ought to be subject to the whole, for the good of both. Besides there are, and
will be very many Ecclesiastic affairs which will concern many Congregations
equally and alike, which cannot be determined by any one. (2) Because, the
Pastors and Presbyters of particular Congregations will stand in need each one
of another help, and assistance mutually. (3) Because, cases and difficulties
may occur, more entangled, and intricate, than can be settled and composed by
the Governors of any one Congregation. (4) Seeing particular Congregations
which ly nigh one to another, ought to shun divisions, and differences, and to
live in peace and unity, it follows manifestly, that there ought to be Synods
or Councils, consisting of the Presbyters of many particular congregations,
which ought to be subordinate, to these Councils, and Synods. (5) From Christ's
own precept, and command, Tell the Church; Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. For if our
blessed Lord appointed, that for a single brothers offense, (he trespassing
against GOD, or his brother, for gaining of him, and removing the Scandal) he
be brought before the church, it follows by consequence, that the same course
ought to be taken, when any one particular Congregation, offends against
another, and remains obstinate in their scandalous Opinion, and Practice. For
our blessed Lord, has sufficiently prescribed a Remedy in this place, for
removing of all Scandals, and Offenses, whether of one brother against another,
or of one Congregation against another. Nay, surely, since Christ has
consulted so much the conversion of one brother, that has sinned, and gone
astray; much more will he look to the good, and conversion of a whole
Congregation. (6) Because, any one single congregation, with one Pastor only,
has not the power of Ordination, an instance whereof cannot be given, either
from Precept, or Practice, in all the New Testament. Nay, the Ordination of
Ministers, in the New Testament, was always performed by a College of Pastors
associate together; Acts 6. 6. Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14. (7) Because,
from this doctrine of the Independents these and the like absurdities will
follow.

First, that the Prophets must be censured, and judged by way of authority, not
by other Prophets, but by the multitude: and vulgar of the Congregation, which
is contrary to 1 Cor 14. 32.

(2) That all the Councils, in the times of the Apostles, which were convocated
upon necessary occasions for matters which concerned many churches alike, were
but during the time, and extraordinary, and so not obliging succeeding
churches, though the occasions, and causes, why these Councils were convocated
then, are, and will be to the end of the world. (3) That private Believers,
must be the Bishops of their own Bishops, Watchmen of their own Watchmen. No
communion or fellowship among Ecclesiastic Ministers. That single and
particular churches, though they have defiled, and pudled themselves, with the
most black, and ugly Heresies, with the most abominable faults, and vices, yet
are not liable to any Ecclesiastic Censure, but must be refered, to the
immediate judgment of Christ, at the last Day. (4) That a College of Pastors,
and Presbyters conveened together from several congregations, shall have no
more power of the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, than any one particular man,
that is able to look to the good of his brother. (5) That a Pastor, out of his
own Congregation, has no power to administer the Sacraments, or to preach the
Word, or exerce any Ministerial Act. From which Absurdities, it follows
evidently, that this kind of Church Government labors under a manifest defect
of the Means of Propagating the Gospel. (6) That Christ, has as many visible
bodies, as there are particular congregations. That Men and Women, are to be
accounted Members only of a particular congregation, and not of the
Church-Catholick. And that those who are excomunicated, are only casten out of
a particular congregation not out of the Church Universal.

Quest. II.
MAY not the Ministers of the Church of themselves, by virtue of their office,
meet in Assemblies, with other fit Persons upon delegation from their Churches,
when Magistrates are open enemies to the Christian Religion?

Yes. Acts 15. 2, 4, 22, 23, 25.

Well then, do not the Erastians err, who maintain, that the Ministers of the
Gospel have no right or power in themselves, or by virtue of their office to
meet in a Synod, or Council?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Church of GOD, in the primitive times, had power in
themselves, to convocate their own Assemblies, for Worship and Government, not
only without, but against the consent of the civil Magistrate, as is evident
from the Acts of the Apostles, and Church Histories. (2) Though the power, and
right of meeting in church Assemblies be visible in the constitution, and
exercise, yet it is intrinseck and within the church, as well as the power of
Preaching.

Quest. III.
MAY Magistrates lawfully call a Synod of Ministers, and other fit persons to
consult, and advise with, about matters of Religion?

Yes Isa. 49. 23. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Matthew. 2. 4, 5. Prove. 11. 14.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that the civil Magistrate
has no right or power to convocate Synods, or Councils, but that it belongs to
the Bishop to convocate Diocesian Synods; To the Metropolitan to convocate
Provincial Synods; To the Primate and Patriarch to convocate National Synods:
To the Pope only to convocate and call Oecumenick and general Synods?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, under the Old Testament, Councils, and Synods were appointed and
called by godly Kings; 1 Kings 8. 1. 2 Kings 23. 1. 2 chronicles. 29. 4. (2)
Because, it is the duty of the civil Magistrate being born within the church,
to take care that Peace and Unity be preserved and kept in the Church: that
the Truth and Word of GOD, be entirely, and soundly Preached and obeyed: that
blasphemies and heresies be kept under and suppressed; that all corruptions in
Worship and Discipline be reformed: that all GODS Ordinances be lawfully
established, administered, and preserved. And if it should happen, that both
Church and State Iudicaturies, should make an universal defection from the
purity of doctrine and worship received and acknowledged, it is the duty of a
godly King, by virtue of his Regal Power, and Authority, to set about a work of
Reformation, and to call and command all ranks of People to return to the true
Worship and Service of GOD; Isa. 45. 23. Psalm 122. 7, 8: 9. Ezra 7: 23, 25,
26, 27, 28. Levit. 24. 16. Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 6, 12. 1 chronicles. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. 2 Kings 23. from the first verse to the 26. (3) From the example of
Constantine, that did convocate the first Nicene council: From Theodosius the
elder, that did call the first council of Constantinople: From Theodosius the
younger, that did call the first council at Ephesus: From Martianus, that did
call the Chalcedon council.

Quest. IV.
MAY all Synods or Councils since the Apostles days err?

Yes.

And have not many actually erred?

Yes.

Well then, does not the Popish Church err, who maintain, that councils
confirmed, and solemnised by the Popes authority, cannot err, neither in
explaining Doctrines of Faith, nor in delivering Precepts, and Rules of
Manners, common to the whole Church?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, all the Priests, Levites, and Prophets of the Jewish church, who
had the same Promises which the Christian church has now under the New
Testament; (1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. 2 Samuel 7. 16. Isaiah 49. 15, 16.) together with
the High Priest have sometimes erred, as is clear from the following
Scriptures; Isaiah 56. 10, 11. Ierem. 6. 13. Ierem. 14. 14. Hos. 9. 7, 8, 9.
Mic. 3. 9. The Lords Prophets that were immediately guided, and inspired by
him, must be excepted. (2) Because, councils under the Old Testament, lawfully
called, have oftentimes erred; 2 Samuel 6. 6. 3. Ier. 26. 7, 8, 9. 1 Kings 22.
6. And under the New Testament; John 9. 35. John 11. 47, 48, 52. Matthew. 26, 57,
59, 65, 66. Acts 4. 5, 6, 17, 18. (3) Because, the Pope cannot show a proof of
infallibility; Romans 3. 4. (4) Because, it is foretold in the New Testament,
that many Pastors, and Teachers shall become false Prophets, and turn Seducers;
and that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of GOD, showing himself that he is
God; Mat. 24. 11, 24. Acts 20. 29, 30. 2 Peter 2. 1. 2 These. 2. 4. (5) It is
most evident, that many councils approven and authorized by the Pope, have most
foully erred, and that some have openly contradicted others.

CAAP. XXXII. Of the State of Men after Death, and of the Resurrection of the
Dead.
Question I.
ARE the Souls of the Righteous, being made perfect in holiness, received into
the highest Heavens where they behold the Face of GOD in Light and Glory?

Yes. Acts 3. 21. Ephesians. 4. 10.

Well then, do not the Greeks, Arminians, Anabaptists, and Papists err, who
maintain, that the Souls of the Righteous are not presently after death,
admitted to enjoy happiness, which consists in seeing of GOD; but are put into
some Mansion, though it be not a Heavenly one; yet a place above Hell, where
they enjoy, even until the Resurrection, some Heavenly Delight, and Recreation,
without seeing of GOD?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Socinians err, who affirm, That the Souls of the Righteous
after death, until the Resurrection, are extinguished, and put out, to speak so?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Souls of the Righteous after Death are with Christ in Heaven,
and enjoy that blessed Vision; Phil. 1. 23. Acts 3. 21. Ephesians. 4. 10. (2)
Because, the Spirits of Just Men after Death return to GOD, and are received by
GOD; Eccles. 12. 7. Acts 7. 59. Note, that Solomon only speaks of the people
of GOD. Yet some understand it of the Souls both of Believers and unbelievers,
which are both sentenced by GOD, as supreme Judge, immediately when a man
dies, every man to his place, the Souls of Believers to Heaven, of unbelievers
to hell. (3) Because, the Saints departed, together with the Angels, are said
to sing perpetually Praises and Thanksgiving before His Throne; Rev. 4. 6, 9,
10, 11. Rev. 5. 8, 9, 10. Rev. 7. 9, 10. (4) Because, Christ promised, that the
Thief should be with him in Paradise, that same very day he died; Luke 23. 43.
Paul also calls it the third Heaven; 2 cor. 12. 2. 4. (5) Because, the Spirits
of just men, are said to be made perfect in holiness and glory, and placed in
the Heavenly Jerusalem with the Angels; Heb. 12. 22. 23. (6) Because, the
Apostle says, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved we
have a building of GOD, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; 2
Cor. 5. 1, 2. (7) Because, the same Apostle says, therefore we are always
confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord; 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8. (8) Because, the souls of the righteous after death
are comforted, and carried into Abraham's bosom; Luke 16. 22. 25.

Quest. II.
ARE the souls of the wicked cast into hell, where they remain in torments, and
utter darkness reserved to the judgment of the great day?

Yes. Luke 16. 23, 24. Acts 1. 25. Jude 6, 7. verses. 1 Peter 3. 19.

Well then, do not the Greeks, and others err, who maintain, that the souls of
the wicked are not adjudged to hells torments, till after the resurrection?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Socinians err, who maintain, that the souls of the wicked
shall never be tormented in hell?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the particular judgment of every single man, follows immediately
his departure out of this life; Heb. 9 27. (2) Because, the soul of the rich
Glutton, after it departed from his body, was tormented in the flames of Hell;
Luke 16. 22. 23. (3) Because, the souls of wicked men departed go to their own
place, that is to hell; Acts 1. 25. (4) Because, the souls of wicked men, are
no less punished in hell, than the Apostate Angels; Jude verses 6, 7. (5)
Because, the Spirits of those who in the time of Noah were disobedient are said
to be in prison; 1 Peter 3. 19. This prison is Hell; Matthew. 5. 26, 27.

Quest. III.
DOES the Scripture acknowledge any other place than heaven and hell for souls
departed from their bodies?

No.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who besides these two places, have devised
other four.

First, a place called Limbus patrum, in which the Faithful, who died before
Christ's passion, have been shut up, as in a dark prison, under ground; and
being without torment, and for the time wanting happiness, have been kept
closs there until Christ's Resurrection and ascension into heaven.

Secondly, a place called Limbus infantum, in which Infants which die without
Baptism, suffer the eternal punishment, not of Sense, but of Loss.

The third is a most pleasant Meadow, in which as in a Royal prison, the Souls
that are in it, want happiness, yet suffer no punishment of Sense, except what
arises from the delay of happiness, but only of Loss.

This place seems to be the Elisian Fields, taken out of the sixth book of
Virgils Aeneiods.

The fourth place is called Purgatory, which is a middle place between heaven
and hell, in which are the Saints, who have departed from this life, without
making satisfaction by temporal punishments, for their venial sins, yet have
gone thither for the guilt of their punishment, the fault whereof is pardoned
in this life: that when they have satisfied and are well purged from every spot
and blemish, they may be admitted to that blessed Vision in seeing GOD for ever.

Do not (I say) the Papists err, who besides heaven and hell maintain other
four places, for souls departed?

Yes.

By what reasons do you confute Limbus patrum?

(1) Because, the Souls of the Faithful that departed before Christ's passion,
were made Inhabitants of the same Heavenly Jerusalem, with the Angels; Heb. 12.
22, 23. (2) Because, the Spirits and Souls of the Faithful that died before
Christ suffered, returned to GOD who gave them; Eccl. 3. 21. (3) Because, the
virtue of Christ's sacrifice did no less extend it self to Believers under the
Old Testament, than to Believers under the New; Rev. 13. 8. (4) From the
example of Enoch, and of Moses, and Elias, which two before the passion of
Christ, were seen upon the mount with him; Genesis 5. 24. 2 Kings 2. 11. Luke 9.
30, 31. Heb. 11. 5.

By what reasons confute you Limbus Infantum?

(1) Because, the Covenant belongs to the Children of Believers though not
baptized; in which Covenant, glory and life eternal are promised; Acts 2: 39.
(2) Because, Christ said, that the Kingdom of Heaven belonged to little
children, though not baptized; Matthew. 19. 14. (3) Because, the Infants of the
Israelites dying before the eight day, were not shut up in Limbus Infantum, as
the Adversaries themselves confess. But the Nature and Essence of Baptism under
the New Testament, and the Nature and Essence of Circumcision under the Old,
are the same; Col. 2. 11, 12. (4) All the Arguments which are brought against
the absolute necessity of Baptism, do clearly overturn this fiction of Limbus
Infantum.

Thirdly, There is no such place, as a most pleasant meadow, in which, as in a
Senatorian prison, the Souls that are in it want Felicity; yet suffer no
punishment of Sense. This was made evident in the First Question. Lastly, there
is no such place as Purgatory. (1) Because, there is no such thing as Venial
sin, as it is explained by the Popish-church, upon which false Foundation, is
built this fancy of Purgatory; Romans 6. 23. (2) Because, temporal punishments do
not extend themselves beyond this life; Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. 1 Peter
5. 10. For in this life only, the Godly receive their evil things, as the
Wicked receive their good things; Luke 16. 25. (3) Because, after the fault is
pardoned, there remains no punishment to be undergone; Ezekiel. 18. 22. Psalm 32.
1, 2. Micah 7. 19. Romans 8. 1, 33. (4) Because, the Thief upon the Cross, that
was converted, did not suffer afterward any punishment in Purgatory; Luke 23.
43. Neither could his death, and confession upon the Cross, be accounted a
perfect satisfaction (as the Adversaries affirm) because he did acknowledge, he
had received the due reward of his deeds; Luke 23. 41. He that suffers as a
Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evi doer, his punishment cannot be accounted
a satisfaction; 1 Peter 4. 15. (5) Because, they that die in the Lord, rest
from all their labors; Rev. 14. 13. (6) Because, Christ's satisfaction for the
sins of Believers, is most full, complete, and perfect, and does not need our
imperfect satisfactions, whether for the Fault or the Punishment; Isaiah 53.
chapter; Titus 2. 14. 1 John 1: 7: Heb: 10: 14: Col. 1: 20, 21, 22. Neither by
our sufferings in Purgatory, is Christ's satisfaction applied to us. First,
because our sufferings there cannot be an instrument for applying Christ's
Merits to us. For on GODS part, we have the Word, Sacraments, and the Spirit as
means, for applying his merits to us. On our part we have Faith. Was it ever
heard of in the Word of GOD, that the Lord made use of exquisite torments for
applying his Grace? To apply Mercy by the executing of Justice: Is forgiving
debt, applied by exacting the debt? Shall pardon be applied to by the punishing
of us?

Quest. IV.
WIll such as are found alive, at the last day not die but be changed?

Yes. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52.

Well then, do not the Papists err, who maintain, that such as are found alive
at the last day shall die?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, Christ is ordained of GOD to be Judge of Quick and Dead; which
distinction would be needless, if all truly Died; Act 10. 42. (2) Because, the
Apostle says (as was cited) we shall not all sleep but be changed: which place
of Scripture is not to be read, we shall all therefore sleep, as the Papists
say, putting in the Greek particle oun, for ou, therefore for not. Because this
illative particle oun, cannot agree sufficiently with the Apostles Preface,
Behold, I show you a mystery: This Mystery is not death it self, but a change
in place of death, which is a great Mystery indeed. (3) As the Resurrection of
many of the bodies of the Saints, was a preamble of the great Resurrection of
our bodies; ( Mat. 27. 52.) So the translating of Enoch, that he might not see
death, seems to be a preamble of this change in place of death Heb. 11. 9.

Quest. V.
Shall the Dead be raised up, with the self same bodies and none other, although
with different qualities, which shall be united again to their Souls for ever?

Yes. Job 19. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.

Well then, do not the Socinians, Arminians, Anabaptists, Photinians, and
Marcionites err, who maintain, that the same individual body, is not raised up,
which we carried about with us here, and laid down in the dust, but another
body made of Air, or of some matter more subtle than Air, altogether void of
flesh and blood, made anew by Christ?

Yes.

Do not likewise many of the Quakers err, who maintain also, That the same
individual body is not raised again, but that there is a change thereof in
substance, as well as in quality?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, it is evident from Scripture, Phil. 3. 21. that there shall be a
transforming of those vile bodies at the Resurrection, to be fashioned after
the glorious body of Christ; and so not the forming and making of a new one,
which is hard to conceive, if the same individual body should not be raised,
and if this change here spoken of, be as well in substance, as in quality. (2)
Because, the Apostle says, He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies ( and therefore not bodies made of Air) by his
Spirit, that dwells in you; Romans 8. 11. (3) The same Apostle says, For this
corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortality must put on
immortality; 1 Cor. 15. 53. (4) Because, the Justice of GOD requires, that the
same individual bodies shall receive rewards, or punishments, which have done
good or evil, while life remained; 2 Cor. 5. 10. Romans 2. 6. Ephesians. 6. 8. (5)
Because, the body of Christ, who is the efficient cause of our Resurrection, (1
Cor. 15. 4, 12, 13, 16.) rose again that same individual body; Luke 24. 39, 40.

Quest. VI.
Shall the bodies of the unjust by the power of Christ, be raised to dishonor?

Yes. Acts 24. 15. John 5. 28. 29. Phil. 3. 21.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who maintain, there shall be no
resurrection of the unjust?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Apostle says, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every man may receive the things done in the body; 2 Cor. 5. 10.
(2) Because, the hour comes, in the which, all that are in their graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life: and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation: John 5. 28, 29. (3) Because, the Apostle says, being accused before
Tertullus, there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the Just and
Unjust; Acts 24. 15. (4) Because, according to the Enochs Prophesy, the Lord
comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them; Jude verses 14, 15. (5) Because, many
of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth, shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt; Daniel 12. 2.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Last JUDGMENT.
Question.
Shall the wicked who know not GOD, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, be
casten into everlasting torments, and be punished with everlasting destruction,
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power?

Yes. Matthew. 25. 31, to the end; Romans 9. 22, 23. Acts 3. 19. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9.

Well then, do not the Socinians err, who defining eternal death to be the
extinguishing of the Body and Soul, maintain, that the wicked are to suffer no
torment in hell; and that their whole punishment will be to be deprived of
Eternity, or anihilated, that is, both Soul and Body turned into NOTHING?

Yes.

Do not likewise the Origenists, and some Anabaptists err, who think, that not
only the wicked, but the Devils themselves, after many torments in hell, shall
be received by GOD into favor, and be made blessed and happy?

Yes.

By what reasons are they confuted?

(1) Because, the Apostle affirms, almost in so many words, that which we have
asserted; 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. (2) Because, Life Eternal, and Death Eternal,
are in Scripture opposed to one another in the same sense; Mat. 25. 46. But
Life Eternal in Scripture, is not taken for being simply Eternal, but for being
Eternally happy, or to be in a blessed Eternal state and condition; Psalm 133.
3. Therefore, Eternal death must be taken in Scripture not for anihilation, or
being turned into Nothing; but for an Eternal wretched and miserable state and
condition. (3) Because, the Scripture saves, but the children of the kingdom
shall be casten into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth; Matthew. 8. 12, 13. (4) Because, the Scripture affirms expressly, that the
wicked are tormented in hell; Luke 16. 24. Next, there are some degrees of
torments there, but there are no degrees in non esse, that is, in not to be.
(5) Because, Abraham saves expressly, there can no man pass from the place of
torment, to the place of bless and happiness; Luke 16. 26. (6) Because, the
torments of the wicked are called a Worm that dies not; a fire that cannot be
extinguished. (7) Because, the Scripture says, that the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever; Rev. 14: 11. Rev. 19. 3. (8) Because, the
wicked will be carried into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels; Matthew. 25. 46. And the same wicked, are to rise again to shame, and
everlasting contempt; Daniel 12. 2. And to suffer the vengeance of Everlasting
fire; Jude verse 7. And now only is the accepted time, and now is the day of
Salvation; 2 Cor. 6. 2.

FINIS.

