

THE ANATOMY OF Human Bodies; Comprehending the most Modern DISCOVERIES AND
CURIOSITIES In that ART. To which is added A Particular Treatise OF THE
Smallpox and Measles. Together with several PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS AND
EXPERIENCED CURES. With 139 FIGURES curiously cut in Copper, Representing the
several Parts and Operations.

Written in Latin by ISBRAND de DIEMERBROECK, Professor of Physic and Anatomy
in Utrecht.

Translated from the last and most correct and full Edition of the same, By
WILLIAM SALMON, Professor of Physic.

LONDON Printed for W. WHITWOOD at the Angel and Bible in Little-Britain, 1694.
At which place all Dr. Salmons Works are sold

THE PREFACE.
HOW beneficial the exact knowledge of the Fabric of humane Bodies is, and how
difficult the same skill is to attain, the continual improvements in Anatomy
one Age after another, notwithstanding the utmost diligence of the last, do
sufficiently evince. Were it not beneficial, so many Philophers and Physicians
in all Ages had not employed their pains about it; and were it not difficult,
some or other of these great Men had completed it. Of which number we may
reckon Democritus and Hippocrates, the two Parents of solid Philosophy and
Physic, one of which great Men was by the City of Abdera invited to take a
Journey to cure the other of Madness; but the Physician finding the Philosopher
intent upon his Anatomical scrutiny for the seat of the Bile, and receiving
wise Answers to all his other enquiries, returned satisfied that the multitude
of that place labored of the very Disease, which they were so mad to have
cured in Democritus.

Many more great Men among the Ancients, such as Aristotle, Diocles,
Erasistratus, Praxagoras, Herophilus, Asclepiades, Euripho and others
cultivated this Province; but none in former Ages excelled Galen.

Nor was Anatomy in esteem only among Phisophers and Physicians; but even Kings
and Emperors were both Spectators of, and Actors in it. Alexander the greatest
of Emperors, employed both himself and his Master Aristotle sometimes in
Dissections, notwithstanding his Conquests and great Affairs, which took up so
much of his time and care. Also the best of Emperors, Marcus Antoninus, who was
so prudent and wise a Man, gave himself to the search of Nature and to cutting
up of humane Bodies, that he might the better understand his own Frame and
Constitution. Nor did several Egyptian Kings disdain to manage the Anatomical
Knife with their own Royal hand.

Certain also it is, that Boethus and Paulus Sergius the Roman Consuls, and
other great Personages, both Learned and Warlike, honored Galen with their
presence at his Anatomical Administrations* where they might see and admire the
skill and workmanship of the Divine hand in building a Tabernacle for the Soul
of Man.

And indeed among all the advantages of Learning, none is greater than to have
skill in Nature; and yet above all, the highest pitch of knowledge is to know
our selves. Be he Philosopher, Orator, Lawyer or Divine, that thinks he knows
so much, to what purpose is it, if he is wise abroad and a fool at home, if he
knows not the Habitation of his Soul, the seat of his Reason, whereby he is
willing to distinguish himself specifically from Brutes, and signally from the
most of Men? What an exquisite piece of folly would it appear to be, if a Man
skilled in Minerals and Plants, and in most other subjects of Natural enquiry,
yet should not know the Animal Economy at all? Certainly he would to judicious
Eyes appear no less impertinent, than the Man that should mind every Man's
business but his own, and in balancing Accounts would be found as rich in
knowledge, as the foresaid impertinent would be in Estate.

For Anatomy is not a knowledge only honorable and pleasant; but profitable and
highly useful, especially to a Physician; so necessary, that the Ancients
thought it the very Foundation upon which the celebrated Art of Physic is
built, which being once taken away, the whole Art must fall to ruin.

As an Architect, when he goes to repair a decayed House, must of necessity
know all the Parts of the House, of what substance they must be, of what
figure, how many in number, and how they must one be joined to another. So he
that professes Physic, can never cure the diseased Parts aright, unless he has
an exact Idea of their substance, figure, bulk, number, and mutual connection
one to another, which can only be attained by Anatomy.

If a Philosopher ask a Reason of any action either Natural or Animal, it is
only the knowledge of the Parts of a Humane Body, that can furnish a Man with
an Answer. And if you are to cut out a Thorn, or the Point of any Weapon, or if
you are to open a Fistula or an Abscess, you can perform nothing aright without
Anatomy.

It is through want of Skill in this, that sometimes Sense, sometimes Motion,
sometimes both are violated, or wholly abolished, and (which is worst of all) a
contemptuous neglect hereof by some Physicians has been the cause of present
death to some Persons.

Of such moment is the knowledge of Anatomy, both in cure of Diseases, and in
presaging the Event. But unskilfulness makes Men bold where there is reason to
fear, and timorous where all is safe, and no occasion of fear is.

Yet now adays how many Medical Rabbis are there pretending themselves to be
either Chemists or Galenists, and not inferior to the Master of their Sect, who
do not understand Books of Anatomy: So far are they from ever having seen or
shown to others any Dissections. And divest but these fellows of their Titles,
you will find them mere Syrrup-mongers, endeavoring more to please the Palate
than to cure Diseases.

Which indeed is the reason we have so many circumforaneous Impostors, who
promise boldly every thing to the unlearned Multitude, relying upon Receipts for
Medicines composed without Reason.

Hence it is come to pass, that he who knows but how to make up a Medicine,
dares pronounce his Judgment of Diseases, and give his Medicines without any
regard had to an able and learned Physician. And so Fellows play with Men's
lives, who have skill in nothing, much less in so abstruse an Art as Physic is.

Wisely therefore have our Laws provided, that none but such as are recommended
by their Learning and Probity should be admitted to take care of the Health of
Men, none I say, but such as are approved of by the Learned. We have not in
England wanted our Cato's, Boethus's and Paulus's, who by Law have kept
Sycophants and Knaves from Practicing of Physic; who have obliged every one to
Practice that Art and Trade he has been brought up to, and who have restored
Learning to its place and honor.

For only the Learned in Anatomy know, what Part a Disease does primarily
affect, and what by Sympathy, of what Nature things are, and what Remedies
ought to be applied to each Part, since the Method of Cure varies according to
the Nature of several Parts.

Only Men skilled in Anatomy can give true Judgment upon a Wound, whether it be
Mortal or no, which is of no small moment to a Judge or Magistrate for their
Conduct and Procedure upon Criminals in that particular.

Such likewise they must be, who by dissecting a Diseased Body, can procure any
advantage to the living, by finding out more proper Remedies, according as by
Dissection they have found in others the cause and seat of the Disease.

Though by what has already been said, you see the Credit and Reputation
Anatomy has in former Ages been, yet the Study of it never flourished more than
in this last Age, wherein so many are so strenuously industrious, that one
would think in our Age it might be brought to perfection* Who can ever forget
the Learned Asellius, for finding out the Lacteal Veins? No less than immortal
Glory can be due to the Renowned Harvey, our Countryman, for finding out the
Circulation of the Blood. He that cannot acknowledge the Excellency of our
Willis for his Anatomy of the Brain, must never pretend to the subject
Discourse. The curious Researches of our Wharton on the Glands surpass what has
been said in former Times. The Scholastic and Learned Glisson has performed his
Share in trasing the Meanders of the Liver-Vessels. The acute Lower has shown
in sensible Terms, how the prime Mover of the Humane Machine exerts its Power.
The renowned Bartholinus in Denmark, the Swammerdam's, Bilsius's, de Graaf's,
and others in the Low Countries; but especially the Learned and Laborious
Diemerbroeck, in Utrecht, have raised to themselves immortal Monuments of their
Learning and Industry about this Subject. And upon Diemerbroecks Labors
principally, what I have here to say, shall be employed. He says, he had for
several Years been conversant in Anatomical Studies; that in teaching others,
he had learned many things himself that were new, and till his Time altogether
unknown; upon which he resolved to write a Book of particular Observations, and
make them public, as he saw several others had done before him. But abundance
of his Friends dissuaded him from this, and urged him rather to write a whole
Body of Anatomy, and to put into it (besides what Galen, Eustachius, Vesalius,
and others had written, who had been most excellent in Works of this Nature)
not only his own, but all the Modern Inventions of all Learned Men whatsoever.
This Advice was not unwelcome to him, because none had attempted this before
him. But the Attendance upon his Practice, the Greatness of the Undertaking,
and the Criticalness and Censoriousness of this curious Age, to say nothing of
the Malice and Envy of some, did a little deterr him. However, these
Difficulties being surmounted, he undertook the Business, finished it, and made
it public.

All the new things, which either he could find out, or were hitherto found out
by the best of Anatomists, he has here brought upon the Stage. He further, in
his First Edition, engaged, that whatever hereafter he should find lying hid in
obscurity, he would bring to light, and when he died, that he would bequeath
all to Posterity. For as long as the Desire of advancing Anatomical Knowledge
should continue in the World; he knew innumerable other things would be
produced, which we cannot now so much as dream of, such things he recommends to
Posterity, and that out of Love to the common Welfare, Men would not hereafter
scruple to undertake this Province.

In this Anatomy of his, he tells you, he is not so ambitious as to arrogate to
himself the excellent Sayings, or the new Inventions of others; but desiring to
give every one his due Honor; he sets down the Names of the Authors, of whom
he borrowed any thing; for, as Pliny says, He ever reckoned it a piece of Good
Nature and Modesty, to acknowledge his Benefactors, but that it was an Argument
of Guilt and Ill Nature, to choose rather to be catched in Theft, than to
restore another his own, when he at the same time is in debt upon Interest. And
so he gives to all their Due. For, he professes, he would not be accounted one
of these, that by writing of Books, would procure themselves a Name, who by
raking and scraping all they can from others, get a great deal together, and
vaunt it all for their own, concealing the Authors Names from whence they
stole, when in the mean time they mis-apprehend perhaps the Authors Meaning,
and what they have thence transcribed, neither they themselves well understand,
nor are they able to express it to others.

Nevertheless, in quoting of Authors, he uses not many Flatteries and
Complements, but avoids all fulsome and Adulatory Blandishments, wherewith
abundance of Books now adays are rather blotted than adorned, while they style
the Authors, whom they cite, the most Eminent, never enough to be commended,
the most Acute, the most Famous, the most Learned, the most Noble, the most
Celebrated, etc, and adorn themselves, especially such as are yet alive, with I
know not what Epithetes (it may be to avoid and prevent some shroud Objections,
which happily they might otherwise fear; or that they themselves being ambitious
and delighted with such empty Applause, desire the same Favor, at one time or
other, to be returned upon themselves) he reckons, all he quotes, to be Learned
Men, nor does he doubt of it, though he thinks some more Learned than others.
Therefore he would have no Man take it ill, that he lards not his Name with
many such Epithets; because, as Complements now pass indifferently upon all
Men, they rather fully the Illustrious Worth of the Deserving, than add any
Splendour to it.

In this Book he studies not so much Politeness of Style, as the Truth, which
has no occasion for Bombast and Rhetoric. But that he may the better discover
what the Truth is, in several places he opposes other Men's Opinions, but in a
friendly way; some he refutes, and wholly rejects, but without any Malice; here
and there he ushers in his own, but without Ambition; and whereas he has
observed, that in most Authors, several things are wanting about the True Use
of the Parts, many things, either written or judged amiss, in several places he
treats more fully concerning it, but without Disparagement or Reproach to
others. For he never reckoned it* any Fault in a Learned Man, that all other
Men's Writings do not please him alike, nor that he corrects many things, and
contradicts many, provided it be done civilly, and without Virulence and
Calumny; which alas! is now the Practice of too many Supercilious Scriblers,
who, the better to defend their Darling Opinions, and these often taken, and
stolen from others, and vouched for their own, had rather attack their
Adversaries with foul Words and Scurrilous Writings (which does not at all
become Learned Men) then concert the difference in friendly Reasonings.

In the Seventh Book of this Work, and other where, in describing the Ducts of
the Veins, he takes a new and unusual Method; for whereas other Anatomists
heretofore derived the Branchings of the Veins from the Vena Cava and other
great Veins, to all the Parts of the Body, he on the contrary prosecutes them
from the Parts to the great Veins, and so to the Vena Cava, that so the
continual Progress of the Blood, according to the Order of Circulation, might
the better be demonstrated.

Thus much he published in his Life Time: But before he died, he had made
several fresh Collections, and somewhere Alterations. These in this last
Edition, from whence this Translation was made, are added by his Learned Son.
Wherein we may modestly aver, that the most material things, found either in
Ancient or Modern Anatomists, are comprehended, and far more Opinions and
Discoveries, than ever were contained in any one Anatomical Treatise yet extant.

Now it being agreed by all skilful Physicians, that Anatomy is the solid Basis
of Physic; and (as has before been said) the Learned Diemerbroeck having
excelled in laying the Corner Stone, how can it reasonably be suggested, that
the same Learned Hand cannot build a Superstructure Correspondent? The Author
therefore having not rested in Theory alone, but having put in Practice what he
so well knew in the Art of saving Men; and moreover, having given, not only his
own, but other Men's Practice in the most Epidemic Diseases, the Smallpox and
Measles, which were never till this Edition made public; we thonght we could
not do better, than give our Countrymen, in their own Tongue, what he so
advantagiously has written in the Learned, and only to such as understand that.
In these acute and violent Diseases, we find the best Methods yet invented,
scarce sufficient to rescue the major Part of Patients from them; how requisite
therefore is it, that the Skill of so Learned and successful a Physician as
Ours should not dye with him? But he rests not here, his worthy Son has
likewise communicated in this Edition, some of his Fathers Observations upon
various Diseases, wherein consists the Life and Soul of Physic; for in them, as
in a Piece of Workmanship, you may see the Authors Skill, better than in any
Precepts, inasmuch as it is much easier to prescribe Rules how to act, than to
put those same Rules in Practice. So that in this Volume you may have a Summary
of the Excellencies in the Art of Physic, which so many Learned Men in all
Ages, since Physic was an Art, have by their utmost Diligence and Ingenuity
been able to accomplish.

Tab. I.
THE EXPLANATION Of the Sixteen PLATES.
The EXPLANATION of the First TABLE. In Folio 68.
This Table exhibits the Delineations of the Chyle-bearing Channels, the
Pectoral Chyle-bearing Channel, and of the Lymphatic Vessels of the Liver; cut
in Brass by their first Discoverers.

FIGURE I. All the said Vessels, as they occur in a Dog.
A. THE Ventricle. B. The Pylocus. CC. The Duodene Gut. DDD. The Iejune Gut.
EEE. The Ilion Gut. F. The Blind Gut. H. The Beginning of the Right Gut. IIIII.
The five Lobes of the Liver. K. The Vesicle of the Gall. LL. The Kidneys. MM.
The Emulgent Veins. NN. The Hollow Vein. O. The Gate Vein. R. The Vesicle of
the Chylus. SS. The Mesentery. TT. The broken Part of the Mesentery, that the
Ligature of the Lymphatic Vessels of the Liver might be conveniently adapted.
aa. The Glandulous Sweetbread. bb. The Fleshy Sweetbread, annexed to the
Duodenum, and lying under the Ventricle. ccccc. The milkie Veins lying between
the Intestines and the Glandulous Sweetbread. ddd. The Milkie Veins issuing
out of the Glandulous Sweetbread. eeeee. The Exits of the Lymphatic Vessels
from the Liver. fff. The Progress of them to the Kernel. m. And from thence
into the Chylus-Bag. gg. Two Branches of the Choller-receiving Channel. H. The
Insertion of this Channel into the Duoclenum. iiiii. The (...) Veins. m. A
K^rnel seated under the Porta Vein, receiving the Lymphatic Vessels of the
Liver. nn. One of these Channels cree^ng through the Vesicle of the Gal^. oooo.
The Ramification of the Porta Vein, and its Ingress into the Liver. tt. The
Veins of the Vesicle of the Gall. xxxx. The Places of the Valves in those
Channels.
FIGURE II.
pppp. The Places of the same Valves.
FIGURE III.
T. The Bifurcation of the Chylebearing Channel in the Thorax, under the Heart,
as it is frequently found.
FIGURE IV.
z. The various Ramification of the Chyle-bearing Channel less common.
FIGURE V.
x. The Axillary Vein, with the Left Iugular i. n. The threefold Insertion of
the Chyle-bearing Channel, less common; for it is more frequently single.
FIGURE VI.
AAA. The same Insertion in a Man's Head. BB. The Axillary Vein entire. C. The
External Iugular Vein. d. The Clavicle.
FIGURE VII.
A. The Heart removed to the Side. BB. The Lungs turned back. CC. The Hollow
Vein. D. The Right Axillary Vein. E. The Left Axillary Vein. F. A part of the
same Vein opened to show the Insertion of the Chylebearing Channel. G. The
Sternon delineated only with Points. H. The Left Iugular Vein. II. The Aorta
Arteria. KK. The little Chylus-bag. L. The Hepatic Branches of the Hollow Vein.
aa. The Emulgent Veins. bb. The Lumbar Veins. dd. The Crural Veins. eeee. The
Lymphatic Vessels under the Right Gut, tending upwards to the Chylus-bag,
fffff. The Kernels placed by the Crural Veins, out of which those Lymphatic
Vessels rise. ggg. The said Lymphatic Vessels rising out of the Kernels. hhh.
The Lymphatic Vessels proceeding between the Muscles of the Abdomen to the
Chylus-bag. iiii. The Milkie Veins creeping between the Glandulous Sweetbread
and the Chylus-bag. kkk. The Glandulous Sweetbread. ll. The Milkie Mesenteric
Veins between the Glandulous Sweetbread, and the Chylus-bag. MM. The
Chyle-bearing Channel in the Thorax. N. The Insertion of it into the Axillary
Vein. oo. The Kernels of the Ster non. pp. Their Lymphatic Vessel discharging
it self into the Channel of the Chylus in the Thorax. Q. A little Branch of it
proceeding toward the Ribs. RR. The Glandules of the Heart. S. Their Lymphatic
Vessels inserted into the Chyle-bearing Channel under the Heart.
FIGURE VIII.
xx. The Gullet. b. The Kernel annexed to it. gg. The Lymphatic Vessel arising
out of it, and inserted into the Chylebearing Channel. dd. The Chyle-bearing
Channel.
FIGURE IX. The Chyle-bearing Channel in a Dog, as first discovered by
Pecquetus, and by him delineated.
1. The Trunk of the Hollow Vein ascending. 2. The Receptacle of the Chylus. 3.
The Kidneys. 4. 4. The Diaphragma dissected. 5. 5. The Lumbar Psoa Muscles. 66.
The several Meetings of the Chyle-bearing Channels.
FIGURE X. The same Chyle-bearing Channel, together with the Chyle-Bag, taken
out of a Dog.
A. The Trunk of the Hollow Vein ascending, opened upwards in length. BB. The
Meeting of the Iugular and Axillary Veins; where the Springs of the Chylus are
marked out by Points. CC. The Valves of the Iugular Veins looking downwards.
DD. The Distribution of the Milkie Vessels to the Springs, as described by
Pacquetus. EEE. Various Meetings of the Milkie Vessels. F. The Ampulla, or
upper Part of the Chyle-bearing Bag, conspicuous in the Thorax, near the
untouched Diaphragma, toward the Left Side. G. A little Channel appearing on
the Right Hand by the Diaphragma. HH. The remaining Portion of the Diaphragma.
I. The Receptacle of the Chylus. LLL. The Milkie Mesaraics entering the
Chyle-bag, cut off. MMM. Several Valves of the Chylebearing Channel. ooo.
Valves preventing the Return of the Ascending Chylus.
FIGURE XI. The Chyle. bearing Channel in a Man, as discovered and described by
Bartholinus.
A. The Upper Chyle-bag rare and seldom seen. bb. Two Chyle bags mutually
joined to the Milkie Vessels, seldom seen, for generally there is but one. ccc.
The Milkie Branches ascending from the Bags. D. The single Thoracic Branch. E.
The Right Emulgent Artery. FF. The Kidneys. GG. The descending Trunk of the
Great Artery, cut off below the Heart. H. The Spine of the Back. K. The Gullet
turned back to the side. LL. The Kernels of the Thymas. M. The Thoracic Channel
tending to the Subclavial Rib. N. The Insertion of the Chyle-bearing Channel
into the Subclavium. o. The Valves. P. The inner Form of the Axillary Vein,
expanded and slit the full length. R. The External Form of the Iugular Vein.
TTT. The Ribs of each Side. V. The Bladders in their proper Holes. xx. The
Diaphragma laid open on each side.
The EXPLANATION of the Second TABLE. In Fol. 69.
This Table shows the Lymphatic Vessels seated in the Neck, as they are
described one way by Lewis de Bills, and another way by Jacob Henry Pauli.

FIGURE I. The Lymphatic Channels of the Neck described by Lewis de Bills, and
by him called the Dew-bearing Channels.
A. THE Dew-bearing Channel ascending upwards from the Cistern. B. The fissure
of the said Channel about the fifth and sixth Vertebre of the Thorax. E. The
Winding Receptacle which that Channel makes above the small Twigs of the
Iugular Vein. F. The windings which that Receptacle makes about the writhed
Receptacle. 3. Part of the Hollow Vein under that Receptacle. 4. The Kernels of
the Thorax. G. A Branch of the Dew-bearing Channel, running forth to the
Kernels of the Breast. H. The Branch that grows to the Thoratic Kerhels under
the winding of that Channel. I. A Branch of the Dew-bearing Channel, ascending
to the upper Kernel of the Neck. K. A little Twig of the first Branch ascending
upwards. L. A Branch of the same ascending to the lower Kernel of the Neck. M.
The division of the Branch L. 5. The lowermost Kernel of the Neck. N. The
Gullet. O. The Iugular Vein. P. A little Sprig of the Iugular Vein. R. A Trunk
of the great Artery. V. The Guts distorted. X. The Dew-bearing, by us called
Milkie Veins. YYY. The great Kernel of the Mesentery, or Asselius's Sweetbread*
with the Kernels adjoining to it. Z. The little Pipes from the Mesenteric
Glandules toward the Cistern. 6. The Duodene Gut cut off. 7. The Right Gut cut
off. 9. The hollow part of the Liver with its Lobes.
FIGURE. II. The Lymphatic Channels of the Neck, described by Jacob Henry Pauli.
AA. The Hyoides Muscles in the Sternon out of place. B. The Shield resembling
Gristle. C. The Pipe of the Aspera Arteria. DD. The Gullet lying under the
Aspera Arteria. EE. The Muscles of the Neck cut athwart. G. The hollow Vein
ascending. HHH. The Axillary Veins. II. The External Iugulars out of place. KK.
A Sprig of the External Iugular near the Neck. LL. The External Iugulars. M.
The single Channel of the Iugular Lymphatics, coming from the long Kernel, and
partly spread upon the Gullet, out of place. NN. OO. Two Lymphatic Vessels
proceeding from the Cervical Kernels. Tab: III
P. The common hole like a Viol. qq. Two Appendixes, one entering the Axillary,
the other the Iugular Veins. ss. Pecquetus's and Hornius's Thoracic Channel*
ascending from the Chyle-bag. TT. The upper Ribs. V V. The lower Ribs. 1. The
lower conglobated Parotic. 2. A small Kernel seated outwardly above the Iaws.
3. The Maxillary Kernels, round. 4 The oblong Maxillary Kernel. 5 The lesser
Kernel sometimes wanting. 6. The fleshy Tyroidaean Kernels discovered by
Wharton. 7. The Cervical Kernels compacted like a Bunch of Grapes. 8. The
Kernels of the Neck, sometimes placed outwardly next the External Iugular, but
seldom. 9. The under Axillary Kernel.
The EXPLANATION of the Third TABLE. in Fol. 146.
This Table shows the Urinary Bladder, and the Testicles in Men, with their
dependencies acurately described by Regner de Graef.

FIGURE. I. The Urinary Bladder with (...) Parts annexed.
A. THat part of the Urinary Bladder to which the Urachus was annexed. B. The
forepart of the Urinary Bladder opened. CC. The Ureters. DD. The Exit of the
Ureters into the Bladder. E. The Neck of the Bladder. FF. The Parts of the
seminary Vessels cut off. GG. The Vessels running forth to the seminary
Vessels. HH. The Seminary Bladders blown up. I. The Caruncles with two holes
through which the Seed breaks forth into the Ureter* KK. The Glandulous Body,
or the Prostate opened in the forepart. LL. The small mouths of the Channels of
the Glandulous Body, opening into the sides of the Caruncle, and unless they be
blown up, conspicuous only by certain points. M. The Beak of the Caruncle. N.
The Ureter opened in the upper part.
FIGURE II. The Testicles of a Man with its Coverings.
A. The Parts of the preparing Vessels cut off. B. The Vaginal Tunicle
containing all the Vessels of the Tunicle. C. The beginning of the Cremaster
Muscle. D. The Fleshy Fibers of the same, annexed to the Vaginal Tunicle, and
running out the whole length of it. EE. The Fleshy Fibers of the same, ending
obscurely in the Vaginal Tunicle. F. The Vaginal Tunicle containing the
Testicle.
FIGURE. III. The Testicle with its Coverings annexed laid bare.
A. The Preparing Vessels cut and turned back. B. The same Vessels annexed one
to another by slender Membranes. CC. The Artery preparing the Seed, carry
through the Belly to the Stones. DD. The Ramifications of the Veins preparing
the Seed through the sides of the Stone. E. The Albugenious Tunicle containing
the substance of the Testicle. F. The Vaginal Tunicle thrown back. G. The
bigger Globe of the Epididymis. H. The middle part of the Epididymis. I. The
lesser Globe of the same. K. The end of the same, or the beginning of the
Vessel carrying the Seed. L. The different Vessel cut away.
FIGURE IV. The Testicle inverted.
A. The Artery preparing the Seed. B. The division of it into two Branches. CC.
The bigger Branch carried to the Testicle. DD. The lesser Branch hastening to
the Epididymis. E. The bigger Globe of the Epididymis adhering to the Testicle.
FF. The Epididymis inverted, to show how the Artery runs under it. G. The end
of the Epididymis. H. The Vessel carrying the Seed cut away.
FIGURE V.
A. The beginning of the Epididymis, where the Seminary Vessels perforate the
Albugineous Tunicle. BBB. The bigger Globe of the Epididymis drawn upward, to
show the Ramificatious of the Vessels, and their entrance into the Testicle. C.
The preparing Vessels cut off. D. The Divarications of the preparing Vessels
through the Albug^eous Tunicle. E. The Albugineous Tunicle.
FIGURE VI.
A. The Body of the Testicle, the Albugineous Tunicle being taken off. BB. The
Albugineous Tunicle inverted. CCC. The Portions of the preparing Vessels
preforating this Tunicle cut away. D. The Albugineous Tunicle sticking close,
to the back of the Testicle, by reason of the Membranes of the Testicle there
meeting.
FIGURE VII.
A. The substance of the Testicle, separated from the Albugineous Tunicle. BBB.
The Solutions of the substance; by which it appears not to be a Glandulous
body, as at first sight it seems to be, but a Body composed of Vessels. C. The
Albugineous Tunicle stretched upward.
FIGURE VIII.
AAA. The Seminary Vessels of the Testicles placed in a certain order between
the thin Membranes. BB. The Seminary Vessels running out through the Membranous
substance sticking to the back of the Testicle. C. Certain small Portions of
the Seminary Vessels perforating the Albugineous Tunicle, cut off. DDDD. The
Albugineous Tunicle opened, and drawn to the sides.
Tab IV


FIGURE IX.
A. The Testicle cut athwart. BBB. The Disposition of the Seminary Vessels. C.
The Concourse of the Membranes detaining the Seminary Vessels, least they
should be jumbled together, sticking close to the Back of the Testicle.
FIGURE X. The Prostate or Glandulous Body.
AA. The Glandulous Body opened in the Forepart. B. The Ureter opened in the
upper Part. C. The Passages of the Glandulous Body laid bare. O. The Place of
the Caruncle, through which the Seed breaks forth into the Ureter.
FIGURE XI. The Vessel of the Testicle of a Dormouse.
A. The Spermatic Artery descending to the Testicle. BB. The whole Testicle,
with admirable Dexterity, cleared so as to show the Vessels.
The EXPLANATION of the Fourth TABLE In Fol. 154.
This Table shows the Yard, with the Seminary Vessels, and other Parts annexed
to it, exactly delineated by Regner de Graef.

FIGURE I. The hinder Part of the Yard
A. The Urinary Vessel. BB. Portions of the Ureters. CC. Portions of the
Vessels carrying the Seed. DD. The deferent Vessels dilated like little Boxes.
EE. The Vessels running forth to the Seminary Vessels. FFFF. The Seminary
Vessels distended with Wind. GG. The Hinder Prospect of the Prostatae. H. The
Ureter. I. The Meeting of the deferent Vessels, with the Seminary Vessels. K.
The Muscle dilating the Ureter. L. The same Muscle drawn back to the Side. M.
The Spungy Part of the Yard under the Ureter. NN. The Ureter. OO. The Spungy
Bodies of the Yard. P. The Nut. qq. The Muscles extending the Yard.
FIGURE II. The Forepart of the Genital Parts.
A. The Urinary Bladder. B. The Neck of the Bladder. CC. Portions of the
Ureters. DD. Portions of the Vessels carrying the Seed. EE. Vessels running
forth to the Seminary Vessels. FF. The Seminary Vessels. GG. The Prostatae. H.
The Ureter adjoining to its Spongy Part. II. The Spungy Part of the Ureter. KK.
The Muscles erecting the Yard. LL. The Beginning of the Nervous Bodies
separated from the Share-Bones. MM. The Skin of the Yard drawn to the Sides.
NN. The Doubling of the Skin which constitutes the Preputium. OO. The Skin
which was annexed behind the Nut. P. The Back of the Yard. Q. The Nut of the
Yard. R. The Urinary Passage. SS. The Nerve running forth above the Back of the
Yard. V. The Nervous Bodies meeting together. WW. Two Veins meeting together,
and running along the Back of the Yard with one remarkable Branch. X. The Vein
opened to show the Valves.
FIGURE III. The Yard divided to the Ureter.
AA. The Nut of the Yard, together with the Nervous Bodies divided through the
Middle. BB. The Membranes of the Nervous Body of the Yard divided one from the
other. CC. An Artery creeping through the Spungy Substance of the Nervous Body.
DD. The Spungy Substance of the Yard. EE. The intervening Fence. FF. The
Fibrous Shoots of the Intervening Fences, ascending like a Comb. G. The Ureter
cut off about the Glandulous Body. H. The Middle of the Ureter. I. The End of
the Ureter perforating the Nut. KK* The Spungy Substance of the Ureter. LL. The
Beginnings of the Nervous Bodies dilated like little Bellows. MM. The Muscles
erecting the Yard.
FIGURE IV. The Yard opened at the Side.
AA. The Nut laid bare. B. The Bridle. CC. A Portion of the Skin, from which
the other Part covering the Yard, is separated. DD. The Ureter lying under the
Nervous Bodies. EE. The Membranes of the Nervous Bodies of the Yard divided.
FF. An Artery shooting out through the Spungy Substance of the Nervous Body.
GG. The Spungy Substance of the Nervous Body. HH. The Orifices of the Arteries
cut off. I. The Ureter. K. The Spungy Substance of the Ureter. LL. The
intervening Fence of the Nervous Bodies.
FIGURE V. The Yard dissected athwart.
AA. The Spungy Substance of the Nervous Bodies. BB. Two Arteries perambulating
the Nervous Bodies. C. The Urinary Passage of the Ureter. D. The Spungy
Substance of the Ureter. E. The Intervening Fence. FF. The strongest Membrane
of the Nervous Bodies. G. The thinnest Membrane containing the Spungy Substance
of the Ureter. A. A remarkable Vein creeping along the Back of the Ureter.
Tab. V.


FIGURE VI. The Communication of the different Vessels, with the Seminary
Vessels in the Body of Man.
AA. The thick Parts of the different Vessels endued with Substance and a small
Cavity. BB. The Parts of the different Vessels, endued with a thin Substance
and a large Cavity. CC. The Extremities of the Different Vessels, straightened
again together, and gaping with a small Hole into the Neck of the Seminary
Vessels. DD. The Neck of the Seminary Vessels divided into two Parts, by means
of a certain intervening Membrane, to the end the Seed of the one side should
not mix with the Seed of the other, before it comes to the Ureter. EE. The
Seminary Vesicles distended with Wind. FF. The Vessels running through them.
GGG. The Membranes by which the Vesicles and different Vessels are detained in
their Situation. HH. The Blood-bearing Vessels running out to the sides of the
different Vessels, and embracing them with their small Branches. I. The
Caruncle through the Pores of which the Seed bursts forth into the Ureter. KK.
The Channels of the Glandulous Body gaping into the Ureter, at the sides of the
Caruncle. LL. The Glandulous Body divided in the Forepart. MM. The Ureter
opened.
FIGURE VII.
The same Letters with those of the preceding Figure, as the one showed the
External, so these show the Internal Substance of the Seminal Vessels.
The EXPLANATION of the Fifth TABLE, In Folio 174.
This Table shows the Constitution of the Womb, and the Female Privities, and
the Parts adjoining, as well in Women with Child, as in empty Women.

FIGURE I. The Womb containing an Embryo almost two Months gone.
A. THE Womb. B. The greatest Vein among those which are in the Superficies of
the Womb. CC. The Pendulous Testicles. DDDD. The Membrane of the Womb, to which
the Shootings forth of the Vessels adhere. E. The Nympha. FF. The Hair of the
Privities. GG. The Horns of the Womb, in the Superficies of which, appear
little Veins, according to the Delineation of Aquapendens. But these we do not
reckon to be the true Horns. H. The Urinary Passage. II. The Privity. KK. The
Wings.
FIGURE II. The Entrance of the Womb divided according to its Length.
A. The Orifice of the Womb. B. The Neck of the Womb. C. The Orifice of the
Bladder. D. The Neck or Sheath Divided.
FIGURE III, The Substance of the Womb of a Woman with Child divided, to show
the Cheescake.
AAAA. The four Triangular Parts of the Womb reflexed outward. BBB. The
Cheescake of a tuberous and unequal Form. C. The Membranous Substance of the
Cheescake, thicker than the other Membranes which is annexed to the Womb, but
here torn off to show the Chorion. a. The Chorion. D. The Neck of the Womb
divided.
FIGURE IV. The Genital Parts of an Empty Woman.
A. The Right Kidney Kernel. B. The Left Kidney Kernel. CC. The Kidneys on both
sides. DD. The Right Emulgent Veins. EE. The Right Emulgent Arteries. FF. The
Trunk of the Hollow Vein divided into two Iliac Branches, the Right and Left.
G. The Left Emulgent Vein. HH. The Left Emulgent Arteries. II. The Right
Spermatic Vein. K. The Right Spermatic Artery. L. The Left Spermatic Artery.
M. The Left Spermatic Vein. NN. The Trunk of the Great Artery divided into the
Right and Left Iliac Branch. OO. The Female Testicles. PP. A Portion of the
broad Ligament. QQQQ. The Tubes of the Womb on each side. R. The Bottom of the
Womb. SS. The round Ligaments of the Womb cut off below. T. The Neck of the
Womb. V. The Hypogastric Vein on the Right Side. V. The Hypogastric Artery on
the Left Side. X. The Hypogastric Artery on the Right Side. X. The Hypogastric
Vein in the Left Side, extended to the Womb. Y. The Sheath of the Womb. Z. The
Urinary Bladder depressed above the Privity. aa. A Portion of the Ureters cut
off about the Bladder. bb. A Portion of the Ureters cut off about the Kidneys.
cc. The Vessels preparing the Seed, dilated about the Testicles. c. d. The
Channel of the Testicles, or the different Vessel.
FIGURE V.
A. The Right Testicle. BB. The Right Tube depressed. C. The Left Testicle. DD.
The Left Tube of the Womb. E. The Bottom of the Womb. FF. The round Ligaments
of the Womb. G. The Urinary Bladder inserted into the Sheath of the Womb. HH.
Portions of the Ureters. II. The two musculous Supporters of the Clitoris. K.
The Body of the Clitoris it self.
FIGURE VI.
AA. The bottom of the Womb dissected athwart. TABULA VI.
BB. The Cavity of the Bottom. C. The Neck of the Womb. D. The little Mouth in
the Neck of a Woman's Womb which has born a Child. EE. The wrinkl'd Prospect of
the Sheath of the Womb dissected. FF. The round Ligaments of the Womb cut off
underneath.
FIGURE VII. The Woman's Yard.
A. The Nut of the Yard. B. The Prepuce. CC. The two Supporters. D. The Chink
not manifestly pervious.
FIGURE. VIII.
AA. The two spongie Bodies of the Yard dissected athwart. B. The Nut of the
Yard. C. The Prepuce. DD. The two Supporters.
FIGURE IX.
A. The Head of the Clitoris prominent under the Skin. BB. The outward Lips of
the Privity sundred one from the other. CC. The Nymphae sundred also. D. The
Caruncle placed about the Urinary passage ( a) EE. Two Myrtle-shap'd fleshy
Productions. FF. Two Membranous expansions containing the Chink.
FIGURE X.
A. Membrane spread athwart the Privity, taken for the Hymen.
FIGURE XI.
This shows the Privities of a Female Infant, where the the Parts are the same
as in Fig. 9.
The EXPLANATION of the Sixth TABLE in Fol. 186.
This shows the Genitals of Women taken out of the Body, and placed in their
natural Situation, accurately delineated by Regner de Graef.

AA. THE Trunk of the great Artery. BB. The Trunk of the hollow Vein. C. The
Right Emulgent Vein. D. The Left Emulgent Vein. E. The Right Emulgent Artery.
F. The Left Emulgent Artery. GG. The Kidneys. HHH. The Ureters cut off. I. The
right Spermatic Artery. K. The left Spermatic Artery. L. The right Spermatic
Vein. M. The left Spermatic Vein. NN. The Iliac Arteries. OO. The Iliac Veins.
PP. The Internal Branches of the Iliac Artery. QQ. The External Branches of the
Iliac Artery. RR. The Internal Branches of the Iliac Vein. SS. The External
Branches of the Iliac Vein. TT. The Hypogastric Arteries carried to the Womb
and Sheath. VV. The Hypogastric Veins accompaning the said Arteries. XX.
Branches of the Hypogastric Artery shooting to the Piss-bladder. YY. Branches
of the Hypogastric Vein carried to the Bladder. ZZ. Portions of the Umbilical
Arteries. a The bottom of the Womb wrapped about with its common Tunicle. bb. The
round Ligaments of the Womb, as they are joined to the bottom of it. cc. The
Follopian Tubes in their natural Situation. dd The rims of the Tubes. ee. The
holes of the Tubes. ff. The Stones in their natural places. g. A portion of the
right Gut. h. The Neck of the Womb, the common Tunicle taken off to show the
Vessels more conspicuously. i. The Forepart of the Sheath freed from the
Piss-bladder. k. The Piss-bladder contracted. ll. Bloody Vessels running
through, the Bladder. mm. The Sphincter Muscle girding the Neck of the Bladder.
n. The Clitoris. oo. The Nymphae. p. The Urinary Passage. qq. The Lips of the
Privity. r. The Orifice of the Sheath.
The EXPLANATION of the Seventh TABLE In Fol. 245.
This Table shows the Secondines with the Umbilical Vessels, in a human Embryo,
and the Parts differing from those of ripe Age exactly described by Casp.
Bauhinus, Bartholine and H. Fab. ab Aquapendente.

FIGURE. I.
AAAA. THE Flesh of the Cheescake, or the Uterine Liver. BB. The Amnios
Membrane. C. The Umbilical Vessels. D. The Umbilical Vein, and the two
Umbilical Arteries.
FIGURE II.
AAA. The Amnios Membrane. B. The Umbilical Vein and two Umbilical Arteries.
CC. The Chorion Membrane. DD. The branches of the Veins and Arteries dispeirs'd
through the Chorion. E. The Conjunction of the Vessels of the Navel, as they
are wrapped about with a little Tunicle resembling a little Gut.
FIGURE III.
The Skeleton of a dissected Birth, differing in many things from a Man of
grown years, as may be seen in the Text.
FIGURE IV. Shows the length of the Umbilical Vessels from the Cheesecake to
the Liver of the Infant, and the progress of the Umbilical Vein from the Navel
to the Liver; also the Liver of the Birth and the Gallbladder.
A. The Cheesecake wrapped about with the Chorion. BBBB. The Umbilical Vessels.
TABULA VII
CC. The Liver of the Infant. DD. The two larger Branches of the Umbilical Vein
s^itting themselves into lesser. EE. The Branches of the Umbilical Arteries. G.
The Trunk of the hollow Vein ascending to the gibbious part of the Liver. H.
The Gate-veine. I. The Umbilical Vein boaring the Porta and the hollow Vein. K.
The Gallbladder. LLLL. The Vessels of the Chorion, or Branches of the
Umbilical Veins and Arteries dispeirsed through the Chorion.
FIGURE. V.
AAA. The outermost enfolding of the Birth called the Chorion. BBB. The Flesh
growing to the outermost folding, or the Uterine Cheesecake or Uterine Liver.
CCC. The Vessels distributed.
FIGURE VI.
AAAA. The bottom of the Womb dissected into four parts. B. Part of the Neck of
the Womb. CC. The Veins and Arteries embracing the Neck of the Womb. D. The
Utrine Cheesecake. EE. The outermost enfolding of the Birth.
FIGURE VII.
AA. The substituted Kidneys. BB. The true Kidneys distinguished with several
Kernels ill expressed by the Error of the Graver. C. The great Artery, whence
branches to the Capsulas and Kidneys. D. The hollow Vein from whence the
Emulgents, and little Veins of the Capsulas.
The EXPLANATION of the Eight TABLE In Fol. 270.
This Table shows the Birth of the Womb described by H. Fab. ab Aquapend. and
G. Bartholinus.

FIGURE I. Showing the Situation of the Birth, swimming upon the Moisture,
together with the Cheesecake, and the Chorion annexed to it.
A. THE Cheesecake with the Chorion annexed. B. The Umbilical Vessels. C. The
Moisture upon which the Birth swims. DDDD. The four Parts of the Womb. E. The
Neck of the Womb. F. The Sheath opened. G. The most remarkable Trunks of the
Vessels of the Chorion.
FIGURE II. Showing the Situation of the Birth in the Womb; which however
varies in others.
A. The Head Prone with the Nose hid between the Knees. BB. The Buttocks to
which the Heels are joined. CC. The Arms. D. The Line drawn about the Neck, and
reflex'd above the Forehead, and continuous to the Cheesecake.
FIGURE III. Shows the Situation of the Birth now endeavoring to come forth.
A. The Head of the Infant. B. The Privity. CCCC. The upper Parts of the
Abdomen taken away with a Penknife.
The EXPLANATION of the Ninth TABLE In Fol. 326.
Showing the Heart with its Vessels in its Situation, with the Ventricles and
Valves belonging to the same: together with the Lungs in their Situation, the
Rough Artery and Diaphragma.

FIGURE I.
A. THE Pericardium enfolding the Heart. BB. The Lungs embracing the Heart in
their natural Situation. C. The hollow Vein ascending above the Heart. D. The
Original of the Azygos Vein. E. The right Subclavial Vein. F. The right Iugular
Vein. G. The left Iugular Vein. H. The left Subclavial Vein. II. The right and
left Carotis Artery. KK. The right and left Subclavial Artery. LL. The Nerves
of the sixth pair descending to the Lungs. M. The Original of the great Artery
descending.
FIGURE II.
A. The Pericardium taken from the Heart. B. The Heart spread over with the
Coronarie Veins and Arteries. C. The Trunk of the great Artery shooting out of
the Heart. D. The descending Portion of it turned upward. EE. The Arterious
Vein distributed toward the Left hand to the Lungs. F. The Channel between the
Arterious Vein and the great Artery, conspicuous only in the new born Birth but
dried up in those of riper Age. G. The right Branch of the Arterious Vein. HH.
The right and left Branch of the veiny Artery. I. The Auricle of the Heart. KK.
The Lungs adjoining to the Heart. L. The Proper Tunicle of the Lungs separated.
FIGURE III. Showing the Heart of an Infant entire.
A. The Proper Membrane of the Heart separated. B. The Parenchyma of the Heart
bare. CC. The right and left Auricle of the Heart. D. The great Artery issuing
out of the Heart. E. A portion of the hollow Vein standing without the Heart.
Tab. IX.


FIGURE IV.
A. Part of the Heart cut athwart. B. The left Ventricle. CC. The right
Ventricle. DD. The Fence of the Heart.
FIGURE V. The inside of the Heart.
A. The Orifice of the Coronary Vein. B. An Anastomosis between the hollow Vein
and the veiny Artery, conspicuous only in new born Insants, in ripe years
consolidated. CCC. The treble pointed Valves. DDD. The right Ventricle of the
Heart opened. aa. Passages terminating in the Fence.
FIGURE VI.
A. The Arterious vein dissected in the right Ventricle. BBB. The Semilunary or
Sigmoides Valves, in the Orifice of the said Vein. CCC. The right Ventricle of
the Heart opened.
FIGURE. VII.
A. The Arterious Vein dissected. B. A mark of the Anastomosis between the
veiny Artery and the hollow Vein, as being only to be seen in the Birth. bb.
Passages terminating in the Fence within the Membranes. CC. Two Miter-like
Valves seated in the left Ventricle at the entrance of the Arterious Vein. DD.
The left Ventricle of the Heart opened.
FIGURE. VIII.
A. The great Artery dissected near the Heart. BBB. The Semilunar Valves
belonging to it. CC. The left Ventricle of the Heart. D. Part of the left
Ventricle reflexed.
FIGURE IX.
AB. A right and left Nerve of the sixth pair, to the Lungs. C. A middle Branch
between each Nerve. D. An Excursion of the same to the Pericardium. EE. Two
larger Branches of the rough Artery, Membranous behind. FF. The hinder Part of
the Lungs. G. The proper Membrane of the Lungs separated. HH. A remainder of
the Pericardium. I. The Heart in its place, with the Coronary Vessels.
FIGURE X.
AAA. The inner Superficies of the Sternon, and Gristles connex'd. BB. The
Mammary Veins and Arteries descending under the Sternon. C. The glandulous Body
called the Thymus. DDDD. The sides of the Mediastinum pulled off. EE. A
hollowness caused by a vulsion of the Sternon, between the Membranes of the
Mediastinum. F. The Protuberancy of the Mediastinum, where the Heart is seated.
GG. The Lungs HH. The Diaphragma. I. The Sword resembling Gristle.
FIGURE XI. The Diaphragma.
AB. The right and left Nerve of the Diaphragma. C. The upper Membrane of it
separated. D. The fleshy substance of it bare. F. The Hole for the hollow Vein.
GGG. The Membranous Part or Center of the Diaphragma. HHH. The Appendixes of
the same between which the great Artery descends.
FIGURE XII. The glandulous Body seated by the Larynx.
AAA. The Kernels growing to the Larinx. B. A portion of the Iugular Vein, two
Branches of which pass forward through the said Kernels.
FIGURE. XIII. The Aspera Arteria taken out of the Lungs.
A. The rough Artery cut off below the Larynx. B. The right Branch of it,
divided first twofold; afterward into several Bronchia. C. The left Branch
divided in like manner. dddd. The Extreme Parts of the Branches terminating in
little Membranous Channels.
The EXPLANATION of the Tenth TABLE In Fol. 357.
Showing the Bronchial Artery discovered by Frederic Ruysch; together with the
substance of the Lungs as it was observed by Malpigius.

FIGURE I. The Ramification of the Bronchial Artery.
A. THe hinder Part of the Aspera Arteria, of a Calf cut off from the Larynx.
B. The right Branch. C. The left Branch. D. The Bronchial Artery, the little
Branches of which accompany the Bronchia to the end. E. The hinder part of the
descending Artery, from whence the Intercostals proceed. F. The uppermost
Branch, to be found in Calves and Cows only.
FIGURE II. This and the following show the substance of the Lungs.
The outermost Piece of the Lungs dried containing the Net as it is delineated.
FIGURE III.
The Inner Vesicles and hollownesses shaddow'd, with a particle of the space in
the upper part annexed. But the Original and entire Propagation could not be
exposed to the Eye by the Graver's Art.
FIGURE IV.
The various concinnation of the Lobes, above the Trachea and Pulmonary
Vessels, which are shown as taken out from their natural Situation.
FIGURE V. The Lungs of Frogs, with the Trachea annexed.
A. The Larynx, which is half gristly. Tab. XI.
B. A little Chink, which is exactly closed at the Will of the Animal, and
being closed, keeps the Lungs Swelled with Air. C. The Seat of the Heart. D.
Part of the Exterior Lungs. E. The propagated Net of the Cells F. The
Propagation of the Pulm^y Artery. G. The Hollow Part of the Lung cut in the
middle. H. The Propagation of the Pulmonary Vein, shooting forth to the tops of
the Sides.
FIGURE VI. Shows the mere Cell, without the intervening Sides, increased in
Magnitude.
A. The inner Area of the little Cell. B. The Sides torn away and stopped. C.
The Trunk of the Pulmonary Artery, with the Branches Appendent, terminating as
it were in Network. D. The Trunk of the Pulmonary Vein, wandering with its
running Branches over the Tops of the Sides. E. A Vessel at the Bottom, common
as well to the lateral Angles of the Sides, as to the continued Ramifications
of the Net.
The EXPLANATION of the Eleventh TABLE In Folio 370.
Showing the Larynx with its Muscles; as also the Aspera Arteria, the Gullet,
the recurring Nerves, and the upper Part of the Throat, with its Muscles.

FIGURE I. The Prospect of the Larynx before.
A. THE Hyoides Bone covered with certain little Membranes. B. The lower Side
of the Hyoides Bone. D. The upper Side. F. The Second Pair of Muscles, common
to the Larynx. G. The Second Pair of common Muscles, ill described about the
Original being so narrow. N. The First Pair of Muscles proper to the Larynx. I.
Part of the Shield-resembling Gristle.
FIGURE II. The hinder Part of the Larynx.
L. The Epiglotis. H. The Guttal Gristle. V. The Ninth Muscle of the Larynx. K.
The hinder Part of the annular Gristle.
FIGURE III. The hinder Lateral Prospect of the Larynx.
V. The Ninth Muscle of the Larynx. P. The Second Pair of the Muscles of the
Larynx. R. The Third Pair of the Muscles proper to the Larynx. a. The Right
Muscle of the fourth Pair of Muscles, proper to the Larynx. b. The upper Part
of the same left Muscle. h. The Prospect of the Shield-resembling Muscle
behind. i. The Prospect of the Annular Muscle before. k. The hinder Prospect of
the same. l. The Guttal Gristle.
FIGURE IV.
A. The inner Face of the Epiglottis. aa. The Prominences of the Arytenoides
Gristles. BB. The Arytenoides Muscles every way loose. CC. The hinder
Crycoartenoides Muscles. D. The broader Part of the Annular Gristle. EE. The
hinder Membranous Part of the Aspera Arteria.
FIGURE V.
A. The External Face of the Epiglottis joined to the Larynx. BB. The
Thyroartenoides Muscles. CC. The lateral Crycoartenoides Muscles. D. The
Crycoides Gristle. EE. The Forepart of the Aspera Arteria.
FIGURE VI. The Lateral Face of the Larynx.
A. The Hyoides Bone still covered with certain small Gristles. B. The lower
Side of the Hyoides Bone. C. The upper Process of the Scutiform Gristle. F. The
second pair of Common Muscles to the Larynx. G. The first Pair of common
Muscles. H. The Throat. I. The Swallowing Muscle, which others call the third
Pair. K. The Place of the Muscles of the Epiglottis in Brutes that chew the
Cud, which is wanting in Men. l. The Guttal Gristle. g. The Forepart of the
Scutiform Gristle. M. The Kernels of the Larynx, annexed to the Root, at the
Sides of the Aspera Arteria.
FIGURE VII.
A. The Hyoides Bone still covered with little Membranes. B. The lower Side of
it. C. The upper Side of the Scutiform Gristle. D. The upper Side of the
Hyoides Bone. K. The Place of the Muscles of the Epiglottis in Brutes. L. The
Epiglottis. h. The Forepart of the Scutiform Gristle. L. The Epiglottis. M.
The Kernels fastened to the Root of the Larynx. H. The Throat.
FIGURE VIII. The Aspera Arteria and Gullet, with the recurring Nerves, on the
hinder Part.
AA. The Muscle drawing the Gullet together. BBB. The Gullet. CCC. The Aspera
Arteria under the Throat. D. The Membranous Part of it. EEEE. The Nerves of the
Sixth Conjugation. FF. Nerves inserted into the Tongue behind. GG. The Right
recurring Nerve turned back to the Humeral Artery. HH. The Left recurring Nerve
wound about the descending Trunk of the Great Artery. II. A Nerve tending to
the sinister Orifice of the Ventricle, and the Diaphragma. KK. A Nerve
descending to the Diaphragma. LL. The Iugular Arteries, of each side one. M.
The Left Humeral Artery. N. The Right Humeral Artery. O. the great Artery. PP.
Stumps of the Pulmonary Arteries.
FIGURE IX. The upper Part of the Throat, with its Muscles.
AA. The Cephalopharyngean Muscles. BB. The Sphaenopharyngean Muscles. CC. The
Stylopharyngean Muscles. DD. The Sphincter of the Throat divided. E. The inner
Face of the Throat. F. The outer Face of the Throat.
The EXPLANATION of the Twelfth TABLE, In Folio 418.
This Table, delineated by Willis, shows the Originals of the Nerves of the
Fifth and Sixth Pair (according as he numbers them) and the Roots of the
Intercostal Nerve, proceeding from them: Also the Originals of the same
Intercostal Nerve, and the Vagous Pair, and of the Nerve proceeding from the
Spine to the Vagous Pair, carried along to the Region of the Ventricle.
Moreover, it represents the Originals and Distributions of the Nerves of the
Seventh, Ninth, and Tenth Pair, and of the Nerve of the Diaphragma. In the same
also are described the Originals of the Vertebral Nerves, and their
Communications with the Former, as they are to be found in Men. But it is to be
observed, that Willis, in this Table, does not follow the Ancient (which we
observe in our Description) but his own new Computation of the Number of the
Nerves. Whence it comes to pass, that what we in our Text call the Third, he
calls the Fifth; what we the Fifth, he calls the Seventh; what we the Seventh,
he calls the Eight Pair.

AAA. A Nerve of the Fifth Pair, with the two Branches of it: AA. of which the
uppermost tending up-right before, distributes several Sprigs to the Muscles of
the Eyes and Face, to the Nose, Palate, and upper Part of the whole Mouth.
Besides, two little Branches, aa. which are the two Roots of the Intercostal
Nerve. The other lower Branch of the Fifth Pair, tending downward, is
dispiersed into the lower Iaw and all the Parts of it. aa. The two Sprigs sent
from the upper Branch of the fifth Pair, which together with the other little
Sprig, b. closing with the Nerve of the Sixth Pair, constitute the Trunk, D. of
the Intercostal Nerve. B. A Nerve of the Sixth Pair, tending straight forward
before to the Muscles of the Eye; from the Trunk of which, the Sprig b. which
is the third Root of the Intercostal Nerve, is reflexed. bbb. The third Root of
the Intercostal Nerve. C. The Original of the Auditory Nerve, or of the Seventh
Pair, with its double Process, soft and hard. c. The softer Branch of it, which
is entirely distributed into the inner Part of the Ear, into the Muscle which
elevates the Hammer, and into the Cochlea. c. The harder Branch, which rising
whole out of the Cranium, and slightly touching the Slip E. of the Eighth Pair,
together with that makes a particular Nerve, which is presently divided into
several Branches, of which, the 1. Terminates in the Muscles of the Tongue and
Hyoides Bone. 2. Is again divided into several Slips; of which the Uppermost XII
3. Ends in the Muscles of the Face and Mouth. 4. In the Muscles of the
Eyelids and Forehead. 5. In the Muscles of the Ear. D. The Trunk of the
Intercostal Nerve, consisting of the three foresaid Roots, being about to pass
the Ganglio-form'd Fold. Which Fold seems to be the uppermost Node of the
Intercostal Nerve, produced without the Cranium. E. The Original of the Nerves
of the Vagous Pair, consisting of many Fibers, to which a Nerve rising from the
Spine joins it self, and inoculated with them, passes the Cranium; which being
crossed, it goes away, and after Communication with some of the adjoining
Nerves, ends in the Muscles of the Scapula and Back. e. A little Sprig of the
Eight Pair, Meeting the Auditory Branch. fff. Other Slips of the Vagous Pair,
tending to the Muscles of the Neck. G. The principal Branch of the same Pair,
terminating in the proper Ganglio-form'd Fold. H. The upper Ganglio-form'd Fold
of the Vagous Pair, I add which admits the little Sprig K. from the other
adjoining Fold of the Intercostal Nerve. hh. A Branch from the foresaid Fold of
the Vagous Pair, into the Muscles of the Larynx, a remarkable Branch of which
passing under the Scutiform Gristle, meets the recurrent Nerve, and is united
to it. i. A small Twig from the Cervical Fold of the Intercostal Nerve,
inserted into the Trunk of the Vagous Pair. KK. The lower Fold of the Vagous
Pair, from which several Nerves proceed to the Heart and its Appendix. l. A
remarkable Sprig sent to the Cardiac Fold. m. Nervous Fibers distributed into
the Heart and Cardiac Fold. n. The Left recurrent Nerve, which being wound
about the descending Trunk of the Aorta, and reflex'd upwards toward the
Scutiform Gristle in its ascent, imparts many Slips XXXX. to the Aspera
Arteria; and lastly, meets the small ^wig h. sent from the Ganglio formed Fold.
This Recurrent, by moans of its being reflected, sends certain Branches also to
the Heart. L. The recurrent Nerve in the Right Side, which being reflected much
higher, twines about the Axillary Artery. o. A remarkable Branch sent from the
Trunk of the Vagous Pair in the Left Side; which being presently divided, one
Sprig of it winds about the Trunk of the Pneumonic Vein; the other touching the
hinder Region of the Heart, is scattered into several Slips, which cover the
Superficies of it. This is also met by the Cardiac Branch, sent from the Trunk
of the other. p. A Sprig of the foresaid Branch encompasing the Pneumonic Vein.
q. The other Branch of the same, imparting many Shoots to the Heart, which
Shoots cover the hinder Superficies of it. rrrr. Small Shoots sent forth from
the Trunk of the Vagous Pair, which after a long Course, are inserted into the
Oesophagus; reflexed beyond their proper Situation. ssss. Many little reflexed
Sprigs, whose Ramifications being distributed into the Substance of the Lungs
variously bind and tie the Bloodbearing Vessels. TTT. The Trunk of the Vagous
Pair is divided into two Branches, the outer and inner, both which bending
toward the like Branches of the other side, are united to them, and after
mutual Communication, constitute the two Stomachic Branches, and upper and
lowermost VV. Inner Branches, which being united into X. constitute the
Original of the Lower Stomachie Branch. WW. The External Branches, which
constitute the upper Stomach* Branch. X. The closing of the inner Branches. F.
The Original of the Ninth Pair, with many Fibers which united, make a Trunk
that is carried toward the Tongue; nevertheless, in its Progress, sending forth
two Sprigs. THTH. The first tending downwards, and united to the Branch of the
Tenth Pair, terminates in the Sternothyroides Muscle. phph. The second Sprig,
ending in the Muscles of the Hyoides Bone. 99. A Trunk of this Nerve passing
into the Body of the Tongue. G. The upper Ganglio-form'd Fold of the
Intercostal Nerve, which is the uppermost Node of this Nerve, when it is got
out of the Brain. a. A Sprig sent forth from this Fold into the Neighboring
Fold of the Vagous Pair. bb. Two Nervous Processes, by means of which, this
Nerve communicates with the Nerve of the Tenth Pair. g. A Sprig sent to the
Sphincter of the Throat. L. The Cervical or middle Fold proper to Man, which is
placed in the middle of the Neck in the Trunk of the Intercostal Nerve. d. A
remarkable Branch from the second Vertebral Pair into this Fold, by means of
which, this Branch communicates with the Nerve of the Diaphragma, in its first
Root. ee. Two Branches from the same Fold into the Trunk of the Nerve of the
Diaphragma. 55. Several nervous Fibers from the Cervical Fold to the Recurrent
Nerve. th. A Twig from the same to the Trunk of the Vagous Pair. chapter Another
remarkable Sprig into the Recurrent Nerve. chch. Two remarkable Branches sent
toward the Heart, which the other l. rising a little below, overtakes: These
being carried downward, between the Aorta, and the Pneumonic Artery, meeting
the Parallel Branches of the other side, make the Cardiac Fold D. from which
the principal Nerves that terminate in the Heart proceed. l. A Branch
proceeding somewhat beneath from the Intercostal Trunk, which with the former
is designed to the Cardiac Fold. D. The foresaid Cardiac Fold. m. A little
Lappet proceeding from the same which winds about the Pneumonic Artery. g. The
lower Lappet binding the Pneumonic Vein. z. The Intercostal Nerve that sinks
into the Cavity of the Breast, where it binds the Axillary Artery. eee. Four
Vertebral Nerves sen^ to the Thoracic Fold, of which, the uppermost binds the
Vertebral Artery. ooo. Three remarkable Nerves sent from the Cardiac Fold,
which overspread the Fore-Region of the Heart, as the Nerves P. q. proceeding
from the Trunk of the Vagous Pair, impart their Ramifications to the hinder
Part of it. ^. The Vertebral Artery bound about by the Vertebral Nerves. sss.
Nervous Shoots covering the Fore-Region of the Heart. TTT. Nervous Shoots and
Fibers distributed to the hinder Part of it. TH. The lower fold, properly
called the Intercostal or Thoracic; into which, besides the Intercoctal Nerve,
four Vertebrals are inserted, of which, the uppermost in its. Descent, winds
about the Vertebral Artery. I. The Intercostal Nerve descending through the
Cavity of the Breast, near the Roots of the Ribs, where in its whole Progress,
it admits ^ Branch from the particular middle Vertebres. H. A Nerve of the
Tenth Pair, consisting* in its Original, of many Fibers, and springing forth
between the first and second Vertebre, where it presently sends forth two
nervous Processes bb. into the upper Fold of the Intercostal Nerve. X. A Branch
of the same, which being united to a little Twig of the ninth Pair, terminates
in the Muscle Sternothyroides, immediately resting upon the Aspera Arteria. 20.
A small Twig reversed into the hinder Muscles of the Neck. 21. A small Twig
into the Pathetic Spinal Nerve. X. Shoots from the principal Branch of the same
Nerve into the Sternothyroides Muscle. I. The Original of the first Vertebral
Nerve, which in this as in all other Vertebral Nerves, consists of many Fibers,
of which, the one Bunch proceeds from the upper, the other from the lower Brim
of the Spinal* Marrow, when they are met close into the same Trunk, which is
presently shattered into Nerves distributed several ways. th. A small Sprig
from this Nerve into a Branch of the tenth Pair. th. Another small Sprig into
the Pathetic Spinal. c. A signal Branch sent upwards to the Muscles of the Neck
and Ears. T. A small Sprig from the bowed Nerve to the Fore-muscles of the
Neck. 7. A Nerve from this Pair to the first Brachial Nerve, from whence the
Nerve of the Diaphragma takes its uppermost Root. M. The Original of the second
Vertebral Nerve, from which the uppermost Brachial Branch proceeds, and into
which the Nerve of the Diaphragma is first radicated. This Brachial Nerve, in
four-footed Beasts, rises near the fourth and fifth Vertebre, and so the Root
of the Diaphragma lies beneath. V. The Vertebral Branch designed to the Arm. Y.
The Nerve of the Diaphragma, to the Root of which, the Sprig d. from the
Cervical Fold, joins it self, and a little lower, from the same Fold, two other
Branches ee. extend themselves to the Trunk of it. This Communication is only
proper to Men. ph. The other Root of the Diaphragma from the second and third
Brachial Nerve. chapter The lower Trunk of the Nerve of the Diaphragma, removed out
of its place, which in its natural Situation, crossing the Cavity of the Breast
without any Communication, runs directly to the Diaphragma; where spreading
into three Sprigs, it is inserted into the Musculous Part of it. pspsps. The
rest of the Brachial Nerves. ooo. The Originals of the Brachial Nerves. 22. The
farthest Original of the Spinal Nerve that comes to the Vagous Pair. 23. The
beginning Trunk of the same Nerve, which in its whole assent, running through
the side of the Spinal Pith, passes through the middle Originals of the
Vertebral Nerves, and from the Stalk of the Pith, receives its Fibers. 24. The
descending Trunk of the same Nerve, which parting from the Vagous Pair, is
reflexed outward, and after Communication with the Nerves of the Ninth and
Tenth Pair, terminates altogether in the Muscles of the Scapula. 25. The lower
Process of the same Nerve.
The EXPLANATION of the Thirteenth TABLE In Fol. 419.
This Table shows the lower Ramifications of the Vagous and Intercostal Pair
distributed to the Ventricle and the Bowels of the whole Abdomen: as also the
Originals of the Vertebral Nerves, which lie opposite to the former, and are
inoculated into some of them.

A. THe lower Stomachic branch, which consists of the inner branches of the
vagous Pair of each side united together, and which being spread over the
Bottom of the Stomach, dispeirses it is shoots and rivolets all along every way.
BB. The upper Stomachic branch which consists of the External branches of the
vagous Pair united together, and creeps through the upper Part of the
Ventricle. C. The Coalition of the outer branches. D. A Nervous Fold composed
of the fibers of each Stomachic Nerve, united together near the Orifice, and as
it were woven into a kind of small Net. aa. The Extremities of each Stomachic
Nerve, which there meet the Hepatic Nerves and communicate with them. EE. The
Intercostal Nerve in each side, descending near the Roots of the Ribs, and all
along from the several Vertebral Nerves ee. receiing a Branch. F. A Branch
proceeding from the Intercostal Nerve of the left side, and sent toward the
Mesenteric Folds. G. The same Mesenteric Nerve biforked, sends a larger Branch
to the Fold which is both the Stomachic and Spleenary and a lesser into the
Kidney Fold. H. A Parallel Mesenteric Branch proceeding from the Intercostal
Nerve of the right side, and bending toward the Mesenteric Folds. 3. The bigger
Branch of this Nerve in like manner bifork'd, runs to the Hepatic Fold, and the
lesser to the Kidney Fold. h. The first Mesenteric Fold of the left side, which
is also the Stomachic and Spleenary, from which several little bundles of
Nerves, or numerous Conjugations run several and several ways. 5. The
Mesenteric Kidney Fold of the left side, into which besides the Mesenteric
Sprig, bb. two other Nerves are immediately inserted from the Intercostal
Nerve. ggg. From this Fold seated near the Capsula of the Gall, several Nerves
and Fibers, are sent to the Kidneys. dd. The Nerves and Fibers by means of
which this Fold chiefly communicates with the Mesenteric Fold. e. The first
little bundle of Nerves tending from the former Fold h. to the Spleen, where
being arrived, it turns back certain Fibers to the bottom of the Ventricle. n.
The second Conjugation of Nerves, from the foresaid Fold to the bottom of the
Stomach, whose Fibers communicate with the small Sprigs of the lower Stomachic
Nerve. th. The third Conjugation of Nerves between this Fold and the Hepatic
adjoining. ps. The fourth Assemblage of Nerves between this and the largest
Mesenteric Fold. 6. The Kidney Mesenteric Fold, into which as in its Parallel,
besides the Mesenteric branch. KK. Two Nerves are produced from the Intercostal
Nerve. (...)* XIII
l. The Nerves and Fibers between this Fold and the largest of the Mesentery. m
A signal Branch between this Fold, and the adjoining Hepatic. g A signal
Assemblage of Nerves and Fibers from this Fold to the Kidneys, which climb the
Emulgent Vessels, and variously bind them. 77. The upper Mesenteric Fold of the
right side, called the Hepatic. oo. A numerous Assemblage of Nerves from this
Fold to the Liver and Gallbladder, from whence several Sprigs are distributed
to the Pylorus and Sweetbread. These Nerves and Fibers ascending toward the
Liver, cover the Hepatic Artery with a kind of Net, and almost hide its Trunk.
These Sprigs meet together with the tops of the Stomachic Nerves aa. p. Sprigs
distributed about the Pylorus. rr Other Sprigs dispeirs'd into the Sweetbread.
cc. The Nerves extended between the Fold and the largest of the Mesentery, O.
The largest Mesenteric Fold, from which a vast Assemblage of Nerves **. arising
under the large Kernel of the Mesentery, is dispeirs'd every way into several
shoots and branches, and distributed to all the Intestines besides the right
Gut. Nerves and Fibers extended every way rest all along upon the Arteries and
Veins, and bind and tie them after various manners. TT. Nervous shoots from
this Fold into the Female Testicles, or Uterine Kernels, which meet the
branches of the Vertebral Nerves of the twentieth and one and twentieth Pair
sent to the same Parts, and are knit together. VV. The Vertebral branches into
the Female Stones. 8. The lowermost Fold of the Mesentery, seated much beneath
the former, and having for their Original three Nerves on each side, arising
somewhat lower from the Intercostals. PHPHPH. Three Nerves on each side sent
from the Intercostal Nerve to the lowermost Mesenteric Fold. chch. A Nerve
extended directly from that Fold to the largest Mesenteric Fold, which in its
passage receives certain Branches from the Intercostal Nerve on each side, viz.
4. 4. 5. 5. 5. and sends it self two Sprigs to the Female Testicles. phph Two
Nerves from the foresaid Nerve to the Female Testicles. 9. Another little Fold
somewhat above this lowermost. o. A nervous Process extended from the foresaid
lowermost Fold into the adjoining small one. a. A signal Nerve from the least
Fold 9. carried to the largest Fold of the Mesentery, which during its whole
ascent, stretches it self under the right Gut and part of the Colon, and
furnishes them with numerous shoots. bb. The other Branch sent downwards from
the same Fold, which stretches it self under the lower Part of the said right
Gut, and affords it numerous shoots. cc. Two Nerves sent downward from the
lowermost Mesenteric Fold 8. which being dismissed about the lowermost Cavity
of the Belly into the Basin, in that place sink under the two Folds kk. viz.
one seated in each side. KK. The double Folds seated within the Basin, the
Nerves of which are assigned for the Excretions of Urine, Dung and Seed, and so
they send forth the Nerves d. d. toward the lowermost Mesenteric Fold. dd. A
Nerve which ascending from the foresaid Fold on each side, near the sides of
the right Gut, inserts several shoots into it: with which being double the
other Nerve b. ^. descending from the smallest Fold, meets. ee. The Nerves from
the same Fold to the Womb. f. A Nerve from the same Fold to the Blader. g. A
Nerve to the Prostates. h. A Nerve from the Root of the twenty eighth Vertebral
Pair to the Muscle of the Podex. i. The twenty ninth Vertebral Pair, from
whence, k. A Nerve to the Sphincter and the rest of the Muscles of the Podex.
ll. A signal Nerve on both sides from the same Pair to the Yard. m. Another
shorter Branch to the Muscles of the Yard. LL. The Intercostal Nerve below the
Kidneys. m. A little Nerve from the Vertebral Branch to the Cremaster Muscle of
the Testicle in Men. n. The 21. Vertebral Pair, the Original of which lies hid
near the Kidneys. From this Nerve several shoots are sent on both sides to the
Female Testicles, which meet with other Mesenteric Sprigs distributed to the
same Part. o. A Nerve from the 22. Vertebral Pair, from whence also certain
Sprigs to the Female Stones. pppp. Nerves designed for the Thigh, of which
those that rise above, in their descent receive Branches from those that rise
beneath. q. The Intercostal Nerves bending each to other near the beginning of
the Holy-bone, communicating by the transvers Process r. rr. The other
transvers Process within the Curvature of the Os Sacrum connecting the two
Intercostal Nerves. s. Both Intercostal Nerves terminate into minute Fibers,
which Fibers are distributed into the Sphincter of the Podex. t. A Nerve from
the 24. Vertebral Pair, which is carried to the Kernels of the Groin. vvv.
Shoots on each side sent from the Intercostal Nerves to the body of the Ureter.
X. A Nerve designed to the Testicle and Cremaster Muscle; cut off where it goes
forth from the Abdomen.
The EXPLANATION of the Fourteenth TABLE In Fol. 457.
FIGURE I. The Exterior Parts of the Eye.
AAAA. THE Skin turned back, BB. The bigger Muscle of the Orbicular Eyelid. C.
The Tendon of the same in the wider corner of the Eye. DD. The lesser Muscles
of the Eyelyds. EE. The Brows of the Eyelids. G. H. The upper and lower
Eyelid. I. The larger Corner. K. The lesser Corner. L. The Conjunctive
Tunicle. M. The Corneous Tunicle.
FIGURE II. The Muscles and Nerves of the Eye.
AAAA. The Cranium cut open. BB. A portion of the dissected Brain. CC. The
Cerebel. D. The meeting of the Optic Nerves. EE. Their Progress to both Eyes.
GG. The first Muscle of the Eye, called the Attollent. H. The second Muscle of
the left Eye, called the Depressor. Tab. XIV.
II. The straight inner Muscles, or drawers to, in each Eye. KK. The external
straight Muscles or drawers from each Eye. L. The fifth Muscle of the left Eye,
or the External Oblique. MM. The sixth Muscle or Internal Oblique, the Tendon
of which passes through the Trochlia, N. O. The Optic Nerve of the right Eye.
P. The Corneous Tunicle in the midst of which is the Apple.
FIGURE III.
AA. The Cranium resected. BB. The Cerebel. CCCC. The Dura Matter. D. A portion
of the dissected Brain. EE. The Sprig of the Optics. F. Their concourse. GG.
Their separation. H. The general Original of the Muscles. II. The Muscle of the
Eyelid in its place. K. The straight Muscle drawing the Eye outward. L. The
straight Muscle moving the Eye upward. M. The third right Muscle moving the
Eye-downward. N. The last right Muscle drawing the Eye to the inner Parts. OO.
Branches of the Motory Nerve inserted into the Muscles. PP. The Globeous Body
of the Eye it self prominent under the Muscle of the Eyelid. Q. The upper
Eyelid with its Hairs. R. The Bone broken off. S. The Body of the left Eye. T.
The Muscle of the upper Eyelid, out of its place turned back.
FIGURE IV. The Eye-brow and Eyelids.
AA. The hairy Eye-brow. BB. The fat of the Eye-brow. CCCC. The inner
superficies of the Eye brows. DDD. The Gristle of the Eyebrows. E. The upper
edging of Hair. F. The lower edging of Hair.
FIGURE V.
AA. The Muscle of the upper Eyelid in it is place BB. The Gristle of the
Eye-brow. C. The place of the Eyelid cut off. D. The hairy edging of the upper
Eye-brow.
FIGUR VI.
AA. The Muscle of the upper Eyelid. BB. The Gristle of the same Eyebrow. C.
The Hairs.
FIGURE VII.
A. The Nerve of Optic. B. The Motory Nerve. C. The rise of all the Muscles. D.
The Trochlear Muscle. E. The Trochlea or Wheel. F. The string of the Trochlear
Muscle. G. The Internal straight Muscle. H. The External straight Muscle. I.
The Muscle of the upper Eyelid. KK. The remainder of the Eyelids cut off. L.
The hairy Edgings.
FIGURE VIII.
AAA. The Gristle of the Eyelids taken out. B. The Hairs of the upper
Eye-brow. C. The Hairs of the lower Eye-brow.
FIGURE IX.
A. The Corneous Tunicle, with the transparent Apple. B. The straight Muscle
Attollent. C. The straight Muscle depressing. D. The inner Muscle bringing to.
E. The External Muscle drawing from. F. The inner Oblique, or Trochlear. G. The
outter Oblique, or lower.
FIGURE X.
A. The Optic Nerve. B. The seventh Muscle proper to many Brutes surrounding
the Eye. CCCC. The straight Muscles. D. The Trochlear Muscle. E. The lower
Oblique Muscle.
FIGURE XI.
A. The Optic Nerve. B. The Original of the Muscles. C. The straight lateral
Muscle. D. The upper straight Muscle. E. The other straight Muscle. FF. The Fat
of the Eye hiding the Muscles and the Optic Nerve. G. Part of the Skin of the
upper Eyelid cut off. HH. The Sclerotic Tunicle of the Eye. I. The Corneous
Tunicle. K. The Apple of the Eye. L. The Hair of the lower Eye-brow. MM. The
lower Eye-brow.
FIGURE XII.
The Annate Tunicle separated and out of place, furnished with several minute
Veins and Arteries.
FIGURE XIII.
The Christalline Tunicle.
FIGURE XIV.
The Chrystalline Humor and its Figure.
FIGURE XV.
The Watery Humor.
FIGURE XVI.
The Vitreous Humor receiving the Chrystalline in the middle.
FIGURE XVII.
A. The Optic Nerve. BB. The Choroides Tunicle laid bare from the Sclerotic.
CCCC. Veins depressed through the Sclerotic. DD. The Sclerotic inverted. E. The
Rupture of the Sclerotic.
FIGURE XVIII.
A. The Optic Nerve. BB. The Dura Matter surrounding the Optic. CC. The
Sclerotic opened, showing the Nerves through the Fissure.
FIGURE XIX.
A. The Optic Nerve. BB. The Uveous folded back, and partly separated from the
Netlike. C. Part of the Net-like separated from the Uveous.
FIGURE XX.
A. The Net of the Tunicle bare. B. The Conjunctive Tunicle, or the White of
the Eye. C. The Corneous. D. The Apple of the Eye.
Tab. XV.
The EXPLANATION of the Fifteenth TABLE, In Folio 469.
Showing the Parts of the Ear, especially the Inner Parts.

FIGURE I. The External Ear whole with the Muscles and Concavities.
AA. THE Helix of the Ear. BB. The Anthelix. C. The Tragus or Bunching of the
Ear. D. The Anti-tragus. E. The Lobe of the outer Ear. FF. The Shell or Hollow
of the outer Ear. GG. The Nameless Cavity between the Helix's. H. The Muscle
moving the Ear directly upward. III. The threefold Muscle drawing it upwards.
FIGURE II.
AA. The Skin with the Membrane drawn upward and downward. BB. The Gristle
constituting the Ear. C. The Hole pervious to the Auditory Passage. D. Part of
the Ligament of the outer Ear. E. Part of the Lobe of the Ear.
FIGURE III. The Forepart of the Inside Ear.
A. Part of the Bone of the Temples, containing the Stony Bone. B. The Auditory
Passage. C. The Threshold of the Auditory Passage, or Bee-hive. D. The
Mammi-form Process. E. The Style-resembling Process torn off.
FIGURE IV.
A. A Portion of the Auditory Passage. BB. The Membrane of the Drum. C. The
little Foot of the Hammer transparent through the Menbrane. D. The Teat-like
Process. E. The Bodkin-like Process.
FIGURE V. The Muscles of the Inside Ear.
A. The Muscle moving the Membrane with the Hammer outward. B. The Membrane of
the Drum. CC. The Muscle moving the Membrane with the Hammer inward. E. The
Head of the Hammer.
FIGURE VI.
A. Part of the Auditory Passage. B C. The Cavity of the Drum, wherein. B. The
Oval Hole, conspicuous when the Stirrup is removed. C. The Round Hole.
FIGURE VII. The Stony Bone, with the small Bones of the Tympanum, in Place.
A. The small Hammer. B. The small Bone called the Anvil. C. The upper Part of
the Stirrup. DD. The Windings of the Cochlea discovered according to their
natural Bigness.
FIGURE VIII. Four little Bones out of place.
A. The little Hammer, with its two Processes. B. The Anvil applied to the
Hammer. C. The Stirrup. D. The Orbicular Bone fastened with the Ligament of the
Stirrup.
FIGURE IX. The lower Face of the Bone of the Temples.
A. The Goos-quills transmitted into the Auditory Passage, through the Passage
which leads to the Palate. BB. Shows the same Passage next at Hand, though
broken in Part.
FIGURE X.
AA. The Hollowness of the Cochlea, the broader Part of which, runs to the
Labyrinth. BB. The Hollowness of the Labirinth, wherein the Oval Hole appears,
by reason of the Bone dissected from the side. Four other Holes opening
themselves in Circles, are shadowed with Black. The fifth, in the Extreme
largest Turning of the Cochlea, is broken,
FIGURE XI.
AA. The first Hole of the Bones of the Temples, into which the Auditory Nerve
is admitted. BB. The Stony Process of the Bone of the Temples, in which the
demonstrated Cavities are contained.
FIGURE XII.
AB. CD. The end of the passage discovered. into which the Auditory Nerve
enters, the Bone being filled away. B. The Hollowness wherein the softer part of
the Auditory Nerve, rests at the Center of the Chochlea. CA. An Apophysis
between each Portion of the Nerve, prominent like a Bridge. EE. The Footsteps
of two Circles, tending to the Labyrinth.
FIGURE XIII.
A. Part of the Bone of the Temples in which the Tympanum being removed,
together with the passage receiving the Auditory Nerve, appears. AA. The softer
part of the Auditory Nerve. BBB. The harder part of the Auditory Nerve,
obliquely descending under the Drum, thicker at the Exit. CC. A Small Nerve
from the fourth Pair, joining it self to the descending harder Portion of the
Auditory Nerve.
FIGURE XIV.
AA. The Shell. B. The Drum. C. The Hammer. D. The Stirrup.
FIGURE XV.
E. The Stirrup. F. The orbicular Bone fastened with the Ligament of the
Stirrup. G. The Oval hole.
FIGURE XVI.
H. The Hammer. I. The Staple. K. The Stirrup. L. The Orbicular Bone.
Tab. XVI.
The EXPLANATION of the Sixteenth TABLE, In Folio 488.
Showing the Salavary Channels, and the Lymphatic Channels of the Eyes in a
Calves Head, as they are acurately delineated by N. Stenonis and Wharton.

FIGURE I.
aaaa. THE Parotis conglomerated. bb. The Parotis conglobated. c. The Lymphatic
Vessel tending downward from the conglobated Parotis. dddd. The Roots of the
outer Salival Channel. eee. The Trunk of the Salival Channel. fff. The
outermost Branches of the Iugular Vein. ggg. The Nerves which are between the
Kernel and the Head, so are they knit one to another, as in H. II. Little
strings of the Nerve accompanying the Salival Channel.
FIGURE II.
aa. The Orifices of the Vessels proceeding from the lower Kernel of the Cheeks
into some of which a Bristle may be thrust. b. The opening of the outermost
Salival Channel in the uppermost and Extreme Part of the little Teats. The
other points mark out the other holes, through which the viscous Humor upon
squeezing issues forth.
FIGURE III.
aa. The Kernel under the Tongue. bb. The Vessels belonging to it. cc. The
Orifices of the Vessels for excretion. d. A hollowness observed at the side of
the Tongue.
FIGURE IV.
A. The holes of the Palate through which the slimy Humor is squeezed out. bb.
The Tonsils.
FIGURE V.
One Vessel among the rest of those that proceed from the Kernel in the lower
Part of the Cheeks.
FIGURE VI.
A. The hinder Part of the Maxillary Kernel. aa. The hindermost Roots of the
Salival Channel. C. The hindermost Trunk of the same Channel, ascending the
Tendon of the double bellied Muscle. DD. The return of it and uniting with the
foremost Channel. E. The common Trunk of the Salival Channel. F. G. The double
bellied Muscle. H. The Progress of the said Trunk to the Fore-teeth, of the
lower Iaw. I. The Opening of the Channel under the Tongue. K. The round Kernel
next to the Maxillary.
FIGURE. VII.
A. The hinder Part of the Maxillary Glandule. BB. The former Part of the same,
with the foremost Roots of the Spittle-Channel. C. The hinder Trunk of the same
Channel ascending a Tendon of the double-belly'd Muscle. D. The return of the
same and Union with the foremost Channel. EE. The common Trunk of the Salival
Channel. F. G. The double-Muscl'd Muscle. H. The Progress of the Trunk toward
the Fore-teeth of the lower Iaw. I. The Salival Channel opened under the
Tongue. K. A round little Kernel nextto the Maxillary. L. A row of Asperities
under the side of the Tongue. M. The Tongue out of its place.
FIGURE VIII. The Conglobated Kernels.
a. The Conglobated Parotis. b. The Conglobated Kernel next the lower Maxillary
Kernel. c. Another Conglobated Kernel seated above the Chaps. d. The common
Kernel. e. The Lymphatic Vessel tending to the Confines of the Jugulary and
Maxillary Kernel. fff. Three Lymphatic Vessels, carried from the three
Glandules a. b. c. to the common Glandule d.
FIGURE IX. The Left Eye of a Calf.
A. The upper nameless Glandule of the Eye. b. The larger Corner of the Eye. c.
The lesser Corner of the Eyes. ddd. The Lobes into which the foremost Border of
the Kernels is divided through the Lymphatic spaces of which eee. They make
their Exit.
FIGURE X.
A. The inner superficies of the Eyelid. bbb. The Nameless Kernel which
together with the small Vessels ccc. appears through the slender Tunicle of the
Eyelid. dd. The Orifices of the Lachrymal Vessels.
FIGURE XI.
A. The Lachrymal Kernel seated in the inner Corner. B. The Gristle proceeding
from the Kernel it self. bbb. The gristly Border. cc. The Membrane. dd. Two
Entrances, one of each side the Gristle.
FIGURE XII.
aa. The continuation of the Lachrymal points to the Extremities of the
Nostrils. bb. The Vessel for excretion proper to the Nostrils.
ANATOMY BOOK I. Of the lowest Cavity.
The Preamble.
I Am undertaking to write a Book of Anatomy; but am doubtful whether I should
term it the Art and Exercise of Physicians, or of Philosophers. For though
formerly it was first instituted for their sakes; yet now these are so much
taken up with it, that it can scarce be determined, to which Faculty it is more
obliged, or to which it is of nearer Affinity: Since in this our Age both the
one and the other are as industrious in this Affair, as if the welfare of each
Faculty lay in Anatomy, and as if both borrowed all their Light from it, as
from another Sun; so that they who are destitute of Skill in this one Art, are
reckoned to walk in darkeness and to know nothing in a manner: Since several
others also, who areof neither Faculty, nor indeed professedly of any, are so
sollicitous about the knowledge of Man's Body, that may strive how they may
bring Anatomy to greater perfection; and most of these men are desirous not
only to equalize others in this Exercise, but to signalize themselves above the
rest. So that Anatomy, which formerly was undertaken for the sake of Physic,
appears now to be the common Practice of all men, and as it were the Eye of all
solid Knowledge whatever. To whose further advancement, since I also would
contribute my Talent, when I have examined first what Anatomy is, and what its
Subject, I shall in succinct order take a view of all the Parts of the humane
Body.

CHAP. I. Of Anatomy, and Man's Body, its Division and Parts in general.
I. ANatomy is an Art which Definition of Anatomy
teaches the Artificial dissection of the Parts of the Body of Man, that what
things in them can be known by Sense, may truly appear.

The primary subject of Anatomy is Subject.
the Body of Man, partly because it is the perfectest; partly because the
knowledge of a Man's self is very necessary, a great share whereof consists in
the knowledge of his own Body. Besides, Anatomical exercises are very necessary
for Physicians, and were chiefly instituted for their sakes, whose Studies are
directed to the cure of Diseases only in humane Bodies, and not to the cure of
Brutes, as being unworthy of their noble Speculations, and therefore left to
^arriers and other Plebeians. So that in this regard the Artificial Dissection
of humane Bodies must be preferred before the Dissection of any Brute whatever;
since Physicians may this way far better attain the perfect knowledge of the
subject of their Art, than if they should search the Bodies of Brutes. In the
mean time, however, because humane bodies cannot always conveniently be had,
neither will Law nor Piety at any time allow the cutting of them up alive, yet
nevertheless it is necessary that we should get the perfect knowledge, of the
site, connection, shape, use, etc. of the Parts by many Dissections and
Inspections; for which purpose men use, in defect of humane Bodies, to dissect
several Brutes, sometimes alive, but usually dead, especially such, whose
Inwards and most of their Parts are likest in form, site, and use to the humane
body; that by the knowledge of them the parts of a humane body may the easilier
be known, when afterward they are once or twice shown in a humane body.

II. A humane body is considered generally Different consideration of the Body.
Generally.
or particularly.

III. Considered generally, or in the whole, the chief differences are observed
in relation both to the shape, stature and color.

What the shape is in the known Difference of shape.
World, every one knows, and daily sees. But they that have seen the East and
West Indies, and that have Traveled other strange and remote Countries,
describe many uncouth and unknown shapes to us. For some tell, how they have
found Men without heads, whose eyes were in their breasts: Others, men with
square heads: Others, men all hairy: Others, Salvages, whose shoulders were
higher than their heads; they write, such were found in Guajana: Others, men
with Tails: And others, men otherwise shaped.

Difference of stature consists herein, Difference of Stature.
that some are thick, others slender; some short, others tall. Upper France
breeds short and slender men, and very few tall people are found there.
Northern Countries breed tall and strong men: And the Germans come nigh them.
England and Holland breed a middle sort. Nevertheless, some very tall people,
though few, are found in the Low Countries. Ten years agone at Utrecht Very
tall People.
I saw a Maid Seventeen years of Age, so tall, that a proper man could scarce
reach to the top of her head with his fingers ends. Near Schoonhoven, in the
Village Leckerkerck, a few years agone, there lived a Country fellow, a Fisher,
commonly called the great Clown, a very strong man, I have often seen him, when
he stretched out his arm, the tallest of ordinary men might go under it and not
touch it. Anno 1665. at Utrecht-Fair, in the Month of July, I saw a very strong
man, and very tall, and witty enough, (which is a rarity in such great bodies)
above eight feet and an half high, all his Limbs were proportionable, and he
was married to a very little woman, whom, when he Traveled, he could without
any trouble carry in a Pouch along with him: he was born at Schoonhoven of
Parents of an ordinary size. At the same time a Country wench was shown,
Eighteen years of age, who was nigh as tall as the said man, her whole body was
well shaped, but she was of a dull capacity. Yet these rare instances of a vast
stature which I have seen (like unto which Platerus Observat. l. 3. describes
four more) are nothing, compared with some, which are described by Historians.
The body of Orestes, which by command of the Oracle was dug out of the Earth,
is said to have been seven Cubits long: which Cubits, according to Aulus
Gellius, among the Romans amounted to twelve feet and a quarter. William
Schouten in his Journal reports, that in the Port, called Desire, near the
Straits of Magellan, he found men of ten and eleven Cubits. Fazellus, decad. 1.
lib. 1. cap. 6. mentions several bodies, found in diverse places, some of which
were seventeen, others eighteen, others twenty, others two and twenty Cubits
long, and one of their Teeth weighed five ounces. Pliny writes, that in Crete a
Mountain was broke by an Earthquake, and on that occasion a body of forty seven
Cubits was found, which some thought Orion's, others Oetius's. So likewise
Camerarius relates diverse stories of such Giants, Meditat. Histor. cent. 1.
cap. 82.

And on the other hand likewise Dwarfs.
sometimes men are ^ound of a very low stature, viz. three or four feet long.
We call such Dwarfs. Formerly I have seen three or four of them. Platerus
Observe. l. 3. in principio, describes three such, which he saw. Aristotle lib.
8. histor. animal. cap. 12. writes for a certain truth, that Pigmies dwell
about those place, where the Nile runs into Egypt, and they are such short
dwergens, that they are not above an ell high. But this People could never yet
be found by the modern Seamen, who have sailed the World over (perhaps, because
they could not get with their Ships to that peoples Country) and therefore one
might very well question the truth of the story, had not Aristotle, who ought
to be trusted a great way, writ it. Nevertheless Spigelius does not believe
Aristotle, but reckons his story of the Pigmies a fable, being so persuaded, 1.
From the authority of Strabo, lib. 1. Geograph. 2. From the experience of
Francis Alvarez a Portugueze, who himself Traveled those parts, whereabout
Aristotle writes, the Pigmies are, namely where the Nile runs into Egypt; yet
he could no where see or find that little Nation, but says, that those parts
were inhabited by middle statured people.

The difference of color is great, Difference of color.
according to the difference of Countries: For in Europe and Christendom people
are white, in Aethiopia and Brasile black, in diverse parts of India tawny, in
some places almost red, in others brown, in others whitish.

IV. A humane body considered Particular consideration of the body.
particularly, or according to each part, affords for consideration the neat
figure of each part, the most convenient connection, the admirable structure,
the necessary action, and lastly, the great, yet harmonous diversity of all and
each function and use.

V. The part of the Body is any bodily Definition of a part.
Substance joined to the whole in continuity, having its own proper
circumscription, and with other parts making up the whole, is fitted for some
function or use. What continuity is.


This is an exquisite definition.

For First, the part of a humane body must be a bodily substance, and such as
is joined to the whole in continuity ( a thing is said to be continued, whose
least particles stick one to another in rest) not in contiguity: For contiguous
bodies must of necessity be diverse, and one may be separated from the other
without hurting either, both remaining entire. For as Wine contained in a
vessel cannot be called a part of the vessel, nor the vessel a part of the
wine, because there is no continuity between them two; so likewise blood
contained in an Artery, cannot he called a part of the Artery, nor of a humane
body, since it is not joined thereto in any continuity.

Secondly, A part must with others make up the whole; for whatever things are
above the complement, are not reckoned parts of one body, but are bodies
subsisting by themselves, which often adhere to the whole, that they may be
nourished by the whole. Thus a child or mole in the womb are not parts of a
woman's body, but subsist by themselves, and yet by means of the placenta
uterina and umbilical vessels, they are joined to the womb, that they may
receive nourishment from it; nevertheless the woman, when she is delivered,
remains entire. So likewise Sarcomata or fleshy excrescences, and such things,
are not reckoned among the parts of a humane body, because they neither make up
the complement of the whole, nor are designed for requisite functions and uses,
but adhere to the whole, that thereby they may be nourished.

VI. Thirdly, A part must be made for some function or use,

VII. A Function, or Action, is a certain What a function is.
effective motion made by an Organ, through its own proper disposition to it.

This is either private, whereby the parts provide for themselves; or public
whereby the whole is provided for; for instance; The stomach by a private
action, or coction, converts the blood brought to it by the Arteries into a
substance like it self, and so is nourished: But it performs another action
besides, whereby it provides for the whole Animal, to wit, chylification.

VIII. The use of a part is a certain What use (...).
aptiude to some proper intention of nature, to wit.

Such as not only turns to the benefit of the part, whence it proceeds, but
also respects the good of some other part, or of the whole. It is doubly
distinguished from action. First, because action is only competible to parts
that operate, but use is often competible to things that do nothing at all,
that is to such as help an acting part, so that it may act better. Thus the
cuticle acts nothing; but its use is to moderate the sense of the skin, to
cover it and the extremities of the vessels, and to defend it from external
injuries: Fat acts nothing, it only cherishes and moistens the parts and makes
their motion easier: Hair acts nothing; but its use is to cover and adorn the
head, and to defend it from external cold. Secondly, Because action is
competible to the whole operating Organ, but use to every part of the Organ;
for instance; The action of a Muscle is to contract; but the use of the
Musculous Membrane is to contain its fibers, and to separate it from other
Muscles; of the Artery, to bring blood to it; as of the nerves, animal spirits,
to support the fibers of the flesh. Yet oftentimes use, action and function are
promiscously used by Anatomists: And the action of a part, because it tends to
some end or other, is often called use: And also use, because it excludes not
action, is called action. But use is of greater latitude then action.

Hippocrates divided things that make Things that make up the whole.
up the whole into things containing, things contained, and things that move or
have in themselves the power of motion. Galen calls these three things Solid
parts Humors and Spirits. In this division the threefold parts of the body are
not comprehended, but only three things, without which a man cannot continue
entire, that is, alive. For only the containing or solid parts are true parts
of the body. Yet these parts cannot continue alive, except they be continually
nourished by the humors. Not Where the humors and spirits be parts of the Body.
that humors are parts of the body, but the proximate matter, which by coction
is changed into the substance of the parts, into which till they are changed,
they cannot be called parts; and when they are changed, they cannot be called
humors: for a bone is not blood, and blood is not bone, though the one be bred
of the other. The same must be understood of spirits, which being made of the
subtilest and hottest part of the blood, do very much contribute to the
nutrition of the body. Therefore though a man cannot continue alive without
these three, yet it does not follow, that all these three must necessarily be
parts of the body. A Vine consists of solid woody parts, and a Juice whereby it
is nourished, and yet it is evident, this Juice is no part of the Vine, because
if a Vine be unseasonably cut, abundance of it runs out, the Vine remaining
entire: wherefore a blind man may see, that it is no part if the Vine, but only
liqour, which by further coction would be turned into a Vine. Thus also when
there is a Flux of blood by the Haemorrhoids, Menses or any other part; or when
one makes water or sweats, no man in his wits will say, that then the parts of
a man's body are voided, although a man cannot live without blood and serum. But
if pieces of the Lungs be brought up in coughing, or if pieces^ of the Kidneys
be voided in Urine, as it sometimes happens in their exculceration, then it is
certain that the true parts of the body are voided.

Besides, these are parts of the body, Actions proceed from Solids.
whence actions immediately proceed, and they proceed not from the humors and
spirits, but from solids. For the humors and spirits move not the Heart, Brain,
and other parts, but they both breed and move the humors and spirits: for when
the Heart, Brain, and other parts are quiet, humors and spirits are neither
bred nor moved (this appears in a deep swoon) and though there is abundance of
them in the body, and those very hot and fit for motion, as in such as dye of a
burning Fever; yet as soon as the Heart is quiet, they neither move through the
Arteries, Veins and Nerves, nor are able to move the Heart, or any part else,
which is a certain Argument that they are Passive, and that no Action can
proceed from them. And that the humors and spirits are moved by the Heart, and
bred in it and other parts, will more plainly appear, lib. 2. cap. 11. and lib.
3. cap. 10, 11. and in several other places.

And now though solids cannot act Solids (...) not without the humors.
without the humors and spirits, and by them their Actions (in as much as by
their quantity, or quality, as their heat, cold, etc. they are able to cause
this or that mutation or temper in Solids) are made quicker, slower, stronger,
weaker, better or worse; yet they are without air; yet air is no part of the
body, neither does the Action of respiration proceed from it, but from the
muscles of the breast forcing it out, though in the mean time air by giving way
to the motion of the muscles, and passing in and out through the Aspera
Arteria, affords such an aptitude for respiration, as without it no respiration
could be performed; though also by its heat or cold it may make respiration
quicker, slower, longer or rarer, according as by these mutations the heat of
the parts is augmented or diminished, and thereupon necessity obliges one to
breath quicker or slower. So the Heart and other solid Parts are not moved by
the humors and spirits, but act upon the humors and spirits, they move,
attenuate and concoct them till at length they turn their apt particles into a
substance like themselves, and so apply and unite them to themselves, and make
them parts of the body, which they were not before they were applied and
assimilated. For one part of the body is not nourished with another part of its
whole, a bone is not nourished with flesh, nor a vein with a nerve, etc.
Neither can that which nourishes the parts, by any means be called a part, for
otherwise there would be no difference between a part and its nutriment: With
which Nourishment, unless the Parts be daily cherished, and their consumed
particles restored, their strength and substance would quickly waste and fail,
and by that failure at length their Action would be lost.

So that Man of necessity must have both Blood and Spirits for the support of
Life (hence says the Text in Levit. 17. 11. the Soul (that is the Life) of the
Flesh is in its Blood) as being the nearest Support of the Body, without which
neither the Parts of the Body can act, nor the Man himself live. Yet it does
not follow from thence that the Blood and Spirits are part of the Body: For the
same might be said of the external Air, without which no Man can live. For take
away from a Man the use of external Air either by suffocation or drowning, or
any other way, you presently deprive him of Life, as surely as if you took from
him his Blood and Spirits. Yet no man of Judgment will say that the external
Air is a part of the Body: Seeing that most certainly, if that without which
Life cannot subsist were to be accounted a Part, the external Air must of
necessity be said to be a Part of our Body, as well as the Blood and Spirits.
Moreover it is to be considered, that if the Humors and Spirits have contracted
any Foulness or Distemper, they are by the Physicians numbered among the Causes
of Diseases, not among the diseased Parts. Besides, that if they were Parts,
they ought to be similar, yet never any Anatomist that I ever yet heard of,
recken'd 'em among similar Parts. For most of the Organic Parts are composed
out of the Similar. And yet among those Similar Parts which compose the
Organic, never did any one reck'n the Blood or Spirits, as Similar Parts. For
all the Organs ought to derive their Composition from those things which are
proper and fixed, not from those things which are common to all, and fluid,
continually wasted and continually renewed.

IX. Therefore the Body of Man may exist entire in its Parts without Blood,
Spirits, and Air; but it cannot act, nor live without 'em.

And thus a Man cannot be said to live without a rational Soul, and to be a
perfect and entire Man; yet every one knows that the Soul is not to be reck'n'd
among the parts of the corruptible Body, as being incorruptible, subsisting of
it self, and separable from the rest of the Body; since, that being
incorruptible, it cannot proceed from any incorruptible Body, but derives it
self from a divine and heavenly Original, and is infused from above into the
corruptible Body, to the end it may act therein so long as the Health and
Strength of those corruptible Instruments will permit Actions to be performed.
To which we may add, that an Anatomist, when he enquires into the parts of
human Body, considers 'em as such, not as endu'd with Life, nor as the parts of
a Rational Creature. Neither does he account the Causes of Life and Actions, by
any manner of Continuity or Unity adhering to the Body, to be Parts; nor is it
possible for him so to do.

And thus it is manifest from what has been said, That the Spirits and Blood,
and other Humors neither are nor can be said to be Parts of our Body. Yet all
these Arguments will not satisfy the most Eminent I. C. Scaliger, who in his
Book, de Subtle. Exercit. 280. Sect. 6. pretends with one Argument, as with a
strong battering Ram, to have ruined all the Foundations of our Opinion.

If the Spirit (says he, and he concludes the same Thing of the Blood and
Spirits) be the Instrument of the Soul, and the Soul is the beginning of
Motion, and the Body be the Thing moved, there must of Necessity be a
Difference between the thing moved, and that which moves the Instrument.
Therefore if the Spirits are not animated, there will be something between the
thing enlivening and enlivened, forming and formed; which is neither formed nor
enlivened. But the Body is moved because it is enlivened. Yet is it not moved
by an external but an internal Principle. Now it is manifest, that the Spirits
are also internal, and that the internal Principle of Motion is in them,
therefore it follows that they must be part of the Member.

But this Argument of the most acute Scaliger, though it seems fair to the Eye at
first sight, yet (thoroughly considered) will appear to be without Force, as
not concluding any thing of Solidity against our Opinion. For the Spirit is no
more an Instrument that moves the Body, than the Air is the Instrument that
moves the Sight or Hearing. So neither are the Spirits the Instrument of the
Soul, but only the necessary Medium, by which the active Soul moves the
instrumental Body; and also perceives and judges of that Motion so made in that
Body. So that it is no such Absurdity (as Scaliger would have it to be) but a
Necessity, that there should be something inanimate between the enlivening
Soul, and the instrumental Body enlivened, which is part of neither, but the
Medium, by which the Action of the enlivened instrumental Body may be performed
by the enlivening Soul. But, says Scaliger, the Body is moved, because it is
enlivened, and that not by an external, but an internal Principle. We grant the
whole; yet we deny the Spirits to be the internal Principle, when it is most
apparent that the Soul is the internal Principle which operates by the
assistance of the Spirits.

So that it cannot from hence be proved that the Spirits live or are Parts of
the Body, but only that they are the Medium, by which the Soul moves the Body.
But because that Scaliger spied at a distance a most difficult Objection, viz.
How the Spirits could be a Part of any corporeal Body, when they are always
flowing and never in any constant Rest, but continually in Motion through all
the Parts of the Body indifferently, to avoid this Stroke, he says that the
Spirit's a quarter of that part of the Body where they are at the present time,
and when they flow out of that part then they become a part of that Body into
which they next infuse themselves; and so onward. But this way of concluding of
Arguments is certainly very insipid, and unbeseeming so great a Man, when it is
plain from the Definition of a Part, that a part of our Body, is not any fluid
and transient Substance but as it is joined to the Body by Continuity and Rest.

X. The Parts of the Body are twofold. Division* the (...).


1. In respect of their Substance. 2. In respect of their Functions.
XI. In respect of their Substance, they are divided into Similar, and
Dissimilar.

XII. Similar Parts are those which are divided into Parts like themselves. So
that all the Particles are of the same Nature and Substance. And thus every
part of a Bone is a Bone; of a Fiber, a Fiber. Which Spigelius calls
Consimiles, or altogether alike: the Greeks (...), or of like Parts.

They are commonly reckoned to be ten: Bones, Gristles, Ligaments, Membranes,
Fibers, Nerves, Arteries, Veins, Flesh, and Skin. To these by others are added
the Scarf-Skin, Tendons and Fat. By others, the two Humors in the Eyes, the
Glassie and the Crystalline; by others the Marrow, the Brain, and Backbone:
And lastly by others, the Hair, and Nails.

Of these some are simply Similar, as the Bones, Gristles, Fibers, etc. wherein
there is no difference of Particles to the Sight. I say, manifest to the Sight,
for that in respect of the several smallest Elements, not to be perceived by
the Eyes, but by the Mind, of which they are composed, no part of 'em can be
said to be really and simply Similar. Others are only Similar as to the Senses,
wherein there is a difference of Particles manifest to the Sight, as a Vein,
Artery, Nerve, etc. For a Vein consists of the most subtle Fibers, and a
Membrane: An Artery of Fibers, and a double different Tunicle. A Nerve
consists of the Dura and Pia Matter, or Membrane, little Fibers and Marrow.
Nevertheless to a slight and careless Sight they seem to be Similar, because
they are every where composed after the same manner, and so are like to
themselves, as not having any other Substance or Composition in the Brain, than
in the Foot or any other Parts.

Of the several similar Parts we shall afterward discourse in their proper
Places.

Now all the similar and solid parts, in the first forming of the Birth are
drawn like the Lines of a rough Draught in Painting, out of the Seed; to which
the Blood and milkie Juice contain*d in the Amnion, and Membrane that wraps
about the Birth soon after joining, nourish the Parts delineated, and increase
and enlarge their Bulk.

'Till of late, it was believed that the Blood of the Mother in the first
forming of the Parts did concur with the Seed, not only as a material but
effective Principle (which Opinion was afterward exploded by all the most
eminent Philosophers) and that some Parts shared of more Seed, others of more
Blood, and others received an equal Share of both. And hence proceeded that old
Division, which divided the Parts, in respect of this Principle of Generation
into Spermatic, which in their Spermatic, Sanguine, and Mixed.
Forming were thought to partake of more Seed than Blood, as the former eight
Similar Parts. Others, into Sanguine, in the forming of which the Blood seemed
to predominate, as in the Flesh. Others mixed, which were thought to be formed
of equal Parts of Blood and Seed, as the Skin. But this Diversity of the Parts,
does not proceed from the first forming, but from the Nourishment, in respect
of which some received more, others less Blood for the Increase of their
Substance: Also others are more and more swiftly, others less, and more slowly
increased in their Bulk.

Those Parts which are called Spermatic being cut off, never grow again, or
being broken or separated, never grow again but by the assistance of a
Heterogeneous Body. Thus a Bone cut off can never be restored; but it being
broken, it unites together again by means of the Callus, or glutinous
Substance, that gathers about the Fracture; but Parts made of Blood are soon
restored, as is apparent when the Flesh is wounded or cut off.

Those that are mixed, are in the middle, between both. Nevertheless as to the
Spermatic Parts, when broken or separated, some question whether they may not
be united again without the help of a Heterogeneous Medium: and they believe
that in Infants and Children, whose Spermatic Parts, as the Bones, are very
tender may be united again by Virtue of a Homogeneous Medium. But seeing we
find that even in Children and Infants, wounds of the Skin never unite without
a Scar, nor fractures of the Bone without the assistance of the Callous Matter,
it is most probable that in no Age the Spermatic Parts unite without a
Heterogeneous Medium; though it be not so conspicuous by reason of the
extraordinary Moisture of the Parts in new Born Children, and young People.

XIII. Dissimilar Parts are those Dissimilar Parts.
which are divided into Parts, unlike in Nature and Substance, but not into
Parts like themselves. Thus a Hand is not divided into several Hands, but into
Bones, Flesh, Nerves and Arteries, etc.

XIV. In respect of their Functions, the Parts are distinguished two ways.

1. Into Organic, and not Organic; 2. Into Principal and Subservient.
XV. Organical Parts are such as Organical Parts.
are designed for the performing of Actions, and to that end have received a
certain, determinate and sensible Conformation and Fashion.

Now that they may have an aptness for the Duties imposed, there are required
in these Parts, Continuity, fit Situation and Number, proper Figure, and
Magnitude.

Which Parts are not only Dissimilar, as was formerly thought, but also
Similar. For Example, a Nerve, though it be a Similar Part, yet because it is
entrusted with the office of Conveighing and distributing the animal Spirits;
for this reason it is no less an Organical Part than a Muscle, or a Hand: and
the same thing is also to be understood of a Bone, an Artery, and a Vein. So
that it is a frivolous distinction of Caspar Bauhinus, and some others, who
while they endeavor to exclude Similar Parts, out of the number of Organic,
distinguish between Instruments, and Instrumental Parts; whereas indeed there
is no more difference between 'em, than between an Old Woman, and a very Old
Woman.

XVI. Parts not Organic are those Parts not Organic.
which have a bare Use, but perform no Action, as the Gristles, the Fat, the
Hair.

XVII. Principal Parts are those Principal Parts.
which perform the Noblest and Principal Action.

By these the Motions of several other Parts are promoted, and from them
proceed. And they are reckoned to be three in Number; two, in respect of the
Individual; and one in respect of the Species. 1. The Heart, the Fountain of
Vivific Heat, and the Primum Mobile of our Body, from whence the vital and
Natural Actions proceed. 2. The Brain, the immediate Organ of Sense, Motion,
and Cogitation in Man, by means of which all the Animal Actions are performed.
3. The Parts of Generation; upon which the Preservation of the Species depends.

XVIII. Subservient Parts, are all Subservient parts.
those that are useful and subservient to the Principal: As the Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, Lungs, Kidneys, Hands, etc.

And these, as necessary to Life, are Noble.
to be called either Noble, without which a Man cannot live, as the Lungs,
Stomach, Guts, Liver, and the like. Others as not being necessary for Life, but
are proper for some use or action, which renders Life more Comfortable, are to
Ignoble.
be called Ignoble, as an Arm, a Finger, a Foot, a Hand, Ear, Nose, Teeth, etc.
which we may want and yet Live.

To these may be added, those whose Office is more mean and hardly manifest, as
Fat, Hair, Nails, and the like.

Now that the Demonstration of these Parts may be the more conveniently made
plain, and described in their Order, we shall divide the Body of Man, according
to the modern Anatomists into the three Ventricles, and Limbs.

XIX. The Venters are certain remarkable Cavities, containing one or more of
the Noble Bowels.

In this Place the words Cavity and Venture are not to be strictly taken for the
Cavities themselves only, but lest the Members of this Division should be too
Numerous, we would have comprehended under 'em at large, as well the containing
Parts that form those Cavities, as also the Parts contained within 'em:
together with the Neck, or if there be any other parts annexed to 'em, which
may be reckoned to the Members. Afterward in the following Chapters, when we
come to discourse particularly of the several Venters, we shall more at large
subdivide 'em into Parts Containing, Contained, and such as are adjoining to
them.

XX. These three Venters are the uppermost, the middle, and the lowermost.

XXI. The uppermost Venture or Cavity The uppermost Venture or Cavity.
is the Head, wherein are contained the Brain, the Eyes, the Ears, and other
Parts.

Now there was a necessity that this same Tower of the principal Faculties
should be seated in the highest Place, to the end that being at a further
distance from the places where the Nourishment is dressed, the most noble Animal
Functions should not be disturbed by its Steams and thick Exhalations: partly
for the convenience of the Senses of Hearing, Seeing and Smelling, whose
Objects more easily dart themselves from a higher than a lower place into the
Organs of the Senses, and by that means become more perceptible. The middle
Venture.


XXII. The second or middle Venture or Cavity is the Breast, the Mansion of the
Heart, Lungs, rough Artery or Windpipe, and the Oesophagus or Gullet. This the
great Creator placed in the middle, that as a King resides in the midst of his
Kingdom, so the Heart the most noble and principal Habitaculum of Life should
inhabit this middlemost Palace of the Microcosmical Kingdom, and there sit as
in its Throne, from thence with more convenience to water the several Regions
of the Little World with its Rivulets of enlivening Nectar and Heat.

XXIII. The third Venture which is The lowermost Venture.
generally called the lowermost, and concludes with the Abdomen or Paunch, as
the seat of the Liver, Stomach, Guts, Reins, Womb, and many other parts,
serving for the Concoction of Nourishment, Evacuation of Excrements, and
Generation of Offspring: therefore necessarily to be placed lowermost, lest
the manifold disturbances and abominable filth of this Kitchen should annoy the
superior principal Viscera in their Functions.

XXIV. Limbs are the Members Limbs.
adjoining to the Venters, and distinguished with Joints.

These being granted to Man for the better accommodation of Life, are twofold,
Arms and Legs.

XXV. The Arms in Man, are divided into the Shoulders, Elbows, and Hands: The
Leg is divided into the Thigh, the Shin, and Foot.

According to which Division we have A Division of the Work.
divided this our Anatomy into ten Books. In the first four of which shall be
explained the History of those things which are contained in the several
Cavities and Limbs. In the six latter we shall discourse of those things which
are common to the whole Body, the Muscles, Membranes, Fibers, Arteries, Veins,
Nerves, Bones, Gristles, and Ligaments.

CHAP. II. Of the lowermost Venture in general.
I. IN regard the lowermost Venture contains in it several moist Parts which are
liable to putrefaction, the sink of many Dregs, therefore Anatomists begin
their Dissections from thence, to avoid the effects of swift putrefaction, and
to remove those Bowels first out of the way, which might soonest infect the
whole Body, and so prevent a requisite consideration of the rest.

II. This Venture Aristotle (Hist. Nomina.
Anim. lib. 1. c. 13.) properly calls (...): the Common People simply the
Belly, in a more reserved signification: which Celsus willing to distinguish
from the superior Venture, calls Imum Ventrem, the lower Belly.

III. The lower Venture is all that Cavity, The lower Venture.
bounded above by the Swordlike Cartilage and the Diaphragma or Transverse
Muscle; on each side by the lower Ribs, behind by the Joints of the Loins; and
below, by the Bones of the Hip, the Os Sacrum and Share-bone, or Os Pubis.

IV. The fore parts of this Cavity adjoining to the lower Cartilages of the
Ribs, and comprehended under 'em, were by the Ancients called Hypochondria and
Praecordia; being two, a Right and a Left.

V. All that which falls upon the Epigastrium.
middle Ventricle of the Hypochondria, and the Gutts next to it, for more clear
distinctions sake, with Veslingius, is called Epigastrium, though Riolanus will
have it to be the Region of the Stomach: But the Ancients gave the name of
Epigastrium to the whole Paunch; which the Arabians called Myrach. In the upper
part of this Epigastrium is a certain Cavity, by the Greeks called (...) and
(...); by the Latins Scrobiculus Cordis.

VI. The middle Region is the Region The Region of the Navel.
of the Navel, lying equally from the Navel three fingers above and below,
whose sideling Parts are by the Greeks called (...), by the Latins Ilia,
because the Gut Ilium lies chiefly concealed under those places. Hypogastrium.


VII. That part which is comprehended between this Region and the space of the
Share, is called the Hypogastrium, Imus Venture, and Aqualiculus. Whose lateral
Parts from the bending of the Hip to the Share, are called Inguina, or the
Groyns.

VIII. The Share* by the Greeks The Share.
(...), is that part next above the Privities covered with hair in persons
grown to full Age. Of each side of which are the (...), which the Latins call
Inguina, or the Groyns. Perinaeum.


IX. The lower part between the Root of the Yard and the Fundament, is called
the Perinaeum.

X. The hinder parts of the Paunch Loins.
or Abdomen above, are filled up by the Loins or Lumbi, below by the Buttocks
or Clunes, which the Greeks call (...) and (...).

The Cleft dividing the Buttocks by Buttocks.
Hierophilus is called (...), where the hole of the right Intestine breaks
forth, vulgarly called the Podex or Fundament.

XI. This Venture consists of parts containing or external, or of parts
contained or internal.

XII. The Containing, which they Abdomen.
properly call the Abdomen or Paunch, are either common or proper.

XIII. The parts contained are adapted either for Nourishment, Evacuation of
Excrements, or Generation.

The Physiognomists affirm that notable Conjectures may be made concerning the
Disposition of Men from the form and bigness of this Belly. Thus Aristotle
affirms that a little Belly is one of the principal Parts from whence Wisdom
appears in man. Among others, a ^lat and hollow Belly denotes a man envious and
covetous. A round Belly betokens sobriety. A swag-Belly marks out a sleepy,
slothful, stupid Fellow. A Navel swelling out very much, is a sign of a person
given to Venery.

CHAP. III. Of the common Containing Parts; and first of the Cuticle and Skin.
I. THose are said to be the Common containing Parts, that infold not only this
Belly, but cover all the rest of the Body except the Yard, the Scrotum, or Cod,
the Eyelids, and some other parts that want Fat.

II. These are, the Cuticle, the Skin, The containing parts.
the Fat, the fleshy Pannicle, the Membrane common to the Muscles.

III. The Cuticle, or Scarf-skin, which the Cuticle.
Greeks call (...) (as it were a thing spread over the Skin) is a thin, fast,
insensible little Skin spread over the Cutis, and so closely sticking to it,
that it cannot be parted from it, but by the raising of little Blisters by the
force of Fire or Vesicatories.

Aquapendens observed it sometimes Sometimes double.
double under the Vesicatory, divided into two very thin Skins, an outermost
somewhat closer, and an innermost much thinner, and sticking so close to the
Skin, that it cannot be taken off with a Penknife; which was so provided by
Nature, that seeing the Skin is subject to outward violence, that if one Skin
should perish, the other might remain entire, and supply the uses to which the
other was designed.

IV. It is said to grow from the Original.
moisture of the Flesh condensed by the dryness of the ambient Air; but
erroneously, in regard it appears to have a Seminal Principle as well as the
Skin, or any solid Parts.

It covers the Skin, and shuts up the The Use.
Mouths of the Vessels that extend to the Skin, and moderates its exquisite
Sense, and prevents the overmuch running out of the moisture.

Julius Castor of Placentia, and several other Anatomists, will not allow it to
be a part of Human Body, for four Reasons.

1. Because it was not produced out of the Seed in the first forming of the
Parts; but afterward arises from the Excrements of the third Concoction
condensed and dried by the Cold, like the film that grows upon Porridge. Which
they say is apparent from hence, that when it is taken away or scraped off, it
easily grows again, which the Spermatic parts never do.

2. Because it is void of Sense; nor is it wasted, as the other parts are, by
Diseases.

3. Because it does not live.

4. Because it performs no action.

But all these Arguments are of no force, as being full of manifest
contradiction. For by the unanimous consent of all Anatomists, even of those
that propose these Arguments; it is allowed to be the first and outermost of
all the containing Parts; in which particular they had all very grossly erred,
were it not a part of Human Body. But let us see what weight their Arguments
carry.

To the first we say, That the smallest Threads or Fibers of it were formed out
of the Seed, in the first delineation of the Parts. Which is apparent in all
Abortions covered with a Skin, where there is always a Scarf-skin to be seen;
which could not be generated by the external Cold, for there can be no such
thing in the closed Womb; nor by the dryness of any ambient Substance, there
being no such thing that can touch the Birth swimming in a moist milkie Liquor;
and therefore proceeds from some small portion of the Seed. Which is apparent
in Ethiopian Infants, as well brought forth in due season, as ejected by
Abortion, who bring the external blackness along with 'em out of the Womb.
Which Color only dies the Scarf-skin, and not the Skin (as Riolanus observed
in the Dissection of an Ethiopian, whose Scarf-skin or Cuticle was only black,
the Skin it self being whiter than Snow.) If now they receive that blackness
from their first Formation in the Womb, then the Cuticle into which that Color
is incorporated in the very first forming of the Body, had its Original with
the rest of the Parts out of the Seed; not from any Excrements, or Viscous
Exhalations, in regard that no such things can be at the beginning of
Formation. As for its growing again when cut away or rubbed off, it has that
quality common also to the Teeth, which are daily worn by Mastication, yet grow
again (concerning which see lib. 9. cap. 10. following.) Nay we find, that in
the change of Teeth, the greatest part of 'em shed themselves, and afterward
come again. The same quality also is common to the Sanguin Parts; which are not
excluded however out of the number of Parts, because they grow again when taken
away: seeing they have such a copious nourishment of Blood, that easily admits
of such a Restoration. And thus from the ends of the Vessels of the Skin, which
it covers and shuts, certain Exhalations breath continually forth like a kind
of Dew from the Blood to the Cuticle, for its nourishment, which is sufficient
easi^y to restore its decayed and wasted Particles.

Then if it be generated, as they say, like a Film growing over Milk thickened
with flower, that prove; it to be a part of the Body, proceeding from the same
Principle with the rest. For that same cream or film in Milk, is not the
Excrement of the Milk condensed, nor any thing extraneous to the Milk, but the
thicker part of the Milk, and therefore the Milk.

To the second, we say, that though it be not sensible, nor wasted manifestly
in Diseases, yet is it no less a part of the Body than the Bone, which is
neither sensible, nor does seem to be wasted.

To the third, we say, It Is a false Assertion, that it does not live; for it
increases and grows with the rest of the Body, (which Parts not living never
do) and is nourished with Alimentary Juices, like the rest of the Parts. Which
Juices, though they cannot be manifestly perceived by the sight, that signifies
nothing, for that happens to those Juices that nourish many Bones, and the
Periostea or Membranes that enclose the Bones, the Teeth and many other parts.
Besides, it is subject to its Diseases proceeding from bad Humors and Blood,
as is apparent in the Leprosy, the Meazles, and many other disaffections. In
some it is thinner and softer, in others thicker and harder. But such
differences deprive the Cuticle of Life, no more than the Skin, which is
subject to the same variety. Lastly, who can be so sottish to believe that our
whole living Bodies should be covered and born with a dead substance or matter
round about it.

To the fourth we say, That though it do not act, yet the use of it is
absolutely necessary; and consequently that it is no less a part of the Body
than a Cartilage or Gristle, the Fat, many Membranes, Flesh, and other Parts
which are very useful, but perform no action at all.

Therefore we must conclude it a true part of Human Body: 1. Because it is one
of those things that fill up the space; for a man without a Cuticle is not a
complete whole man: 2. Because it adheres in Continuity to the Body: 3. Because
it is appropriated as aforesaid to a certain necessary use.

V. The Skin, Cutis, (...), as The Skin.
it were (...), a Band tying together the parts of the Body; in Brutes P^llis
and Corium, the Pelt or Hide is a covering Membranous, thick, generated act of
the Seed, and clothing the External Body, as well to measure the excesses and
differences of tactible Qualities, as to preserve it against the assaults of
accidental Violences.

VI. It consists of a Substance proper Its Substance.
to it self, being of a middle Nature, between a Nerve, a Membrane, and Flesh.
For it is not without Blood, nor so quick of feeling as a Nerve; not so thin as
a Membrane; nor so full of Blood as the Flesh; but it is endued with Blood, and
as it were a Membrane somewhat sinewy and somewhat fleshy, which by virtue of
its fleshiness, enjoys a greater thickness than any Membrane; and by virtue of
its Nervosity has an acute and quick sense.

Aristotle seems to allow it a Substance plainly fleshy; for (in the 29th
Problem, and l. 2. de generat. Animal. c. 6.) he affirms the Cutis or Skin to
be produced of the Flesh growing dry. In which sense also Columbus (l. de Spir.
c. 5. and 8.) calls the Skin the Exiccation or drying up of the Flesh. With
whom Galen, 3. Method, and Ferne^ius l. 5. Pathog. c. 8.) seem to consent,
saying, That the Skin is the dryer part of the Flesh that lies underneath it.
But seeing there is so great a difference between the Substance of the Skin,
and the Flesh that lies under it; and for that the Skin is almost every where
separated from the Flesh by the Fat that runs between, and the fleshy Pannicle,
it is apparent that the Skin can be no part of the dried up Flesh. I say almost
every where, for in the Forehead it sticks so fast to the Muscles under it,
that it follows their Motion, and seems to be united to 'em, though in truth it
be a part subsisting of it self, and not generated by the Flesh of the Muscles,
but only most closely fixed to it. Whence we must conclude that the Skin owes
its Original to no other part; but that it was produced in the first forming
the Parts no less immediately from the Seed, and obtained a Nature no less
proper to it self, than any other of the Parts.

Lindanus affirms the Substance of it to be twofold; the outward Part, nervous;
the inward part fleshy. For he likens the Skin to the rind or peel of an
Orange; whose exterior yellow Substance is thinner, harder, thicker, and more
porous. The inner white part thicker, softer, looser and more spungy: and so he
believes the Skin to be. And Massa is of the same Opinion, who writes that the
Skin consists of two little Skins, and that they may be divided by the edge of
a Razor.

VII. In respect of the Substaace the The Difference.
Skin differs in thickness, fineness, thinness, and hardness, according to the
variety of Temperament, Age, Sex, Regions, and Parts.

Here Spigelius proposes a Question, Whether the Instrument of Feeling?
Whether the Skin be the Instrument of Feeling? Which Aristotle and Avicen seem
to deny, but Galen and his Disciples affirm to be true. For the Solution of the
Question, this is briefly to be said: That the Membrane is properly the
Instrument of feeling; and hence the Skin, as it is a Membrane, may be said to
feel. But because that other thicker Parts not feeling of themselves are
intermixed with the Sensitive Particles, hence it comes to pass, that its
feeling Faculty is in some measure moderated, that it might be neither too
dull, nor too quick.

VIII. It is temperate in the first The Temper.
Qualities, and enjoys a moderate Sense of Feeling. For in regard it is
subservient to the Sense of Feeling, to the end it may be able the sooner, and
with less detriment, to feel External Injuries, before the Inward Parts receive
any Damage, it ought to have a mean temper between the tactible Qualities; by
means of which it might be able to perceive all Extremities. And because the
Constitution of tactible Qualities is generally felt and examined by the Hands,
therefore the innermost Skin of the Hands is most exactly temperate, and of a
moderate sensibility, so it be not become brawny by laborious Exercise.

VIII. The Figure of it is plain and The Figure.
Flat; nor has it any other Properties peculiar to it self, but such as it
borrows from the Parts subjected to it; according to whose Shape it is either
Level or Unequal, Prominent on Ex^uberant, Contracted or Depressed.

In many Parts it has various Lines and Wrinkles according to the variety of
its Motions; from the Inspection of which in the Hand the Art of Chiromancy
promises Wonders.

IX. It never moves of it self b^t Motion.
when it is moved, and then it is moved either by the Part which it invests, or
by the Muscles annexed to it, as in the Forehead and hinder part of the Head.

X. It is nourished by the Blood infused Nourishment and Vessels.
into it through innumerable little Arteries. It has innumerable little* Veins,
of which several discharge themselves into the Iugulars, the Axillars, or
Armhole-Veins, the Epigastric's, Veins of the Loins, and Saphaenae or Crural
Veins. Innumerable other Veins also return their Blood to the Heart invincibly
through some other greater Veins. It receives the Animal Spirits through the
Nerves, of which the numberless small Branches, and little Fibers terminate in
the Skin from the parts beneath it; and contribute to the quickness of its
Feeling.

XI. It is of a continuous or connexed The Pores.
Substance, except only in those places where there is a necessary Perforation
for the Entrance and Egress of things necessary, as the Mouth, the Nostrils,
the Eyes, the Fundament, the Womb, the Pores, etc.

XII. In many places it is hairie, Hair.
as upon the Head, the Share, the Chin, the Lips, the Armpits; moreover, but
especially in Men, upon the Breast, the Arms, Thighs, and Legs.

But as for the Quantity, Color, Length, Thickness, and fineness of Hair,
there is a very great Variety according to the Temperament and Constitution of
the Body.

XIII. The Color of the Skin is Color.
various. 1. According to the diversity of Regions. Hence some are deep Yellow,
like the Scythians: Others bright Yellow, as the Persians, according to
Hippocrates. Others Black, as the Ethiopians, Brasilians, and Nigrites. Others
between Yellow and Black, as many of the Indians. Others between a deep Yellow,
Red, and Black, as the Mauritanians. Others White, as the Europeans. 2.
According to the Variety of Temperaments and Humors therein contained. Hence
the Phlegmatic are Pale, the Choleric Yellow, the Melancholy Swarthy, and the
Sanguine Fresh and Lively. 3. According to the Variety of the parts of the
Body: For if it stick to the Flesh, as in the Cheeks, it is more ruddy, if too
much Fat, it looks pale; if to a dry and wrinkled part, brown and dull; if it
lie over great Veins, it looks blue.

XIV. Whether Action or Use be to be The Use.
attributed to the Skin is disputed. Galen will allow it no Action. li. de
Cause. Morb. c. 6. And therefore affirms it to be formed by Nature particularly
for Use. On the other side Julius Casser of Placentia l. de tact. org. sect. 2.
c. 1. besides Use ascribes to it a certain public Action, so far as it
performs the Act of Touching or Feeling, and discerns and judges of Qualities.
Aristotle agrees with Galen; and many Arguments uphold Casser, which he
rehearses and weighs in a long Discourse. l. Citat. a cap. 1. ad 9. And there
also at the same time disputes of the Organ of Feeling, from Chap. the 10. to
the 19. of the Book even now cited.

CHAP. IV. Of the Fat, the fleshy Pannicle and Membrane of the Muscles.
I. FAT, is an unctuous or oily Fat.
Substance, condensed by Cold to the thinnest Membrane lying upon the fleshy
Pannicle, and closely joined to it, produced out of an oily and sulphurous
part of the Blood, which b^ing spread under the Skin, excludes no less the
penetrating Injuries of Cold, than it hinders the immoderate Dissipation of the
natural Heat, moistning the inward Parts, and facilitating their Motion.

When I say it is condensed by Cold, then by Cold I mean a lesser Heat, not an
absolute Frigidity void of all Heat. Which is explained at large by Andr.
Laurentius* Anat. l. 6. c. 6. Where by many Reasons and Similitudes he clearly
demonstrates, how a lesser Heat may make a Condensation. Valesius also weighs
and decides all the Arguments brought to and again upon this Subject.
Controvers. Med. and Philos. l. 1. c. 10.

II. The Matter of Fat is Blood: Hence it comes to pass that where The
Substance.
Blood is wanting, there is never any Fat or Grease. And that not every sort of
Blood, but such as is prefectly concocted, Oily and Sulphurous, made by
Concoction out of the most airie and best part of the Nourishment. Hence it
comes to pass, that such Persons whose Blood is not Oily (though plentiful) but
hot, Melancholic, Choleric, ill Concocted, Serous, Salt, or which way soever
sharp as in Scorbutics and Hypochondriacs, never become Fat. For that through
the vehement and sharp Fermentation, occasioned by the acrimonious Particles,
the oily Sulphurous Particles in the Blood either are not generated in
sufficient Quantity; or being generated or consumed, before they can be
separated from the sanguine Mass, and grow to the Membranes. Hence it is
manifest wherefore Children are tenderly plump, but never Fat, because their
Blood is very Serous, and the more thick and oily parts of it, are wasted in
the Nourishment and Growth. Therefore Aristotle in his History of Animals l. 3.
c. 13. writes, That all Creatures of riper Age sooner grow Fat than such as are
young and tender, especially when they are arrived at their full Growth of
Length and Breadth, then they come to augment in Profundity.

III. The Primarie efficient Cause is moderate Heat (not too fierce, as The
efficient Causes
that which dissipates overmuch, nor too little, which neither concocts well,
nor dissolves the concurring Vapors) the secondary Cause is the Condensation of
those Vapors raised by that Heat to the colder Membranes. Nor is it a Wonder
that Condensation should be made, when those Vapors light upon the Membranes
not absolutely cold (though they are said to be cold in respect of other Parts
that are hotter) but moderately hot as is before said. As we see melted Lead,
when it is removed from the Fire condenses again though the place be very warm,
however not so hot as the Fire.

Nevertheless those oily sulphurous Vapors do not only light upon, neither are
they always condensed upon the Superficies of the Membranes, but if the Members
are sufficiently Porous, they insinuate themselves into their Pores, and spread
over the whole Membranes, where they embody together, and become a part of 'em;
and by that means the Fat is dispersed through those universal Membranes, as it
is done in that Membrane which lies next under the Skin. But if the Membranes
are more firm and thicker, then the Fat adheres only to their Superficies, as
we find in the Intestines, the Heart and some other Parts that are fortified
with a firmer and more compacted Membrane.

IV. The learned Malpighius ( exercit. Fat Kern^, (...) (...) the
de Om. Ping. and Adip.) makes an Enquiry what that is, by means of which, the
Oily and Fat Particles are separated from the Sanguine Mass, seeing that Heat
alone (which can raise indifferently any Vapors from the Blood, but not
particularly separate the oily Vapors from the rest) is not sufficient to do
it. Whence he conjectures (...) that Separation is made by the means of certain
Kernels, appropriated only to that Duty, and that by others the oy^y Particles
are infused into certain Channels or Passages, which he calls Ductus Adiposos,
or Channels for the Fat, and through which they are spread up and down upon the
Membranes. In which place he brings several Arguments to support this new
Speculation of his. Which new Discovery of so great a Man, is not to be
despised, nor to be rashly rejected; but to be more seriously considered; in
regard the following Reasons render it somewhat Doubtful. 1. Because the
Kernels never appear to sight, nor can be any where demonstrated. 2. Because
the certainty of the Passages of the Fat and their Cavity, is a thing as much
to be disputed. 3. Because the Fat or oily Matter is somewhat Viscous, and
therefore not so lvable to be separated from the Blood by invisible Kernels; or
to pass through the imaginary Cavities of invisible Channels, when the most
subtle Animal Spirits which are liquid and not viscous at all, cannot pass
through the invisible Pores of the Nerves, but that they are stopped by every
slight Obstacle, more especially by the least quantity of viscous Humor, as we
find in Palsies. 4. For that a fat Sweat breaths forth from the Bodies of many
People, when it is a thing not to be believed, that these sort of Kernels are
every where inwardly annexed to the Skin of the whole Body.

V. Whence it is apparent, what is The Temperament.
to be thought of the Temperament; that is to say, that Fat is moderately hot,
though it condense in the Cold, and be less hot than Blood. Which Temperament
appears, 1. From the Matter of it, which is Blood concocted, airie and
sulphu^ie. 2. From the efficient Cause, which is Heat. 3. From the Form, which
is Ovliness. 4. From the End, which is to help the Concoction of the Parts; and
by its temperate Heat to defend against the external Cold. 5. For that it is
easy to be set in a Flame. Of which Galen thus writes, l. 4. de usu part. c. 9.
That Fat is hot, is known to the Sense it self, by those that use it instead of
Oil. And this also more especially manifests it to be true, because it is
easily set on a light Flame, as approaching nearest the nature of Flame; for
nothing cold is suddenly kindled.

VI. Picolominus has asserted that Whether it has any peculiar Membrane?
Fat grows to a proper Solid but most thin Membrane (as we have already
affirmed) for that in Living Creatures the oily Vapors of the refined Blood,
would breath out in great Quantity through the Pores of the Skin, unless some
thick and cold Membrane (which Malpigius calls the Adipous Membrane) should
restrain and curdle 'em together. But Riolanus in his Anthropogr* believes
there is no need of any particular Membrane for that work, in regard that
Condensation may be well enough performed between the thickness of the Skin,
and the fleshy Membrane (perhaps as it grows outwardly to the Intestines and
Membranes of the Kidneys: Which he proves from hence, for that in fat Bodies,
especially in Women, the fleshie Membrane lies wrapped up in Fat, as it were in
the middle of it. And the same thing is proved by others by this Experiment,
that if Fat be melted at the Fire, there does not remain any Membrane proper to
it but only the fleshie Membrane. Hence Riolanus believes that Fat is not to be
taken for any peculiar Part, since it seems to constitute but one only part
with the fleshie Membrane. Yet the same Riolanus (in Enchirid. Anatom. l. 2. c.
7.) reclaiming his former Opinion, attributes a peculiar Membrane to Fat. And
this is that which we also believe. For if the Fat which lies under the Skin be
pulled off with the Fingers, you may easily perceive its more close and fast
sticking by means of the Membrane; and tho the fleshie Membrane be sometimes
overspread with Fat, as sometimes it happens to the Intestines and other
Membranous Parts, this does not prove, but that the Fat it self, which is
extended over the whole Body under the Skin, has its own proper Membrane.

VII. But here some will object, This Membrane then at the first forming of the
Birth ought to have been formed out of the Seed with the rest of the solid
Parts. But neither in Abortives, nor in Infants newly born, any Flesh is
observed to lie under the Skin, therefore there can be no such Membrane there
as that to which the Fat is said to adhere.

I answer, That that Membrane in all new born Infants is most certainly formed,
but by reason of its extraordinary close sticking to the fleshy Pannicle, it is
not so easily to be discovered. I remember once that in a certain large and
fleshy Infant, that was Still-born, I found something of a small piece of Fat,
like a kind of Froth, sticking to the Membrane, and as a Rarity not usually to
be seen so soon, I showed it to all the Lovers of Physic that were by. Peter
Laurembergius also seems to agree with us in this particular; as he, who in his
Anat. l. 1. c. 8 demonstrates, That the Fat (he should have said, rather, the
Membrane to which the Fat will afterward grow) is formed in the Womb, and that
there never was any Child born without Fat (that is, without the Membrane)
surrounding the Body and the Caul.

VIII. As the Fat which incompasses The Fatty Membrane.
the Body grows to its own Membrane, so the same thing happens in the Fat of
other Parts. For wherever Fat is to be found, as in the Intervals of the
Muscles, the Heart, the Kidneys and other parts, there are to be found many
thin Membranes, like little Baggs or hollow Lappets, hanging at the Ends of the
Vessels, which adhere to another thicker Membrane spread underneath as it were
a Base and Foundation. In these the Fat or oily Matters of the little Bagg
being separated from the Blood are condensed and collected; and so out of
several little Baggs filled with oily Matter, being mutually clapped together, at
length are made huge Portions of Fat. Malpighius also, by the help of his
Microscopes, has observed that the said little Sacks are variously formed, some
being flat, others oval, others of another Shape, and that they are knit
together partly by the Membranes of which they are formed, partly by the little
Net of the Vessels. Nevertheless it is to be observed, that these little
membranous Baggs do not grow to all the thick Membranes, which is the reason
that Fat does not grow to all Membranes; as in the Lights, Bladder, the
Meninges, or Membranes of the Brain, the Liver and Spleen, etc. in regard that
no such membranous Baggs do grow or hang to the Membranes that cloth and
invest 'em. Then, as for the Bones it may be questioned in some measure,
whether their own Cavities do not supply the place of membranous Baggs, (which
Cavities in the larger Bones are bigger, in the lesser Bones lesser and Spungy)
or whether any membranous Baggs may be contained in those Cavities, in which
the fat Marrow is collected. Which latter seems to be therefore so much the
more probable, for that the Marrowy Fat seems to be in a manner interwoven with
little Fibers and Membranes.

IX. Others there are who farther Whether any part of the Body.
extend the foresaid Doubt concerning the Membrane of the Fat, and do not put
the Question, whether the Fat encompassing the Body, either alone, or together
with the Membrane to which it sticks, be a Part of the Body it Constitutes; but
whether it be any manner of way to be reckoned among the Parts of the Body?
They who maintain the Negative affirm, 1. That it is not a spermatic Part
engendered out of the Seed. 2. That it is not endued with Life like the rest of
the Parts, because it sometimes grows and sometimes wastes Insensibly. 3. For
that in case of Hunger and Famine it turns into the Nourishment of the other
Parts, whereas one Part cannot nourish another. 4. Because it performs no
Action. 5. Because it is not restrained within any peculiar Circumscription.
But because the Affirmative seems to me the more fit to be embraced as the
truer, I answer, to the First; that the first and least Delineaments of the
spermatic Parts, are only engendered out of the Seed, which at the first are so
thin, that they can hardly be discerned by the Eye, or else lie hid, as in the
Teeth and several other Parts, which do not appear till long after, when
enlarged and increased by the Nourishment which is daily afforded 'em: And so
also it is with Fat. To the Second, That as the Muscles through Diseases
insensibly decay, and yet it cannot be said that they are not endued like the
rest of the Vessels with Life, thus also the Increase or Decrease of the Fat is
no Proof that the Fat is not also endued with Life like the rest of the Parts.
To the Third, I answer, That it is not true, that the Fat turns to the
Nourishment of the rest of the Parts in case of Famine; but rather that is most
certain, That the Fat is wasted also by long abstinence, like the other Parts,
when deprived of its Nourishment. To the Fourth, I say, that Galen (l. 6. de
placit. c. 8.) allows Action to Fat, by understanding Use, as he also in many
other places confounds Action and Use, though in reality there be a great
difference between 'em. Besides that the Cuticle, the spungy Bones of the
Nostrils, the various Membranes, the Hair and other Parts, though they perform no
Action, but only serve to several Uses, are therefore not excluded out of the
number of the Parts; for which Reason there is as little cause for the
exclusion of Fat from the same Number. To the Fifth, I affirm, That it is
restrained within its own Circumscription, though not contracted to a Point, in
like manner as the Flesh, which has no Circumscription exactly determined;
besides we know that the Figure makes nothing to the Essence of the Part.

X. The Color of Fat in Men, as Color.
well as in brute Beasts, differs something according to Age. For in Youth it
is of a yellowish, or rather rosy kind of Color; in elderly People somewhat
enclining to White; but in decrepit People altogether White. Though these Rules
are not so general in any Age, but that there may be sometimes an Exception,
and the Sport of Nature may be observed. Laurembergius attributes this
Diversity of Colors to the Qualities of the Blood: Not without reason. Others
would rather deduce it from external Causes. But these will agree with
Laurembergius, if we will allow the Qualities of the Blood to be changed by
external Causes: And so the Blood may be said to be changed by the Variety of
Causes.

XI. Fat is either internally thickened in the internal Parts or external,
spread next under the Skin, of which we chiefly speak in this place. This is
circumfused over all the Body, except the Lips, upper part of the Ear, the
Eyebrows, the Cods, and the Yard, to which it would be but a Burden.

XII. It differs also in Quantity The Plenty of it.
several Ways. 1. In respect of Age: For in florid Age, it is more plentiful
than in Childhood and Old Age. 2. In respect of Sex: For in Women it is more
plentiful than in Men. 3. In respect of the Temperament, Region, and Time of
the Year: For it less abounds in hot and dry than in cold and moist Tempers. 4.
In respect of Motion and Rest: For sedentary and lazy People are more subject
to be fat, than they who are given to Exercise, or constrained to hard Labor.
5. In respect of Diet: For they that feed upon costly Diet, and indulge their
Appetites, and make use of Nourishment of plentiful and good Juice, are more
subject to be fat, than they that live sparingly. 6. In respect of the Parts
themselves: For it is more plentiful in those Parts where it is of most use, as
the Abdomen, Breasts, Buttocks; more sparing in those Parts where it is of
little Use, as the Hands and Feet; but none at all where it is unprofitable and
burdensome. 7. In respect of Health: For healthy People are fuller than sickly
and diseased.

XIII. Suet grows to the internal A^eps or Suet.
Parts, being the same with Pinguedo or Fat in a large Sense. But to speak
specifically, it differs from Fat, for that this is softer and more moist,
easily melted, and being melted, does not so easily congeal. Whereas Suet is
harder and dryer, is much longer in melting, and being melted, more difficultly
hardens again. This is certain however, that several Physicians use the Word
promiscuously, and call any oily Substance of any Creature Fat, Grease, or
Suet, as they please themselves; which is also to be found in Galen: who is
frequently carelessly neglectful of making any Distinction or Property between
these Words; and l. 2. Sympt. de pingued. thus writes; If thou will call every
oily and fat Substance in Animals Grease; but Fat may be taken for the whole
Genus of that sort of Substance.

XIV. The fleshy Pannicle, fleshy The (...) Pannicle.
Membrane, and membranous Muscle, by the Greeks (...), is a strong Membrane
full of fleshy Fibers, especially about the Forehead, Neck, hinder part of the
Head, and Region of the Ears, spread over the whole Body, as well for Covering
as Defense, endued with an exquisite Sense, so that being assailed with sharp
Rapers, it causes a quivering and shaking over the whole Body.

XV. This Pannicle in Man lies Situation.
next under the Fat, and extends it self to those parts that want Fat, as the
Eyelids, the Lips, the Cods and Yard. In most Brutes it is spread under the
Skin, to which it sticks very close, and has the Fat lying under it. By the
benefit of which, many Creatures have a Skin that is easily moveable, by means
whereof they shake off Flies and other troublesome Insects, as we find in Cows,
Hearts, and Elephants.

XVI. It sticks most closely to the Connection.
Back, and is there thickest, and therefore is vulgarly said to derive its
Original from thence.

In the Neck, the Forehead, and the hairy part of the Head it can hardly be
separated from the Muscles that ly under it, and it is so firmly knit to the
broad Muscle, that it seems to compose it.

XVII. It is somewhat of a ruddy Color.
Color in newborn Infants, in People of riper years it is somewhat white.
Which Color however varies somewhat according to the Fat, the Vessels and
Fibers annexed to it; so that it is sometimes more pale, and sometimes between
both.

XVIII. The inner part is smeared Zas's absurd Opinion of the use.
over with a slimy Humor, to make the Muscles slippery, and render their
Motion more easy.

N. Zas in his little Dutch Treatise of the Dew of Animals, ascribes a most
unheard of Use to this Membrane. For he affirms that it attracts to it self the
serous Humors from all parts, and that it is the real Receptacle or common
Seat of the Serum or Dew. Which serous Humor flows from thence into all the
Spermatic parts, and washes away all their Impurities. That it is the Spring
and Source of all our Sweat; and that in all Distempers of the Joints, it
poures forth an incredible quantity of gravelly water, vulgarly called Aqua
Articularis, or Joynt-water, with many other fantastical Dreams (as he was
taught by his illiterate Master Lodowic de Bills) concerning this Membrane,
which he frivolously endeavors to impose upon others; altogether ignorant that
there is no attractive virtue in this Membrane at all, nor any receptacle or
place where such a manifest quantity of the serous Humor or Dew, much less any
great quantity, sufficient to be sent to all the Spermatic Vessels, and to be
emitted by Sweat; neither are there Pores sufficient to receive so great a
quantity in so compact and thin a Membrane: Moreover, in the Dissections of
Bodies, as well living as dead, that Membrane never is to be seen turgid or
swelling with any serous or other dewy Humor, as he calls it.

XIX. The Membrane common to The Membrane of the Muscles.
the Muscles, is a thin Membrane clothing all and every one of the Muscles,
and separating them from themselves, and the adjacent parts.

Riolanus, animadvert. in Bauhin. finds fault with Bauhinus for reckoning this
Part in the number of the common Containing Parts; and yet in the mean time
calls it a Membrane proper to the Muscles. But Bauhinus's meaning may be easily
interpreted for the best; That he reckoned that Membrane among the common
Containing Coverings, as it is proper only to the Muscles, but common
nevertheless to all the Muscles, that is to say such a one as infolds, covers,
and contains such and such Muscles only, but in the mean time is common to all
the Muscles.

CHAP. V. Of the Proper Containing Parts.
I. THe Containing Parts proper The Bones.
to the lower Belly, are the Bones, Muscles of the Abdomen, and Peritonaeum, or
Membrane of the Paunch.

II. The Bones are few and large, that is, the Vertebers of the Loins, the Os
Sacrum, with the Crupper-bone adjoined, the Huckle-bone, Hip-bone, and
Share-bone; of which more l. 9. c. 12.

III. The Muscles of the Paunch or Muscles.
Abdomen are ten, (sometimes eight, seldom nine) distinguished by their proper
Membranes, and the running along or situation of the Fibers; on both sides
equally opposite one to another.

IV. The first Pair, which is External, Oblique descending.
is framed by the Oblique descending Muscles, full of obliquely descending
Fibers also.

These arise from the lower part of the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth
and eleventh Ribs, before they end in Gristles folded among the Spires of the
greater Saw-shap'd Muscle, and the transverse Processes of the Vertebers of the
Loins; sticking also to the side of the Hip-bone, and end with a broad Tendon
in the middle of the Paunch at the Linea Alba. Which Tendon sticks so close to
the Tendon of the next ascending Muscle, that it is almost inseparable from it,
nor can be parted from it without being torn and dilacerated. Now its
membranous Tendon begins at the Linea Alba, which Spigelius calls the Similunar
or Halfmoon Line. These Tendons in Men (which also happens to the two other
lower Pairs, the Ascending and Transverse) are crossed on both sides by the
Processes of the Peritonaeum, extending themselves to the Testicles; but in
Women by the Vermiform Ligaments of the Womb; which Passage being overmuch
widen'd or broken, if the Call or Intestines fall upon the Groin or Cod, it is
the cause of Burstenness.

They derive Nerves, Arteries and Veins from the Intercostal Branches at the
upper part:

V. The Linea Alba is a whitish The Linea Alba.
part running from the Cartilago Mucronata through the middle of the Paunch and
Navil, to the Os Pubis, or Share-bone.

It has the firm Substance of a Tendon, through the Concourse of the Ends of
the Tendons of the Descending, Ascending, Transverse, and Pyramidical Muscles
of the Abdomen.

It is broader above the Navil, narrower below it; and in Women with Child many
times it appears of a bluish Color; which Color it has been known to keep
till the third Month after Delivery.

Riolanus animad. in Bauhin. seems to believe it to be a peculiar Membrane
running out from the Cartilago Mucronata of the Breast, through the Navil, to
the Commissure or joining of the Share-bone, and receiving the Tendons of the
Share-bone. In the same Animad. in Bauhin. he affirms the Linea Alba to be
imaginary; perhaps because that being blind through Age, he could no longer
discern it.

VI. The second Pair is constituted Obliquely Ascending.
by the Muscles obliquely Ascending, furnished with Ascending Fibers, which as
they ascend, cross the Descending in form of a Letter X.

They arise from the Transverse Processes of the Vertebers of the Loins (from
whence they receive the Nerves) and the Apophyses or going forth of the Os
Sacrum, (but membranous both,) and the outward fleshy part of the Hip-bone*
Hence the fleshy Ascending are joined at the top to the Cartilages of the
eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh Ribs, and terminate in the Linea Alba with a
broad nervous Tendon crossing the right Muscles; and are nourished by the
little Branches of the Arteries growing from the musculous Artery near the
Loins, and casting forth Veins to the musculous Vein.

Some Anatomists vulgarly hold, that these Muscles with a double Tendon enfold
the right Muscles. Which is not very probable. For above, the Tendons of the
Ascending Muscles rest upon the right Muscles, and are so fast interwoven with
their Tendony Intersections, that they can hardly be separated whole from 'em.
But in the lower or inner part of the Muscles those Tendons cannot be
discovered, and therefore they are deservedly rejected by Vesalius, and
Riolanus; and Lawrentius is justly blamed by Riolanus, for taking notice of 'em
in his Sculptures.

VII. The third Pair is that of the Musculi Recti.
Musculi recti, so called because of the straight Course of the Fibers.

They are very strong, three or four fingers broad, and about a finger thick.

They arise fleshy from each side of the Cartilago Macronata, the Breast Bone,
and the Cartilages of the Ribs, (where they receive three or four Nerves from
the Intercostal parts) and so descending directly down; and being united almost
near the Navil, and distinguished with two, three, sometimes four Impressions,
as it were into several Muscles, end at length with a strong, thick Tendon in
the Share-bones. Some Anatomists describe their beginning from the Sharebones,
and make 'em to end in the Cartilages of the Ribs. Others believe that they
consist of several Muscles, and place their beginnings partly in the Cartilages
of the Ribs, partly in the Sharebones, and make 'em to end at their
Intersections, and affirm the several parts contained between the Tendon-like
Inscriptions to be so many Muscles. To which Opinion, not improbable, Spigelius
gives his consent, induced thereto by this Argument, Because they not only
receive Nerves from the Intercostals above, but also below from the first Pair
of the Loins. For it is a perpetual Rule, that every Muscle moves toward its
beginning. But where the Nerve is inserted, there, as Galen testifies, is the
beginning of the Muscle, (See the Reason l. 5. c. 1.) but here several Nerves
are inserted into their Parts, not only above and below, but also those which
are interspac'd with separate Interfections; and therefore there are many
beginnings of these Muscles; which in regard they cannot be many in one Muscle,
therefore all the Musculi Recti do not consist of one, but of several Muscles.
Moreover if we consider their primary use, which is strongly to press down the
Belly for the Expulsion of Ordure and the Birth; which Compression and
Expulsion does not require that either the Breast Bone should be drawn
downward, or the Os Pubis upward; but that those Bones should remain in their
places, and that all and every the parts of these Muscles should swell
together; that so the upper parts of every one should draw upward some parts
that are nearest to 'em at the first Intersections; the lower parts other parts
which are nearest to 'em, downwards; and that the middle parts, lying between
the Intersections, should draw to themselves the parts that are next 'em on
both sides.

Which Contractions being made by distinct and several Parts to several parts,
(which cannot be done in one Muscle) it follows that every single Musculus
Rectus must consist not of one, but of several Muscles.

VIII. As they receive large Arteries from the Epigastrics ascending, and the
Mammillary Arteries descending, so they send forth a larger sort of Veins to
the Epigastric and Mammillary Veins.

IX. These Arteries and Veins at their Ends in the inner part, are vulgarly
said to join together about the middle by Anastomoses one into another. So that
the Ends of the Epigastricks open into the Ends of the Mammillary Veins, whence
many derive the Consent and Sympathy of the Dugs* with the Womb. But I have
always observed these Anastomoses or Openings of one Vein into another, to be
wanting; nor did I ever yet meet with any Body wherein these Ends were not
distant one from another, the breadth either of a Thumb or a little Finger, so
that I am certain the Cause of that Consent can by no means proceed from hence.

Thus Vesalius likewise, in Exam. Obs. Fallop. writes; that he has observed that
those Vessels are never so united, that it may be said, there is any
Communication between 'em. Bartholin also in dub. anat. de lact. Thorac. c. 1.
writes that he sought for these Anastomoses in a sound young Woman, killed six
weeks after her Delivery, but could find none: rather that the Branches
ascending and descending were about a fingers breadth distant one from another:
yet Riolanus defends those Anastomoses most stiffly, Anthropog. l. 2. c. 8. and
asserts that he had shown 'em to a hundred of his Scholars. But for all that, I
do not give so much credit to his words, as I do to my own eyes. Perhaps old
Riolanus might be dimm-sighted at that time, and so perhaps might think he saw
what was not to be seen. Of these Anastomoses see more l. 6. c. 3. and l. 7. c.
7.

X. The fourth pair resting in the The Pyramidal Muscles.
lower Place upon the Musculi Recti, are the Pyramidal Muscles, so called from
their figure which is Pyramidal; but from their use Succenturiati, because they
are thought to assist the Musculi Recti in their duty.

They arise small and fleshy from the Share-bones, where they also receive the
Nerves. From this larger foundation they rise smaller and smaller, and scarce
four fingers bread, ascending the Ends of the Musculi Recti, yet somewhat
unequal in length, the left being both shorter and narrower, they thrust their
sharp Tendon into the Linea Alba, and sometimes extend it to the Navel with a
slender End.

Vesalius* Andern^cus, and Columbus describe those Ends erroneously for the
beginning of the Musc li Recti, seeing that the interceding Membrane, and also
the Separation which may be made without any prejudice to the Musculi Recti,
also the Obliquity of the Fibers quite different from the strait Muscles, and
lastly a peculiar way of thrusting themselves into the Linea Alba, clearly
demonstrate that they are several and distinct Muscles.

XI. Fallopius and Riolanus ascribe Their Office.
to these Muscles the Office or Action of compressing the Bladder, and
promoting the Excretion of Urine, or the Act of making Water.

Nevertheless sometimes' both these Muscles are wanting; sometimes the one, and
sometimes the other, is lacking; but more frequently the Left than the Right,
and then the broader and more fleshy End of the Right supplies their place. We
have several times shown as well when they have been both to be seen, as when
they have been defective, both in Public and Private Exercises.

XII. The fifth Pair consists of the Transverse Muscles.
Transverse Muscles, fastened to the Peritonaeum underneath, and full of
Transverse Fibers.

They begin from the Ligament rising from the Transverse Processes of the
Vertebers of the Loins, the Huckle-bone, and the Cartilaginous Neighborhood of
the six inferior Ribs. And being furnished with Arteries, Veins and Nerves
obliquely ascending, they end with a large Tendon in the Linea Alba. To these
the Peritonaeum sticks so close, that it cannot be separated from 'em without
Dilacerati^n.

XIII. The common Opinion is, that The Action of the Muscles of the Abdomen.
all the forementioned Muscles compress the lower Belly, and by that means
promote the dispersing of the Nourishment through the Vessels and Bowels, as
also the expulsion of super abundant Excrements, and the mature Birth, also
that they assist the Breast in strong Respiration, and Expectoration, or
forcible throwing off what is offensive to the Lungs, fasten the Contained
Bowels, and defend 'em from External Injuries, and cherish 'em with their Heat.
But I think this, that it is convenient to discourse somewhat more particularly
of their Actions. For if generally they all serve to compress the Belly; which
are they that raise the Containing Parts of this Belly? For their Elevation and
Depression is Alternate, and both are equally necessary to the pushing and
squeezing forward of the Nourishment and Humors through the Contained Parts,
which I admire no Person has hitherto taken notice of. And therefore there is a
notable Distinction to be made of the Operations of these Muscles.

XIV. In the first place the two oblique Pair raise the Abdomen. For in regard
they swell at their beginnings or fleshy Part, then the Tendons with the Linea
Alba draw outward and raise upward; and that same swelling usually concurs with
the swelling of the Dilating Muscles of the Breast; and therefore in breathing,
the Abdomen is also elevated together with the Breast* which every man may find
in himself. Then again that Elevation may be made without breathing, when the
Animal Spirits, especially more copious, are determined to these Oblique
Muscles, and very few flow into the dilating Muscles of the Breast. This
Operation also, among other things, their Oblique Situation teaches us; (which
is not so convenient for pressing forth;) as also their Original, and the
length of their Tendous. But the other three Pairs manifestly serve for
Compression. For the Musculi. Recti, with the Pyramidal, when they swell,
cannot but very forcibly depress the Belly; and the transverse Muscles
swelling, because they rise from the Loins, cannot but very strongly contract
the Belly, by drawing the Linea Alba backward.

Spigelius l. 4. anat. c. 10. ascribes another Use to the Muscles of the
Abdomen, that is, to move the Trunk of the Body at the Sides Circularly and
Obliquely, and to bend the Body forward. Of which two Offices, the one is to be
ascribed to the Oblique, the other to the Straight Muscles.

Besides the foresaid Muscles, those Muscles seated in the Region of the Loins
and Ossa Sacra, may be reckoned among the Muscles of the Inferior Belly: But
because that they are chiefly serviceable to the Action of other Parts, they
are not mustered in the Order of the Muscles of this Belly.

XV. The most inward Containing The Peritonaeum.
Part of the Abdomen is the Peritonaeum, by the Arabians called Ziphach,
because it is spread over all the Bowels of this Belly, and not only contains
and restrains 'em, but clothes them with a Common Tunicle.

Vesalius and Bauhinus, following the Opinion of Galen, de ^su part. lib. 4.
cap. 9. ascribe to it the Office of compressing the Intestines, and to the
Exclusion of the Birth. But in regard that Action or Compression is Voluntary,
it is necessarily performed by the Muscles, the Instruments of voluntary
Motion, by which means the compressed Peritonae^m pushes forward, and so
presses forth only by Accident.

XVI. It is a thin and soft Membrane, interwoven with Spermatic Fibers, smooth
within-side, and as it were besmeared over with Moisture, without fibrous and
somewhat rough.

XVII. It is improperly said to derive its Original from the first and second
Vertebrae of the Loins, because the thickness of it is more in that place, and
its Connection firmer. I say improperly, because no one Spermatic Part derives
it self from another, but all take their Original from the Seed. Fallopius is
of Opinion that it has its beginning from the beginning of the Mesentery.
Lindan, agreeing with Riolanus, deduces its beginning from the Membrane
outwardly enfolding the Vessels and the Bowels. But in regard this Membrane is
rather to be taken from the Peritonaeum that spreads it self over all the lower
Belly, the Peritoneum can never derive its beginning from that.

XVIII. Jacobus Sylvius observes it Its Duplicity.
in men, to be thicker and stronger in the upper part of the Belly, in women
toward the lower part of the Belly. Which Bauhinus believes so ordered by
Nature in the one, as being more addicted to Gluttony; in the other, for the
sake of the Womb, and the Birth to be therein conceived. But Spigelius affirms
it to be thicker in both Sexes always in the lower part, and never in the
upper. Which he believes was so ordained by Nature with great Prudence, as
being the Part which is most obnoxious to Ruptures; in regard that whether we
sit, walk, or stand, the Bowels always weigh downwards; and therefore that the
Peritonaeum may be better enabled to sustain their weight, she thought it
necessary to strengthen and fortify that part.

XIX. It has very small Nerves that Its Vessels.
arise from the Vertebra's of the Breast and Loins. Arteries and Veins that
spring from the Diaphragmatic, Mammary, and Epigastric Vessels.

XXI. It is bored thorough at the passage of the Gullet and Vessels above and
below, and proceeding outward in the Birth, as also of the Vermiform Ligaments
of the Womb. Moreover, its outward Membrane forms in men, two Oblong Processes,
like more loose sort of Channels descending toward the Scrotum, for the defense
of the Testicles and Spermatic Vessels descending and turning again.

XXII. This Membrane is called Vaginalis, the Sheath-Membrane, because it
comprehends the Stones as it were in a Sheath. But in Women, whose Stones are
not pendulous without, it extends it self on both sides to the end of the Round
Ligaments of the Womb; and proceeding forward, together with it, without the
Abdomen, extends it self above the Share-bones to the Clitores. But its inner
Membrane sticks fast, and grows to the Spermatic Vessels, or the foresaid
Ligaments of the Womb, passing forward, and together with the Vaginal Membrane,
extending without the Cavity of the Abdomen. For that Membrane being either
dilated or broken in that place causes Bitterness; so that the Intestine and
Caul in Men falls into the Scrotum; in Women down upon their Groyns. Which
Rupture or Dilation of the Peritonaeum, if it happen in the Navel, is called
Hernia Umbilicalis, or the Navel-Rupture.

CHAP. VI. Of the Parts Contained; and first of the Caul.
I. THE Parts Contained in the Abdomen, either perform the public Concoctions;
or serve for the distribution of the Nourishment and Blood; or expel the
Exerements, or serve for Generation.

The Stomach, small Guts, Sweetbread, Liver, Spleen, and Caul (which is
serviceable to them) perform the public Duties of Concoction.

The Arteries, Veins, Milky and Lymphatic Vessels serve for the distribution of
the Nourishment and Blood.

The thick Intestine, the Gallbladder, the Porus Biliarius, the Kidneys, and
the Urinary Bladder, expel the Excrements.

The Spermatic Vessels, the Stones, the Parastatae or crooked Vessels at the
back of the Testicles; the Prostatae or Glandules under the Seminal Bladders,
the Seminary Vessels, the Woman's Privities, her Womb and Neck of the Womb
contribute to Generation. But though in Men the Yard and Testicles are excluded
out of the Abdomen, yet are they by Anatomists reckoned among the Parts
contained* because the Spermatic Vessels go forth toward the Testicles from the
Internal Parts, and the different Vessels proceed from the Testicles toward the
inner Vessels; and for that the Seed which is collected together in the inner
Prostatae and Seminary Vessels, flows out of the Yard.

Of all which we are to treat in the following Chapters according to their
order.

II. The Peritonaeum being opened, presently appear the Navel Vessels. Of which
in the 32. Chapter.

III. Those being removed, the Caul The Caul.
offers it self; in Latin Omentum, as it were Operimentum, because it covers
the Bowels. The Greeks call it Epiploon, for that it does, as it were, swim
over the Guts; sometime Gargamon, sometimes Sagena, that is, a Net, or little
Net; for that by reason of the straggling Course of its Vessels, it resembles a
Fisher-man's Net: the Arabians call it Zirbus. It covers all the Sanguineous
Parts; though it appears fatter over some, and more membranous over others.

IV. It is a thin and double Membrane The Description.
rumpled like a Purse, arising from the Peritonaeum that infolds the outside of
the Stomach and Colon. Riolanus derives its Original from the Mesentery: Which
Opinion differs not from the first, when the Mesentery has its Membranes from
the Peritonaeum; of which it is a certain sort of Production.

V. It consists of a thin Membrane Its Substance and Connection.
interwoven with several folds, and small thred-like Fibers, growing in the
forepart to the bottom of the Stomach and the Spleen, and sometime also to the
round Lobb of the Liver, at the hinder part growing to the Colon, and so folded
like a Sack; as also of several Vessels, and a soft kind of Fat, which is
chiefly spread about the Vessels, and is very plentiful in fat People.

VI. It has a world of Veins, which Its Vessels.
it transmits to those which run toward the Liver from the Stomach and Spleen,
and so to the Vena Porta, or great Vein of the Abdomen. With which are
intermixed several Arteries from the Branches of the Ramus Coeliacus and
Mesenterick Artery, and some few Nerves that proceed from the Plexures of the
Intercostal Nerves of the sixth Pair.

VII. The Roots of the Blood-conveighing Its Interweaving.
Vessels, meet one another here and there with an Anastomoses, leaving
conspicuous Spaces between each other, which are also filled themselves with
smaller Branches; springing sidelong from the larger Roots, by means of whose
frequent Conjunction an apparent Net is formed, whose middle Spaces exhibit
various Figures framed with wonderful Art and Workmanship. Many of these lesser
Branches also run out into the Fat, and not only thrust themselves slightly
into the outermost Lumps, but also penetrate farther in, and are fastened to
the Lumps or little Globes of Fat: and sometimes they are hid with a small thin
Membrane spread over 'em, so that they are imperceptible. Malpigius Exercit. de
Oment. ping. and Adip. exactly describes the Structure of the Caul, in an Ox, a
Sheep, a Heart, a Dog, and some other Animals.

VIII. Veslingius asserts, that several The Gladules.
little Kernels, plain to be seen, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, are
scattered up and down in the said Vessels. But Riolanus animad. in Vesling. and
Barthol. affirms that he never observed any such Kernels. But through Age he
seems to have forgot a truer Assertion in Anthropogr. where he acknowledges
some few. And indeed they are very few, and those only under the lower and
deeper Part, under the Pylorus, or right Orifice of the Ventricle, and the
Spleen.

In like manner Wharton, in his Adenographia makes mention of but very few. For
c. 12. he writes, That he only found two little Kernels, but those always in
the Caul. One bigger in the place where it joins with the Pylorus; which he
observed received some few milkie Vessels running from the bottom of the
Stomach toward the length of the Caul (but he is in an Error, for there are not
any milkie Veins that derive themselves from the bottom of the Stomach, but as
far as I could find by three or four Observations, these Vessels do not seem to
be milkie, and advancing to the Kernel, but rather Lymphatic, and proceeding
out of the Kernel.) These Vessels, the same Author says that afterward, viz.
from the length of the Caul they run with an oblique Course toward the right
Extremity of the Sweetbread, which they partly seem to creep under, and partly
glide by, tending toward the common Receptacle of the Chylus, into which they
disburthen themselves. The other Kernel he asserts to be a little less, which
he affirms to have found sometimes double, sometimes treble, sometimes
consisting of more Bodies. But if many Kernels are found in any Body that was
sickly, at his Death, he calls those Kernels Adventitious, because they are not
to be found in healthy Bodies.

IX. The learned Malpigius, besides Corpora adiposa.
the aforesaid Vessels, observes other very thin and slender Bodies, extended
like small Threads, among the Vessels that shoot sorth, which he calls Corpora
adiposa, or fat Bodies: and he believes 'em to be certain peculiar hollow
Vessels, carrying the materials of Fat for the Generation of Fat, though it be
impossible to observe their Original, by reason of their extreme Slenderness.
In the mean time he is of Opinion that these Materials of Fat are separated
from the Blood by the means of certain invisible adipous Kernels, and are so
sent to these Vessels, and through those conveyed into the Membranes, rhere to
be coagulated into Fat. For as there are certain peculiar Kernels appointed for
the separation of Acid, Salt, Bitter, Lympid, etc. Humors, from the Blood (for
this shall be made out in the following Chapter) so he believes that there must
be certain peculiar Kernels (which he calls A lipous) of necessity appointed of
oily and fat Particles from the Blood; and that those oily Particles being
separated, are to be carried through certain peculiar adipous Vessels, in the
same manner as the Blood, the Animal Spirits, the Chylus, and lympid Humor,
called Lympha, are carried through peculiar Vessels; upon which he introduces
many ingenious and probable Conjectures. But what it is that makes me question
the Truth of these Kernels and Adipous Vessels, I have already set down in the
fourth Chapter preceding; where I have made mention of these Kernels.

X. The Caul is seated about the Its Situation.
Intestines, into whose Windings and Turnings it insinuates it self, and
spreads a great part of its self between the Spleen and the Stomach.

XI. In many Persons it scarcely The Bigness.
extends it self below the Region of the Navel, in some farther, reaching even
to the Bladder, and sometimes in fat Women compressing the Mouth of the Womb
(to the bottom of which it rarely grows) it occasions Barrenness, as
Hippocrates testifies: And in Men if it fall down through the torn Peritonaeum
into the Scrotum, it causes that Rupture which is called Epiploce, when the
Caul falls into the outward Skin of the Cods. It appears in more Folds and
Doubles toward the Spleen than in any other Parts. Sometimes in Women after
Delivery; remaining all rumpled about the middle of the Belly, it occasions
terrible and frequently returning Pains.

XII. For the most part, in Men The Weight.
grown up, it hardly exceeds the weight of half a Pound; and yet sometimes it
has bin known to weigh several Pounds. Thus it is found to be wonderfully
increased in some Diseases: And Wharton relates that in a Virgin that died of a
Cachexie, he saw a Caul that was fleshy, or rather Glandulous; about half a
Thumb thick. Sometimes also in fat and tun bellied People that are sound, it is
covered over with a great quantity of Fat, which increases its weight. Thus
Vesalius l. 5. c. 4. saw a Caul, which being augmented to the weight of four or
five Pounds, drew down the Stomach with its Ponderosity, and was the Occasion
of the Parties Death by its weight.

XIII. By cherishing the Heat of the Its use.
Stomach and Guts, it causes more successful and speedier Concoctions. It
supports the splenick Branch, and other Vessels tending to the Stomach, Colon,
and Duodenum. Moreover it many times receives the Impurities and Dreggs of the
Liver, as appears out of Hippocrates, l. 7. 55. also out of his 4. lib. de
Morb. and lib. 1. de Morb. Mulier. As also from the Observations of Riolanus,
Rossetus, and other Physicians.

CHAP. VII. Of the Ventricle, Hunger, and the Chylus.
I. TAke off the Caul, and presently The Stomach.
the Ventricle or Stomach appears; as it were a little Belly, called by the
Greeks (...), as also Gaster.

II. It is an organic Part of the Definition.
lower Belly, seated in the Epigastrion, next under the Diaphragma, which
receives the Nourishment taken, prepared by Mastication, and let down through
the Gullet, and there concocts it; and dissolving the best part of the
Nutritive Substance, converts it into a Chylus or whitish kind of Substance,
like to Cream.

III. It consists of a triple Membrane; Membranes.
the outermost thick and common, springing from the Peritonaeum, the middle,
fleshy, the innermost, full of Wrinkles, and covered over with a viscous
Crustiness, to preserve it from the Injuries of Acid Juices.

IV. In the middle and innermost Fibers.
Membrane, in the first place, there is to be seen great Variety of Fibers
extended, some obliquely, some straight, and some Circular: For the
strengthening of the Bowels, and more easy Retention and Expulsion.

V. The innermost Tunicle is vulgarly The inner Tunicle.
said to be common to the Gullet and Oesophagus; whereas it is of a far
different Nature and Structure, and in regard of its Temper and Composition,
contains a most admirable fermenting Quality, which the Membrane of the Mouth
of the Stomach and Oesophagus is not endued withal; and hence it engenders and
stores up within it self a peculiar Fermentative Humor; which being in a sound
Condition, the Concoctions of the Stomach are rightly performed, but being
vitiated by the Mixture of Choler, or any other depraved Humors, occasion a bad
Concoction. And therefore it would be better to say that this Tunicle is not
common with, but continuous to the Oesophagus and Mouth of the Stomach. For
there is a great Difference between Continuitie and Community. For the one
denotes only the inseparable Adhesion of the Substance alone; but the other
signifys the Equality both of Faculties and Uses. For Example, the great
Artery, is continuous to the Heart, but not common, as not having such
Qualities and Actions as the Heart has.

VI. The Temperament of the Stomach Temperament.
is moderately Hot, not so hot as the Heart, Liver, and many other Parts. Which
moderate Heat is augmented and cherished by the Heat of the Parts that lie
round about it: To the end the Concoction of the Chylus may be the better
accomplished; which otherwise is greatly endammaged by the Excesses of these
Parts either in Heat or Cold.

VII. In a Man there is but one The Number.
Stomach: It being a rare thing to find two Stomachs in any Body: Of which I
never read but three Observations; of which one concerning a Stomach divided
into two, is cited out of Ioselinus by Theod Schenkius, in Anat. The other is
cited by the same Person out of the Observations of Salmuthus: And the Third is
set down by Riolanus, Anthropogr. l. 2. c. 20. in these Words. Once I saw a
double Stomach continued, but distinguished with a narrow Mouth in a Woman
publicly dissected in the Year 1624. In this Woman the Stomach was oblong,
narrow in the Middle, equalling the Gut Colon in Breadth and Largeness. Which
being dissected, I found that narrow Part, being like the Pylorus, to end in
another large Cavity, which afterward terminated in a thicker Orifice, which
was the real Pylorus, from whence, as an Ecphysis, the first Intestine took its
beginning. Beside these three Examples, I do not remember that ever I read any
thing farther upon this Subject. But there are two Stomachs in Animals that
chew the Cud, and many other Animals, that feed upon harder and raw
Nourishment; also in Birds that cast up their Meat out of their Stomachs to
feed their Young ones. And then the First by the Latins was called Ingluvies,
or the Crap: Which is more Membrany and Thinner, the other more Thick and
Fleshy. And in the First the Matter seems to be prepared for concocting, the
Second to be perfectly Concocted. It is said that in some Creatures three
Stomachs have bin found; and Riolanus testifys, that four have bin found in
those Creatures, which chewing the Cud have Teeth only in one Jaw.

VIII. The Shape of the Stomach is Figure.
Oblong, Gibbous toward the right Part, and slenderer toward the Right.

IX. It rests upon the Backbone Situati^.
near the first Verteber of the Loins, and with the left Part, which is rounder
and bigger, giving way to the Liver, it hangs forward toward the left Side: The
left Side being the slenderer, and covered with the left Lobe of the Liver, and
supported by the Sweetbread, is joined to the Duodenum, or first of the small
Guts.

X. The Bigness varies according to The Bigness.
the Diversity of Ages and bigness of Bodies; to the Proportion of which it
ought to answer; though that be no certain and perpetual Rule. For I have
dissected several tall Men, who have had very small Stomachs, and several Men
of a short Stature, that have had large Ventricles. Gluttons, Voracious, or
Greedy People, have generally large Stomachs. Such was that, which Schenkius
anat. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 14. affirms that he saw in a great Glutton that held
ten Quarts of Wine. That was also a large one, mentioned by Spigelius Anat. l.
8. c. 8. that contained fourteen Pints of Liquor: Which was found in a Man that
had a large Mouth. Whence Bauhinus Anat. l. 1. c. 46. believes that a Man may
judge of the bigness of the Stomach from the largeness of the Mouth: And that
such as have a wide Mouth* have a large Stomach, and are Voracious: Which is
also the Opinion of Spigelius. But neither is that Rule without Exception: For
I remember that Falcoburgi^s, a certain famous Anatomist of Leiden, cut up
before us, in the public Theater, the Body of a very tall strong Man, who in
his Life time had bin a stout drinker, and a great Eater, and always Healthy
until he came to be hanged against his Will, in whom we saw so small a Stomach,
that it hardly amounted to half the bigness of an ordinary Man's Stomach: But
trebly exceeded other Ventricles in thickness.

XI. It is distinguished into the The Bottom.
Bottom or Cavity (the one the lower or greatest Part, inclining to the left
Side, with its chiefest and largest Part, where the first Concoction is
finished) and two Orifices, the Right and Left.

XII. The left Orifice, commonly The Stomach.
called the upper Orifice, is that which is properly the Stomach, and
Continuous to the Gullet and Diaphragma, about the eleventh Verteber of the
Breast, over against the Cartilago Mucronata, admits the swallowed Nourishment.
This, exceeding the other in Bigness, thickness, and Largeness, is interwoven
with many orbicular Fibers, somewhat fleshy (which cause its more firm
Contraction, and in the various Postures of the Body lying down, hinders the
Nourishment from falling back into the Mouth) and Nerves from the sixth Pair;
and in that is the natural Heat of the Appetite, according to the vulgar
Opinion: Not that the Act of Desiring is there performed, which is only in the
Brain, but that through the Intervals there is such a Cause in it, the Trouble
of which being perceived in the Brain, stirs up such an Act of Desiring.

XIII. The other Orisice, which is The Pylorus.
the Lower, properly called Pylorus, or the Doorkeeper, is narrower than the
other, somewhat bowed toward the Back Bone, on the left Side, full of Fibers
thwarting one another, having a thicker Circle, and shaped like an Orbicular
Muscle (by means of which it detains the Nourishment for some time, lest it
should slip away too soon, and undigested) and continuous to the Duodenum Gut,
send the concocted Nourishment to the Bowels. Which Nourishment does not pass
by a steep Fall, as lying equally high with the Stomach, but ascends before
Expulsion.

XIV. The Ventricle receives Nerves, The Vessels.
Arteries, and Veins.

XV. It receives Nerves from the Its Nerves.
sixth Pair. For that both the Trunks of the wandering Pair, below the Ramus
pneumonicus, descending along the Sides of the Oesophagus, is divided into two
Branches, the External and Internal. Of these, the External by and by join
together again, and embody into one Nerve, and spreads it self over the upper
part of the Ventricle with many Shoots. The Internal also running together,
make one Nerve, which descending along the Oesophagus, and the external part of
the Stomach, encompass the bottom of the Ventricle, and sends into it a great
number of Fibers. Through these Nerves the Animal Spirits flow in great
Quantity into the Ventricle, contributing to it a quick Sense of Feeling: Which
because of the larger Quantity of Nerves dispersed into the Stomach, becomes
more sensible in the upper Part than the lower, which is thought to be the
cause of Hunger. Through these Nerves of the wandering Pair is infused into the
Fibers of the Ventricle, a natural Power of Contracting themselves, in all
Expulsions, of what ever is contained in the Ventricle: And by means of them
also is that great Consent between the Ventricle and the Brain.

XVI. It receives its Arteries from Its Arteries.
the Coeliac Artery, which serve to carry the Alimentary Blood with which it
is nourished.

XVII. It is sprinkled with several Its Veins.
Branches of small Veins sculking among its Tunicles, many of which meeting
here and there, and closing together, they form at length four more remarkable
Veins, which run to the Porta Vein, that is the 1. Gastrick, which is bigger
than the rest, 2. and 3. the right and left Gastroepiploid, 4. and the Pyloric
Branch: Also another Vein, Vas breve.
called the Vas breve, or Vas Venosum (which issues forth from the Ventricle
sometimes with one, sometimes with two, sometimes three, and sometimes more
Branches, to be inserted into the Spleen Branch. By these the remainder of the
Blood, which is left after the Nourishment of the Stomach is conveyed to the
Liver.

XVIII. Formerly Physicians asserted It carrys nothing from the Spleen to the
Ventricle.
that there was a certain acid Juice or Blood, which ascended into the
Ventricle through the Vas breve, for the Nourishment of it, as also to create
an Appetite, and stir up Hunger in the Ventricle. But the very Sight it self
demonstrates the Falsehood of this Doctrine in the Dissections of living
Animals, in which it is apparent that there is nothing flows from the Spleen to
the Ventricle; but that the Blood continually flows from the Ventricle to the
splenic Branch: For upon tying the Vas breve, there will presently appear a
Swelling between the Ventricle and the Ligature; but a shrinking of the Vessels
between the Ligature and the splenetic Branch. Which is a certain Sign that the
Blood flows as we have said; and that it hardly reaches the Spleen (for the
Entrance of the Vas breve into the splenetic Vein, for the most part, is
somewhat distant from the Spleen) nor does it enter into the Spleen, but is
poured forth into the splenetic Branch, and flows from thence directly to the
Porta. More of this Matter may be seen in the following 16. Chapter.

XIX. Here we are to note by the The Triangular Space.
way, that some learned Men are very trivial in their Exposition of the 54.
Aphorism of Hippocrates l. 7. where he says, They who have any Phlegm included
between the Ventricle and Diaphragma, are troubled with Pain, because the Phlegm
has no Passage to either Belly, etc. Induced by these Words, they assert, That
between the lest Sde of the Ventricle and the Diaphragma, there is a large
Triangular Cavitie, fenced about with Membranes proceeding as well from the
Ventricle, as from the Diaphragma and Caul, which nevertheless is a gross
Mistake: For that there are no Membranes sent from those Parts that meet in
that place, neither is there any such Cavity formed there. Indeed sometimes a
Portion of the Caul insinuates it self between the Diaphragma and the hinder
part of the Ventricle, so that sometimes it counterfeits the swelling of the
Spleen. And this is that without all doubt, which has deceived the Patrons of
the said Opinion, not being well versed in Anatomy.

XX. The Ventricle, though it be not a It is moveable.
principal Part, yet is it an assistant and serviceable Part; To which we are
c^iefly beholding for the Preparation of the Nourishment (whence Quintus
Serenus, a Sammic Poet, calls it the King of the Body.

They on Truths Royal Basis seem to stand,
Who give the Stomach the Supreme Command:
If it be Strong, it gives Strength, Vigor too,
To other Parts: If weak, their Overthrow.
And therefore all Diseases that assault Wounds of the Stomach m^tal.
it are to be accounted very dangerous; and the Wounds which it receives are by
Hippocrates, 6. Aphor. 17. deservedly accounted Mortal; because the membranous
Vessels are hard to be cured in that part: and if they happen about the
Stomach, by reason of the great number of Nerves intermingled in those places,
they kill the Patient with continual Convulsions and Hichups: but if they light
upon the lower part, the swallowed Nourishment presently falls through the
Holes into the Cavity of the Abdomen, where in a short time they rot the other
Bowels with their Corruption and Putrefaction. However though Use and Reason
confirms that saying of Hippocrates, yet this Rule sometimes, though not
frequently, admits an Exception; for it has been known that some Wounds of the
Ventricle have been cured. And of such Cures we find Examples set down by
Fallopius de cap. Vuln. c. 12. Cornax in Epist. Julius Alexandrinus Annot. ad
l. 6. c. 4. Therapeut. Galen. Schenkius also collects other Stories from
others, Observat. A rare Observation.
l. 3. Such a Cure I observed in the Month of December 1641. in a Country ^ad,
who in upper Holland was wounded with the Stab of a Penknife in the right side
of the Ventricle; the wound being of an indifferent size, so that for eight
days together we saw all his Meat and Drink came out again at the Orifice,
especially if you did but press the lower part of the Ventricle with your hand:
Which Efflux of his Nourishment stopped for seven days, but then returned again
for three days, and no more; nor did the Nourishment discharge it self so much
as it did before. Afterward being ordered to lie upon his right side day and
night, nothing more flowed out; so that no other Disease happening, and the
Surgeon following his Cure, the Patient, beyond mine and the Expectation of all
Men, within six or seven weeks was perfectly cured. Nor did he afterward feel
the effect of any detriment which the wound had left behind, nor any hurt done
to his Stomach. But,

More miraculous are those Accidents concerning two Knife-swallowers, of which
the first is related by Bernard. Suev^s, Tract. de Inspect. Vulner. Crollius in
Praefat. Basilic. Sennertus Prax. lib. 1. part. 1. Sect. 1. c. 15. and several
others, of a Bohemian Countryman, who in the Year 1602. at Prague, swallowed a
Knife nine Inches long; which Knife, after it had lain seven weeks, was at
length cut out of his Stomach, and the Patient perfectly cured.

The other Accident George Lothus and Roger Hempsing relate, as seen by
themselves, in a particular part of Germany, of a young Man of two and twenty
years of Age, who at Regiomont in Prussia, in the Month of May 1635. swallowed
a Knife by chance, the breadth of two hands in length, the smooth Haft slipping
down unawares. Which Knife was cut out of his Stomach six weeks after, and the
Patient perfectly cured in a Month. This Knife was afterward given by Daniel
Becker, a Physician of Dantzick, to Otho Heurnius then Professor of Physic and
Anatomy at Leyden, where it is still preserved among other Rarities in the
Anatomy-Theatre.

XXI. That Stones do grow in the That Stones grow in the Ventricle.
Kidneys and Bladder, is a thing frequently known, and sadly experienced; and
that Stones have been also found in the Liver, Lungs, and several other parts,
is that which the Observations of Physicians testify: but that they should
breed in the Stomach, is a thing hardly ever heard of; and yet Bauschius gives
us four Examples of it. Ephemerid. Med. Phys. Tom. 2. Observe. 181. The first
out of James Dobie Zen^ki, who reports, That a certain Woman, after long Pains
in her Stomach, vomited up two Stones about the bigness each of an Almond, and
was presently freed from her Gripes. The second out of Laurentius Scholtzius,
who writes, That a certain Person, long tormented with cruel pain in his
Stomach, at length vomited up a very large, oblong, and hard Stone, upon which
his pain ceased. The third out of the same Author, of a Woman who at forty
years of Age was troubled with a Pain and Swelling of her Stomach, want of
Appetite, and continual Reaching; In whose Stomach, after she was dead, were
found as many Stones as a man could well hold in the hollow of his hand, which
being long kept, moulder'd away, and crumbl'd into a kind of yellow Salt: He
adds a fourth Example of Count George of Oppendorf, in whose Stomach were also
found several little Stones.

XXII. The Action of the Stomach Its Action.
is to make the Chylus, that is, to extract a Milkie Juice by peculiar
Concoction out of the several Nourishments, which is called the Chyle.

XXIII. The Chyle is a Milkie The Chyle.
Juice like the Cream of a Ptisan, prepared and concocted out of the
Nourishment received into the Stomach.

XXIV. The Nourishment or Food The manner of Concoction.
is concocted in the Stomach by way of Fermentation; by which means they
dissolve, and so the Juice is extracted out of 'em.

XXV. Fermentation is twofold. Fermentation twofold.
One whereby the Particles of the Mixture are stirred about of themselves, grow
warm, and are rarified; and by dissolving the Salt which binds 'em together,
they are so separated, that they become more full of Spirits: and are then for
the greatest part mixed together again, and though more full of Spirits, yet
remain mixed. The other, which is by many called Effervescency, is that by
which the Acid Particles of the Salt, for the greatest part, boiling together
with some Watery and Tartarous Matter, are concentered by Coagulation, and so
are separated from other Particles of the Mixture, that they never return to an
exact Union and Mixture with 'em again.

XXVI. After the first Manner Fermentation causes Chylification: though in our
following Discourses, when we design to express a vehement Fermentation, we
shall make use of the word Effervescency.

XXVII. This Fermentation is made The manner of Fermentation.
when the Salt parts of the swallowed Food, are by the heat of the Stomach, and
the acid Juice, dissolved, melted, and become full of Spirits, and withal
corrode and move about the Sulphurous Particles, and so after a kind of Combat
forsaking the strict Chains of their Mixture, are expanded and shaken somewhat
sour and sharper as they are, through the thicker Mass, together with the
sulphury spiritous Particles jogged together in like manner, and because of
their passage denied, and mixture of the thicker Matter not yet fully
dissolved, being driven back again, they assail that Mass with motion upon
motion, and divide and expand the smallest Particles of it one from another,
and dispose 'em to a more easy separation, and to receive the form of another
Paplike and Milkie Mixture. But as for what Particles cannot be sufficiently
dissolved by this Fermentation, or reduced to a Milkie Substance, they become
Excrement, whose separation from the Milkie Juice is wrought in the Guts.

XXVIII. This fermentative Concoction The force of Fermentation.
(which is finished without any vehement Motion upward or downward, or any
tumultuous Agitation through the Cavity of the Ventricle, as happens in Water
boiling over the Fire) is so violent, that by the force of it the hardest
Meats, which can hardly be mollified with a whole days boiling over a
Kitchin-fire, in a few hours are not only softened, but so dissolved and
melted, that the Particles being forced from their friendly Union, and torn one
from another, and mixed with the Liquor either inherent or infused into the
Stomach, they are turned into a Pap-like Consistency, not unlike to the Cream
of a Ptisan.

XXIX. Now that the Food is rather The reason of Chylification.
turned into Chyle, than into Choler, Blood, or any other Humor, that is to be
attributed to the peculiar Quality of the Substance of the Ventricle, or to the
Specific Temper and peculiar Structure, and consequently to the Specific
Ferment and manner of Fermentation; as the peculiar Quality of the Liver and
Spleen produces another Ferment, and as Blood is made in the Heart. However it
is not done by the fermentative Particles alive, which are mixed with the
swallowed Food, nor by a moderate Heat, as some are of Opinion. For they only
conduce to the dissolution of the Nourishment, but the moderate Heat to promote
the said Concoction or Fermentation, and excite the absconding Power to Action.
But why that Concoction and Dissolution produces the Chylus, rather than any
other Humor, that is to be attributed to the peculiar Quality of the
Substance, there is no other Reason to be given for that, but only the peculiar
Quality of the Substance, in respect of which, the Heat operates otherwise in
the Stomach, than in the Heart or any other part; and there disposes of the
Ferment after another manner than in any other Bowel. Thus as the Kitchin-fire
mollifies one way by Boiling, another way by Roasting, another way, that which
is Fried in Butter, or otherwise, that which is prepared in Vinegar or Pickle,
and that by reason of the Substances by which, and upon which that softening is
to be brought to pass: Thus the Heat of our Body, by reason of the proper
disposition of the Ventricle, and the Juices therein contained and bred,
therefore otherwise soften and dissolve the Nourishment in the Stomach than the
other parts, and disposes the Ferment after another manner, to enable that
Ferment to dissolve and concoct the swallowed Nourishment, in a distinct manner
from the Reconcoction in other parts of the Nourishment already melted and
dissolved for second Concoction. So that by reason of this peculiar Quality,
while the Stomach is sane, and acts according to Nature, there can be no other
Juice there made than a white Chyle.

XXX. Paracelsus writes that Archaeus with his Mechanic Spirits could perfect
Chylification in the Stomach: but by Archaeus he means the innate Heat. To this
Opinion Riolanus seems to adhere in Not. ad Epist. Wallaei. Nevertheless he
admits something of a shadow of a peculiar Quality, in these words: I attribute
the Cause to the diversity of the innate Heat, in the manner of the Substance,
that is, says he, the property of the innate Heat. Not that the innate Heat
differs of it self in Substance. But when it cannot subsist without a Body or
Substance without it self, it must operate variously according to the diversity
of that Substance in the several parts.

XXXI. Hence it is apparent, how frivolous that is which some assert, That the
Ventricle does not make the Chyle, but is only an Instrument and Receptacle
where the Chyle is made; and that it no otherwise makes the Chyle than the Pot
wherein the Meat is boiled makes the Broth. But I would fain know who is so
blind as not to see, that when Chylification is attributed to the Stomach, we
do not mean the bare Membranes of the Ventricle, but a live and sound Ventricle
that is furnished with its own Spirit and Heat, and a Convenient proper Ferment
generated out of the peculiar Quality of its own Substance, with none of which
things a Porridge Pot can be said to be endued.

XXXII. The Color of the Chyle The Color of the Chyle.
is Milkie and somewhat white, by reason of the sulphury Particles, dissolved
with the salt ones, and mixed with the acid Ferment of the Stomach. For every
Liquor impregnated with Sulphur and a Volatile Salt, or a Salt admirably well
dissolved, presently turns to a kind of Milk, if any thing of acid Moisture be
poured upon it. Which is proved sufficiently by the preparations of Sulphur,
and the Extracts of Vegetable Rosins. Also Spirit of Hartshorn or Soot, being
sprinkled with any liquid Juice, or only fair Water, presently turns to a kind
of Milk.

XXXIII. Plempius and Walaeus Whether it may be red.
are of Opinion that the Chylus is not always white; but that from red
Nourishment it becomes red, from green, green. But herein they mistake; for
were it not white of it self, it never would be found always white in the Milky
Vessels of the Mesentery and Breast; but we should also meet with red, green,
or any other Color, which was never yet observed by any Person. True it is,
that frequently it appears sometimes more, sometimes less serous and thin, in
the pectoral Chanel of the Chylus, according as there is more or less of the
Lymphatic Juice, which flows in great quantity from all parts into the
Chylebearing Bag; which Limpid Juice, when there is no Chyle, continually and
leisurely flows alone through that Chanel; nevertheless the Chyle that appears
in those Milky ways, is never seen to be of any other Color than white.

XXXIV. Therefore though the whitish Color of it may be something darkened in
the Ventricle and Intestins by many other thick Particles of the Nourishment
tinctured with green, red, or any other Color, and intermixed with it, in such
a manner that the Mixture cannot be discerned, it does not thence follow, that
the Chylus of it self has any other Color than white. For though in green Herbs
the white, or rather pellucid Color of the spirituous and watery Parts be not
apparent to the sight, it follows not from thence, that the spiritous and watery
part of those Herbs is of a green Color; for if the separation be made by
distillation, it presently appears pellucid. And so it is with the Chylus, for
being separated from the Mass which is tinctured with any more cloudy Color,
mixed with the acid Ferment of the Pancr^as or Sweetbread, it never appears of
an^ other Color than white.

XXXV. But because Chylification cannot go forward unless the Nourishment be
swallowed into the Stomach, it will not be amiss, before we prosecute any
farther the History of Chylification, first to inquire into the cause of
Hunger, that so we may more easily attain to the more perfect knowledge of
Chylification.

XXXVI. What Hunger is there is What i^ Hunger.
no man but can readily give an account, that is to say, a desire of Food.

But what it is that provokes that desire, and is the occasion of it, has been
variously disputed among the Philosophers.

XXXVII. Anciently they held that Whether from sucking.
it proceeded from the attraction or sucking of the emptied Parts; and that the
first emptied Parts sucked it from the Veins, the Veins from the Liver, the
Liver from the Stomach endu'd with a peculiar sucking Quality; which act of
sucking they thought occasioned that trouble which we call Hunger. But this
Opinion is now adays utterly exploded. First, for that according to this
Opinion plethoric Persons would never be hungry: Secondly, because there can be
no such att^action by the emptied Parts through the Veins from the Liver, by
reason of the little Lappets or Folding-doors that hinder it.

XXXVIII. Others observing that Whether from an acid Juice.
acid things create Hunger, believed it to be occasioned by the acid Juices,
carried from the Spleen through the Vas breve to the Ventricle. But this
Opinion Modern Anatomy more curious has utterly destroyed, demonstrating in
living Animals, that the Blood descends through that Vessel from the Stomach
toward the Spleen, and so empties it self into the Splenic Branch, but that
nothing flows a contrary Course from the Spleen to the Stomach.

XXXIX. Many there are, of which Whether from the Juices of the Arteries.
number Regius, who affirms that Hunger is occasioned by the biting of the
emptied Ventricle, by certain sharp and hot Juices, continually forced through
the Arteries into the Ventricle or its Tunicles, which after the Expulsion of
the Chylus, not knowing what to gnaw upon, prick the Ventricle, whereby the
Nerve of the sixth Pair, being moved within it after a certain manner, excites
an Imagination of taking Nourishment for the relief of that pricking. But this
Opinion is from hence confuted, for that the Blood of the Arteries, by reason
of the Dominion of the Sulphury Particles, is by no means sour, but smooth,
soft and sweet; so that it neither does, nor can cause any troublesome pricking
or corrosion, neither in the Tunicles of the Ventricle, nor of any other Parts,
though of most exquisite Sense (as the Adnate or Conjunctive Tunicle of the Eye,
the Nut of the Yard, etc.) Besides, it would hence follow, That by how much the
more of this Arterious Blood is thrust forward to the emptied Stomach, so much
the more hungry a man would be: but the Contrary is apparent in burning Fevers,
that such as in health have fasted two days together, are no more a hungry,
whereas their Stomach is clearly emptied, and the Blood continually flowing
through the Arteries into the Stomach. Then if Hunger should be provoked by
that Corrosion, why does not that hungry Corrosion happen in such People?

We were about forty of us one time A Story.
traveling together, in our Return out of France, at what time being becalmed
at Sea, so that there was a necessity for us to tarry longer than we expected,
all our Provision, Water and other Drink being near spent, so that at length we
were constrained to fast the third day, not having a crumb of Bread nor a
draught of Drink to help our selves: but after we had fasted half a day, or a
little more, there was not one that perceived himself a hungry; so that the
third day was no other way troublesome to us, but that it weak'ned us, and made
us faint: Neither did the Arterious. Blood occasion any hungry Corrosion in our
empty Stomachs. And thus not only Reason, but also Experience, utterly
overthrows the aforesaid Opinion. And therefore Ludovicus de la Forge vainly
invents a way for this Arterious fermentative Liquor from the Arteries to the
Stomach, in Annot. ad Cartesii lib. de Hom* where, says he, It may be here
questioned, why that Liquor (i. e. the Fermentative) is carried through the
Arteries to the Stomach and Ventricle, rather than to other Parts. To which I
answer, That the Arteries conveigh it equally to all Parts, but the Pores of
all the Membranes are not so convenient to give it passage, as the Pores of the
Ventricle. Now that this feigned Subterfuge is of no moment, appears from
hence, That in the Membrances of the Brain, and many others, whose Pores are so
convenient, that the Blood may be able to flow in greater quantity through
them, than is conveyed to the Stomach; yet there is neither any Corrosion or
Vellication of the Part. Some, that they may defend this Corrosion the better,
say That the Blood which is conveyed, or flows to the Stomach, is sharper
than that which is conveyed to any other Part. But this no way coheres with
Truth, because all the Blood is one and the same which is sent out of the Heart
to all the Parts of the whole Body; nor is there any thing to separate the
sharp from the milder Particles, or thrusts 'em forward to these, rather than
to those Parts.

XL. Others lastly, to whose Opinion The tru^ Cause.
we think fit to subscribe, assert that Hunger is occasioned by certain acid
fermentative Particles, bred out of the Spittle swallowed down, and some others
somewhat Salt or indigested Acids, adhering to the Tunicles of the Ventricle,
and by that drawn to some kind of Acidity; or remaining in it after the
Expulsion of the Chylus, stitching to the inner wrinkl'd Membrane (especially
about the upper Orifice) and a Vellication, troublesome to the Stomach, which
being communicated by the Nerves of the sixth Pair to the Brain, thereby an
Imagination of Eating is excited, to appease the troublesome Corrosion.

XLI. This Acrimonie is infused into those fermentative Particles by the
Stomach, when the sulphurous Parts are jumbl'd in the Juices that stick to the
inner Tunicle, and the Salts are melted by the convenient Heat of the Ventricle
to a degree of Fusion, and so they turn Acid after a Specific Manner. To which
purpose the swallowed Spittle descending to the Stomach may be very prevalent
(for this has a fermentative Quality in it self, as we shall show ye l. 3. c.
24.) and to the same effect may also conduce the subacid Pancreatic, or
Sweetbread Juice being infused into the Duodenum, if any Part of it shall rise
toward the Stomach, or shall transmit any acid Vapors or Exhalations from the
Intestin to it.

XLII. Here some Object, and say, An Objection.
if this be the Cause of Hunger, then when the Stomach is full, and Concoction
and Fermentation are both busily employed, Men would be most Hungry; for then
many more acid and fermentaceous Particles are called forth to their Work,
which must of Necessity pull and tear the Ventricle much more than the few
before mentioned. It Is denied. For the Particles to be fermented and fermented,
that is dissolved, will be more; but not the Fermentaceous, or Particles
dissolving. Of which we have an Example in Leven'd Bread, whose single Parts
have no power to ferment another Mass of Flower; because the acid Particles are
no longer predominant, but the Sulphurous, as appears by the sweetness of the
taste: And so long as that prevalency of the sulphury Particles continues in the
dissolved Particles, so long they cannot become Acid or Fermentaceous (for
Sulphur is Sweet.) As appears in Fevers, wherein acid Medicines are generally
most plentifully prescribed, for the subduing of the sulphury Predominancy: And
restoring the convenient fermentaceous Quality. For when the Prevalency of the
sulphurous Particles is overpowered by the Force of the salt Acids, then comes
the fermentaceous Acidity to be introdu^d. So that there are not more acid,
sharp, and corroding Particles in the full Ventricle concocting the Food* or if
there be, they are so stained by the copious Liquor intermixed, so that they can
occasion no troublesome Vellication to the Stomach; by which means the Hunger
cannot be greater at that time, but rather ceases altogether. But when the
Ghylus, and with that the dissolved sulphurous Particles intermixed with the
salt are gone off to the Intestins, then the Remainder that sticks to the inner
Tunicle of the Ventricle, or is carried thither with the spittly Juice, as
being freed for the most part from the redundancy of sulphurous Particles,
grows sour through the heat of the Ventricle, and so begins to tear again, and
renews the Appetite, which ceases again, when that Acidity comes to be
retemper'd by the Meat and Drink thrown into the Stomach, and its Acrimony
comes to be mitigated and blunted.

XLIII. But if these fermentaceous Juices are not only not moderated in the
Stomach, but that through some defect of the Liver, Sweetbread, or other Parts,
over sharp Humors are too abundantly bred in the Body; or flow from the Head,
or some inferior Parts, into the Stomach, in so great a Quantity, that their
Acrimonie cannot be sufficiently tamed and tempered by the swallowed Food, then
happens that preternatural Hunger which we Canine Appe^ite
call Canine; with which they who are troubled, often vomit up undigested Meat
together with sour Juices like the Juice of Limon (as they themselves confess)
and by reason of the gnawing Acrimony, occasioned by the extreme viscousness of
the Humors remaining in the Ventricle, presently become hungry again and fall
to eat. But if the fermentaceous Particles are in themselves very viscous, or
thicker, and of a slower Motion, then they require a longer time to elevate
themselves and excite Hunger; which chiefly happens when the acid Spirits less
abound in the whole Body, and consequently in the Spittle, and that viscous
Humor that sticks to the inner Tunicle of the Stomach.

XLIV. Sometimes also it happens that Hunger is frequently diminished, when
bitter Choler ascends in too great Quantity into the Stomach (as in choleric
Men, in the Iaundise, and several sorts of Fevers) and therein by its Mixture
corrupts not only the fermentaceous Relics of the Nourishment remaining in the
Stomach after the Expulsion of the Chyle, but also the Spittle that flows to
it. The more remote Causes of lessening the Appetite are various, as excess of
Sleep and Laziness, excess of Care, and looseness of the Belly, etc. Overmuch
Sleep, and too much sitting still, for that for want of sufficient Exercise of
the Body, the Humors also are not sufficiently stirred; nor are the acid
Particles conveniently separated from the Viscous, so that they cannot be
sufficiently roused up to Action. In extraordinary Cares of the Mind hunger is
not perceived, because the Thoughts are otherwise employed. And as for looseness
of the Belly, it is a certain Truth that the Ferment is vitiated.

XLV. Now these fermentaceous The Ferment.
Particles that excite Hunger, as appears by what has bin said, are acid, or
somewhat acid, and are the same that promote the Conoction of the Stomach, and
ferment and dissolve the swallowed Nourishment. Hence it is, that Acids
moderately taken increase the Appetite, and cause a better Concoction of the
Stomach. Of which we have an Experiment (besides our daily Experience in our
Seamen, who make long Voyages to the Indies. For having fed upon thick and hard
Meats for a long time, hence it comes to pass that their Appetites are
depraved, and their Concoctions but weak; which breeds a Scorbutic ill Habit of
Body. But when they come to Islands or Countries where they meet with plenty of
Limons, and other acid Fruits, presently their Appetite is restored, and all
the concoctive Faculties, that languished before, are renewed, together with
their Strength, through the said acidity, and so in a short time they recover
their former Health. Therefore to keep the Seamen in Health in those long and
tedious Voyages, the Masters of Vessels are wont to carry along with 'em a
certain Quantity of Citron Juice, which they distribute now and then among the
Mariners, when they find their Stomachs begin to fail 'em.

XLVI. Acid therefore are those fermentaceous Particles which excite Hunger;
which if they be wanting in the Stomach, the Appetite fails, nor can the
Chylification be perfected, but the Meat is thrown off into the Bowels raw and
unconcocted as when it was first swallowed down: But they being again restored
to the Stomach, the Concoction returns, and the Appetite is restored. Hence
says Hippocrates 6. Aph. 1. In long Fluxes of the Belly, if sour Belches
happen, it is a good Sign.

XLVII. Now how it comes to pass that the fermentaceous Particles obtain that
embased Acrimony, has bin already said, by an apt Heat melting those salt
Particles to a degree of being Liquid and ready to flow. I say, Apt. For as
Bread becomes well leavened in a luke warm Place by the Ferment mixed with it,
in a cold Place in great difficulty, but in a hot Oven can never be fermented:
So this Acidity which will not be excited but by a moderate Heat of the
Stomach, will not be stirred by too small a Heat, and is scattered and
dispelled by too great a Heat; and thereby those Juices that should make the
Ferment will be quite consumed. Hence Flegmatic People that are troubled with a
cold Distemper of the Stomach, have neither good Appetites nor good
Concoctions; and Choleric Persons, who are infested with an over-hot Temper of
the Stomach, have none at all. However it does not follow from this, that the
greater the Heat of the Stomach is, the quicker must be the Appetite, and the
stronger and better the Concoction: For the contrary appears in burning
Fevers, and an Inflammation of the Stomach: As also in a Lion, whether he be
accounted the hottest of all Creatures, yet can he not digest Iron, Gold,
Brass, or the like; which however are easily digested in the Stomach of an
Estriche, as being endued with a sharper Ferment, though not with so fervent a
Heat. As Langius relates that he saw at the Duke of Ferrara's Court an Estriche
both swallow and digest those Metals, l. 1. Epist. 12.

XLVIII. Therefore it is not the Heat but the Ferment, which in some is more
sharp and acid, in others more moderate, which is the next Cause of the
Appetite and Digestion of the Stomach: But moderate Heat is the Cause which
disposes the Matter which begets that Ferment that elevates and excites to
Action.

XLIX. But whereas this Power What is the chylifying Heat.
and Virtue in the Stomach of making this Ferment, and of Chylifying by its
Assistance, cannot be excited into Action but by an apt and moderate Heat, some
there are who question what, or rather where this Heat lies that produces this
Action. Whether it be the Heat of the Membranes of the Ventricle, or the Parts
that ly round it, or of any Humor, or any Spirits. Certainly there is no
difference of this Heat in the diversity of Subjects, in relation to self; for
all Heat is excited by the Motion and Agitation of the least Particles and
subtle Matter (for because the Heat is fiercer in red hot Iron, slacker in the
Flame of Straw; this does not argue the difference of the Heat it self, but of
the Quantity, proceeding from the diversity of the Subject to which it is
inherent) But the Diversity of Operations proceeds from the diversity of the
things themselves, upon which, and by virtue of which the Heat acts. For the
same Heat melts Wax, hardens Clay, wastes the Meat upon the Spit, bakes it in
the Oven, and boyls in the Pot, putrifys in a Dunghill, and hatches Eggs in a
Stove, without the assistance of a Hen. In like manner to promote the Act of
Chylification, it is required that the moderate Heat (which is no more than one
and the same, should be proportionably adapted in the Stomach; that is, both in
its Membranes, its Humors and Spirits, and that it should be cherished and
fostered in like manner by the Heat of the Parts that lie round about it; for
so being truly and aptly proportioned, it is impossible but the Ventricle must
act properly and naturally toward the Chylification of proper Matter, by
dissolving and extracting a Chylus out of it.

L. The Preparation of Nourishment The manner of Chylification.
for Chylification proceeds gradually after a certain kind of Method. For first
the Spittle is mixed with the Meat which is chewed and masticated in the Mouth,
not only softning them, but infusing into them, a fermentative Quality (of
which Quality see l. 3. c. 6. and 24.) then comes Drink, Ale, Wine, or any
other Liquor, which for the most part contains in it self acid Particles and
fermentaceous Spirits. This Nourishment the Stomach strictly embraces, and
squeezes it self round about it by the help of its Fibers, and mingles with it
the Specific fermentaceous Juices, as well those bred in the interior Tunicle,
as those that are affused upon the Spittle. Then by an apt and proper Heat
there is a Mixture and Liquation or Melting of the whole Substance of the
Nourishment together. For that the fermentaceous Particles sliding into the
Pores of the Nourishment, withal get into their very Particles themselves, stir
about, melt and dissolve the more pure from the thick, and render 'em more
fluid, to the end they may be able to endure another form of Mixture; and be
united among themselves into the form of a milky Cream. Which being done, by
the squeezing of the Ventricle they fall down to the Intestins together with
the thicker Mass with which they are intermixed; in them to be separated by the
mixture of Choler and the pancreatick or Juice, after another manner of
Fermentation, and so to be thrust down to the milky Vessels.

LI. The certain Time for the finishing The time for Chylification.
of Chylification cannot be determined. For here is great Variety observed
proceeding from the variety of the Temperament of the Stomach, Age, Sex,
Position, and Disposition of the Parts adjoining, and the Nature of the
Nourishment themselves.

LII. But why some Meats are digested sooner, some later; the Reason is to be
given from the variety of the Meats themselves in Substance, Hardness,
Solidness, Thickness, Thinness, Heat, Cold, etc. For which reason some are
dissolved with more case and sooner, some with more Difficulty and later in the
Stomach. But then again, why the same Meats are in others sooner in others
later concocted; and wherefore some Stomachs will easily concoct raw Fish, hard
Flesh, half boiled, or though it be raw, but the Stomachs of others will with
great Difficulty the tenderest and best prepared Diet; this proceeds from the
various Constitution of the Stomach, the Ferment, and the proportion of Heat.

LIII. What I speak of Meats, the same is to be understood of Drinks: Which for
the same Reasons, and because of the same Varieties, are digested in others
well, in others ill, in others sooner, in others later; and render the
Digestions of the Stomach, in others better, in others worse. For Example, if
Wine or any other Liquor be drank plentifully, that is either quickly digested,
by reason of the great Plenty, Thinness, and Spirituosity of acid Particles,
and so flows down to the Intestines; or else by reason of the extraordinary
Quantity, being very heavy and troublesome to the Stomach, is thrust forth raw
and undigested; of which Crudity the signs are sour Belches, Vomiting,
Rumbling in the Guts, and Crude Urines.

LIVE. If fair Water be drank which contains no acid Particles, in a hotter
Stomach, or where sharp and hot Humors abound, there it uses to temper, and
somewhat to suppress an excessive and stinking Fermentation: but in a colder
Stomach, and full of cold Juices, it hinders Digestion. For that by its cold
Moisture it dulls the sharp fermentaceous Particles contained in the Stomach,
and the Meat received; that is, by its intermixed and plentiful Aquosity it
breaks to pieces and separates the least Particles of the active Principles at
too great a distance one from another, so that they cannot act with a mutual
and sufficient activity one upon another, so that then there happens a lesser
Motion, and for want of that the more cold arises, so that the fermentaceous
Particles cannot be sufficiently attenuated by the heat of the Stomach, nor
elevated to a just degree of Effervescency; and then they become unable to act
upon the Particles that are to be fermented.

LV. Note also that fat Meats too Fat things abate hunger.
plentifully eaten abate hunger, and render the Chylifying Concoction more
difficult; because they dull the Acrimony of the fermentaceous Particles: or
rather because they so involve the chiefest part of the Particles of the
Nourishment received, that the sharp fermentaceous Particles cannot act with
convenience upon 'em; which efficacy of Fat is to be seen in External Things.
For Silver or Pewter Vessels being smeared over with Fat, are not to be
corroded by sharp Vinegar infused, though the Vinegar retain all its Acrimony.
Neither will Aqua fortis corrode the Skin if well greased over. Thus the sharp
fermentaceous Matter acts with very great difficulty upon Meats that are over
fat; which is the reason that the eating of too much Fat occasions vomiting.
See more of Ferment, c. 17. and l. 2. c. 12.

LVI. Ludovicus de Bills; a kind of a paradoxical Anatomist is said to have
observed the Time of Chylification in the dissection of Dogs, after this
manner, according to the Report of N. Zas. If a Dog be fed with only sweet
Milk, then the Chylification will be perfected about two hours after: Mix white
Bread with that Milk, it will be three hours, or somewhat less, before the
Chylification will be perfected. If the Milk be thickened with Barley Meal, and
so eaten by the Dog, it will be four hours before the Chylus will appear in the
Stomach: But feed the Dog with white Bread only, and it will require six hours
to perfect the Chylus.

But these Observations of Bills are very uncertain; for that all the Stomachs
of Dogs are not of the same Constitution, nor in the same Condition of Sanity,
nor digest their Meat in an equal space of Time; thence it will come to pass,
that Digestion which shall be accomplished in the Ventricle of one within an
hour, shall not be finished in another in two or three hours, though it be of
the same Meat. Moreover, unless these Observations be meant of all sorts of
Concoctions of Nourishment received by the Stomach, they will contradict both
Reason and Experience, which will teach us that neither in Men nor Dogs, all
Meats that are swallowed into the Stomach, are digested together, nor are all
their apt and agreeing Particles turned into Chyle; all at a time, the thinner
first, the thicker afterward, so that there can be no certain time prefixed
for Chylification. For Milk being eaten with Bread, though perhaps it requires
three hours, before all the apt Particles shall be turned into Chylus; yet will
it not be three hours before some Chyle be produced out of it; for the thinner
Particles of the Milk will be sooner turned into Chyle, which will be
conspicuous after one, sometimes in half an hour, and sometimes sooner, while
the Bread and thicker Particles of the Milk shall remain to the third hour in
the Ventricle. He then who affirms that the Chylification is not perfected
before the end of the third hour, is in an Error, for the very first hour a
good part of it was perfected and finished.

LVII. Bernard Swalve in querel. and opprob. Ventric. elegantly describes the
time of Chylification, and the Obstacles that may happen to hinder it. Where he
introduces the Stomach thus The (...) diments and (...) of (...).
speaking:

All things that are received do not equally resist my Labor. One gives way
sooner than another. Upon Milk meats I spend but an hour; not full two upon
Pot Herbs: Nor does the softness of Fish require that time. Food made of
Flower, as Bread and Crust, I can hardly dissolve into Cream in four hours; and
the harder the Flesh is, the longer and more diligently must I labor. Mutton
and Beef require seven hours to tame their Contumacy. Here I stand in need of a
greater quantity of Acids, and a greater resort and assistance of Spirits. Now
my Substance operates more strongly, and then all these things are frequently
weakened and dispoil'd of their force. I omit to mention many things that
disturb my Office, and hinder me in my duty, now this, now that, which puts me
into a languishing Condition. For this is my misery, hence my tears, that I
cannot resist the Invasion of External Injuries, and that I am exposed to so
many and so great Errors and Mistakes that obstruct me in my Employment. These
Mischiefs are so fruitful, that I cannot always obtain my End in Digestion.

LVIII. Assuredly these things are very The Order of Chyli^ication.
well and succinctly described by Swalve, for that many and several sorts of
Food being eaten at one Meal, do not all together, and at one equal distance of
time, suddenly part with their Milkie Juice; but according to the greater or
lesser force of the Stomach, and the fermenting acid Juice, and the difference
of Food in Substance, Quantity, Quality, Hardness, Viscosity, Thinness,
Solidity, etc. The more spirituous and thinner Parts in some are sooner, in
others later dissolved, and turn into Chyle; and they which are first digested,
pass first through the Pylore or Orifice, the other remaining a longer time in
the Stomach, till a more accurate dissolution. This proceeding is manifest from
the Refreshment after the Meal; For the strength of Nature is soon repaired,
whereas the Meat is easily perceived to remain in the Stomach. Which first
Refreshment is caused by the thinner Particles of the Nourishment first
dissolved and concocted, and already discharged by the Stomach. Which, should
they remain in the Stomach till the absolute Concoction of the harder Masses,
by that overlong stay they would be too much digested, and so become
corrupted, or vitiated at least. And this Method is evident in the dissection
of Dogs, killed presently after they have filled their Bellies. For generally
in their Bowels and chyliferous or milkie Vessels, there is found a thinner
sort of Chyle, which we have many times shown to the Spectators in a sufficient
Quantity, scarce an hour or two after they had eaten: especially if they fed
upon a more juicy fort of Meats, when the chiefest part of the Food, not being
yet turned into Chyle, still remained in the Ventricle.

LIX. Hence appears the mistake of The Order of Meats;
many Physicians, who thought that the Nourishment which was first eaten was
first discharged out of the Stomach; those things which were last eaten were
last parted with. And hence they have been very careful to prescribe an Order
in Feeding; as, to eat those things which are of easy Concoction first, and
those things which are hard of Digestion last, for fear of begetting Crudities
through a preposterous Order in Feeding; according to the Admonitions of
Fernelius 3. de Sympt. Cause. c. 1. 5. Pathol. c. 3. Mercurialis 3. Prax. c. 12.
Sennertus 3. Prax. part. 1. Sect. 2. c. 9. and of many others. Certainly
whatever Variety is received into the Stomach is confused, mixed, and jumbled
together, and that by Fermentation, by which the spiritous and thin Particles
spread themselves, and free themselves from the dissolved thicker Substances,
and so the thick being stirred and agitated together with the thin; by that
motion there is made a Mixture of all together; of all which Mass, that which
is sufficiently digested passes through the Pylorus, that which requires
farther Concoction, remains of a harder Substance in the Stomach.

LX. Here three hard Questions are to be examined in their Order. First,
Whether if Hunger be occasioned by the acid fermentaceous Particles, creating a
troublesome Vellication in the Stomach, what is the Cause of that which is
called Pica, or a depraved Appetite (as when People long for Chalk, Oatmeal,
Lime, and the like.) Secondly, Whether in a Dyspepsie (or difficulty of
Digestion and Fermentation in the Guts) Choler can be bred in the Stomach, such
as is evacuated upward and downward in the Disease called Cholera. Thirdly,
Whether the whole Chyle, when concocted on the Stomach, fall into the
Intestines.

LXI. As to the first, The Cause of a depraved Appetite (called Pica and
Malacia) seems to us not to have been by any person sufficiently explained;
when as the affect it self is a thing to be admired, in regard the force of it
is such, especially in Virgins and Women (for men are seldom troubled with it)
that they will often with a wonderful desire covet Meal, Chalk, Tobacco-pipes,
Dirt, Coals, Lime, Tarr, raw Flesh, Fruits, and other strange things altogether
unfit for Nourishment; as live Fish, the fleshy and brawny part of the Members
of a living Man, and Stones, (as Sennertus reports that he knew a Woman that
swallowed every day two pound of a Grindstone, till she had at length devoured
it all) besides several other Precedents cited by Physicians, and what daily
occurs to our Observation. Now they generally affirm the Cause of this Mischief
to be the depraved Humors contained in the Ventricle, which, according to
their various Natures, excite in some a various Appetite to this, in others to
that, whether bad or good: in some, to dissimilar noxious things, in others to
similar, as the vicious Humors according to their different qualifications
variously tear and move the little Fibers of the Nerves of the Ventritle, by
the peculiar Motion of which communicated to the Brain, there arises the same
Motion in an instant in the Brain, by which a peculiar Appetite is stirred up
to this or that thing. Francis de le Boe Sylvius Prax. l. 1. c. 2. as also in
the Dictates of the Private College assembled in the Year 1660. going about to
explain this thing more particularly, asserts that the Cause of this depraved
Appetite is a vicious Ferment of the Stomach, corrupted either by the vicious
Nourishment, Physic, or Poison, swallowed down; or by several Diseases,
especially such as are incident to Women, infecting the whole Mass of Blood,
then the Spittle, and lastly the Ferment of the Ventricle, and disposing 'em to
an ill habit. But if this formal Reason be of any force, let us from thence
also ask this Question, Why such an Appetite, coveting this unusual Diet, is
also to be found in those who are troubled with no vicious Humors in the
Stomach, as I have sometimes found by Experience; though I cannot deny but that
there may be now and then for all that some ill Humors in the Stomach?
Wherefore in a Man, whose Ferment and Ventricle are without fault, merely upon
the wistful looking upon some Picture, sometimes of Fish, sometimes of Fruits,
or other things not fit for Diet, shall find himself to have a strong Stomach
for these things? in the same manner as the looking upon the Picture of a naked
Venus excites many Men to Venery? What, and of what sort must be the Nature and
admirable Quality that must so move the little Fibers of the Nerves and the
Brain, that by reason of that special Motion there must be an Appetite to
Grindstones, Tobacco-pipes, Coals, etc. which there is no body but knows can
never be desired as a remedy against that troublesome gnawing, or as necessary
for Nourishment.

LXII. And therefore these things must proceed from some other Cause, that is
to say, from the Mistake of the Imagination, and thence a depraved Judgment
arising from an ill habit of the Brain, and a vicious Motion of the Spirits;
and not from the pravity of the Humors in the Stomach. For according as the
vicious Humors augment or diminish the Vellication of the Fibers more or less
intensly, it may increase or abate the Appetite, but not direct it to a
particular choice of Diet, especially such a one as is unnatural. For Hunger is
a natural ^nstinct, by which Nature is barely excited to receive Nourishment,
as a remedy for the gnawing, but not more especially to this o^ that Food, or
to this or that Diet, if it may be so called, as being altogether unnatural.

LXIII. Then as for that which is said, That sound healthy People being a
hungry, covet sometimes Fish, sometimes Flesh, sometimes Fruit, now roasted,
now boiled, etc. This proceeds not from any peculiar Vellication or Gnawing,
but from an Animal Appetite, which judges that sometimes such sort of Meats,
sometimes another, sometimes sweet, sometimes sour, will be more grateful and
proper for the Stomach; and therefore sometimes they covet more eagerly
Wormwood-wine, raw Herrings, and several other things of themselves ungrateful,
than others more pleasing to the Palate, and more wholesome.

LXIV. Now since the Choice or Refusal of Meat, or of any thing else, depends
upon the Judgment, and Judgment proceeds from the Brain, certainly the Cause of
coveting this or that peculiar thing, is not to be sought for in the Stomach
but in the Brain; which if it be out of order, through bad Humors, and ill
Vapors arising from any filth gathered together in the Womb, Spleen, or
Sweetbread, and hence asscending up to the Brain, easily occasions depraved
Imaginations, whence follows a deep depraved ^ Judgment, and through the
mistake of that Judgment, noxious and absurd things are covered, rather than
the best and most wholesome, as Chalk, Coals, and c. (A thing well known to
happen to melancholy People, who many times dote upon one particular thing,
though in other things their Judgment is sound enough.) For how far Intent and
frequent Cogitation upon a thing avails to increase such a depraved Appetite,
is apparent in Women with Child, who many times long to that degree, that if
they cannot get what they desire, the Child shall carry the Mark of the thing
longed for. Which impression cannot be said to preceed from any depraved
Humors of the Stomach, but from the Brain; for that the Imagination being
intense upon those things, and Judgment made upon their use, and Benefit
proceeds from thence, and the Ideas of those things are conveyed from thence,
and imprinted upon the Birth by the Animal Spirits. Besides, they that are
troubled with a depraved Appetite, do not always long for one and the same
thing, but sometimes for one thing, sometimes another, as their Fancies are
fixed more upon one thing than another, which cannot be imputed to any ill
Humor adhering to the Ventricle; for that then the longing for variety of
things must proceed from the variety of Humors. Besides, these sort of
Patients are troubled with a depraved Appetite when they are a hungry, and then
they most eagerly long for those things which they have thought of before,
whether good or bad; and believe 'em then not to be bad or hurtful, but
pleasing and wholesome. Which Depravation of the Appetite I have cured more by
Cunning than by Physic; enjoining the People of the House never to mention in
the hearing of the Patients those hurtful things, and to remove all sorts of
Pictures out of their sight; and in the mean time to feed 'em with wholesome
Diet, and that often in the Day, to prevent their being much an hungry.

LXV. There is one Objection re-mains, An Objection.
that is to say, If a depraved Appetite were not caused by the ill habit of the
Stomach, the Patients would be sick upon the eating such kind of noxious Diet,
neither would such things be digested in the Stomach; but on the other side, it
appears that few or none suffer any harm by it, without doubt because there are
those depraved Juices in the Stomach, which are able to digest that
preternatural Diet, which the Stomach seems to have particularly required, as a
remedy for that peculiar Vellication or Twitching of the Nerves. But the force
of this Objection is easily answered, when it is considered that it is not
absolutely true, that such Patients receive no Damage from such incongruous
and preternatural Diet, and that it is only true in very few, and that only
once, twice, or thrice, but that afterward they are cruelly afflicted by it,
contracting Oppilations of the Bowels, the Dropsy, the wild Scab or Maunge,
called Psora; and several other Distempers. But the reason why they receive no
Damage at first, is twofold.

First, Because upon the eager devouring of these things the Animal Spirits
flow in great Plenty to the Stomach (as upon Venereal thoughts they flow in
great abundance to the Generating Parts; together with a great quantity of
Arterious Blood. Now how effectually these Natural Spirits operate in
nourishing the Body, we shall explain more at large, l. 3. c. 11. and how far
they conduce to the Concoctions of the Stomach, if they flow into it more
plentifully than is usual, is apparent in those Slaves to their Bellies, that
waste whole days and nights in thinking what they shall eat, and are always
stuffing their Guts. For they, by reason of the plentiful Spirits designed for
the Stomach, have much swifter and better Concoctions, than such as are always
busi'd at their Studies, whose Animal Spirits are called another way; and
therefore are frequently troubled with Crudities, and hardly are able to digest
the lightest Food.

Secondly, Because they that are troubled with a depraved Appetite, are for the
most part melancholy; or such as breed more sour fermentaceous Juices, are
more sharp and copious than usual, in the Spleen, Sweatbread and Ventricle;
whence when they begin to be a hungry, they have a sharper Stomach, and far
more easily digest whatever they eat, than others; nay, than they themselves
can do at another time. Thus I have known a Woman with Child, that longing for
ripe Cherries, has at one time eaten up six or seven pound together; another
that has eaten thirty Cheesecakes; and another that would eat raw salt Herrings
and digest 'em well, when at other times they did not use to be so greedy. And
hence it comes to pass, that at sueh a time they will digest a large quantity
of Meat, or those preternatural Things (as Oatemeal, Chalk, and Coals) or at
least the Stomach discharges 'em without any harm. But if they continue that
immoderate Course of Diet, that sharper Juice at length failing, it becomes
such a Disturbance to the Bowels and Stomach, that their Concoctions are
thereby plainly interrupted and depraved, to the breeding of copious bad
Juices, that increase a great quantity of ill Humors, which is the cause of
several Distempers. From all which I think it is sufficiently manifest, that a
depraved Appetite does not primarily proceed from any depraved Humors bred in
the Stomach, or sticking to it, but from some defect of the Brain, and mistake
of the Imagination.

LXVI. The second Problem is affirmed Whether Choler be generated in the
Stomach.
by Regius, and several other Physicians, although it be far from being true. For
in a crazy Condition of Health, the Humors in the Stomach may be corrupted
several ways, and many bad ones may be gathered together, and yet never any
Choler bred therein. And for that which is exonerated upwards and downwards in
the Disease called Cholera, that is not bred in the Stomach but in the Liver,
collected and amassed together in the Bladder of the Gall, the Porus Biliarius,
and other places adjoining; from whence, sharply or sowerly fermenting and
boiling, it bursts forth at last, with great Violence, into the Duodenum, and
by virtue of that Motion is discharged and thrust out partly upward, through
the Stomach, partly downward through the rest of the Intestines. Which is
sufficiently apparent from hence, in regard that the Invasions of Choler are
subitane, no Signs preceding of any ill Affection of the Ventricle, or of any
Choler bred or gathered togethet within it; and for that often when People have
made a good Meal, not feeling any Disturbance either in the Appetite, or in
Digestion, it overflows in their Sleep at Midnight, and sometimes in the day
time, without any foregoing Notice; which certainly could not but precede, if a
copious quantity of Choler, the Cause of the Disaster, were bred in the
Stomach, or gathered there together. Neither will Reason permit us to believe,
that Nature has constituted various and several Organs to perform one and the
same Office, such as is the Generation of Choler. For to ob^ain that End, she
makes use only of one sort of Means; and thus the Stomach alone Chylifys, the
Liver alone breeds Choler, To wi^ that serous or lymphatick Juice, of which
Choler, by means of the Fermentum in the Gall. Bladder i^ bred. See more hereof
in* Synopsis Medicinae, l* 4. c. 8. Sect. 10. 14. ad 36. Salmon.
the Heart only breeds Blood, etc. Nor does the usual Subterfuge avail in this
place; that Choler generated in the Stomach, is not natural, but preternatural
Choler. For to this I answer, that that Choler, which the Distemper, called
Cholera, (which Choler, they say, is bred in the Stomach) and in the
Loosenesses of many Infants is discharged in great quantity, is a sharp, and
for the most part eruginous or green Choler; I have found it to be such in the
dissected Bodies of many that have died of this Distemper, heaped up together in
great Quantity in the Gallbladder, and the ductus Cholodichus; but little or
none in the Stomach. Which is a certain Sign, that this Choler, when it is in a
boiling Condition, breaks forth into the Stomach and Intestines, but that it is
not bred there.

LXVII. In Infants that have died of such a green choleric Looseness, I have
observed, and that frequently, the Gall-bladders full of very green Choler, and
swelled to the bigness of a large Hens Egg. So that it is most certain that
where the natural, there the preternatural Choler is bred; that is to say, on
the Liver. This is to be understood (...) the (...) before ^pressed, (...) we
have hinted i^ the M^rgin of the former P^ragraph, Salmon.
But some will say, that it is impossible that so great a quantity of green
Choler should be so suddenly bred in the Liver, or be collected and stirred up
from any other Part within it, as uses to be evacuated in the Disease called
Cholera, in a few Hours: For in the space of four and twenty Hours, several
Pints of that Matter are evacuated, to the filling of some Chamberpots, and
therefore of necessity it must be true, that that Choler is at that time bred
in the Stomach. To which I answer, That this Choler being gathered together
from all Parts to fill the Gall Bladder, for the most part is of a dark green
Color, and very sharp, and when this, being in a boiling Condition, breaks
forth into the Intestines and Ventricle, then it vexes and tears those Parts,
and like a violently pricking Medicin, causes the Serous, and various other
Humors, to flow from all Parts to the Intestines. Which being tinctured by a
small quantity of green Choler infused into the Ventricle and Intestins, become
all of a green Color and so are discharged green out of the Body: Which
Redundancy of flowing Humors being sometimes very great, the Ignorant believe
that it is only mere Choler that is expelled the Body in such a great Quantity,
when they are only other Humors colored by the Choler. Now that this Choler
causes such a Tincture by its Intermixture, I know by Experience; for that with
half a Spoonful of that Juice taken out of the Gall-bagg; I have, in the sight
of several People, tinctured a whole Pint of Water.

LXVIII. The affirmative Patrons Whether part of the Chylus be carried to the
Spleen?
of the third Problem, with whom Regius consents, assure us that all the Chylus
does not flow from the Stomach to the Intestins, but that some Part of it is
conveyed to the Spleen, through the Vas venosum breve, and other neighboring
Gastric Veins. For Proof of which they give a two sold Reason. The first is,
because the Birth in the Womb is nourished first of all with the milky Juice
that swims at the top of it, and through the Navel-vein sticking to it, and not
as yet extended to the Placenta, conveyed to the Liver and Heart of the
Infant. Now if this happen to the Embryo; it is no wonder that when a Man is
born, that part of the Chylus should pass through the Gastric Veins to the
Spleen. The other Reason is, that after a Man has fed heartily, there follows
such a sudden Refection, that so great and so sudden could never happen, if the
whole Chylus were first to pass through all the milky Vessels; and that some
part of it did not rather get to the Spleen by a shorter Cut, and thence reach
to the Heart more speedily.

LXIX. To the first Reason, I answer, That the Embryo is not at that time
nourished with the milky Juice, but with the remainder of the seminal Liquor,
poured upon it by reason of its vicinity to it, entering the Pores, and soon
after received into the Mouth: And that the Navel* vein, being at length
fastened to the uterine Placenta, can neither receive or attract any more milky
Juice; So that an Agreement with it and the Gastric Veins, was ill contrived
from hence. Moreover, supposing that any thing of the alimentary Juice were
carried at that time to the Liver of the Birth through the Navel Vein; I say,
it does not follow from thence, that the Chylus in Men born, passes also out of
the Ventricle through the Gastric Veins, and out of the Intestins through the
Mesaraics: That Comparison being altogether lame, seeing that several Parts are
in such a manner serviceable to the Birth, which they cannot pretend to in Men
born. Of which, all the Navel Vessels afford us an Example, the Foramen Ovale
in the Heart; the Closure of the Arteria Pulmonaris with the Aorta, etc.
besides that several Parts have no use as yet in the Birth, that come to be
serviceable in Men born, as the Lungs, the Liver, the Spleen, the genital
Parts, the Eyes, the Nose, the Ears. So that from the use of any Part in the
Birth* there can be concluded no use of any Part in a Man born; as we cannot
conclude any use of the Gastric and Mes^raic Veins from the use of the
Umbilical.

LXX. As to the second Reason, it seems to infer a very plausible Argument from
sudden Refreshment, that follows after Eating and Drinking, which is thought to
be occasioned from hence, because that the more subtle Part of the Chyle,
passing by a shorter Cut from the Ventricle to the Spleen, gets far sooner to
the Heart, and refreshes it, than if it were first to pass to the Intestins,
thence through several milkie Vessels to the Vein called Subclavia, and so
through the Vena cava to the Heart. Nay, I have sometimes heard that for a
farther Proof of this Assertion, that an Example was cited by Regius out of
Fernelius, of a certain Female Patient, whose Pylorus or Orifice of the Stomach
was wholly obstructed, yet did she cat every Day, though she threw what she cat
up again, and in that manner lived a long time. Which could never have bin,
says Regius, unless something of the Chylus had bin conveyed out of the
Stomach through the Gastric Veins to the Spleen. 1. Because the Chyle enters no
other but the milky Vessels. 2. Because there are no milky Vessels at all, that
are carried to the Stomach, or from the Stomach (as Deusingius pretends to
assert Institut. Anat. though I do not believe that ever any Deusingian will
presume to make out) so that if the Chyle should pass from thence to the
Spleen, it ought to be conveyed through the Vas breve, and other Blood
conveighing Veins; whereas they neither admit the Chylus, nor can receive it,
for the Reasons brought concerning the Mesaraicks l. 7. c. 2. 3. Because the
Chyle is not separated from the thicker Mass, nor enters the milky Vessels,
unless Choler be first mixed with it, together with the pancreatic Juice, which
does separate and attenuat^ it by a peculiar Fermentation or Effervescency from
the thicker matter that involves it; which Choler is poured forth into the
Guts, and not into the Stomach, and if it should be carried to the Ventricle by
Chance, that is, contrary to the usual Motion of Nature, and then Chylification
is disturbed. Now that the Chyle cannot be separated from the thicker Matter,
or attenuated by Fermentation without the Intermixture of Choler, so that it
may be able to enter the milky Vessels, is apparent in those People that are
troubled with the yellow Jaundice; in whom, by reas^n that the Choler cannot
flow into the Duodenum, by reason of some Obstruction of the Cholodochus, or
any other Cause whatever, that Distemper happens, because the Choler being
denied Passage into the Duodenum, the Patients cannot go so often to the Stool,
and when they do, the Excrement is for the most part Chylous and white,
collected together in the Guts, and cannot be fermented and distributed for
want of Choler. How true this Passage is, I leave to those who have read what I
have formerly ^it in my Synophs Medicinae l 4. c. 8. sect. 10. 14. ad 36: but
besides what we have there spoken we have had several I^cterical Patients, in
whom none of this has bin true, but their Stools have bin as numerous as
before, and in some more numerous, and in most of them of as good a color as
formerly: Moreover, I have near a hundred times seen the Excrements Chylous,
white, and sometimes like Clay, void of all manner of reddish or yellowish
Color, and yet the Person not only free from the yellow Iaundice, but also in
good Health. Salmon.
As to the sudden Refreshment after Meals, that comes not to pass by reason of
any shorter Cut from the Stomach to the Spleen, and from thence through the
Liver and Vena Cava to the Heart (which however is not a shorter way neither,
than when it is carried from the Ventricle to the Intestines) but because the
subtle Vapors of the Nourishment, penetrate through the Pores of the Ventricle
to the Heart (For the whole Body, as Hippocrates testifies, is (...), or full
of Streams) and likewise all together gently tickle the Nerves of the Sixth
Pair, common to the Heart and Ventricle; which is apparent from hence, because
not only Nourishment, but all fragrant Smells, and cordial Epithemes or
Applications, refresh those that are subject to swooning, and recover 'em out
of their Fits; when as neither the Odors nor those things from whence the Odors
exhale, reach either the Spleen or the Heart, but only the most subtle Vapors
make their Passage through the Pores. And moreover it is wonderful to think how
soon the thin Particles of the Nourishment, which require but little Digestion,
pierce through the milky Vessels to the Vein Subclavia, and the Heart. I have
given to Dogs, emptied with long Fasting, liquid Nourishment of easy
Digestion, and within three quarters of an Hour after having dissected 'em, I
found in that short space of time a watery Chyle, very plentiful in all the
lacteous or milky Vessels, carried from the Ventricle and the Intestines, though
the Food seemed to be all entire in the Stomach. The History cited out of
Fernelius seems not to be very rightly quoted. For I do not remember that ever
Fernelius wrote any thing of Obstruction of the Pylore. Indeed in his L. 6.
Patholog. c. 1. he relates a Story of a Woman with Child, that had a hard
swelling in her Stomach, so that no Nourishment could descend into her Stomach,
but presently upon touching that Orifice they returned toward the Throat
again, which Woman in two Months time, with all the Art and Endeavors that
were used, could get nothing into her Stomach. But what is this Story to the
Proof of the Opinion forementioned? He tells us the Nourishment could not
descend into the Stomach, therefore no Chyle could there be made out of it;
neither could the Chyle flow from the Stomach to the Spleen. The Story of
Philip Salmuth Cent. 1. Obs. 20. might have bin cited and objected much more to
the Purpose, of a certain Person who was troubled with continual Vomiting, and
was forced to throw back all the Meat he swallowed, by reason the Passage was
stopped by a Scirrhous or hard Swelling at the Mouth of the Pylore, as was
found after he was dead. Another Story like this is recorded by Benivenius
observat. 36. and another by Riverius cent. 1. Obser. 60. and another by
Schenkius exerc. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 33. not unlike the Story which Io. Vander
Mere related to me of an Accident seen as well by himself as by several of the
Physicions in Delph, of a certain Woman that for half a Year lay very ill at
Delf, and vomited up all the Meat she eat after some few Hours, the first well
concocted, the next loathsome and smelling very badly: After which her
Evacuations by Stool began to cease by degrees; so that for the first Week she
did not go to Stool above twice or thrice, then once a week, and then hardly
once in a Month, which brought her to nothing but Skin and Bone, till at length
she died: In whose Body, being opened, was found a Pylore all Cartilaginous,
with an Orifice so small, that it would only give Passage to a little Needle.
But seeing it appears by these Histories, that the Pylore can never be suddenly
nor long so straightened, but by degrees, so the passage of the Chylus is
obstructed by degrees, from whence it comes to pass, that for want of
sufficient Nourishment, the strength is wasted insensibly, and the Body
emaciated by degrees: Seeing also that by their going to stool, though it were
but very seldom, and for that the Pylore would admit the passage of a little
Needle, that it would not admit a greater Body, it appeared that the Pylore in
those Persons was not totally obstructed, or if it were wholly closed up, yet
that they did not live long by reason of that Obstruction, but died in a short
time, it cannot thence be proved that the Chylus passes from thence to the
Spleen. For if this were true, the Patients strength would not have failed so
soon through the Obstruction of the Pylore, nor have yielded so easy an Access
to Death.

LXXI. Bernard Swalve considering Whether the Chylus enters the Gastric Veins.
these Difficulties, Lib. de Querel* and Approb. Ventric. p. 63, 64. dares not
assert that Refreshment is occasioned by the Chylus coming a shorter way than
through the Intestins, but writes that supposing a case of necessity, the
little Orifices of the Gastric Veins in the Tunicles of the Ventricle gape a
little, and that into them, it is not the Chylus, which is too thick, but a
more Liquid Juice is speedily infused presently, to be intermixed with the
Blood flowing back to the Heart. But according to this Assertion Swalve seems
to offer a most cruel Violence to the Gastric Veins, and to force 'em to
confirm his Speculation, as if by agreement he would, at his own pleasure shut
'em up, but upon this Condition, that they should not gape, but in a time of
necessity, or being open, should not empty their Blood into the Cavity of the
Ventricle (which otherwise might easily happen, and so occasion Vomiting of
Blood,) and that they should not take the Chylus it self, but only sup up a
Liquid Humor out of the Stomach, and so carry it in a hurry to the Heart.

LXXII. The use of the Chylus is ^he use of (...) Chylus. A second ^igression.
Whether a^ parts are (...) by the Chylus.
to breed good Blood out of it: But whether any parts are nourished at the
first hand by the Chylus, before it be changed into Blood, is a Controversy.

This Galen most plainly writes concerning the Ventricle, l. 3. de Natural.
Facult. c. 6. in these words* Moreover this is the end (that is of the
Concoction of the Stomach) that so much as is apt and agreeing in Quality,
should take some part to its self. And therefore that which is the best in the
nourishment, that it draws to it self in the nature of a Vapor, and by
degrees, stores up in its Tunicles, and fixes it to 'em. When it is fully
satisfied, whatever of Nourishment remains, that it throws off as burdensome.
The same thing he also asserts, c. 12, 13. of the same Book. Vallesius confirms
this Opinion of Galen by many Arguments, Controvers. Med. and Philos. l. 1. c.
14. That the Ventricle is nourished by the Chylus, the shape of its Substance,
and these Reasons over and above, te^us. If the Ventricle were not nourish*d by
the Chylus, neither would it digest the Food. For why does it generate the
Chylus? Is it not to send it to the Liver? Therefore it is the Care of the
Ventricle to nourish the Liver; and therefore it is not guided by Nature, but
by Intellect. For those things that operate by Nature, are never concerned with
the care of other things. Moreover, either the Ventricle retains some part of
the Chylus, and sends some part to the Liver, or it retains nothing at all of
it. If it retained nothing, it would presently covet more, since only
Nourishment seems to be that which can protect it from Hunger; and therefore
the Blood alone is not proper to nourish the Members. Endi^s Parisanus is also
of the same Opinion with Galen, l. 5. Subtle. Exercit. 3. c. 2. as likewise
Hen* Regius Medic. l. 1. c. 4. neither do Peramatus and Montaltus differ from
the rest. Aristotle contradicts Galen, who shows by many Reasons, l. 2. de
part. Animal. c. ^* that the Blood is the last Aliment, and that all the Parts
are immediately ^ourish'd by that, and not by the Chylus. Plempius l. 2. Fund.
Med. c. 8. though he thinks that both Pa^ts may be easily maintained by reason of
the weakness of the Arguments; nevertheless he asserts with Aristotle, That the
Ventricle, and all the Parts, are at first hand nourished with the Blood, and
supports this Opinion by many Arguments. Of the same Opinion is Bernard Swalve
in querel. and Opprob. Ventric. we are also inclined to approve the Opinion of
Aristotle, That the Blood is the last Nourishment* But I would have this added,
That the Chylus contributes a certain Irrigation necessary* to moisten the
Stomach and Milkie Vessels, without which they could not continue sound, though
they may be nourished by the Blood. In the same manner, as many Herbs being
exposed to the heat of the Sun* though they receive sufficient Nourishment from
the Earth, yet languish and wither, unless they be often watered; the moisture
of the Water contributing new vigor to 'em; as loosning again the Particles
too much dried and contracted by the heat of the Sun, and by that means giving
a freer ingress to the Nourishment. In like manner the Tunicles of the
Ventricle and Milkie Vessels, unless moysten'd by the Chylus, would grow too
dry, and so the Pores of the Substance being contracted, would not so readily
admit the nutritive Blood flowing into 'em, and for that reason would be much
weakened, and at length quite fa^l in their Office. Which is the reason that by
long fasting the Milkie Vessels are many times so dried up, that they can never
be opened again, which afterward obstructing the Distribution of the Chylus,
causes an Atro^hie that consumes the Patient. But when there is a defect of
that moisture in the Brain, then the troublesome contraction of its Tunicles
causes Thirst, and the Vellication occasioned by the fermentaceous Juice that
sticks to 'em, begets Hunger, neither of which a new Chylus pacifies by its
Nutrition, but the Humid Moistures swallowed produce that effect, and the
Chylus extracted out of those by their moist'ning, by which the contraction of
the Tunicles is released; and the Acrimony of the Juice yet twitches, is
tempered and mitigated. And that this is done only by Humectation, is mani^est
from hence; for that all moist'ning things, as Ale, Water, Ptisan, and the
like, being plentifully drank, presently allay and abate the thirst and hunger
for the time.

LXXIII. But what shall we say of the Child in the Womb, which seems to be
nourished by the Milkie Juice alone of the Amnion or Membrane that enfolds the
Birth, at what time there is no Blood that flows as yet through the Navel
Vessels? To which I answer, That the Birth is nourished by the thicker
Particles of the Seed remaining after the forming of the Body of the said Seed,
first partly changed into Blood in the Beating Bladder, or Bubble; partly
closed together by Proximity and some kind of Concoction: not that it is
nourished by the Chylus or any Milkie Juice of the Amnion Membrane: but then
the remaining Particles of the Seed being consumed, then it is nourished by
Blood made of the Lacteous Liquor of the Amnium. By which nevertheless it could
not be nourished, were it destitute of that Moisture with which it is watered
by the Lacteous Liquor. See more of this c. 29. of this Book.

LXXIV. If any one shall acknowledge, That the Stomach, which because it is
manifestly furnished with several Veins and Arteries, is therefore nourished
with Blood, but deny that the Milkie Vessels were to be nourished with it, when
they receive into 'em no Blood conveighing Arteries. I answer, That there are
innumerable Parts in our Body, wherein the Arteries are not to be discerned,
though it be certain they enter into those Parts. And to which we can perceive no
way through which the Blood should be conveyed; which Parts nevertheless are
nourished by the Blood, and not by the Chyl^s. Of which sort are the Corneo^s
Tuni ^e, the U^eters, the Membrane of the Tympanum or Drum of the Ear, sundry
Ligaments and Bones, ma^y Gristles, etc In which number the Milkie and
Lymphatic Vessels may be reckoned. For though Entrance of the Blood into 'em be
not so perceptible, yet can it not be thence concluded, that the Blood does not
find a way into those Vessels, when in many other Parts the Entrance of the
Blood is not discernable, and yet their being nourished proves the Access and
Entrance of the Blood.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Guts.
I. FRom the right Orifice of the Ventricle, call*d the Pylore, the Guts are
continued; by the Greeks (...), because they are placed within the Body; and
henco by the Latins called also Interanea.

II. They are Oblong Bodies, Membranous, The (...).
Concave, Round, variously wreathed about, reaching from the Ventricle to the
Podex, serving to receive the Chylus, and to contain and Whether they d^ (...)
(...) to the r^king the Chyle.
make way for the Excrements. I say for receiving the Chyle, etc. But it is a
thing much controverted, whether they do not also contribute to the making the
Chyle. For this seems to have been the Opinion of Galen, who l. 4. de us^ part.
has these words; The Guts, though they were not framed for the Concoction of
the Chylus, but only to contain and distribute it, yet because Nature is
sometimes slothful and idle, in its passage through the Guts, it comes to be
perfectly elaborated. Aretaeus and Aretius follow the Opinion of Galen, and
among the more modern Authors Spigelius; and the very Similitude of the
Structure of the Ventricle, the Guts seem to make for him; as well in the
Substance, Temper, Color, and Contexture of the Tunicles. And Plempius, swayed
by these Authorities, l. 2. Fund. Med. c. 8. assumes the Affirmative; and
affirms that the same Concoction which is performed in the Stomach, may be
performed in the Guts (which Regius also inculcates) and hence concludes, the
Clysters made of Liquid Nourishments, given at the Fundament, may nourish, in
regard there is a thick Chylus concocted out of 'em in the Guts, and carried
away through the Milkie Vessels, and so communicated to the whole Body. But we
rather approve the Negative; for that seeing all manner of Crudity proceeds
from a cold and moist Distemper of the Stomach, (as in a Lientery) the Meat is
evacuated without any alteration, or without any manner of Concoction, which
however, were there any chylifying virtue in the Guts running a long way
through their crooked Windings and Meanders, would at least gain some kind of
Alteration into a Chylus. Moreover, the Choler flows continually together with
the Sweetbread Juice into the Guts, and in them indeed ferments the concocted
Nourishment, but by the virtue of that peculiar Effervescency, and its
Bitterness, it rather hinders than promotes chylific Concoction, as is apparent
when it sticks in too great quantity to the Stomach. And then who can believe,
that Clysters mixed with the Excrement in the thick Gut, can be changed into a
Chylus, and consequently nourish the Body. The stinking Place, and the feculent
Ordure therein intermixed, plainly teach us, that there can be no alteration
into Chyle made there. Perchance they may so far repair the strength of the
Body, as some more subtle and benign Vapors may ascend through the Pores and
Vessels to some superior Bowels, and somewhat refresh 'em, in the same manner
as the Odor of Wine, hot Bread, Honey, Aqua vitae, and roast Meat, received
thorough the Nostrils, refresh the fainting Spirits, though they be not turned
into a Chylus.

III. The length of the Guts exceeds The length.
or equals the length of the Person whose they are, six times more, or less,
(others who also measure in the Stomach and Gullet, say seven times, or
somewhat less.) Hippocrates stretches 'em out to twelve or thirteen Cubits.
Vesalius to fourteen Italian Else and a half. We commonly measure 'em at
fourteen of our Dutch Else, or very near. Only in the Year 1668. in November,
once at a Public Dissection we found the Guts of one Person to be sixteen Else
and a half; and hence, that they might lie in a little room, placed in the
Abdomen with several windings and crooked Circumvolutions, and joined to the
Mesentery, by means of which they were tied to the Back, and sustained by the
Cavities, the Os Ilium.

IV. There was a necessity for such a The reason of the length.
length and circumvolution, that the concocted Nourishment falling down from
the Stomach, might stay the longer in the Guts, be more conveniently fermented
by the mixture of the yellow Choler, and the Pancreatic Juice, and by that
means the more subtle Parts of the Chyle being separated from the thicker Mass,
might with more ease be thrust forward into the narrow Orifices of the Milkie
Vessels, partly by the proper Peristaltic Motion of the Entrals, partly, and
that chiefly, by the impulse of the Muscles of the Abdomen, moved by the force
of Respiration: And to that end, because the Separation ought to be made in the
small Guts, Nature leads about, and forces the thinner Substances through
several windings and turnings as through so many Stops and Remora's, whereas
she carries the thicker Substances thorough a Circular and Oblique Passage
only. Moreover, she has formed certain little Folding-doors to open and shut,
which hinder the over rapid course of those things that flow downward. For had
the Chylus flowed down through the short Guts, either before a due and
convenient Fermentation, or could pass from 'em, whereby the Body had been
deceived of its due and convenient. Nourishment, she had constrained Man to eat
often for the support of himself, and to supply that defect by continual
filling. Of this Cabrolius and Riolan^s give us several Examples, that is to
say of Men most voracious, in whom, after their decease, one Gut has been
found, and that wonderfully short, in the shape of a great Roman S. Add to
this, that the Excrements had flowed down much more speedily, and had thereby
exposed Man to the more frequent duty of Evacuation.

V. Their Circumference is round, Their Circumference
to the end they may be more capacious, and for the more easy descent of those
things that pass through 'em.

VI. Their Substance is Membranous, Their Substance and Tunicles.
like the Stomach, having also a triple Tunicle. The Exterior common, and
overcast with Fat, arising from the Membranes of the Mesentery, springing from
the Peritonaeum. The Middlemost fleshy; interwoven with several thinner Fibers,
especially the transverse and straight Fibers. The Innermost nervous, which in
the slender Guts is wrinkl'd, to stop the Chylus, and overspread with a kind of
fleshy spongy Crust, but very thin, (which some call the Peristoma, others the
Silken Covering, others the Woolly Moss) through which Fallopius believes the
Chylus to be transmitted and strained, as it were, through a Sponge; and to
prevent the Injuries of the sharp Humors, and for the better defense slippery,
by reason of a slimy Clamminess, generated cut of the Excrements of the third
Concoction; but in the thicker Guts dilated into little Cells. Riolanus l. 2.
Anthrop. c. 12. writes; though without any ground, that the Carneous and Fleshy
Tunicle, which is the middlemost in the Stomach, is the innermost in the Guts,
and that the innermost is thick, but however more nervous, and not much
different from the inner Tunicle of the Ventricle.

VII. Now in regard the Guts are Whether they have an attractive force.
furnished with Fibers of all sorts; the Question is, Whether they have an
attractive Force, by which they may draw the Chylus out of the Ventricle. Many
maintain the Affirmative, induced thereto by the Authority of Avicen, and many
other Arguments; but erroneously; seeing there is in 'em no such attractive
Force. In like manner there is also another Question started concerning their
Retentive Faculty. Both Questions are learnedly and at large discussed by
Andrew Laurence l. 6. Anat. c. 15. Quaest. 10, 11.

VIII. They draw their Nerves from Nerves and Arteries.
the sixth Pair; their Arteries from the Mesenteric Branch, both upper and
lower, and some from the Intestinal Branch of the Coeliac Artery.

IX. Innumerable Roots of small Veins.
Veins dispersed between their Tunicles, meeting together about the knitting of
the Mesentery, form many Veins, from the Ingress of the Mesentery, which they
ascend together, called the Mesaraics; which at the upper part of the
Mesentery, a little before its Ingress into the Vena Porta, close together into
two greater Branches, and so constitute the right and left Mesaraic Vein.

X. Into these Vessels are ingrafted The Milly Vessels.
the Mesenteric Milkie Vessels, gaping with their Orifices toward the inner
Guts, and receiving the Chyle from 'em, and conveighing it to the Grand
Receptacle of the Chyle.

XI. The Temperament of the Guts Temperament.
is said to be cold and dry; that is to say, speaking comparatively, as they
are less hot and dry than many other Parts.

XII. The Use of the Guts appears Their (...).
by what has been said already, not only to receive the Nourishment concocted
in the Stomach, but also that a Separation may be made there in them, of what
is useful, from what is unprofitable; and from them to send what is profitable
into the Milkie Vessels, and exonerate what is unprofitable at the Fundament.

XIII. Now the act of Propulsion Their Motion.
and Expulsion, is performed by the Compressure of the Muscles of the Abdomen,
which is very much assisted by the proper Motion of the small Guts, proceeding
from the Contraction of the Fibers, resting in their proper Tunicles, which is
very conspicuous in living Cats and Coneys dissected. And it is most certain,
that this Motion of the Fibers is performed by the Oblique, but chiefly by the
Transverse Fibers, and by them the Things contained are thrust down from the
upper Parts to the lower. Which Motion, if it happen to be irregular, which
rarely happens, and that the Fibers by their Contraction move the things
contained in the Guts, beginning from the lower Parts to the superior, then
the Ordure carried up from the thick Intestines, ascends into the Stomach, and
is thence vomited out at the Mouth. Thus I remember I handled An Observation.
a young Lad that lay sick at Nimmeghen, who, besides many other nasty 1.
things, vomited up a Suppository that was given him at the Fundament. And here
at Utrecht, in the Year 1658. in 2.
April, I had prescribed a Clyster to the most prudent and grave Consul Wede,
who then lay very ill, which being injected at the Fundament, in a little time
he vomited up again, from which extravagant Motion I concluded a Prognostic of
Death, which ensued some few hours after.

XIV. Though there be but one Gut The Division.
from the Pylore to the Fundament, yet in regard of the thickness of the
Substance, the Magnitude, Shape, and variety of Function, it is distinguished
by Anatomists, into the thin or slender Guts, and into the thick.

XV. The thin or small Gut, so called The thin Gut.
from the thinness of its Substance, possesses all the Navel-Region, and the
Hypogastrium. And this, according to the shape, situation, length, and plenty
of Lacteous Vessels, is by the Ancients said to be threefold. The Duodenum,
Iejunum, and Ilium.

XVI. The first is continuous to the The Duodenum.
Pylore, by Galen called (...), the springing, or proceedings forth: by the
ancient Greeks, and Hierophylus, (...), and thence commonly by the Latins
called Duodenum, from the measure of two Transverse Fingers; though most Modern
Anatomists will hardly allow it the measure of four Fingers. But if you reckon
from the Pylorus to the Inflexion of the Iejunum, where it rises upward
athwart, lying under the Sweetbread, then it will be found to be twelve Fingers
in length.

XVII. This Duodenum contiguous The Substance.
to the Pylore upon the right side, nor wreathed with Circumvolutions, though it
be narrower than the rest of the Guts, yet is of a thicker Substance than all
the rest of the small or thin Guts, and is bored thorough, about the breadth of
four or five Fingers from the Pylore (but seldom about the middle of the
Jejunum, though Plempius says he has seen it) in the wrinkle of its Flexure,
where sticks out a little Teat, sometimes with one hole common to the
Cholidochus; and that other found out by Wirtzungius, sometimes perforated with
two several holes proper to both Channels. Which holes, if they be two, the one
transmits into the Duct^m (...), the other into the (...). But if there be b^t
one Chanel at the Ingress, (which is frequent in Men, very seldom in Dogs) then
the Point thrust into that Gut toward the upper Parts, enters the Ductus
Biliartus; if toward the lower Parts, it enters the Ductus Pancreaticus.
Veslingius reports, and daily Dissections teach us, that this Gut is found to
be of an extraordinary laxity and largeness, and then seems to be joined as a
lesser Ventricle to the larger Ventricle. Which Laxity happens from the sharp
fermentaceous and vitlous Humors sliding into it; which occasions vehement
fermentaceous Ebullitions, by which the Gut is not only very much distended,
but often times filled with troublesome Rumblings, great Pains, sharp
Prickings, and extraordinary Anguish which thence arise.

XVIII. It begins, as has been said, Situation.
from the Pylore, and by and by going down backwards under the Ventricle, it is
reflex'd toward the right Kidney, and adhering to the broader end of the
Pancreas or Sweetbread, is fastened to the Vertebers of the Loins and the left
Kidney by membranous Ligaments, and then extending it self downward to the
beginning of its windings, ends under the Colon*

XIX. The second is called by the The Jejunum.
Greeks (...), by the Latins Jejunum, because it is found empty for the most
part, as well for the great quantity of the Milkie Vessels that enter into it,
as also because of the more speedy Ebullition of the Chylus, by reason of the
Choler and Pancreatick Juice flowing at first hand through its proper Channels,
or its separation from the Dregs, and passage into the Milkie Vessels.

XX. It is in length about twelve or Situation and bigness
thirteen Palms, and about a Fingers breadth wrinkled with many windings; and
seated under the Pancreas, near the Backbone, in the Region of the Navel,
chiefly toward the left side, beginning from the first Circumvolution of the
Intestines, and ending where it ceases to look black and bluish, and to be
empty. Theodore Kerckringius Observe. 39. takes notice in this Gut of some
little Valves or Folding-doors, as it were, for that they do not so shut up the
Gut, as to fill up all its Cavity: But about the middle of its Cavity so shut
it up, that being each of 'em broader at one end than another, they grow
narrower by degrees, and then a little lower are received by another, which
being broader in that part where the other is narrower, so frame and constitute
the Gut, that those things which fall down from the upper Parts may slip down,
but not be precipitated as it were at one fall. The same Kerckringius was the
first also that discovered and observed Valves or little Trap-doors like to
these in the Colon Gut, which he has plainly shown me in a thick and blown Gut,
and then dried, which is the best way to discern 'em most perspicuously. And
therefore he deservedly merits the Applause of this first Invention, seeing
that never any Person before ever made mention of these Fol^ing Docrs or
Valves, that I know of.

XXI. The third proceeding from The Ilium Gut.
the forementioned, is called Ilium, by the Greeks (...), from its being
twisted and twirl'd; and Volvulus by the Latins, by reason of its
Circumvolution, and the multitude of its Twistings.

XXII. This being seated under the Situation and bigness.
Navel, next the Lateral Parts of the Abdomen and the Ribs, equals the breadth
of a transverse Finger; and in length exceeding the other two Measures one or
two and twenty Palms.

XXIII. The Original of it is where the Intestine begins to grow narrower, and
being somewhat ruddy, ends at Bauhinus's Valve, where the Colon begins.

XXIV. That which follows is called The thick Guts.
Intestinum Crassum, the thick Gut, as being of a more fleshy and thick
Substance; and that is also divided into three Parts, the Blind, the Colon, and
Intestinum Rectum, or the Right Gut.

XXV. The first is that which the The blind Gut.
Greeks call (...), the Latins Caecum, so called from its obscure use; or else
because it is not passible or penetrable at the other end; whence it is also
called (...), Mesocolon. And therefore it is a small Appendix, like a long
Worm, sticking to the beginning of the Colon, in length about four Fingers
transverse, having a small Cavity in People grown up altogether empty, but in
the Birth full of Excrements. Spigelius has sometimes found a round Worm within
it. In fourfooted Beasts it contains some Excrements for the most part.

XXVI. It is not fastened to the Connection.
Mesentery, but by the help of the Peritonaeum is joined to the Right Kidney.

XXVII. The Use of this Gut was The Use.
unknown till of late; though some there were that attributed to it this Use,
others that, though all were but vain conjectures, with which they thought
fitting rather to expose, than confess their own Ignorance.

XXVIII. The second of the thick Guts is called Colon, as much as to say (...),
or hollow, as being the most hollow of all the Guts; or as others will have it,
from (...) to hinder, because the Excrements are Stops in its little Cells.
This is larger and broader than the rest, as being eight or nine Palms in
length.

XXIX. It begins about the Os Situatir.
Ilium, knitting it self to the next Kidney; hence it ascends upward, and then
being turned toward the Liver, it proceeds athwart under the bottom of the
Stomach, to which, by the help of the Caul, it is joined, and on the left Hand
is joined to the Spleen and left Kidney with thin Membranes, and then winding
about the left Os Ilium, weaves to the beginning of the Intestinum Rectum.

It possesses the upper Part of the Belly. 1. To the end the Excrements that
are gathered within it, may be rolled down by their Weight, and so the more
easily exonerated. 2. To assist in some measure the Concoction of the Stomach
by the heat of the Excrements; in regard the Chemists believe no Digestion to
be so natural as that which is perfected by the heat of Dung. 3. Secondly, to
prevent the middle Mesentery from being compressed by the weight of the
Excrements: Which would very much straiten the milkie and Lymphatic Vessels,
and Mesaraic Veins and Arteries.

XXX. It has a proper Ligament, Its Ligament.
about the breadth of the middle Finger, according to its length extended at
the upper Part from the Caecum to the Intestinum Rectum, wherein the Row of
little Cells is contained.

XXXI. It is tied to the upper and Connection.
lower Parts by the Assistance of the Peritonaeum. Veslingius ascribes to it
two peculiar suspensorie Ligaments that never appear. But the Extremity of it,
which below the left Kidney extends it self to the beginning of the Intestinam
Rectum, is tied to no part, but remains free from any manner of Band, and is
overspread with a good quantity of Fat.

XXXII. At the Ingress of the thin Bauhinus's Valves.
Gut, it has an orbicular Valve, or little solding Door, looking upwards, which
prevents the Ascension of the Excrements and Vapors, which from the first
Finder, is now called Bauhinus's Valve, though others rather ascribe the first
Discovery to Varolius, and Solomon Albertus: But Riolanus raises a bitter
Contest concerning it.

XXXIII. Anatomists do not agree in the Description of this Valve. 1. Some say,
that it is a Membrane sticking to the Gut on one side, and drawing before it a
Curtain. 2. Others say, it consists of two Membranes opposite one to another,
placed toward the inner Parts of the Colon, which closing together, shut up the
thin Gut. 3. Others believe there is no true Valve in that place, but a fleshy
Circle, wrapped over the thin Gut, where it enters the thick one, and contracting
it like the sphincter Muscle. 4. We our selves formerly, as has bin said in the
Preliminaries, could not think it to be any other than a loose circular
Membrane, or some little Lappet of the Ilium Gut, where it enters the Colon:
Which when any thing ascends out of the Ilium into the Colon, gives way and
opens: But when the quagmiry Excrements or Vapors descend from the Colon to the
Ilium, falls and folds down, and so by obstructing the way, hinders the passage
toward the thin Guts; in the same manner as in the little long Gutters of
Leather hanging out at the sides of Ships, through which the Water that falls
upon* the Decks, readily flows out again. But though the Waves dash upon those;
Gutters, yet because they do not mix with the Water, therefore the Water coming
not into them, does not flow back. Now that we might be assured in this our
last Opinion, I thought it convenient to fish out the Truth a little farther by
some Experiment. And therefore having taken the Colon out of a Body, with a
part of the Ilium, and tied it at both ends with a Pack thread, and blew into
it with a strong Breath, through a small Pipe, and kept the Wind within with a
small Thread, and then dried the Gut, so distended, in the Air, till it became
hard: And then we could clearly discern, not only those half opening Valves of
the Colon sound out by Kerckringius, but we also observed the aforesaid Valve
of Bauhinus, to be a Membrane spread athwart over the Ingress of the thin Gut,
and hanging somewhat over toward the inner Parts of the Colon, and bo^'d
through in the middle from one side to the other with a right or straight Hole,
as if slit with a Penknife. And so we observed also, that the Lips of both
those Openings closing, the Ingress of the Ilium into the Colon was so guarded
by these Valves that nothing could fly back again* And by this View we found,
that of the foresaid four Opinions, the second was the most probable, but that
the first, third, and fourth, which was our own, was a Deviation from the
Truth. Only that the third rightly and truly asserts, that there is a certain
fleshy Circle which laps the Ingress of the Ilium into the Colon.

XXXIV. In this Colon, the The Use.
thicker sort of Excrements are gathered together, and contained till the time
of Exoneration, whereas it would be a great Shame and Trouble to have his
Excrements continually dropping from him. For which reason it is very large and
capacious, and has little closing Valves, to stop and retard the Excrements.
And by reason it encompasses almost the whole Abdomen, sometimes ascending,
sometimes descending, hence it happens that the Dregs and Excrements to be
expelled, pass down more slowly, requiring two or three times of compressing it
self for their Expulsion.

XXXV. The third and last of the The Intestinum Rectum*
thick Guts, is the Intestinum Rectum, which descending in a straight Line into
the hollow of the Hips, ends in the Fundament. Called by the Greeks (...),
because it runs on without any Excrescencies or Windings; also (...), because
it is the Beginning; or (...), because it constrains us as it were by a kind of
Command, to quit our selves of the Burden that oppresses us.

XXXVI. It is far inferior to the The Bigness.
Colon in Length and Br^dth, as not being above one Palm and a half in Length,
and about three Fingers broad; but in Thickness and Carnosity exceeds all the
Guts: Being outwardly covered with fat Appurtenances.

XXXVII. It is tied to the Os Sacrum; Connection.
and Coccyx, by means of the Peritonaeum, and in Men is fastened to the Root of
the Penis, in Women to the Womb by a musculous Substance, whence springs the
great Consent of these Parts.

XXXVIII. The End of it is the The Fundament.
Fundament, called Anus, and Podex, which has three Muscles: The First, which
is called Sphincter, and is fastened to the lowest Parts of the Os Sacrum,
embraces and purses up the Fundament orbicularly, to keep in the Excrements. To
this, there are some who add another, but of a thinner Substance for the same
Use, inseparably joined to the former, and as it were riveted into the Skin, at
the Extremity of the Fundament. But this the greatest part of Anatomists
confound with the first, and make but one of both. The other two are called
Levatores, or Fundament-Lifters, which rising from the Ligaments of the
Coxendix, and Os Sacrum, descend distinct to the Sphincter, and intermix their
Insertions with it, to the end they may draw the Fundament back again, brought
down by the Force of straining, in Evacuation. Though Riolanus derives their
Original from the Bones themselves, yet he divides 'em erroneously into four
Muscles, whereas such a Division cannot be made without Dilaceration, as de
Marchettis well observes, Anat. c. 3. These Muscles being loosened by any
Accident, cause a falling of the Fundament, or rather a sinking down of the Gut.

XXXIX. Into the Fundament are Haemorrhoid Veins.
ingrafted the Roots of the Haemorrhoid Veins, which are two fold. Of which,
the Internal ascending sometimes to the Right, sometimes to the Left Mesenteric
Veins, and sometimes to the Splenic Branch, empty their Blood into the Vena
Porta; but the External enter into the Hypogastric Branch.

XL. Arteries accompany the Veins, Arteries.
proceeding partly from the lower Mesenteric Branch, and partly from the
Hypogastric Artery.

XLI. To these, three or four little Nerves.
Veins join themselves, derived from the extreme parts of the pith of the Back,
which make this Gut very sensible, and infuse Spirits into the Muscles to
enable their Contraction.

CHAP. IX. Of the Mesenterie.
I. THE Mesenterie, or (...), is so called from its Situation, as being placed
in the middle of the Bowels.

II. It is a membranous Part seated Situati^ and use.
in the middle of the lower Belly; destined not only to bring the Vessels safe
to the Intestins, and carry 'em back again, but also to be a common Band of all
the Guts themselves, lest their manifest Windings and Turnings should be
confounded and intangl'd to the manifest hazard of Life and Health.

III. Which though it be but one, is The Division.
divided by some into the Mesaraeum, or Mesenterie, and the Mesocolon, while
the thin Guts stick to the first, the thick Guts to the latter.

IV. It consists of a double strong Membranes.
Membrane, continuous to the Peritonaeum, and every where stuffed with Fat.
Besides which, Wharton writes Adenograph. c. 7. That he has found out and
demonstrated a Third Middlemost and proper to it, somewhat thinner than the
former, and propping up the Vessels and Kernels within it.

V. From the Center to the Circumference Bigness ^ Shape.
it is about the bigness of a Span. But the Shape of it is Circular, whose
Circumference is contracted into innumerable Folds, to streighten the length
and widness of the Guts, and to contain their proper Situation and Order. In
the Middle it is large, Oblong in the Sides, especially on the left Side, where
it descends to the right Gut. But it is of an extraordinary thickness in fat
People, the bulk of Fat being largely augmented: In others it is much more thin.

VI. It rises about the uppermost ^ts Rise.
and third Vertebra of the Loins, to which it is tied with a very firm
Connection. Fallopius believes it to derive its Original at the Nervous Plexare,
or Knitting, from whence it takes its Beginning; of which more c. 18. and l. 3.
c. 8.

VII. It has several very small and Its Kernels.
soft Glandules, inserted among the Membranes; and in the middle, one great
one, all which it is most certain do manifestly conduce to the attenuation and
greater Perfection of the Chylus. And of these Glandules there is great
Difference found in the number, not only in several sorts of Animals, but in
many Individuals of the same Species: However this is observed in Man, where
they are sewer in number, their bigness compensates that Defect. Now that they
conduce to the Attenuation and perfecting the Chylus hence appears, for that
innumerable milkie Vessels run through 'em (after what manner is to be seen
Cap. 11.) and pour the Chylus into 'em, to imbibe in it something of a slight
subacid Quality, for its greater Perfection; which Vessels proceeding from 'em,
meet together at length in the middlemost great Glandule, and thence in a
direct and short Channel are carried to the Receptacle of the Chylus, into
which they empty their milkie Juice. This Glandule Fallopius and Asellus
erroneously call the Pancreas or Sweetbread, and many at this day, the Pancreas
Mesenterii; but very far different from the real Pancreas seated under the
Stomach.

VIII. This both Experience and The use of the Kernels.
our own Eyes do teach us. For if these Glandules come to be obstructed by any
Accident, or that the Liquor bred in 'em (concerning which see something in the
preceding Chapter, and l. 2. c. 2.) and which is to be of necessity, mixed with
the milkie Juice, has by any accident acquired an over acid Sharpness, then the
milkie Juice within 'em becomes coagulated in the Form of a Cheese, and by
reason of its abundant Overflowing swells very much: By which means the Passage
is obstructed to the Chylus that comes next, whence such People as are troubled
with this Distempet (by reason of the Distribution of the Chylus is obstructed)
are troubled with the Coeliac Flux, and gripped with Pains in the Belly, and by
reason of Passage denied to the Nourishment, labor under an Atrophie, and by
degrees are wasted to death. Of which I have already given three Examples.

IX. The first was of a Scotch Soldier, Observe. (...)*
who during his stay in India, and a long tedious Voyage upon his return,
having fed upon unwholesom Diet all the while, fell into a languishing
Sickness, and laboring under a Coeliac Flux with Gripings of the Guts, though
his Appetite was still indifferent good, was brought to our Hospital, where
after he had lain three or four Months, and that all this had been tried in
vain to cure his Coeliac Flux, at length he died as lean as a Rake. The Body
being opened, first there was to be seen an overgrowing Spleen hard and black;
a Pancreas extremely swelled, hard and of an Ash Color; we also found the
innumerable Glandules in the Mesenterie (which in some Persons are hardly
discernable) to be very tumid, and somewhat hard, insomuch that some were as
big as a Bean, but most of 'em as big as a Filberd, and some few as big as a
Nutmeg. But when they came to be dissected, there was nothing in 'em, but a
certain white Cream coagulated into a milkie Substance.

X. The second Example was of a Observe. (...)*
poor Girl of about eleven Years of Age, who dying of such a Flux of the Belly,
accompanied with rumbling and Pain in the Belly, was reduced to nothing but
Skin and Bone. I opened her Body in November 1656. at the request of her
Parents, who believed her to have been bewitched and killed by diabolical Arts,
and by the murmuring and hissing in her Guts, believed Snakes, Toads, and other
Creatures to have bin bred in her Bowels. But when she came to be opened, we
found, as in the former innumerable Glandules of the Mesenterie, very tumid and
somewhat hard, of which many were as big as a Filbert, and some somewhat
bigger. Their outward Color in some was white, in others speckled like black
and white Marble: But within fide, as well in these as in all the rest, was
contained a very white milkie Juice, curdl'd into the form of a Cheese. The
Spleen and Pancreas somewhat exceeded their due Proportion.

XI. The third Example was of a Observe. 3.
noble Danish Child, called Nicholas Retz, between seven and eight Years of
Age, who having lain under a great Atrophie for several Months, accompanied
with griping in the Guts, at length reduced to Skin and Bone, died in June
1662. Whereupon being desired by his Friends and others, who had the Care of
him, to examine the cause of the Child's Death for the Satisfaction of his
Parents, I opened the Body in the Presence of several Spectators; and there I
showed the Liver, Spleen, Heart, Lungs, Kidneys, Ventricle, and Guts, all in
good Order and well Condition: Only the Pancreas was somewhat swelled and ill
colored: But in the Mesenterie appeared the certain Cause of his Death: For
that the innumerable Glandules of the Mesenterie, were swelled to such a
wonderful degree, with an extraordinary hardness, some as big as a Filberd,
others somewhat bigger, and many as big as a Bean: They were all of a white
Color, and contained in 'em a white Cream coagulated to the hardness of a
dryer sort of Cheese, which hindering the Passage of the succeding Chylus, was
the cause of the Atrophie, and consequently of the Death of the Child that
ensued.

XII. From whence it is sufficiently apparent that the Coeliac Flux, and
Atrophie, is occasioned by the Obstruction of those Glandules or Kernels. Nor
is that their Use, which Anatomists commonly ascribe to 'em, that is to say to
prop the Veins and Arteries carried through the Mesenterie, but in them, as in
all Glandules, there is something of a particular fermentaceous Liquor bred, to
be mixed with the milkie Chylus; and for that Reason they become serviceable to
the milkie Vessels (not the Sanguiferous) and hence by reason of their
Obstruction, or something else amiss (such as is occasioned by a vicious
Ferment mingled with the Duodenum) many times the Membranes of the Mesenterium
are stuffed with a world of ill Humors, the occasion of languishing Fevers, and
several obstinate and diuturnal Distempers.

XIII. Riolanus has conceived a The Opinion of Riolanus.
strange Opinion of these Glandules, Anthropog c. 15. while he asserts, that by
reason of them, the Root and Foundation of all Strumas is in the Mesenterie:
And that never any Strumas appeared without the Body, unless the Mesenterie
were strumous; Which he says, was also the Opinion of Guido and Julius Pollux,
with whom it seems he rather chose to mistake, than to understand by physical
Practice and Philosophy, that Strumas have no Affinity at all with the
Glandules of the Mesentery, being only designed for the farther Preparation of
the Chylus alone. Neither can those Strumas that break out on the outside of
the Body, pretend in any manner to any Cause or Original in the Mesenterie:
Since daily Experience tells us, that most People who are troubled with
Struma's, are sound in all other Parts of their Bodies; nor do they complain of
any Distemper in the lower part of the Belly, whereas the Diseases of the
Mesenterie are usually very fatal to the Patient. And the very Cure it self
instructs us in the contrary, which is chiefly performed by Topics, that would
never prevail, if the original Cause of the Distemper lay concealed in the
Mesenterie. Lastly in the Dissections of Persons troubled with Strumas, the
same thing manifestly appears, who are for the most part seen to have a sound
Mesenterie.

XIV. The Mesenterie derives its Its Nerves.
Nerves from the Plexure of the inner Nerves of the sixth Pair; and the Nerves
proceeding from the Marrow of the Loins; which causes it to be so sensible in
its membranous Part, though it be more dull of Feeling in its Fat and glandulous
Part, for which Reason Apostemes ly long concealed in it before they be
discerned as they should be, either by the Patient or Physician.

XV. Its Arteries proceed from the Its Arteries.
mesenterie Branch of the great Artery, the Right and Left, or the Upper and
Lower.

XVI. It has several Veins running It^ Veins.
between its Membranes, called the Mesaraic, which rising with very small roots
from the Tunicles of the Guts, and mutually opening one into another, as they
frequently meet in the Mesentery, at length meet altogether in the two greater
Branches, that is, the right and left Mesenteric continues to the Vena Porta.
These infuse the Blood, forced through the Arteries to the Mesentery and Guts,
being the remainder of the Nourishment of these Parts, into the Porta Vein,
thence to be conveyed to the Liver. Of the Use of the Porta and Mesaraic
Veins, see more l. 7. c. 2.

XVII. Besides the Arteries and Milkie Vessels.
Mesaraic Veins, an innumerable Company of Milkie Veins, and many Lymphatic
Vessels run through it, of which we shall discourse c. 11. and 13.

CHAP. X. Of the Pancreas or Sweetbread.
I. THE Pancreas or Sweetbread so called in Latin, as being all Flesh, is also
called by another name (...), and by the Latins Lactes, from its inner white
and milkie color.

II. It is a glandulous, loose and The definition and situation.
shapeless Body, situated at the first Vertebra's of the Loins, under the
hinder part and bottom of the Stomach, clothed with a thin Membrane from the
Peritonaeum, and as it were hanging at it.

III. The shape of it is oblong and Shape.
flat.

IV. With its broader part adjoining Connection.
to the Confines of the Liver, it lies under the Stomach near the first
Verteber of the Loins; and including the Meatus Biliarius and Trunk of the
Porta is joined to the Duodenum: Hence it extends it self toward the Spleen,
and sharpens by degrees, but is not fastened to it.

V. The Substance of it is altogether Its Substance.
glandulous, and consists of many as it were little Knots or Knobs, cohering
together by means of the Vasa Intercidentia, or interpassing Vessels, and many
small Fibers, and included in the common Membrane taken from the Peritonaeum.
From whence it is that Francis de le Boe Sylvius describes the Sweetbread to be
a conglomerated Glandule, composed as it were of many small Kernels gathered in
a cluster together, and clothed with their own proper little Membrane. These
little Knobs make a show of being hard, but taken together, seem to be very
soft, by reason of their loose Connection.

VI. The color of it is pale, hardly Its Color.
showing the least tincture of any Blood; neither does it agree in color with
any of the fleshy parts. And hence proceeds the wonder, that by the ancient
Anatomists it should be called (...), that is, all fleshy; whereas it should
have been rather named (...), or all kernelly.

VII. The bigness is not the same Its bigness.
in all Persons; for sometimes you shall find it to equal the length of six,
seven, or more cross Fingers, seldom so short as three or four. Its greatest
breadth is generally two Fingers and a half; its thickness the breadth of one
Finger.

VIII. The weight of it is various, Its weight.
according to the weight and difference of the Body. Wharton has observed it in
Men of full-grown Age to weigh four or five Ounces for the most part. Regner de
Graef has observed it in Horses to weigh eleven Ounces. In sickly People it
exceeds the usual bigness, and is often full of Corruption (of which Riolanus,
Hildan, R. de Graef, Horstius, Tulpius, Blasius, and others, give us several
Examples,) and sometimes also little Stones breed within it, as were found to
the number of seven or eight, at Paris, in the Body of a certain deceased
Nobleman, by the Report of R. de Graef, lib. de Succ. Pancreat. who also adds
in the same place another Example out of Sennertus, of a Pancreas hardened to a
Gristly Substance.

IX. It is furnished with small Its Nerves
Nerves from the sixth Pair, more especially from the upper Plexure of the
Abdomen.

X. It receives its Arteries from the Arteries.
left Branch of the Coeliac Artery, leaning toward the Back; and sometimes from
the Splenic Artery.

XI. It sends forth its Veins to the Veins.
Splenic Branch near the Porta: Furthermore, it transmits a Trunk of the Vein,
which in some measure it embraces.

XII. It is also stored with many Lymphatic Vessels.
Lymphatic Vessels: In the middle part of it, according to its length, a
peculiar Chanel extends it self, indifferently capacious, and consisting of a
thin and strong Membrane, called from the first Discoverer Ductus Wirtzungianus.

XIII. This one Chanel runs through the middle of the Bowels, and receives an
innumerable Company of little and small Vessels, open into it from all parts of
the Bowels. Among which there is one somewhat bigger than the rest, which it
admits in its lower part, not far from its Ingress into the Intestin. Sometimes
there are two Channels to be found, but not equal in their length, of which the
one keeps its wonted Station; the other remains a little lower; but both are
joined together for the most part, and make one Orifice: Sometimes also the
other enters the Ductus Cholidochus near the Duodenum, while the other perforates
the Intestine a little below. Frederic Ruisch, Observat. Anat. 12. writes, That
he has often observed two Pancreatic Channels in Human Carkases, of which
neither had any Communication with the Ductus Cholidochus: also that he rarely
found this Chanel single in Dogs. For that in reference to this Chanel the
Sport of Nature is various, even in the same Creatures sometimes, but more
especially according to the diversity of Animals. For that some have one, which
is most frequent in Men: Others two, others three, which being often joined
together, before their Exit out of the Pancreas, sometimes enter the Intestine
separately. In some, they are inserted into the Ductus Biliarius; in others,
partly into the Intestine, in some few, they are inserted into the Stomach;
which happens most frequently in some sort of Fish.

XIV. The Chanel called the Wirtzungian, though it be easily discovered in Men,
yet is not so soon found out in Dogs; because their Pancreas is not contracted,
as in Men; but thin and extended in length; and sometimes as it were divided
into certain Parts. But if the Instrument be thrust into its Orifice, where it
opens into the D^odenum, the Chanel is presently to be found.

XV. The Orifice of the said Chanel The Exit of the Chanel.
discharges it self into the Duodenum, having an opening sufficiently large,
sometimes the breadth of four, sometimes five or six Fingers from the Pylorus,
in a remarkable wrinkle of the Flexure of the Duodenum, (where there is a very
small extuberancy, denoting its Exit) next to the going forth of the Biliary
Pore in Men, in Dogs about two Fingers breadth below the Exit of the Meatus
Biliarius, and not unfrequently opening into the very Biliary Chanel it self,
(as is familiarly observed in Sheep) and some affirm that there is a Valve
belonging to it, looking outward, and obstructing the Ingress of any thing out
of the Intestine into the Chanel. But because the Chanel from part of the
Intestine easily admits the Instrument, and for that this Valve did never
manifestly appear to us, we are apt to believe, that an Oblique Insertion into
the Intestine is sufficient to exclude the Humors, as shall be said concerning
the Ductus Biliarius, c. 15. In another part being extended toward the Spleen;
it grows slenderer and slenderer, till it quite vanishes, before it reach the
extreme Part of the Pancreas, so that it never touches the Spleen, nor enters
it, which is that which some have endeavored to persuade us.

How Nicolas Steno found this Chanel called Wirtzungian in Birds, he most
elegantly describes Lib. de Musc. and Glandul. in these words:

XVI. There is, says he, an Observation made upon Birds, that is of very great
use for the Explanation of the Wirtzungian Duct. For in several sorts of Birds,
I have seen a double Pancreatic Chanel, meeting also with a double Ductus
Biliarius (of which the one comes from the Vessel of the Gall, where it does
not lie upon the Liver, the other from the Liver it self) the Insertion of
which four Vessels varies three manner of ways. For either they all meet
together in one Mouth, or every Pancreatic Chanel, with its Bilary, enters into
a common Mouth, so that the Intestine is only pervious at two holes; or else
every Chanel having its own particular Chanel, is the occasion that there are
four ways into the Intestines. Lately I saw the Hepatic Ductus in a Turky-Hen,
where it went forth out of the Liver single, but then being divided in its
progress, it ran to the Intestine with two little Channels, so that the
Intestine by that means received the Choler out of three little Vessels.

XVII. Into this Wirtzungian Duct, out of all those little Knots, of which the
Pancreas consists in Men, certain little Branches like small Rivulets run
abroad, and pour out the Pancreatic Humor, prepared and concocted in the
little Knots of the said Pancreas, to be thence carried to the Duodenum. But in
that Chanel there is never any Pancreatic Juice to be found, because it flows
with a steep Current into the Duodenum, and never stays in the Chanel: In like
manner as the Urine flowing from the Reins through the Ureters, by reason of
its rapid Passage, is never to be found in them.

XVIII. I admire at Lindanus Med. Whether the Chanel be an Artery.
Physiol. c. 16. Art. 16. verse. 244* where he asserts this Chanel to be an
Artery; but that it is uncertain from whence it springs, whether from the
Aorta, or the Coeliac, before its Splenetic Emission. Assuredly it has no
similitude with the Artery, neither in Substance nor in Use, neither is it any
where continuous with the Arteries: neither does it beat, or contain any Blood
as the Arteries, but without any Blood carries in it a certain peculiar Liquor;
neither does it discharge it self into the Veins, as the Arteries do, but into
the Cavity of the Intestine. Neither is it true which Lindanus adds, that is to
say, That from this Chanel (which he calls an Artery) several little forked
Branches are extended into that Bowel, whereas indeed several little forked
Branches run out from the little Knobs of the Bowel into the Chanel, as has
been said. Therefore less erroneous were they, who affirmed this Chanel to be a
Vein, as resembling a Vein in the Structure and Species of its Substance,
whereas indeed it is no Vein, nor carries any Blood, but is another sort of
Membranous Vessel, appointed for the Conveyance of a peculiar Humor.

XIX. As to the Office of this Bowel The Office of the Sweetbread
(and I hope no Body will be offended, that by virtue of a peculiar
Philosophical License, we call this noble Glandulous Body a Bowel) there have
arisen sharp Contests; while some affirmed that it did only support the
Divisions and Separations of the Vessels, and lay under the Stomach like a
Pillow; others asserted that it fed upon the cruder Portion of the Blood;
others that it assisted the Heart in Sanguification; others that it drew
Melancholy from the Spleen, or furnished the Stomach with fermentaceous Juice,
or supplied the place of the distempered Spleen. Others that it received the
Chylus, and concocted it to a greater perfection, and separated the Choleric
Excrement from it. All which Opinions, when I found 'em to be merely
Conjectural* and altogether uncertain, nor supported by any solid Reasons or
Experience, I thought fit to be a little more diligent than ordinary in the
Examination of this almost neglected part of Anatomy: and at length, after many
Experiments (of which some succeeded ill, some well; for that besides the
Pancreatic Juice; there flowed for the most part great store of Choler by the
Ductus Cholidochus into the Duodenum, tied both above and below, and then slit
long-ways; which Choler spoiled both the Color and Taste of the Pancreatic
Juice) I found by the Dissections, as well of Living as of newly strangled
Creatures, a certain Sublimpid and Salivatick, or Spittly sort of Liquor flow
from the Ductus Pancreaticus, somewhat sour, and slightly Acid (though Needham,
contrary to all Experience, denies its Acidity.) And sometimes having something
of Saltness mixed with it (and the same in mangy Dogs I have observed to stink,
and to be of a very ill taste) I say I observed this clear and salivous or
spittly sort of Liquor to flow from the Ductus Pancreaticns into the Duodenum,
and that sometimes to a very considerable quantity; but never any of the Vasa
Chylifera extended to this Bowel, nor ever was any Chyle found in it.

XX. Whence I judged, that though A Digression.
several Anatomists have described several Vasa Chylifera running out of this
Bowel, and caused 'em to be delineated in their Tables; nay though Schenckius
himself derived the Vasa Chylifera from hence, and were distributed from hence
toward the Mesentery, though Veslingius and Baccius affirm that the Chylus flowed
out of it being wounded, and though Dominicus de Marchettis fancied that he had
observed several Channels running out toward the Liver, and distributed from it
to the Guts, yet that all they were deceived by some preconceiv'd Opinion; The
use of the Sweetbread Juice.
and that neither the Vasa Chylifera do run out of it, neither is the Chylus
emptied forth into it, but that there is in it a peculiar Humor concocted in
it, bred out of the serous and saltish part of the Arterious Blood which is
carried into it, mixed with some Animal Spirits brought and conveyed through
the small and scarce discernable Nerves. Which Humor flowing into the
Duodenum, and being there mixed with the Choler flowing also thither, and the
Nourishment digested in the Stomach, and falling down through the Pylore into
the Stomach, raises a peculiar Effervescency in those Aliments, by virtue
whereof the profitable Chylous Particles are separated from the
Excrementitious, attenuated, and made more fit for Liquation and Distribution.
And this Operation is apparent from the Diversity of the Substance of the
Aliments concocted in the Stomach, and still contained there, from the
Substance of those which are already fallen down into the Guts. For those are
more viscous and thicker, and retain the Colors of the various sorts of Food;
These more fluid, less slimy, and more white. Which aptness for Liquation is
prepared, to the end that by the Peristaltic Motion of the Intestines the
Chylous Particles may be forced through their innermost mucous Tunicle into the
Milkie Vessels, while the rest that are more thick fall down by degrees into
the thick Guts, there to be kept till the time of Evacuation. Now this
Effervescency is occasioned by the Volatile Salt of the Choler, and the
sulphurous Oil meeting with the Acidness of the Pancreatic Juice, as in
Chemistry we find in like manner the same Effervescencies occasioned by the
meeting together of the like Mixtures.

XXI. These things being more seriously considered, I was confirmed in my self,
that the Pancreas or Sweetbread is no such useless Bowel, as it is by many
described to be; nor that the Juice which is prepared within it is so small,
that it can scarcely be discerned, nor that it is unprofitable or
excrementitious, as many have hitherto thought; but that it is a Juice of which
there is a moderate Quantity, and by reason of its specific subacid Quality
very necessary to raise a new Effervescency in the Guts, together with the
Choler that is mixed with it, of the Nourishment concocted and fallen already
down from the Stomach, and by that means a separation of the profitable from
the unprofitable Particles, and that therefore a sound Constitution of Health
depends in good part upon a sound Pancreas or Sweetbread, and that through the
unsoundness of the Sweetbread many Diseases proceed, hitherto ascribed to
Distempers of the Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, and other parts. And it may be
easily observed, that upon its Juice being out of order, that is either too
plentiful or too sharp (especially if there be too copious a mixture of sharp
Choler) there is occasioned an Effervescency too violent and disorderly in the
Guts, which is the cause of sour Vomits, Belchings, Wind, distension of the
Bowels, Diarrhea's, Dysenteries, Colic Passions, and several other Diseases*
though it is as certain, that most of these Diseases may proceed from a
vitiousness in the Choler only.

XXII. On the other side, if the Sweetbread Juice be two scanty, too mild and
insipid, it causes but a weak Effervescency, Obstructions, Atrophie, and
extraordinary binding of the Body. Or being too Salt and Acid, and rising
toward the Stomach, it occasions Canine Hunger, Reaching, sour Belches, etc.
but falling down into the Guts, extraordinary Gripings, Corrodings, Looseness,
etc. Ascending toward the Head, together with the Blood, Epileptic Convulsions,
and as it were Hysteric Passions, and Melancholy Ravings. Therefore Highmore
out of Aubertus, relates, That in a noble Woman, long troubled with an
Epilepsie, and as it were an Hysteric Passion, and at length dying of those
Distempers, there was nothing found defective but her Sweetbread.

XXIII. Ascending toward the Stomach or the Heart, it causes Palpitations of
the Heart, Swooning Fits, together with an inequality and weakness of the
Pulses, etc. Thus Highmore relates from the same Aubertus, That a Merchant of
Leyden could not sleep, or if he did, he swooned away, and at length went away
in one of those Fits; in whose Carcass, all other parts being safe, only the
Sweetbread was found putrified with an Aposteme. And thus according as this
Juice is variously affected, it occasions various Distempers, as are to be seen
in those that are troubled with Hypochondriacal Diseases, of which a great part
are to be attributed to the bad disposition of this Juice. Which Impurities it
contracts, partly through ill Diet, as salt Meats, smoked Meats, Sour, Acid
Food, and such like; or through the bad Concoctions of the other Bowels,
especially of the Spleen: For that from these Causes, by reason of the vicious
Ferment of the Blood, many Particles of the Blood in the Heart being rendered
less spiritous, and somewhat acid and salt, and remaining prone to Coagulation,
and so being carried through this Bowel to the Arteries, cannot be sufficiently
concocted therein, nor changed into a Ferment convenient and proper for the
concocted Aliments already slid down to the Guts.

XXIV. Two years after I had made these Examinations, and committed 'em to
writing, there was brought me a Disputation of the Learned Regner de Graef,
once my Scholar, held in the Academy of Leyden, under the Presidentship of the
famous Professor Fr. de le Boe Sylvius, concerning the Pancreas or Sweetbread,
and its Juice, which confirmed me much more in my Opinion. For at length, among
many other Experiments, after several Endeavors and Inventions to little or no
purpose, he found out an ingenious way, whereby this Juice might be gathered
together in a living Dog; which he afterward very liberally showed to Us, and
several other Spectators, in the Month of March, 1665. He took a fasting Dog,
and having tied his Mouth that he should not bite, and opened his Aspera
Arteria with a Penknife, that he might breath through that hole, presently he
ripped open his Abdomen, and then binds the Gut, as well under the Pylore, as
under the Egress of the Pancreatic Ductus, and then dissects and opens it
between those two Ligatures in the External Part, which is free from the
Mesentery; and with a Sponge wipes away the Choler, Phlegm, and other Stuff
which he found there. Then taking a small Quill of a wild Duck, at the one end
of which he had fitted a small Glass Bottle close stopped round about, he thrust
the other end into the Ductus Pancreaticus, which in Dogs is two Inches broad
below the Egress of the Ductus Biliarius; and then with a needle and a double
Thread, sewed the Gut and the Ductus to the Quill and the Bottle, so that the
Quill with the Glass Bottle, hanging without the Abdomen, should not stir
either from the Gut or the Ductus. This done, he put back the Guts that hung
out before into the inner Parts, and sews up the slit of the Abdomen with a
strong Thread, and so keeps the Dog alive as long as he could, that is, for
eight or ten Hours. In this manner, within the space of seven or eight hours,
he received into his Bottle an indifferent quantity of this Limpid Juice that
distilled into the Bottle thorough the Quill, sometimes half an Ounce,
sometimes six Drams, sometimes a whole Ounce; of which we tasted, and found the
taste to be the same as I had tasted in several of my Experiments before
mentioned, that is, a little sour, somewhat saltish, and somewhat Subacid. The
whole Operation De Graef relates more at large in his Disputation, and
describes in his Tables annexed; and farther testifies, That in some Dogs, that
perhaps were not so sound, he has observed that Juice to be very impure, that
it yielded sometimes a stinking, sometimes a nauseous, sometimes a very austere
and astringent taste; in so much that they who tasted it were all that day
troubled with an uneasy Suffocation, sometimes with stinking Belches, and
Reaching of the Stomach. The same De Graef, in a little French Book which he
published in the Year 1666. upon the same Subject, writes, That at Anjou, in a
Man that died suddenly, and was dissected before he was cold, he collecttd
together the Pancreatic Juice, and found the Acidity of it to be so very
pleasant to the taste, that he never tasted the like in Dogs. And in the same
Book, and more at large in Lib. de Suc. Pancreat. Edit. An. 1671. c. 7, 8, 9,
11. he discourses of the Qualities of this Juice, how being mixed with the
Choler, it promotes Effervescency, and causes the Chyle to be white; and what
Distempers it causes, if vicious; all which would be too long here to repeat.
Most certainly a most ingenious Invention, and for which the Industrious and
Learned Discoverer deserves a high Applause, who by this Industry of his has
lighted us a Candle to the better and clearer knowledge of most Diseases.

XXV. But by the way we are to observe, That as the first Discoverers of new
Inventions are generally given to err in this, that they have such a tender
affection for their newborn Embryo's, though yet but weak and imperfect, that
they will observe no Deficiency or Error in 'em, but with an extraordinary
Pride, loathsome to all Company, endeavor to extoll'em above others, more
mature and perfected by Age and Experience; So does Regner de Graef in this
part show himself a little faulty, while he following the most famous Francis
de le Boe Sylvius, from this one discovered Cause of many Diseases, endeavors
to deduce the Causes and Originals of all Distempers; believing that Diarrheas,
Dysenteries, Colic, Epilepsies, Syncopes, Hysterical Suffocations, Fluxes of
the Terms, Agues, and I know not how many other Diseases, proceed from this one
Cause; as if no other vicious Humors, bred by the ill Habits of the other
Parts, could ever occasion such Diseases. Whereas a thousand Dissections of
Bodies, that have died of those Diseases, plainly demonstrated that those
Diseases were occasioned by the viticus habit of the other Parts, in regard the
Pancreas in them was absolutely sound.

XXVI. We have also in the sight of many Spectators demonstrated, that when the
Sweetbread has been safe and untouched, Diarrheas, Dysenteries and Colicks have
proceeded from some Corruption of the Liver and Choler; Epilepsies from the
depravation of the Brain and Meninx's, or by some stinking Ulcer in the Ear:
also that several Fevers are occasioned by vicious Humors bred in the Body
through the bad Temper, ill Concoction, Corruption, Ulceration or Inflammation
of the other Bowels and Parts, as in Pleurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs,
Squinancies, Phrensies, etc. Also that many times deadly Symptoms and most
terrible Hysteric Passions and Fits are occasioned only by the Distemper of the
Testicles preternaturally swelled, and containing a virulent, yellow, livid
Juice, sending up virulent Exhalations to the upper Parts. Which Diseases have
been many times cured by the Evacuation of that vicious Matter, without
applying any Medicines to the Pancreas or Sweetbread, that was altogether
Innocent of the Distemper.

XXVII. In the Year 1667. November. 16. I dissected in our Hospital a Carcass of
a young Maid of four and twenty years of Age, which had lain sick for three
years together, sometimes troubled with immoderate defluxions of her Courses,
sometimes with Gripes of the Colic, sometimes with Diarrhea's, and want of
Appetite; lastly an* Anasacra or Hydropsical swelling of the whole Body; and
toward her latter end oppressed with a tedious Cough, accompanied with filthy
Spittle; in which Body we found the Sweetbread almost entire, and without any
Damage; but the Liver was in a very bad Condition, not died with a red, but
with a black and bluish Color, and the Lungs full of many little Ulcers. Which
being seen, many Persons, as well Physicians as Students in Physic, renounced
the Opinion of Sylvius, and Regner de Graef.

XXVIII. On the other side Wharton has started a new Opinion concerning the Use
of the Sweetbread, believing the Excrementitious Juices of the Nerves to be
purified therein, and chiefly of that Complication which lies under the Nerves.
Which from the sweet Taste of the Substance of the Sweetbread, he judges not to
be bitter or sharp, but sweet and insipid. But in many other Places of his
Adenography, he discourses after another manner of the other Glandules; and
affirms 'em to prepare the Alimentary Juice for the nourishment of the Nerves.
But who can believe that there should be a redundancy of Excrements in the most
pure Animal Spirits, and that they should flow from all parts of the Body
through invisible Pores to the Pancreas only, there to be separated from the
Animal Spirits? Or who is not able to see that the thicker Juices prepared in
the Glandules, can never pass thorough the thick Substance of the Nerves, but
they must occasion Obstructions and Palsies. But more of these things l. 8. c.
1.

XXIX. By what has been said, it is apparent how far the Ancients, and many of
the Moderns were mistaken in their Opinions concerning the Use of the
Sweetbread; and among the rest Fernelius, who asserts that most of the
superfluous and unprofitable Moistures are heaped up together in the
Sweetbread as in a Sink, and thence flow into the Guts. But in regard this
Bowel it self is covered with a thicker Membrane, and all the particular
Glandules are covered by themselves with a thin little Membrane, nor has it any
other Vessels that enter into it, unless some very small Arteries and Veins,
and very slender Nerves, there does not appear any way for the superfluous and
excrementitious Moistures of other Parts to enter the Sweetbread: Besides that
there is no Reason why they should be forced more to this Part than to the
Kidneys, Guts, or other evacuating Parts.

XXX. Seeing then it is apparent by what has bin said, what the Constitution
and Use of the Sweetbread, and Sweetbread Juice is. We will only add two
Things by way of Corollary. 1. How that particular Juice is generated in the
Sweetbread? 2. How Great, and what sort of Effervescency it raises in the Guts.

XXXI As to the First, our modern The Generation of the panoreatic Juice.
Philosophers teach us, that the Blood contains in it all manner of Humors,
Acid, Bitter, Salt, Sweet, Insipid, Thick, Thin, etc. And that, of these,
certain particular Parts of the Body admit of such and such particularly, which
by reason of certain Disposition of Magnitude and Figure, have an extraordinary
Analogy with their little Pores; but exclude others by reason of their
Disproportion: And so by reason of that specific Constitution of the Pores, the
choleric Humors are most properly separated in the Liver; the Serous in the
Reins, and the pancreatic Juice in the Sweetbread. But though it must be
granted, that in the Nourishment of the singular Parts by reason of the certain
and peculiar Disposition of the Pores in each, some Particles of the Blood
stick to these, others better and more closely to those, till they are changed
into their Substance: Yet this is not to be granted in the Generation of
Humors, from whence at length, that general Nourishment, the Blood, proceeds.
For in the Blood is contained a Matter, out of which Humors of all sorts may be
formed, as it is fermented, mingled, and reconcocted in these or those various
Bowels, and several Parts, yet is there not in the Blood any Pancreatic,
Splenetic, Choleric Juice, etc. (as in Wheat and Bread there is not really any
Chylus, Choler, or Blood) but it is a Heterogeneous Matter containing such and
such different Particles, which being after a peculiar manner mingled and
concocted in the proper Vessels, become Humors Sweet, Bitter, Acid, etc. Not by
reason of any Analogy with the Pores, but because of the specific Nature,
Temper, and Structure of the specific Parts. And thus the matter is contained
in the Earth, out of which, according to the Variety of Mixture and Concoction,
a thousand sorts of Herbs, Trees, Flowers, Shrubs, and other things are
generated: And thus in like manner several Forms of things are shaped by the
Hands of the Artificer: While one makes Statues, another Bricks, another
earthen Vessels of all sorts, though such things were never in the Earth before,
nor could be said to have bin. The Blood therefore, which is sweet, flowing
through the splenic Artery into the Spleen, is there deprived of the greatest
part of its Sweetness, and gains a subacid Quality somewhat saltish; not by
reason of the Pores of the Spleen, but by reason of the natural subacid Quality
of the Spleen, which it infuses in the Blood and certain other Humors that
accompany it. Sweet Wine thus grows sour, being poured into a Vinegar-Vessel;
not by reason of the Pores of the Vessel, having some kind of Analogy either
between the Wine it self and the Particles of the Vinegar, or else because
there was an Acidity in the Wine before, and its acid Particles were only mixed
with the Vinegar, and the sweet not mixed; but because the sour Acidity of the
Vinegar, contained in the Vessel, might there fix the sweet sulphury Spirits of
the Wine, and exalting the Salt and Acid above 'em, altogether deprive it of
its Sweetness. For in that manner is Choler bred in the Liver: not that it was
really praeexistent in the Blood, or for that the Pores of the Liver have any
Analogy, with the choleric Particles of the Blood, were the occasion of its
being separated from it; but because the sweet Blood, flowing in great Quantity
through the splenic Branch to the Porta out of the mesaraic Veins, with a
mixture of the splenetic Juice, becomes so altered, that it is fermented and
concocted after a new Manner in the Liver (which proceeds from the peculiar
Temper, Structure, and Ferment prepared in it) by which means many Particles of
it are made Choler, which were not so before that new Mixture and Concoction:
Concerning which see the following 15th. Chap. de Generatione Bilis. And thus
it is in the Pancreas, wherein some part of the Blood flowing into it through
the small Arteries, is changed into Sweetbread Juice (the rest proceeding
forward to its Fountain the Heart) not by reason of the Analogy of the Pores of
the Sweetbread with that Juice; but by reason of the new Alteration which the
Blood undergoes in it, occasioned by the particular Property or Nature of the
Part, together with the new Mixture and Concoction.

XXXII. As to the second we have The Effervescency of the Choler, (...) (...)
(...) (...).]
affirmed, that the pancreatic Juice being mixed with the Choler that flows to
it, causes a new Effervescencie in the Duodenum. Which is apparent in the
Dissection of living Dogs; in whom generally there is a spumous Humor boiling
in the said Intestine, which is raised by the Acidity of the pancreatic Juice,
and the mixture of Choler, abounding in Volatile and fixed Salt. Which is that
very thing which Chemical Operation teaches us; viz. That acid Spirits meeting
with the lixivious Salt, always fall a boiling if there be nothing intermixed
to prevent the Operation. Now that in Choler there is contained a lixivious
Salt besides the oily sulphury Parts, is hence apparent, for that both may be
separated from it by chemical Art. And then the Taste discovers the moderately
sharp Acidity of the pancreatic Juice; and moreover for that being put into
sweet Milk, it presently curdles it, even as Vinegar and other sharp Juices do.
Lastly, for a farther Proof of that Effervescency occasioned by the mixture of
Choler with the pancreatic Juice, we will add the twice repeated Experiment of
D. Schuylius, Tract. de Vet. Medicin. The Abdomen of a live Dog, says he,
being opened, I tied the Duodenum with a String, not far from the Pylorus; and
with another String a little below the Insertion of the pancreatic Ductus, and
so left the Dog, having sowed up the Abdomen again. Three Hours after, the Dog
being still alive, and strong, for he had lost very little Blood, the Abdomen
being opened again, we found the Space between the two Ligat^res so extremely
distended, that it would not yield to the Compression of the Fingers, but
threatened a Rupture, nor did we find the Dogs Gall-bag less distended. A most
intense and burning Heat also scalded that intercepted Part of the Duodenum; in
which, when I had made a little Wound with a Lancet, together with the Humors
contained therein, great store of Wind brake out with the usual Noise and
rattling of breaking Wind; from whence also, a sour kind of Smell offended the
Noses of the standers by; which when the Gut was more opened, none of the
Spectators could endure. Which was a manifest Argument, that there had not only
flowed thither such a Quantity of Choler, and pancreatic Juice, but that there
was an Effervescency raised in 'em, not a mild and moderate one as in sound
People, but extremely vehement. For not only that part of the Intestin was
full, but distended extraordinarily by a violent force and rushing of the Blood
and Spirits. Nor was it probable that that part of the Duodenum could have bin
so distended, nor that the Vapors, Exhalations, Humors, and Wind, could have
bin dissipated with so great a Force, but by the Effervescency and Agitation of
Particles quite contrary to those Humors. Some few days after I repeated the
same Experiment, in the presence of several Students; and within two Hours or
little more, that Portion of the Intestin swelled very much, but did not burn
so violently: But having opened that swelled Portion of the Intestin, which I
had tied before, frothy Bubbles brake out with a loud noise, with which that
Space of the Gut was distended. So that it is not for Impudence it self to
raise any more Doubts concerning the Truth of this Effervescency.

CHAP. XI. Of the Mesenteric Milkie Vessels.
I. THE milkie Vessels conveighing the white Chylus from the Guts through the
Mesentery, were first discovered in our Age; And in the Yeor 1622, by Gaspar
Asellius, Anatomist of Padua. I say in our Age, for that Hippocrates and others
had some obscure Knowledge of 'em. Galen also saw 'em and observed 'em; but he
believed 'em to be Arteries, and swayed by that Error, assirm'd that the
Orifices of the Arteries reaching to the Intestines, received some small
Quantity of Nourishment, appears l. 4. de Off. Part. c. 17. and l. 3. de
natural. Facult. c. 13. and lib. an Sang. in Art. content. c. 5.

II. Asellius was the first that gave The Name.
em the Name of milkie Veins. But in regard they carry no Blood, and for that
their Substance is far different from that of the Veins, as being much more
transparent and thinner, we thought it more proper to call 'em milkie Vessels
for better distinctions Sake.

III. They are thin transparent The Description.
Vessels covered with a single Tunicle, scattered through the Mesentery,
infinite in number, appointed for conveighing the Chylus.

IV. They take their Original from The Original.
the Guts (the chiefest Part from the Iejunum and other small Guts, among whose
Tunicles, with several small and slender ends of Roots they open into the inner
Hollowness of the Intostines, their Orifices lying hid, under a spungy kind of
Slime, into which the Chylus is squeezed by Compression of the said Guts, and
from whence it is received by the gaping Vessels.) From hence, with an oblique
Passage, they ascend the Mesentery, by the way interwoven one among another,
and variously confused, and so proceed forward between and thorough many little
Glandules, chiefly those that are placed at the Separation of these Vessels,
toward the great or middlemost Glandule of the Mesentery, into which a very
great number enter, and a many cross over the Superficies of it, and afterward
end at the great Receptacle of the Chylus, absconded under that great Glandule.
But they never enter the Liver, as some with Waleus and (...) endeavor to
persuade us. Neither do any of 'em open into the Vena Porta, the Vena Cava, or
Mesenteric Vein; though Lindanus, following Waleus ( l. 2. Physiolog. c. 5.)
asserts that Mistake. Nor are they ever continued with the Mesaraic Veins, as
being Slips of them, which was a Figment of Deusiagius. Nor ever were any seen
to proceed from the Stomach.

V. Wharton observes in his Adenographia, How they pass the Glandules.
that those Vessels in their Entrance into the Glandules, or a little before,
are divided and subdivided into several little Branches, and so are quite
obscured in the very Substance of the Glandules, and after they have so in a
manner disappeared in the very middle of the Glandules, presently new Strings
of the said Vessels spring out again, from the very Body of the said Glandules,
which meeting together form a Trunck as before, and being carried toward the
Beginning of the Mesentry, associates to it self other Branches of the same
kind meeting with it, and is by them enlarged. Thus without doubt, those
Vessels that enter the great Glandule, spring out of it again as from a new
Root, and into the Receptacle of the Chylus.

VI. They have many Valves which Their Valves.
admit the Entrance of the Chylus from the Guts, and hinder its Return, which
though they cannot be easily demonstrated to the Sight, by reason of their
extraordinary smallness, yet thus are they easily apprehended; that is to say,
if these milkie Vessels are pressed toward the great Glandule, they presently
grow empty: And Fred^ric R^isch, a Physician formerly at the (...), now at
A^sterdam, and a famous Dissecter, had publicly shown 'em, and caused 'em to
be engraven in his Plates: But if the same Compressure be made from the Kernel
toward the Guts, the Chylus stops, neither can it be thrust forward. Which is
the reason that in Dogs and other Creatures well fed, that are dissected alive,
or hanged three hours after they have fed, these milk Vessels appear soon
after very numerous and full of Juice in the Mesentery: But while the Guts are
stirred and moved up and down by the Anatomists, together with the Mesentery
annexed for Demonstration sake, that milky Juice is squeezed out of 'em by that
Motion, and flows to the Receptacle of the Chylus; and so these small Vessels
in the Mesentery vanish as it were from between your Fingers, and escape the
Sight, when being emptied, by reason of their thinness and transparency, as has
bin already said, they can no longer be discerned.

VII. The use of these milkie Vessels, Their Use.
is to conveigh not the Blood, but the Chylus from the Guts to the great
Glandule of the Mesentery, and thence to the Receptacle of the Chyle. And this
the whitish Color of the contained Juice teaches us, which in a Creature
killed three or four hours after feeding, is like the Cream of Milk, and
disappears when the Distribution of the Chylus is at an end, nor does the Blood
ever succeed into its Place, and so the Chylus being evacuated, these pellucid
and small Cobweb-lawn Vessels, for want of that milkie Color almost escape the
Sight, which is the Reason why they have lavn undiscovered for so many Ages. I
say almost, in regard that to these that look narrowly, they remain conspicuous
in the form of little Fibers. Which deceived Galen and some others, who took
these little Fibers for Nerves or very small Arteries.

VIII. Now that the Chylus is A Proof.
carried through these Vessels from the Guts to the Receptacle, is apparent
from hence, for that if in a living Animal well fed, and suddenly dissected
three hours after, they be tied in the middle, there will happen a swelling
between the Ligature and the Gut, and a lankness in the other Part. And the
same is also manifest from the Situation of the Valves, of which we have
already spoken.

IX. The cause why the Chylus enters The impulsive Cause.
the milkie Vessels, and is forced through those, is twofold. The one more
feeble: a kind of rolling Contraction performed by the Fibers of the Guts
themselves, which Contraction is conspicuous in Cats and Rabbets dissected
alive. The other is stronger, powerfully assisting the former, an Impulse of
the Muscles of the Abdomen moved upwards and downwards by the Act of Breathing:
By which the Chylous, and consequently the thin and most spirituous Parts of
the Nourishment concocted in the Stomach, and fermented by the mixture of
Choler, and the Pancreatic or Sweetbread Juice in the Guts, being separated
from the grosser and more crude Mass, are forced out of the Guts into the
gaping Orifices of the milkie Vessels. Which Orifices, by reason of their
extreme Narrowness, will not however admit the grosser Parts; and hence it
comes to pass, that being separated from the thin Chylous Parts, and forced to
the thick Guts, they are exonerated through the Fundament as unprofitable
Excrements.

X. From what has bin said, it appears that these Chyle-bearing Vessels, do not
always conveigh the Chylus (for they are often found empty) but only by
Intervals: That is, so soon as the Chylus is perfected in the Stomach, and
descends from thence to the Intestines.

XI. Deusingius in his Treatise de Whether (...) Chylus ^e attracted.
motu Chyli, believes that Expulsion only is not sufficient; and therefore he
adds to it Sucking or Attraction, the necessity of which he endeavors to prove
by these Reasons. If there be no Attraction (says he) but that all Motion must
be referred to Impulsions, how shall we think that the Nourishment enters from
the Mother into the Umbilical Veins, or by what Cause can it be forced thither?
Or how does the Alimentary matter in an Egg reach to the Heart of the Chicken?
Unless by Attraction, by means of the Motion of Rarefaction, and the Reciprocal
Distension and Contraction of the Heart. But these Reasons are not of Force
enough to defend and establish the said Opinion. I answer therefore to both,
That no Nourishment enters immediately from the Mother into the umbilical
Veins; but that as well the Blood, as the milkie Juice, by the Impulse of the
Mother is forced from the Womb only into the Uterine Placenta (as shall be
demonstrated more at large c. 30. of this Book) and thence by the Impulse which
is caused by the umbilical Arteries from the Heart of the Birth toward the said
Placenta, the Blood of the Mother that lies therein, being rarified and
concocted by the arterious Blood of the Embryo, is forced into the umbilical
Vein, and the Chylus also is forced along into the Vasa Chylifera, that tend to
the Concavity of the Amnion, or Membrane that enfolds the Birth. If any one
enquires how the rarified Juice enters the Embryo, before the Navel be grown to
its just Magnitude, and how such a Motion of the Heart is caused by its
Arteries? I answer, That that Ingress is caused by a kind of sliding or
slipping into it; but there is a great difference between attraction and
slipping into a thing. For a hard, heavy, dry, or any other such kind of
Substance is attracted, that cannot follow of it self, and sticks to the thing
that draws it: but a soft and fluid thing slides or slips in; which finding a
lower evacuated place, can neither contain it self, nor subsist in its place,
but slides in of it self without attraction. As for Example; If the Water next
the Mill is cast upward by the Water-Mill, the subsequent Water cannot be said
to be drawn by the Mill, which is sufficiently distant from it, nor is any way
joined with it, but not being able to support it self, slides voluntarily down
to the empty space. And in this manner the Liquation of the Chylus slips into
the Embryo. For while the Heart continually makes Blood of the Matter that
daily offers it self, and forces it away from it, presently the Particles of
the adjoining Liquation or dissolved Nourishment, slip of their own accords
into the empty Pores, and supply the Vacuum. So that there is no attraction of
the Nourishment in the Embryo. And the same is to be said of the Chicken in an
Egg, into which the Alimentary Nourishment enters, partly by slipping, partly
by the Impulse of the Heart of the Chicken.

CHAP. XII. Of the Ductus Chyliferus of the Breast, and the Receptacle of the
Chyle.
I. THis Chyliferos Ductus of The Description.
the Thorax, is a Vessel extended from the Region of the Loins all the length
of the Backbone, to the Subclavial Vein, lying under the short Ribs; through
which the Chylus being poured into it, out of the Milkie Mesenterics, together
with the Lympha or pellucid Water, is carried to the Subclavial Vein. But
because the Passage of the Chylus through it is not continual, hence some, not
without reason, have thought that this Vessel ought to be more properly called
Ductum Lymphaticum The Great Lymphatic Chanel.
Magnum, the Great Lymphatic Chanel; for that as soon as the Chylus vanishes,
it is found to be re-supply'd by the Lymphatic Water.

II. The first Discovery of this is ascribed The Discoverers.
to John Pecquet of Diep* John van Horn, a famous Anatomist of Leyden, both
which discovered it in the Years 1650. and 1652. neither being private to what
the other had done; and in our Time publicly showed it, and caused it to be
engraven in their Plates.

But although we are much beholding to 'em for their Diligence for restoring to
the great Benefit of Physic, the knowledge of this Vessel, which had lain
buried in darkness for almost a whole Age, through the negligence and
unskilfulness of Anatomists, for rendering the knowledge of it more perfect, and
making it apparent by public demonstration; and all this without any
Information beforehand; yet are they not to assume to themselves the whole
honor of the first Invention. For above a hundred years ago this very Passage
was first observed and taken notice of in the Dissection of Horses, by the most
famous Anatomist Bartholomew Eustachius, who Lib. de Vena sine pari, Antigram.
13. writes thus: In those Creatures, (says he) speaking of Horses) from the
great sinister Iugal Trunk, where the hinder seat of the Root of the Internal
Iugular Vein appears, (he believes it to be the Subclavial, where the Jugular
enters it above) a great Root springs forth, which, besides that it has a
Semicircular Orifice at its beginning, (clearly designing a Valve;) there is
also another Root, full of a watery Humor; and not far from its Original,
divided into two parts, which meeting in one stock again that spreads no
Branches, near the sinister side of the Vertebra's, penetrating the Diaphragma,
is carried downward toward the middle of the Loins, where becoming broader, and
embracing the great Artery, it concludes in an obscure ending, which I have not
as yet so well* found out. From which words it is apparent, that this Passage
was first discovered and observed by Eustachius, but the use of it was not
rightly understood. For he describes the Beginning of it from the Subclavial
Vein, where the End is: and the End in the Loins where the Beginning is: So
that we are beholding to Eustachius for the first, but ruder detection; but to
Van Horn and Pecquet for the more accurate and perfect knowledge and
demonstration of it.

III. But though there may be one continued Chanel from the Loins to the
Subclavial Vein, yet because it has a broad capaciousness at the beginning,
like a little Bag, first receiving the Chylus out of the Mesenteric Vessels, it
is excellently well distinguished into the Receptacle of the Chylus, and the
Ductus Chyliferus.

IV. The Receptacle of the Chylus The Receptacle of the Chyle.
is the Original of this Chanel, more capacious than the Chanel it self, and is
a kind of a little Cell, seated in the Loins, into which the Chylus first flows
out of the Mesaraic Milkie Veins, and is collected into that as into a Common
Receptacle, which was the reason that Pecquet first called this little Cell by
the name of the Receptacle of the Chyle. Which nevertheless Van Horn would
rather have called by the name of the Little Milkie Bag. This Bartholinus calls
the Milkie Lumbar Glandule, but erroneously, in regard the Substance of it has
no Resemblance with the Substance of the Glandules. Walter Charleton calls it
by the name of the Pecquetian Conceptacle, from the Discoverer. But in regard
it receives as well the Lymphatic Water poured forth from the Glandules of the
adjacent Parts, as the Chylus it self (for in a live Creature, if you squeeze
out the Chylus with your Thumb, it is presently filled with Lymphatic Water) it
may be no less properly called the Receptacle of the Lympha, as well as the
Chylus, and so much the rather because the Chylus only flows into it at such
and such Intervals, but the Lympha fills it continually.

V. The Seat of this Receptacle is The Receptacle of the Lympha.
under the Coeliac and Emulgent Veins, almost in the middle Region, between the
Muscles Psoas, the Kidneys and the Renal Glandules, which, together with the
Kidneys, it touches by immediate Contract, so that there can hardly be
separated with a Penknife certain little Branches running between. Yet in all
Creatures it does not exactly keep the middle place of the Loins, but in Beasts
most commonly inclines toward the left side, near the hollow Vein descending,
close to the left Kidney, seldom turns to the right side, or keeps directly in
the midst of the Lumbal Muscles.

VI. In Brute Beasts this Vessel is The Number.
generally single, with one Cavity; sometimes twofold; that is, one in each
side. Sometimes one, with a little Membrane going between, as it were
distinguished into two Cells. Moreover, sometimes three of these Vessels have
been said to have been found, two in one, and one in the other side; which is
more than we have ever met with as yet. Bartholinus has observed three in a
Man; two of a bigger size, set one upon another, but conioyn'd with mutual
milkie little Branches, seated between the Cava descending, and the Aorta
Veins, in an Angle, which the Emulgents make meet with the Vena C^va. The third
somewhat higher, and nearer to the Diaphragma, and losing it self in its
Nervous beginning under the Appendix.

VII. The shape of this Receptacle is The Shape.
for the most part round, and somewhat compressed; but many times Oval.

VIII. It varies in Bigness: Frequently The Bigness.
it fills the space between the Lumbar Muscles, extending it self to the
Kidneys and their Kernels. In Brutes we find it sometimes a little bigger,
somewhat extended toward the lower parts.

IX. The inner Cavity, the Chyle The Wi^ness.
being taken out, sometimes equals two Joints of the Fore-fingers, sometimes
only one of those Joints; sometimes it will hardly admit the top of the Finger.
In Men the Cavity is less than in Beasts; But the Substance of the little
Bladder is much more solid, as being very thin, smooth and soft in Brutes, in
Men thicker.

X. From the upper part of the Receptacle Ductus Chyliferus of the Breast.
rises a Branch somewhat broad, called the Ductus Chiliferus of the Breast, or
the Great Lymphatic, consisting of a thin and pellucid small Membrane, like the
Receptacle, leaning upon the Backbone about the middle below the great Artery,
covered with the thin skin that covers the Ribs, and winding somewhat toward
the right side of the Artery, where it is more conspicuous in its lower part,
the Guts being removed to the right side, with the Mesentery and the Diaphragma
cut off. Hence proceeding farther upward under the Great Artery, about the
fifth and sixth Verteber of the Breast, it turns a little without the Great
Artery toward the left side, and so between the Intercostal Arteries and Veins,
ascends to the sinister Subclavial, into which it opens in the lower part or
side, in that part where the sinister Iugular enters into it in the upper
place. But at the entrance it does not open into it with a wide Gaping, but
with six or seven little small Holes, covered over together with a little broad
Valve in the inner Concavity of the Subclavial Vein, which Valve looks from the
Shoulder toward the Vena Cava, where is appointed the Ingress of the Chylus
and Lymphatic Juice out of the Ductus Chyliferus into the Subclavial Vein; but
the Return of the same Juice, and of the Blood also into the said Chanel out of
the Subclavial Vein, is prevented.

XI. Sometimes two Branches, somewhat Two Channels.
swelling, ascend from the Receptacle, which nevertheless we find united below
in the middle under the Great Artery, as if there were but one Chanel only in
the upper part.

XII. In Human Bodies sometimes, Two or more Receptacles of the Chyle.
though very seldom, there are to be found two or three Receptacles of the
Chylus, and from each arise particular Ductus's, which being united in their
Progress, at length with one Ductus proceed to the left Subclavial Vein.

XIII. Their usual Insertion is into The Insertion.
the left Subclavial Vein, as well in Men as in Beasts; but very rarely do
Anatomists observe the Insertion into both Subclavial Veins. Whence I judge
that it is scarce to be found in one Beast of an hundred. Thus Bartholinus
reports that he found the Insertion of the Ductus Chyliferus into the left
Subclavial Vein in the Dissections of six Men and several Beasts, and once only
in a Dog its Ingress into the right Subclavial also. Pecquet observed two
Branches ascending upwards, joined here and there together in the Midway, with
several parallel little Branches, and meeting together at the third Verteber of
the Breast, and then divided again, of which one entered the right, the other
the left Subclavial.

XIV. In the inner part, this Chanel Its Valves.
has many Valves, preventing the Return of the Chylus and ascending Lymphatic
Juice, sufficiently manifest from hence, because the Chylus contained in it may
be easily forced upward by the Finger, but by no means downward; and for that
the Ductus being bored thorough in any part, the Milkie Juice tending upward
from the lower part, flows out; but in the upper part, above the little wound,
stays within the Valves, nor will descend to the wound made in the Chanel.
Moreover, for that the Breath blown into it, through a small Pipe thrust into
it; or Liquor injected into it through a Syringe, easily ascends upward, but
cannot be forced downward.

XV. The Discovery of this Ductus The way to discover it.
Chyliferus belonging to the Breast, is not always equally to be made with the
same easiness, for that because its Tunicle is pellucid, and lies under the
inner clothing of the Ribs, it is not so easily obvious to the sight,
especially if it be empty of Chyle, as frequently it is some hours after Meals,
or after Fasting: but it presently appears when it swells with a whitish
Chylus. And therefore it presently shows it self in live Dogs, or strangled
three or four hours after a full Meal. And then also the Ingress of the Milkie
Mesenteric Veins into the Receptacle of the Chyle, from the great Glandule of
the Mesentery, manifestly displays it self. Bartholinus writes that he readily
found this Chanel with the Receptacle in the Bodies of two men newly hanged,
that had fed heartily before their deaths. In such as lie sick, and dye of the
Disease, it is hard to be discovered, as being empty of Chylus, for that sick
People eat very little, especially when Death approaches, and that their
Stomach makes hardly any Chylus out of the Nourishment received. Nevertheless
in the Year 1654. I found it in two Persons that died through the Violence of
the Disease, and showed it to some Students in Physic. First in April, in the
Body of a Woman emaciated by a long Disease, but while she lived, very thirsty.
In which Body, the next day after the Woman died, I found it swelled with
Serous and Lymphatic Humor, and showed it to the Spectators that were present.
The second time was in May, in the Body of a Woman that died of a Pleurisy, in
her right side, and in her life time, provoked by continual thirst, had drank
very much: and for that reason, both the Receptacle and this Ductus were very
much swelled with Serous Humors. But in both Bodies I found the Situation of
the Chanel to be such, as it used to be in Dogs, and that its Insertion was
into the sinister Subclavial. Only in the first Body the Receptacle of the
Chylus was small, in the latter more large, as admitting into it the whole
Joint of the Thumb. Afterward we have searched for, and found this Ductus in
several Human Bodies, though we have found some variety as to the Receptacle, as
sometimes that there was but only one, sometimes that one distinguished or
divided with a small Membrane in the middle; sometimes by reason of a double
protuberancy, they seemed to be two distinct Receptacles: and sometimes that
out of this one Ductus very seldom two arose; which afterward closed together
in one. But hitherto we never found in Men the Insertion of this Ductus into
the right Subclavial, but always into the left.

XVI. But whether the Ductus Chyliferus sends any Branches to the Breasts and
Womb, we shall inquire in our Discourse of the Womb and Teats.

While we were writing this, came Lewis de Bill's Circle.
forth in Print a small Dutch Treatise of Lewis de Bills, wherein he boasts to
have found out a much further Propagation of the Lactiferous and Chyliferous
Vessels. For he writes, and gives you the draught of it in a Plate annexed,
that the Ductus Chyliferus belonging to the Breast, makes a wreathed Circle to
the Division of the Jugular Veins (which afterward some rather choose to call
the Labyrinth, others the Twisted Turning) and that two little Branches ran
from it to the Glandules of the Teats, and two ascended further upwards to the
Glandules of the Neck. For my part, I have several times searched for the
Continuation of this Contorted Circle with the Chyliferous Duct of the Breast,
but could never bring or follow this Chanel farther than the Subclavial Vein.
Nevertheless, understanding by report of others, that the said Circle could not
often be found, yet that it was sometimes discovered by Steno and others, I
ordered my Dissections of Dogs after another manner, that is, from the upper
part of the Throat to the Sternum or Breastbone, and upon several diligent
Inquisitions after this Circle, sometimes I found it manifestly conspicuous,
especially if it were blown up; for so it became most obvious to the View of
the Spectators. At other times I found nothing else, but only a various
Concourse of several Lymphatic Vessels, taking their Rise out of the Jugular
Glandules, the Glandules behind the Ears, and others adjacent thereto, and
thence running out to several Veins, and then discharging it self into them. In
the mean time I observed this also very accurately, That this Concourse of
small Lymphatic Vessels, was not continued with the Chyliferous Duct of the
Breast, nor received the Chylus from, or carried it farther to the Glandules
that lie round it, as Lewis de Bills erroneously asserts; but quite the
contrary, that that Lymphatic Juice was carried from the said Glandules to that
Lymphatic Circle or various Concourse of several Vessels (I say various,
because it is not always the same in all Bodies) and thence by means of several
little Branches spreading farther, is emptied into several Veins, as the
Glandules of the Armpits and Groins, by means of their Lymphatic Vessels,
exonerate their Lymphatic Juice for the most part into the Milkie Vessels.

XVII. But though this Circle has appeared to us now and then, and other times
not at all; yet it is manifest that some could never discover it. For of late
their came to our hands, the Anatome of the Bilsian Anatome, by Jacob Henry
Paulus Royal Professor in the Academy of Hoppenhaghen, wherein that Learned
Person utterly explodes the said Bilsian Labyrinth, as a mere Fable, because he
could never find it, but only some kind of Concourse of small Lymphatic
Vessels, as aforesaid. His words are these, L. 6. of the said Book: The new
Chylifer Chanel, says he, which D. John van Horn has first divulged, (he means
the Pectoral Chanel) when it leaves the Breast, does not again ascend toward
the Throat, or come to be taken notice of again: And the wreathed Receptacle of
Bilsius, with its Windings, Turnings, Pipes, Branches and small Twigs, is
nothing else but the Propagations and Excurrencies of the Lymphatic Iugular
Vessels from the upper Glandules to the Glandules of the Armpits, and this on
both sides. Wherein Nature sports her self after a wonderful manner, in the
same manner as in the Veins of the Hands and Feet, and which have been obvious
to me at several times in several varieties. But generally they kept this
Order, that the Ductus proceeds alone by it self from the Oblong Glandule of
the Iaw, where it lies between the huddle of the Parotides, and Wharton's
Glandules at the lower Seat of the Larynx, called Thyroidae, accompanied
sometimes with three or four small Branches, which often close with another
Branch, proceeding from the lesser Glandules, which adjoyns to the Caro idal
Artery, and the Internal Iugular Vein, though* not always. This Ductus then
forsaking the Gullet, over which it is spread, associates it self to the
External Iugular Vein, and creeping under it, sometimes crosses over, sometimes
passes by two other Lymphatic Vessels, which proceeding from the Glandules of
the Neck, in the middle of the Neck mutually embrace and bind each other, and
are the occasion of many Branches, but no proper Circle, unless a man will
fancy it so to be. And therefore that famous Circle is a mere Labyrinth, and an
inextricable Error. But all those Propagations of Vessels, when they have once
reached and passed the Branch of the External Iugular (to which frequently
adjoyns a small Glandule also) proceeding from the Muscle that bends the Head
or Mastoides, fall into a common Ductus like a Glass Viol, with a wide Belly,
and as it were blown like a bladder, so that it might not improperly be called
a Receptacle by Bilsius. From which, at length, double Appendixes extend
themselves, of which the one enters the Armpit Vein, near the Pipe of the rough
Artery, in the place where the Carotidal Arteries arise from the Trunk: the
other at a little distance enters the External Iugular: To which another
Lymphatick Vessel (which hitherto Anatomists have derived originally from the
Joints) joins it self from the Subaxillary Glandules. So that there happens a
meeting of several Insertions, that is below, of the Pectoral Ductus (an Error;
for that never passes beyond the Subclavial Vein) from the side of the Axillary
Vessels; above, of the Lymphatical Iugular Vessels, and Vessels arising out of
the Thymus, which is one of the Iugular Glandules, but seldom any passing of
one into another.

XVIII. This Description the same Author, in a new Plate annexed, apparently
demonstrates, and in the same seventh Chapter, adds the way to find out the
Iugular Lymphatics.

But though the foresaid Doctor Paulus wittily enough derides Bilsius's Circle,
yet is it not probable that Bilsius at his dissection should delude so many
Learned Men that were present, into that Blindness and Madness, as to testify
in a Public Writing, that they saw such a Circle clearly by him demonstrated,
which was not really there to be seen: Could they be all so blind? Besides, we
our selves, and several others, have seen this Circle, though we could not always
find it. Which we the rather believe may happen through the Sport of Nature, in
regard that in some Dogs the Circle is found to be perfect; in others only a
disorderly Concourse of Lymphatic Vessels about the Throat. To conclude then, I
assert this in the mean time, That this Circle is no Production of the
Thoracical Ductus Chyliferus (as Bilsius erroneously avers and delineates) and
that, as has been said, it receives no Chylus from it, nor carries any Chylus,
but is a Chanel into which the Lymphatic Juice, being carried from the
Circumjacent Glandules, and other parts, and to be conveyed into the
neighboring Veins, and other parts, is collected together.

Now whether the Chylus and Lymphatic Humor be one and the same thing, or
whether distinct Juices. See Chap. 13. following.

XIX. The use of the Chyliferous The use.
or Great Lymphatic Pectoral Ductus, is to conveigh the Lymphatic Juice
continually, and the Chylus at certain Intervals, being forced out of the
Milkie Mesaraic Vessels, and attenuated therein, by the mixture of the
Lymphatic Juice, to the Subclavial Vein, to the end the Lymphatic Juice may
prepare the Blood to cause an Effervescency in the heart, and that the Chylus
mixed with the Venal Blood, and carried together with it through the Vena Cava
to the Heart; may be changed by that into Blood.

XX. That the Chylus and Lymphatic The ascent of the Chylus.
Juice ascends upward, not only the Situation of the Valves, but ocular
observation in the very Dissection of Animals, sufficiently teach us, by means
of a string tied about this Chanel; for presently there will be a swelling
between the Knot and the Receptacle, and a lankness above the Ligature. Which
Experiment proves successful in a Dog newly hanged, if when the Knot is tied,
the Guts, together with the Mesentery, be lightly pressed by the hand, and so
by that Compression the Chylus be squeezed out of the Chyliferous Mesaraic
Vessels into the Receptacle, and out of that into the Pectoral Ductus.

XXI. Now that the Chylus enters the Subclavial Vein, together with the
Lymphatic Juice, and thence is carried to the Heart through the Vena Cava,
besides that what has been already said concerning the Holes, is obvious to the
sight; it is also apparent from hence, for that a good quantity of Milk being
injected into the Ductus Chyliferus, it is forthwith carried into the
Subclavial Vein, hence into the Vena Cava and right Ventricle of the Heart,
together with the Blood contained in the Vena Cava, and may be seen to flow out
at the Wound made in the Ventricle.

XXII. Now the Cause Impulsive that The impulsive Cause.
forces the Chylus, together with the Lymphatic Juice, out of the Receptacle
into this Ductus Pectoralis, and so forward into the Subclavial Vein, is the
same that forces it out of the Guts into the Milkie Mesaraic Vessels (of which
in the preceding Chapter, that is to say, the Motion of the Muscles of the
Abdomen, moved upward and downward with the act of Respiration, which causes a
soft and gentle. Impulsion of the Chylus through all the Milkie Vessels, which
impulse is conspicuously manifest from hence; for that if in a living Creature
the Muscles of the Abdomen be opened and dissected, and thereby their Motion be
taken away, and then the Bowels of the lower Belly be gently squeezed,
presently we shall see the Milkie Juice move forward, and crowd through all the
Milkie Vessels; and though that Compression has no Operation upon the Pectoral
Ductus, yet the Chylus forced into it by that Compression out of the
Receptacle, is by that forced upward, as one Wave pushes forward another.

XXIII. Here now arises a Question, Whether the whole Chylus ascend to the
Subclavial.
Whether the whole Chylus ascend through this Chanel to the Subclavial? and
whether or no also a great part of it do not enter the Mesaraicks, and so
ascend to the Liver? To which, we say, that the whole Chylus passes to the
Subclavial Vein, except that which out of the Chyliferous Bag, by an
extraordinary Course sometimes, though very seldom flows to the Urine Bladder,
(of which see more c. 18.) or else in Women with Child, according to its
ordinary course flows to the Womb, (See c. 30.) or in Women that give suck to
the Breasts; (See l. 2. c. 2.) But Regius is of another Opinion, believing that
part of the Chylus is carried to the Spleen out of the Stomach through the
Gastric Veins, and part through the Mesaraics to the Liver. Of which, the one
is refuted by us in the preceding Chap. 7. and the other L. 7. c. 2. Deusingius
smartly maintains, that the whole Chylus is not carried to the Subclavial
through the Ductus Thoracicus, and confirms his Opinion by these Arguments.
Exercit. de Chylificat. and Chylimotu.

1. Says he, There is no congruous proportion of Nature between the
innumerable Milkie Veins scattered through the Mesentery, and the Thoracic
Ducts (which nevertheless are seldom more than one) conveighing the Chylus
beyond the Axillary Veins. 2. How shall the Thoracic Duct be able, without
prejudice, to transmit such a quantity of Chylus, carried through so many
Milkie Vessels, to the Receptacle of the Chylus? 3. So very small a portion of
the Chylus as is carried through the Ductus Thoracicus to the Axillaries and
Vena Cava, does not suffice to supply the continual waste of Blood, agitated
and boiling through the whole Body, nor to repair the continual wearing out of
all the parts. 4. Seeing there is a great quantity of Chyle made, and but very
little can pass through the streights of the Ductus Thoracicus, where shall the
rest of the Chylus remain, which between every Meal is not able to pass through
the small Thoracic Duct? 5. That same largest quantity of the Chylus, which in
time of Breeding and giving Suck, is carried to the Womb and Dugs, whither is
that carried, when the time of Breeding and giving Suck is over, when it is
very probable that it cannot pass through the Ductus Thoracicus. 6. If the
Ductus Thoracicus of a live Animal be quickly tied with a string, the motion of
the Milkie Liquour in the Mesentery is not perceived to be hindered.
And then he adds the Experiment of Lewis de Bills, by which he believes it to
be obvious to sight.

These are the principal Arguments by which that Famous Artist endeavors to
uphold his Opinion. Now let us examine of what weight they are, and whether they
are so ponderous as they promise to be, to the end we may see whether Truth
will give her voice for this acute Invention.

XXIV. I answer to the first and second, That there is not only a lesser but a
greater Proportion between the Milkie Mesenteric Vessels, and one or two
Thoracic Ducts, than there is between so many innumerable Veins that proceed
from the Head, the Trunk, the Feet, the Arms, and some other Parts, and one
Vena Cava into which they all evacuate themselves. For if we consider so many
Myriads of Veins, all of 'em may be thought to evacuate into the Vena Cava ten
times as much Blood, as either the Vena Cava can contain, or disburthen from it
self. And yet who does not see that it is done without any disorder; and why
therefore should we wonder that the same should be conveniently done in the
Milkie Vessels? Besides, we must consider that the flowing of the Chylus is not
so continual; for many times there is a great distance between the two Meals,
at what time there is no Chylus that is either made or flows (which is manifest
to the Eye in Creatures hanged a long time after they have fed, in which those
Vessels are found empty of Chylus) and that Men who feed often, or else eat to
excess, and therefore neither Concoct the Chylus over hastily, or in over great
quantity, so that it cannot swiftly make its way through those Passages, such
men are out of order, either because they do not digest the Food they have
eaten sufficiently, or for that the quantity of the Chylus being too great,
cannot pass quick enough through those Milkie Vessels, and therefore by the
way, by reason of its longer stay, grows thick, sour, coagulates, or is
otherwise corrupted, which breeds Obstructions, and impedes the Passage of the
Chylus. Lastly, If we may argue from similitude, we must consider how much
serous Humor passes in a little time through the narrow Ureters: which, if it
may be done with so little trouble in those Vessels, why may not so much pass
through the Milkie Vessels, and the Ductus Thoracicus?

XXV. To the third and fourth I answer, That the portion of the Chylus that
passes through the Ductus Thoracicus, is not so small in quantity, but very
copious, as is obvious to the sight. If a living Dog be quickly opened four or
five hours after he has been well fed, and the Milkie Vessels in the middle of
the Breast be cut away, and then the Intestines together with the Mesentery, be
alternately and softly pressed by the hand, so they be relaxed (as in
Respiration that Compressure is alternately made in healthy and living
Creatures) then it will appear what a quantity of Chylus passes through that
Vessel in the Breast. For in a short time a great quantity will flow forth into
the hollowness of the Breast; neither shall any thing be discerned to flow
thither through any other Passages. Moreover, by the singular Observation of
Walaeus, there is wasted every day in a healthy Plethoric Person, very near a
pound of Blood. Is it impossible that in a whole days time a pound of Chylus
should pass through the Milkie Vessels, to restore and supply that waste of
Blood? In the space of half a quarter of an hour we have squeezed out above two
Ounces by the same way as is before expressed, how much therefore might pass in
a whole day? certainly much more may be thought to pass than is wasted,
supposing that the Chylus were continually present in the Guts, from whence
being continually present, and still passing, proceeds the growth and increase
of the Body, and the Plethory is caused. To this may be added Lower's
Experiment, cited by Gualter Needham, l. de Format. Foet. c. 1. who in a live
Dog having made a hole in the right side of his Breast, tore the Receptacle of
the Chylus with his Finger near the Diaphragma, and then sewing up the External
Wound, preserved the Dog alive: nevertheless, though the Dog were very well fed,
within three days, he died, as being starved to death: but then after he had
opened the Body, the whole Chylus was found to be crammed into that part of the
Breast which was wounded, and the Veins being opened, the blood was seen to be
much thicker without any serous Humor, or Refreshment by any mixture of the
Chylus.

XXVI. To the fifth I answer, That a great part of the Chylus that is wont to
be carried through the Ductus Thoracicus to the Subclavial Vein, during the
time of breeding and giving suck, is carried to the Womb and the Dugs, and
because that for want of that Chylus, which is carried another way, the Woman's
Body is not sufficiently nourished; hence those Women (if they be otherwise
healthy) by the force of Nature, become more hungry and greedy, that by eating
and drinking that defect may be supplied and that in the mean time the
Necessities of Nature may be furnished, which requires Nourishment for the
Embryo or Birth. But if through any Distemper of the Stomach, or of any other
Parts, those Women are not so hungry, but eat little or less than they were
wont to do, then they grow weak, by reason that the Chylus is carried another
way for the Nourishment of the Birth, and are emaciated almost to skin and
bone, as we find by daily Experience.

XXVII. To the sixth, That when the Pectoral Chanel is tied, and the Creature
lies a dying, we see that the Milkie Mesentery, being partly pressed by the
adjoining Parts that lie upon 'em, and partly flagging one upon another, vanish
by little and little. This is true; but not because the Chylus enters the
Mesaraic Veins, but because it is poured forth into the Chyliferous Bag, and
the Ductus Thoracicus, which are then dilated and extended more than is usual
by the Chylus, and when they can hold no more, then it stays about the great
Glandule of the Mesentery in the Milkie Mesaraics, and may be seen therein for
a whole day and longer, which could not be, if the Chylus entered the Mesaraic
Veins.

XXVIII. As for the Experiment of Lewis de Bills, which has seduced too
unwarily several Learned Men into another Opinion, what is to be thought of
that, we shall tell you L. 7. c. 2.

John Swammerdam in his Miracles of Whether the whole Chylus ascend through the
Mesaraic Veins to the Liver?
Nature p. 29. promising to himself that he will restore to the Liver the
Office of Sanguification, or of making Blood, affirms, that the whole Chylus
ascends through the Mesaraic Veins to the Liver, and that what we see in the
milkie Vessels is nothing else but a whitish lymphatic Juice. And this he
proves from hence, for that as he says, we find the Blood as it were streaked
and mixed with white Lines in the Mesaraics, sometimes as it were marked with
Spots, and sometimes he found nothing but pure Chylus in 'em; and at length he
adds these Words; In the Gate Vein, though not tied, we have often seen the
Chylus, and taken it out of the same; and we have seen many of the Mesaraics
filled with Chylus. Now if any Person will suffer himself to be persuaded into
these things, let him, for me, I envy him not. But for my part I give more
Credit to Asellius, Pecquet, Deusingius, Wharton, and several others, but
especially to my own Eyes; than to such Writings as these: Unless Swammerdam
can prove all that I have named to have bin Purblind, and his own Party the
only sharp-sighted People in the World. For they that have any Skill in Anatomy
are to be persuaded rather by Demonstration than by Writing, as be such who
have Eyes in their Heads and believe what they see. But in regard that
Swammerdam promises to explain these things more at large in his Anatomicis
Curiosis (so he calls his Treatise which is now in the Press) we will there
expect a more curious Explanation, in the mean time we will stick to our former
Opinion. But why the Blood is sometimes of a bad Color in the Mesaraics we
shall show l. 7. c. 2. However Swammerdam, to confirm his own Opinion, adds
another Argument taken from that which never any one could yet demonstrate,
that the Chylus is carried out of the Guts into the milkie Veins of the first
sort. But by the same Argument will I prove, that the Chylus is not carried
into the Mesaraic Veins, because no Man could ever yet demonstrate its Ingress
out of the Guts into those Veins. It Is true that John Horn Epist. ad Rolphin.
says he can make it out by Demonstration, but was never yet so good as his
Word; though if there be any at this day who pretend to do it, I wish they would
admit me to be a Spectator, and then I may be able to judge of these Sayings.
Again, No Man could ever yet demonstrate to the Eye the manifest Passage of the
Seed out of the Testicles through the different Vessels into the little
seminary Bladder: Does this prove that the Seed is not conveyed through these
Passages in living People, because it cannot be demonstrated in dead Bodies? The
Seed conspicuous in the Parastatae or Vessels affixed to the back of the
Testicles, and the seminary Vessels, without any more manifest Demonstration,
sufficiently prove, that it ought to be conveyed out of the Testicles and
Parastatae through those Vessels, seeing that the Seed is made in no other
Parts out of the Testicles, (as we shall show c. 22.) and there are no other
Passages to the seminary Vessels. In like manner when we see that the Chylus
concocted in the Stomach flows no where else than to the Intestins, and is then
conspicuous with its white Color, which is apparent from those white Chylous
Stools in the Coeliac Fluxes or Looseness of the Belly, and is also seen to be
no less white in the milkie mesenteric Vessels, the chyliferous Bagg, and the
pectoral milkie Channel: Nay seeing moreover, that after long Famine the Guts
being emptied of the Chylus, it is no longer to be found in the said milkie
Vessels, nor does any such white Liquor appear in any other Vessels; What Man
in his Wits, by the Dictate of Reason only, will question whether the Chylus
passes out of the Guts into the milkie mensenteric Vessels, and thence are
pressed forward to the rest of the milkie Vessels, though the first Entrance were
never yet demonstrated to the Eye. The Defect of which Demonstration proceeds
from hence, that there is such a pressing and moving forward of the Humors and
Spirits in the Bowels and other Parts which are entire and endu'd with Life,
which no Art can perfectly demonstrate to the Eye in dead, mangled, and
dissected Bodies. In the mean time how the Chylus passes out of the Guts into
the milkie mesenteric Vessels, has bin already shown in the foregoing Chapter.
Lastly, what Swammerdam writes, That it is only a white lymphatic Juice which
is carried through the milkie Vessels, let him, I beseech him, tell that Story
to those that know no Difference between the Lympha and the Chylus, nor can
distinguish between those Liquors or Juices.

We affirm and demonstrate that both Liquors pass through the said milkie
Vessels, and why the milkie Liquor is mixed with the lymphatic Juice, we teach
a little before in the same Chapter, and in the following 17.

XXIX. Besides the Passage of the Chylus already mentioned, which many maintain
to be through the Mesaraics to the Vena Porta, Riolanus l. 2. Enchir. c. 18.
Walaeus Epist. ad Barthol. and Maurocordatus l. de mot. and us. Pulm. c. 13.
write, That they have observed the Distribution of the Chylus to other Parts;
and farther relate that they have taken notice that the milkie Vessels run
forward to the very Liver, the Sweetbread, the Trunck of the Vena Cava, near
the Emulgents, to the Vena Porta and Mesenteric, and some others. But all those
learned Men were most apparently deceived by the lymphatic Vessels, which they
thought to be the milkie Vessels, as is apparent from the Text of the forecited
Places, and from what shall be said in the following Chapter concerning the
Rise and Distribution of the Lymphatics.

CHAP. XIII. Of the lymphatic Vessels of the Lympha.
I. THE lymphatic Vessels are thin The Definition.
and pellucid Vessels, conveighing the Lympha, which is a thin transparent, and
clear Liquor, to the Vasa Chylifera and the Veins.

II. The first Discoverers of these The Discoverers.
were Thomas Bartholinus, and Olaus Rudbech, between whom there is a very great
and sharp Dispute for the Honor of the first Discovery, while each one assumes
to himself. These two in Years 1650 and 1651, searching after something else in
dead Bodies, happened by chance into the Knowledge of these Vessels, perhaps
neither of 'em knowing that the other had made the Discovery, so that both may
contend unjustly to ascribe that Honor singly to themselves, which may be
equally due to both. However Glisson and Charleton affirm that these Vessels
were discovered and shown at London by one Ioliff an English Man, before they
were made known by Bartholinus. But Bartholine in his Spicilege, affirms upon
his Word, that he knew that Ioliff was not born before his Discovery, and that
he never knew him either by Name or by Report.

III. Bartholine gives to these Vessels The Names.
the Names of Lymphatic, Watery, and Crystalline, and the Liquor therein
contained he called by a very proper Name, Lympha, from its Clearness and
crystalline Brightness. Olaus Rudbech chooses rather to call 'em the watery
Channels of the Liver and Glandules.

IV. They consist of clear and cobweb-like The Substance.
Skin, out of which being brok'n, if the Water happen to flow out, they
presently disappear, because their Tunicles are affixed to the Vessels and
Membranes that lie under 'em, from which, by reason of their extreme Thinness
and Clearness, they cannot be distinguished.

V. Their Number is not to be Their Number.
numbered, and therefore not to be certainly determined.

VI. Their Color is Transparent Color and Shape.
and Chrystalline: Their Shape Oblong, full of Holes, and hollow like the
Veins, but very knotty: Their Breadth but very small.

VII. They have several Valves admitting Their Valves.
the Lympha into the Vasa Chylifera, and several Veins, but hindering its
Return. These Valves has Lewis de Bills most obstinately all along denied, till
they were shown him at the Hague, delineated in Plates, and made public in a
printed Treatise by Frederic Ruysch, a most excellent Physician and Anatomist,
who discovered 'em bent like a Crescent, fixed to the Sides of the Vessels, and
placed opposite one to another, but much more numerous and thinner than any
that are to be met with in the Veins. Which Valves may be also observed without
any opening of the Vessels: For the Lympha contained being pressed with the
Finger contrary to its proper Motion, is every where stopped by the Valves.

VIII. Lewis de Bills, who had Bils's Error.
called these Vessels before the Dewbearing-Channels, finding himself convinced
by Dr. Ruisch as to the Valves, presently invented a kind of Evasion, and
published it abroad to save his Reputation in a little Discourse Printed at
Rotterdam 1668. He distinguishes between the lymphatic Juice and the Dew;
confessing the one to be carried to the Veins and milkie Vessels through the
lymphatic Vessels, which are furnished with Valves, and affirms this to have
bin found out by himself many Years before (though how truly, appears by
Bartholinus's Answer de experiment. Bilsian. to Nich. Zas, Printed 1661. p.
11.) but this he says flows through particular little Pipes, consisting of very
small Fibers woven together, but furnished with no folding Shutters, seated
among the Veins and Tunicles of the Arteries and lymphatic Vessels, like a kind
of Moss, with a continued Course from the inner Parts to the exterior. An
excellent Evasion indeed, whereby he endeavors to underprop the Truth of his
first Opinion by certain imaginary little Pipes. I call 'em Imaginary, because
that as yet never any, though but a young Practitioner in Anatomy, who does not
easily apprehend there can be no such Pipes in Nature, when the Tunicles of the
Veins and Arterys so closely adhere and stick one to another, that they are
hardly separable by any Art, and that there are no such intervening of Pipes or
any other Passages to be seen, though Men had Lynx's Eyes, much less
demonstrable: Seeing that in regard of this same close sticking of the
Tunicles, many sharp-sighted Anatomists have questioned, whether the Veins
consist of one or two Tunicles. Which may be said of the lymphatic Vessels,
which seem to consist of one single Tunic.

IX. There can be no certain Situation Their Situation.
assigned to the lymphatic Vessels; in regard they are to be found in several
Parts of the Body, and in the Trunck accompanying many Veins, especially the
greater, and seem to be fastened to 'em by little Fibers. Many are also
conspicuous in the Middle, and innumerable in the lower Belly, which do not
accompany the bigger Veins. Many also are found in the Arms at the sides of the
Brachial Vein; as also in the Thighs, sticking to the Iliac and Crural Veins.
Some there are that hold that these Vessels are joined to the Muscles, but I
could never observe any in the Muscles themselves.

X. Concerning their Rise, there Their Rise.
have bin formerly very great Disputes; but by the singular Industry of modern
Anatomists, those Mists are in a great Measure scattered. Nicholas Steno, a
most accurate Dissecter, has labored so diligently in search of their Rise,
that at last l. de Musc. and gland. he pronounces for certain upon the
Testimony of his own View, that there is an Intercourse between all the
lymphatic Vessels and the Glandules, especially such as are clustered together;
which to that purpose have a kind of Hollowness in the Middle, in which that
Liquor is collected out of the Body of the Glandule, as having a farther
Journey to make through the lymphatic Vessels. Thus also Malpigius, lib. de
hepat. writes, that all the lymphatic Vessels, in what Parts soever, still
every where arise out of the clustered Glandules, which are found in a thousand
Places of the Body, even those that proceed out of the very Liver. Which he
affirms, as having found those Glandules in the Hollow and Covering of the
Liver of a Calf, where the bloody Vessels, and the Hepatic Channel enter it. In
like manner Frederic Ruisch reports that he has in the Liver of a Man found, as
it were, a Chain of Glandules; under the Gallbladder, which were hard but
mixed with no Blood.

XI. A great Number of these Vessels go forth from the Liver, which is manifest
to the Sight, though no Ligature be made use of, but if a Ligature be made use of
between the Stomach and the Liver in that part of the Mesentry which knits the
Liver to the Ventricle and Guts, by which Ligature the Vena Portae, with the
Bilarie shall be comprehended: Then presently (if the Experiment be tried upon
a living Creature) between the Ligature and the Liver, there will be a Swelling
of these Vessels, which will more increase if the Liver be gently pressed by
the Hand. But they chiefly arise out of the hollow Part of the Liver, where the
Glandules aforesaid are principally seated, and some of 'em cross over the
Vesicle of the Gall. But whether or no, or how they run through the Substance
it self of the Liver, that is not visible to the Eye, nor can it be as yet
found out by any Instruments or any other Art. Glisson, in Anat. Hepat.
searching backward, found that they creep under the Capsula of the Vena Portae
(which Capsula is a Membrane from the Peritoneum enfolding the Vena Portae,
where it enters the Liver) and that there they hide themselves, nor could he
observe any farther Progress; from the Conjecture it might be probable, that
they follow the Distribution of the Capsula, and Bilarie Passage included in
the same, and never enter the Substance of the Liver. But to us it seems more
likely, that arising out of the clustered Glandules seated in the hollow part
of the Liver, they presently break forth and show themselves; and therefore
that they neither follow the Course of the Capsula and Bilarie Passage, nor can
be much dispersed through the Substance of the Liver.

XII. How Pecquet has observed tho Egress of the lymphatic Vessels out of the
Liver, he himself describes lib. de lact. Thorac. of the second Edition.

Behold, says he, having slit the Belly of a live Dog, I search for the
lymphatic Passages. These being supported by the Trunck of the Vena* Portae,
after the manner of Ivy, presently show themselves* to the greedy Eyes of those
that are called to the Sight. Then after many Encomiums to the eternal Memory
of Bartholine, seeing some running toward the Duodenum, other toward the Center
of the Mesentry, like so many Furrows, I bind'em apart from the Porta with
several Strings. From the Liver all swelling upon their being tied, the other
way languid, vanished from the sharpest Eye; then loosning the Knots, the
Lympha pouring out of the Liver again, through various Springs most worthy to
be observed, by the means of most evident Vehicles of Aqueducts, it seemed to
creep into the Sweetbread.

These things has Pecquet excellently well observed (though at that time he knew
not the true Rise of those Vessels from the clustered Glandules of the Liver)
for the lymphatic Vessels issuing out of the Liver, through the Duplicature of
part of the Mesentery knitting the Liver and Guts to the Back, creep on as well
above as below the Sides of the Vena Portae, and Ductus Cholidochus, the
greatest part toward the Mesentery; and under the Vena Cava, near the fleshy
Pancreas annexed to the Ventricle and Duodenum, several with little dispersed
Branches pass over a certain Glandule lying under the Vena porta, and sticking
to it in many Bodies (being sometimes one, sometimes two or three, seldom none
at all) and thence together with many others, passing beyond that Glandule,
throw themselves into the Receptacle of the Chylus.

XIII. Now lately that accurate Dissector Frederic Ruisch, has observed also
several lymphatic Vessels to proceed from the Spleen, not only from the
Superficies, but from the inner Part of it, accompanying the splenic Arteries
and Nerves, and sets down a singular Method by which it may be found out lib.
de Valv. Lymph. And farther notes, that they are not equally so numerous in all
Creatures of the same Species; and that the Spleen of a Man has fewer than that
of a Calf.

XIV. The same Ruisch, in the From the Lungs.
same Book, writes that he has also seen lymphatic Vessels in the Lungs.
Bartholin avers the same; and Olaus Rudbech has caused 'em to be engraved in
Copper.

XV. Moreover in other Parts these Vessels arise from the clustered Glandules;
which Glandules have this specific Virtue, to imbue the saltish Particles
separated from the Serum, by Dissolution with a slight Acidity: For the Lympha
contains in it somewhat of Acid. They that proceed Their Insertion into several
Parts.
from the Glandules of the Neck, empty themselves for the most part into the
Labyrinth (of which in the foregoing Chapter) or Concourse of the lymphatic
Vessels seated between the jugular Veins. But those that proceed from the
Axillary Glandules they descend, and partly according to the length of the Vena
Cava are carried to the Cystis of the Chylus; partly in the Midway, enter the
Thoracick Chyliferous Duct, into which is opened a Branch proceeding from the
Glandule of the Oesophagus or Gullet. Those that rise out of the Groyns of the
Loins, ascend, and running under the lower part of the chyliferous Receptacle,
empty their Lympha into it, at the Entrance fortified with double Folders,
preventing the slipping of the milky Juice into 'em. Now that several lymphatic
Vessels empty themselves into the Receptacle of the Chyle, is hence manifest,
if upon the opening of a live Animal, you press the Receptacle with your Thumb,
and so empty the Chylus out of it. For then it presently swells and is filled
up again with the Lympha.

XVI. Nor do they open only into Their Insertion inthe Veins.
the Vasa Chylifera, but also into many Veins. And thus Nicholas Steno
observed, that they gape into the Iugular and other Veins, and pour forth their
Lympha. And Frederic Ruisch writes, that it appears to him by Ligature, and the
Structure of the Valves, that all the Conveiances of the Lympha, which are
found in the Lungs, empty their Liquor into the Subclavial, Axillary, and
Iugular Veins. Whither they that arise out of the Joints are carried is not yet
discovered. Some there are who report they have seen clustered Glandules in the
Joints, from whence, no doubt, proceeds the Original of these Vessels; and as
to their Insertion, there is no doubt but that they discharge themselves into
the Vasa Chylifera, and into several Veins.

XVII. Lewis de Bills, out of his Bils's Error.
Ignorance of the Valves of the lymphatic Vessels, in his Epistolary
Dissertation published An. 1659. describes a quite contrary Course of the
Lympha, through a Mistake most remote from Truth, and seems not at all to
distinguish the Lympha from the chylous Juice. And the Admirers of Whether the
Lympha be the same with the chylous Juice;
B^s, choose rather to err with him, than to follow the Truth. Among the rest
Nicholas Zas, in his Dutch Treatise of the Dew of Animals; and others who have
seen the Demonstrations of Bills, believe they have observed the Lympha to be
the same thing with the chylous Juice contained in the milkie Vessels, and that
it is carried out of the Bag, and other chyliferous Vessels to the Liver, and
to the Glandules of the Groins, Armpits, Jaws, and others, and from them flows
also to the Spermatic parts, for to moisten and nourish 'em; but that it is not
carried from the Glandules and Liver to the Vasa Chylifera. Moreover that it
only appears thinner and clearer, as being strained through the Glandules.

XVIII. But our Eyes, and Reason The ^tation.
it self teaches us quite the Contrary.

XIX. Our Eysight thus: Because that besides myself, Bartholin, Van Horn,
Pecquer, N. Steno and several other Sharp-sighted Persons could never perceive
any other Course of this Liquor, than from the Liver, and not from the
Glandules of the Armpits, Loins, and Groyns, (and the same Reason certainly
will hold in other remoter Parts) toward many Veins, but chiefest of all toward
the Receptacle of the Chyle, and other Vasa Chylifera, to which it may be
easily forced with the Finger; but cannot be moved from them toward the
Glandules or Liver, by reason of the Obstruction of the Valves. Nay if in the
Dissection of a living Creature, the Vessels be tied (which has bin often
experimented by me and my Scholars) there will be a swelling between the Knot
and the Glandules, but a lankness and emptiness toward the Vasa Chylifera. Nor
is it of any moment what Regius offers, l. 4. Physic. c. 7. Edit. 1661. That
upon the tying of a Knot, these lymphatic Vessels will swell beyond the Knot;
because the Juice that was wont to be pressed into 'em, is not pressed forward
by reason of the Ligature, and hence when they fall, by their falling they
squeez the Juice contained in 'em backward toward the Ligature. But wherefore I
pray, do they not squeez it forward, seeing that by the same Reason it might
far more easily be done than backward? And if that Motion ought to be made
forward, why does it not so fall out in Veins that are tied, as well as in the
Mesenteric and Thoracick milkie Vessels? Wherefore do not these Vessels, when
the farther Progtess of the contained juice is obstructed by the Ligature, by
their Fall squeez the Juice backward toward the Ligature, but are almost quite
empty beyond the Ligature? Have they not the same Right and Power, as the
lymphatic Vessels? Wherefore also, when there is no Ligature, cannot the Lympha
be forced by the Finger from the chyliferous Bagg toward the Liver and
Glandules of the Groyns and Armpits, though it may be easily for^'d toward the
Vasa Chyliferae* Why do the Valves obstruct this, more than that Motion of the
Lympha? Certainly all these things plainly teach us that the Lympha does not
move from, but to the chyliferous Bag, and the Vasa Chylifera. In the Liver, or
a little below the Liver, the thing is so plainly manifest by the forementioned
Ligature, that it is beyond the Contradiction of any Man that has Eyes; whenas
there is no Chylus strained through the Liver, nor any Chylus that comes
thither, whatever Regius, Bills, and other Asserters of antiquated Learning and
erroneous Demonstrations, so vigorously maintain to the Contrary; as shall be
more largely proved l. 7. c. 2. Now then if this happen thus in the Liver, why
shall the same thing seem such a wonder in the forementioned Glandules, in
which the same thing is evident by Ligature? Why must the Glandules of the
Groyns and Armpits make milkie Juice, and not rather extract it out of the Vasa
Sanguifera themselves, in like manner as we see, that in the Ventricles of the
Brain, the small Glandules adhering to the Choroidal Plexure (so far as which
no milkie or chylous Liquor penetrates) extract a serous and lymphatic Liquor
out of the Vessels to which they adjoyn; and discharge it into the Cavities of
the Ventricles? However if any Follower or Admirer of Lemis de Bills, either
will be pleased, or can at any time demonstrate this thing otherwise to us, so
as to convince us by seeing it with our Eyes, we shall rest satisfied, in the
mean time we are bound to believe what we have hitherto seen and now asserted.

XX. Reason also gainsay's the foresaid Opinion: For that the milkie Juice of
the chyliferous Receptacle, cannot immediately upon its slipping out of the
Receptacle toward the Glandules, supposing 'em to be the Glandules of the
Groyns, changed into this pellucid and clear Lympha, and lose all its milkie
Color in a Moment. But this they say is done, because it is strained through
the Glandules lying in the Midway. But there are no Glandules where the
Insertion of the lower lymphatic Vessels into the Receptacle of the Chylus
shows it self. There are two indeed a little lower, but the various lymphatic
Vessels pass by 'em at such a Distance that they do not so much as touch 'em;
so that the Lympha contained in them cannot attain its transparent Thinness
from such a Straining. Others more studious of Novelty than Truth, that they
may by some means or other underprop this new Opinion, assert with Regius, that
the milkie Juice being infused with Violence into the Receptacle of the Chyle,
becomes Frothy and White, but by Cessa^ion, the Froth ceasing, becomes watery,
and flows to the Glandules, so colored like Water: Like brown Ale, which being
poured forcibly into the Glass, foams at the top with a white Froth, but let it
stand a little, and the Froth turns again to watery Liquor. But how lame this
Simile is, is every way apparent* For certainly there is not so much Violence
in the Motion of the Chylus which should occasion the chylous Juice to become
white and frothy; for that natural Motion proceeds softly and gently, of which
no more violent Motion can ever be felt by a Man, not discerned by the Eye in
Dissections of living Creatures. So that if it presently loses its white Color
(which they call Spumosity) descending from the chyliferous Bagg by a short way
to the Loins and Glandules of the Groins, why does it retain it in a Channel
four times as long, ascending to the subclavial Veins* Whence has it that
whiteness in the Intestines and milkie Mesaraics before it is infused into the
chyliferous Bagg with that feigned Violence? Wherefore standing quiet in the
milkie Vessels, or taken out in a Spoon, by that Sedateness does it not lose
its Color, but still preserve its whiteness?

XXI. And thus, whether we consider the Autopsia, viz. Ocular Convincement, or
Reason, the Lymphatic Vessels do not seem to have any other Original than from
the clustered Glandules, and the Parts by us already mentioned. And further
also, it manifestly appears that the Lympha is a Liquor very much distinct from
the Chylus.

XXII. After the description of these What sort of Liquor the Lympha is?
Channels or Vessels, let us examine in few words what sort of Liquor the Lympha
contained in 'em is. For the Opinions of Learned Men are very various in this
Matter; and every one advances his own as truest, or at least most probable.

XXIII. Bartholine de vas. Lymp. Whether Water.
Brut. c. 6. writes that the Lympha is a simple Water, being the remainder of
the Nourishment, as it is Elementary. This Martin Bocdan (who, Apol. 2. Memb.
11. Artic. 3. agrees with his Praeceptor) asserts in Man to be diffused between
the ^at Membrane and the Muscles, but in other Creatures is contained under the
Skin, and because it does not all transpire through the Skin, therefore that
these Vessels were made for its Evacuation. But both the one, and the other,
describe a very mean rise, substance, and use of this Lympha, when such a
simple Water could never be sufficiently expelled through the Pores only by the
heat of the Parts, nor would there be such a necessity for it to be carried
inward through the Pores of the Body. If you say that this is requisite for the
moist'ning of the Parts, certainly that Office is sufficiently performed by the
moisture of the Meat and Drink assumed. Besides, a mere Water never settles
into a Gelly, as this Lympha will do, if it stand a while in a Spoon.

XXIV. Glisson Anat. Hep. believes Whether a Vapor of the Blood.
the Lympha to be a Liquor consisting of the Vapors of the Blood, gathered
together like Dew, forced into these Vessels, and flowing back with the Vehicle
of the Nourishment brought through the Nerves. But this Opinion is confuted by
these Reasons; 1. Because such Vapors may easily thicken into Dew or Water, but
never like the Lympha into a Gelly. 2. For that the Supposition of the
Nutritive Juice being carried through the Nerves, is false, and by us C. 16. of
this Book, and L. 3. c. 11. and L. 8. c. 1. sufficiently refuted. 3. Because
the Vapors of the Blood, partly invisibly through the Pores, and visibly by
Sweat, partly by the Expiration of the Lungs, or else condensed, may be emptied
with the Urine, Stool, Weeping, etc. so that if that be all, there is nothing
that compells 'em to enter those Vessels.

XXV. Backius does not seem to Whether the Lymphatis Vessels are Veins.
differ much from Glisson, who seems to deduce those Vapors of the Blood out
of the Veins into these Vessels; for he affirms the Lymphatic Vessels to be
Veins arising from the veiny Trunk. But in regard there is a vast variety of
Substance between them and the Veins, and for that no such Original appears,
nor not so much as the least shadow of it, about the veiny Trunk, or Vena Cava;
seeing also they are never known to arise from any other Veins, but are
sometimes inserted into 'em out of the clustered Glandules, it is to be thought
that this Opinion is far from the Truth.

XXVI. George Seger, Dissert. Anat. Artic. 2. pronounces the Lympha to be the
Animal Spirits, or to be made out of 'em, which after they are distributed into
all Parts through the Nerves, are partly there consumed and dissipated, and
partly congeal into this Water.

With Seger agrees Francis de le Boe Sylvius, Disputat. Med. 4. These. 31. and
more at large Disput. 8. These. 40, 41. But that this Invention of Seger is more
Ingenious than True, is apparent from hence, for that the Animal Spirits are
such thin Vapors, that there are not the like in the whole Body (for they
penetrate with an extraordinary swiftness the narrowest and most invisible
Pores of the Nerves) whence it is very likely that they being poured forth into
the Substance of the hotter Parts, presently do their duty with an
extraordinary swiftness; and for the remaining part, by reason of its extreme
tenuity and volatility, is far more swiftly dissipated by the heat of the Parts
than any other Vapors, and much less congeal into Liquor, than any other
extravasated Vapors, unless it happen in some colder Parts, as in the
Testicles, of which we shall treat c. 28. And how suddenly they are dissipated,
is apparent from that weariness which follows violent Exercise, or in the
sudden Laxation of the contracted Muscles. Moreover, should these Spirits
congeal into this Liquor in the Parts to which they flow down, hotter than the
Brain, certainly they would much sooner, and more easily, congeal in the Brain
and Marrow of the Back, by reason of the greater degree of Cold in both, that
is by reason of the Heat which is less in them than in other Parts: but they
are never seen to be condensed in them, neither can such a sort of Liquor
penetrate through the Nerves; and if in them they are not condensed into
Liquor, much less in the Parts hotter than the Brain, the heat of which would
easily dissipate such thin Vapors. Lastly, a most copious quantity of Lympha
flows from the Liver and its Glandules, to which nevertheless there are so few,
and such slender Nerves that reach, that some Anatomists question their ingress
into 'em. Also in the Ventricles of the Brain, from the Choroidal Plexure* a
copious quantity of Lympha, somewhat thicker, is separated by the small
Glandules lying between it, thence designed to flow forth through the Papillary
Processes, and yet there are no Nerves, that enter that Plexure. From whence it
is apparent that the Lympha is not made of Animal Spirits condensed.

XXVII. Bernard Swalve L. de Whether composed of Animal Spirits and Acids.
Pancreat. p. 76. believes the Lympha to be composed of the Remainder of the
Animal Spirits that have lost their Volatility, with somewhat of an Acid Spirit
mixed with it out of the Glandules, and so entering the Lymphatic Vessels. The
greatest part of the Lympha, says he, is beholding to the Animal Spirit, the
lesser to the Acid Spirit. But what has been already said destroys this
Opinion; as also this, that the Lympha is continually moved through innumerable
hollow Vessels in great quantity, whereas so great a quantity of Animal Spirits
can never pass in so great a quantity through the invisible Pores of the
Nerves, and cannot be carried to the making of the Lympha. Moreover, for that a
great quantity of Lympha breaks thorough several Vessels; into which
nevertheless, as has been said, very few Animal Spirits can be carried, and
that through very few and most slender Nerves. Add to this, that the Acid
Spirit of the Glandules has a coagulating Power, and therefore would be a
strange obstruction to the thinness of the Liver. Moreover, Swalve himself Eod.
lib. p. 88. and 89. most eagerly maintains, that nothing, not so much as the
thinnest of Liquors can be carried through the Pores of the Nerves, and
therefore much less such a quantity of Spirits, out of which a part of such a
copious Lympha must be made.

XXVIII. N. Zas above cited, writes, Whether Alimentary.
That the Lympha, which he calls Dew, is an Alimentary Juice, by which the
Nerves, the Membranes, Tendons, also the Tunicles of the Veins and Arteries,
and all the Spermatics are nourished, increased in growth and enlarged. But
among all the foregoing Opinions, there is none that carries with it less
probability than this; which is utterly destroyed by what we have written L. 2.
c. 12. where we prove at large that all the Parts are nourished by the Blood,
and not by any other Humors. But Lewis de Bills, from whence Zas draws all his
main Fundamentals, finding that Zas was too short in the defense of his
Argument, has found out another Invention; for he distinguishes between Dew and
Lympha, and says that the Dew serves for the Uses by Zas assigned, but not the
Lympha: He also ascribes different Passages to each of them, by which they flow
to their parts; of which passages or ways I have lately treated, and
sufficiently demonstrated the vanity of this Invention.

Seeing then that most Learned Men, and Studious Assertors of the Commonwealth
of Physic, did not discern the true Original of this Lympha, and hardly seem to
have reached the use of it, I will not be afraid to venture my own Opinion
concerning this Matter. What sort of Liquor it is.


XXIX. I take the Lympha to be a fermentaceous Liquor, separated from the
serous part of the Blood in the clustered Glandules, yet not simple, but
mingled with much volatile and liquid Salt, and impregnated with some few
sulphury Particles, which by reason of the thinness of its Parts enters these
Vessels, and is carried through them, partly to the Vafa Chylifera, partly to
many Veins. To THOSE, that in them it may by its mixture make the Chylus
thinner and more easy, and more apt to make an easy Dilatation in the Heart.
To THESE, to the end that being mingled with the Venal Blood, not at present so
thin, it may prepare it to a quick Dilatation in the Heart: for in both
respects the Mixture of it is very necessary. For the Chylus of it self is
somewhat sweetish, and somewhat fatty, which shows the predominancy of the
sulphury Juice, not as yet become sufficiently spiritous. And hence, by reason
of the viscid and thick Particles, seeing that if it came alone to the Heart,
it is unapt for Dilatation, there is a necessity, that by the way this Liquor
should be thin, saltish, sowrish, and endu'd with a kind of fermentaceous
Quality, to attenuate its viscousness, and prepare it for Fermentation. For as
Mineral Sulphur, by reason of its viscous Particles, by it self slowly, and by
degrees, but by the mixture of the Saltpeter, cutting those Particles, kindles
at the very touch of Fire; so also the sulphury Particles of the Chylus, if
other saltish and thin Particles were not mixed with it to a just proportion,
would be slowly, and not suddenly dilated, and become spiritous in the Heart.

XXX. To which purpose aforesaid the Pancreatic Juice does also in some measure
contribute, being mixed with the Chylus in the Duodenum, which is a kind of a
stronger and sharper Lympha, and indu'd with a more vigorous fermentaceous
Quality. And therefore it is that this Lympha being carried with the Chylus to
the Heart, renders it more easily diffusive, and fit to be altered into
spiritous Blood. As in Gunpowder the Mineral Sulphur mixed with the Saltpeter
and Coals, presently takes fire. But the Venal Blood, having lost a great part
of its Spirits in the nourishment of the Parts, and the length of its Course,
has need of some mixture of the Lympha to facilitate its fusion in the Heart.
But because it is much thinner than the Chylus, and still mixed with many
Spirits: Hence it is that it requires the less quantity of Lympha, and that is
the reason that fewer Lymphatic Vessels open into the Veins, but a vast number
into the Milkie Vessels.

XXXI. Now because this Lympha Whether the Serum.
is separated from the serous part of the Blood, the Question is whether it be
not the Serum, or a Liquor different from it? To which I answer, That it is not
the Serum, but a particular thin Liquor, extracted out of the Serous part of
the Blood. For in this serous Humor, besides the watery Particles, are
contained other briny Particles in good quantity, and some sulphury Particles.
The salt Particles are apparent from the briny taste of Tears, Sweat, and
Urine; the sulphury from hence, that stale Urine being heated, is easily fired
by the touch of the least flame. Then again in these there are other more
viscous, more crude and fixed Parts, as are often to be discerned in Urine;
others more thin and spiritous, which by reason of their extraordinary
thinness, together with the thin watery part of the Serum in which they abide,
being separated from the thicker Particles on the clustered Glandules, easily
enter those narrow Orifices of the Lymphatic Vessels, proceeding from those
Glandules, (from whence the thicker Particles are excluded by reason of their
thickness) and through these are carried to the Vasa Chylifera and several
Veins.

XXXII. The difference between the The difference between the Lympha and the
Serum.
Lympha and the Serum, is hence made plain; for that the Lympha being taken out
in a spoon, not only held to the fire for the thinner Particles to exhale
(which is the direction of Rolfincius) but being cooled of it self, without any
Exhalation before the fire, thickens into a Gelly; whereas the Serum will
neither thicken before the fire, nor without fire. For that the Salt of the
Lympha, which seems to contain in it somewhat of sowrish, being reduced to an
extraordinary thinness in its most thin watery Particles, and impregnated with
some sulphury Particles, while any heat remains in it, is very fluid; but being
condensed by the Cold, is not fixed into hard and salt Crystals; but together
with the sulphury Parts mixed with it, by reason of their fatty viscousness, by
which the hardness of the salt Particles is softened, it congeals into a Gelly,
which again dissolves into a most thin Liquor by the heat of the fire. Whereas
on the contrary, the cruder Particles of the Serum condensed by the Cold, will
never dissolve through the heat of the fire (which is apparent in Urine) but
into crude and clammy Strings, and many of 'em retain a Stony and Tartarous
Form, and will never return to their former thinness.

XXXIII. Now out of what parts the Lympha proceeds, which is to be separated in
the Glandules, and derived into the Lymphatic Vessels, is by many questioned,
Glisson believes it proceeds from the Nerves; Bartholine from the Arteries. The
first is absurd: Because the invisible Pores of the Nerves cannot give passage
to such a visible and copious Liquor, without a Palsy of the Parts, and an
extreme Relaxation of the Nerves with continual Moisture. The latter is more
probable, by reason of the quantity of the Lympha, which cannot be so copiously
strained out of any Vessels as out of the Arteries, in regard that all the
Glandules receive some ends of the Arteries. And so from that Arterious Blood
forced into the Glandules, by reason of their Specific Structure, the Lympha
seems to be separated in the same manner almost as the Serum is separated from
the Blood in the Kidneys: and from the little Arteries of the Choroidal Plexure
the lymyid serous Liquor is separated from the same Blood by the Glandules
lying between, and deposited in the Cavities of the Ventricles of the Brain,
from thence to be evacuated through the Papillary Processes, or Extremities of
the Olfactory Nerves. But in the Liver, which receives very few Arteries, but
sends forth many Lymphatic Vessels, and pours forth a copious quantity of
Lympha out of its Glandules, this Lympha cannot be there so copiously separated
and poured forth out of so few Arteries chiefly creeping along the Exterior
Membrane, but is rather separated from the Blood brought through the Vena
Portae (which here performs the office of an Artery) by the Glandules that
adhere to the hollow part of it.

XXXIV. But what it is that presses The Impulsive Cause.
forth the Lympha out of the Glandules of the Liver, Spleen, and other parts,
and thrusts it farther when once entered the Lymphatic Vessels, is apparent
from what has been said concerning the thrusting forward of the Chylus, c. 11.
and 12. For the impulsive Cause is the same, that is to say the Motion and
Pressure, partly of the lower part of the Belly by the Muscles of the Abdomen
moved upward and downward; partly by the Respiration of the Lungs. That which
proceeds from the Joints, is moved by the motion of the Muscles of those Parts;
as we find by the motion of the Jaws and the Tongue a great quantity of Spittle
flow into the Mouth, which Spittle is a kind of Lymphatic Juice, but somewhat
thicker, whereas when a man sits motionless, or lies asleep, his Spittle is
nothing so plentiful. For by the Compressure of these Parts, as well the
Glandules therein concealed, as also the Lymphatic Vessels, are pressed, not
only by the Muscles, but also by the incumbent flat Bowels, by which means the
contained Liquor is squeezed and thrust forward out of those Vessels.

XXXV. Charleton, Oeconom. Animal. writes that the Motion of the Lympha through
its Channels is very slow. But Bartholine in Spielleg* confutes that Opinion,
and proves the contrary. For my part, I believe the Lympha to be moved
sometimes slower, sometimes swifter, according to the more vehement or remiss
motion of the Parts where the clustered Glandules and the Lymphatic Vessels
lie, as happens in the Salival Vessels under the Tongue, which proceed from
clustered Glandules.

XXXVI. Observe by the way concerning The Cause of the Dropsy called Ascites.
the Lymphatick Vessels lying hid in the lower Belly, that if they be broken up
by any accident, (for they are very tender) then there happens to be a serous
Liquor poured forth into the hollow of the Abdomen, the increase of which at
length insensibly produces that sort of Dropsy, called Ascites; though it may
also proceed from other Causes.

In the Year 1658* we dissected a young 1. Observation.
Woman of four and twenty years of Age, which for seventeen years had labored
under that Distemper called Ascites, and at length died of it. In whom I did
not perceive the least desect of her Bowels, only that some of the Lymphatic
Vessels were broken, which was the Cause of the Distemper; for in her Childhood
she had been cruelly used by her Parents, who were wont to kick and thump her;
and those blows occasioned the breaking of her Lymphatic Vessels. Which
Suspicion, the Humors that were gathered together in the Abdomen, did not a
little confirm. For they appeared somewhat coagulated in the Body, when it was
cold; though it was not come to that consistency of a Gelly, as is usually seen
in the Lympha when taken out of the Lymphatic Vessels in a Spoon. However, the
reason why she had lived so long in Misery, was the soundness of her Bowels,
and for that by reason of the youthful heat of her Body, much of the Serous
Moisture insensibly flowing into the Concavity of the Abdomen, was every day
consumed.

XXXVII. These Vessels being broken, 2. Observation.
sometimes also it happens that the Lymphatic Liquor does not come to be poured
forth into the Cavity of the Abdomen, but flows out between the neighboring
Membranes, and that occasions the production of those watery Bladders, called
Hydatides, with which the Liver sometimes within, sometimes without, and
sometimes also the Mesentery, and other parts in the Abdomen are seen to
abound. A great number of these Bladders (some as big as a Pigeons Egg, others
as a Hen Egg, and many less) William Straten, at that time Physic and Anatomy
Prosessor in our Academy, afterward principal Physician to the Prince of
Orange, showed us in the hollow part of the Liver of a Thief that was hanged,
Febr. 1647. We have also showed 'em growing sometimes in the Mesentery before
the Students in Physic at our Hospital: and there also we have seen Livers,
which withoutside have been covered with little Bladders full of Lympid Water,
of which number, some having been lately broken, had insus'd a Serous Liquor
into the Cavity of the Abdomen, and by that means had occasioned an Ascites.
Hence I concluded that the Dropsy, called Ascites, is never generated without
some Solution of the Continuum of the inner Parts of the Abdomen, whatever the
Cause of it may be, and I thought their Opinion to be rejected, that this
Disease is begot by the condensation of the Vapors exhaling out of the
Internal Parts into Water, when that Exhalation in some Men happens to be
continual, and yet very few come to be troubled with the Ascites. Volker
Coiter, Obser. Chirurg. Musc. p. 117. writes that he himself found in the Body
of a Phthisical and Dropsical Man, the Bowels of the lower Belly wasted, and
emptied of all their Moisture; but little Bladders, some bigger, some less,
adhering every where to the Mesentery, Peritonaeum, Intestines, Spleen, Liver,
and all the Bowels, and all those little Bladders full of Water. The same Case
is cited by Cordaeus. Com. 5. ad Hipp. de Morb. Mul.

XXXVIII. Now there may be several Causes for the breaking of these Vessels:
But besides violent and external Accidents, the most frequent Cause is, either
Corrosion by sharp Humors, or else their Obstruction and Compression. And for
this Reason the Ascites happens to Gluttons and great Drinkers, that every day
stuff and swill their Guts, who from the Crudities hence bred, either heap
together a great quantity of sharp Humors in the Body, or else bring a
weakness and obstructions upon the Bowels, by which means these little Vessels
are either corroded, or else compressed and straightened, that they cannot carry
and discharge their Lymphatic Humor as they were wont to do, which therefore
flowing out of the Lymphatio Vessels, either causes little Membranes among the
Bladders; or else the covering Membranes being broken, it slides into the
Concavity of the Abdomen.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Liver.
I. THe Liver (...), or Jecur, is a remarkable Bowel seated in the right
Hypochondrion under the Diaphragma or Midriff, of a vast bigness, round and
smooth in the unequal or gibbous part, but concave in the lower part, where it
rests upon the right side of the Stomach.

II. In Dogs and many other Beasts Lobes.
it is divided into several Lobes, but in Man it is contiguous, swelling into a
little Lobe in the lower simous, saddle or flat part. It is rarely divided into
three Lobes, which James Sylvi^s in Isagoge, reports to have seen.

III. The bigness of the Liver is not Bigness.
the same in all Creatures, but according to the proportion of Bodies, it is
larger in Man than in other Creatures, and the natural and ordinary bigness is
such, that it descends three or four fingers below the Bastard Ribs, and
extends it self somewhat beyond the pointed Cartilage of the Breast. Andrew
Laurentius writes, that in cowardly People, great Drinkers and Gluttons, the
Liver is thought to be bigger. Which Rule however, it is very probable, is
liable to many Exceptions. In a preternatural Constitution it deviates from its
ordinary Magnitude, as well in excess as defect. In the Year 1660. I dissected
a Body wherein the Liver was of that enormous Magnitude, that it caused
Admiration in all the Spectators; for below it reached down to the Groyns, and
extended it self from the right side to the Spleen, and so possessed the
chiefest part of the whole lower Belly. But though to the outward view and touch,
it seemed to be of a healthy Color and sound Substance, yet we found in the
middle of it a large hollowness, from whence to the amazement of all the
Beholders, we took out eleven Market pounds of Matter, white, well-concocted,
and without any ill smell. Other monstrous large Livers are described by
Spigelius Anat. l. 8. c. 12. Riolanus Anthrop. l. 2. c. 21. Bartholine Obs.
cent. 1. hist. 85. and by several others.

IV. Less frequently is the Liver defective for want of its due proportion. And
yet we find an Example of that too in Riolanus, lib. citat. who writes that at
Paris, in a certain Body, was found a Liver that was no bigger than a Kidney;
and thence he observes out of Avicen, that the smalness of the Liver is always
noxious, but not the bigness.

How you may guess at the largeness of the Liver by the bigness of the fingers,
See l. 4. c. 1.

V. The Substance of it is soft and Substance.
ruddy, like congealed Blood, the firmness of which appears nevertheless when
the Liver is boiled. There lie hid in it many Kernels, out of which the
Lymphatic Vessels break forth.

VI. Malpigius, who has examined the substance and inner parts of the Liver,
most accurately by his Microscopes, l. de hep. c. 2. has observed many things
unheard of, and hitherto altogether undiscovered. 1. That the substance of the
Liver in a Man consists of little Lobes, which show forth a heap of Clusters,
and are clothed with their own enfolding Membrane, and strengthened by
membranous Knots continued athwart, so that there may be observed middle
spaces, and little small chinks, between the sides of the Lobes. 2. That the
whole Mass of the Liver consists of glandulous Balls and several Roots of
Vessels; and hence, that they may all cooperate for the common good, there is a
necessity of an intercourse between the Vessels and these Glandules. 3. That
the Branches of the Vessels of the Porta, Vena Cava, and Porus Biliarius in an
equal number through all the small Lobes, and that the Roots of the Vena Portae
supplied the place of Arteries, and that there is such a Correspondence between
the Porta and the Porus Biliarius, that both their little Branches are closely
contained under the same Covering. 4. That the Roots of the said Vessels are
not joined together by way of Anastomo^is, but that the glandulous Balls,
constituting the chief substance of the Liver, are in the middle between the
Vessels that bring and carry, by means whereof those that carry infuse their
liquor into those that bring. From which Observations he concludes that the
Liver is a conglomerated or clustered glandule separating the Choler, and this
( Ibid. cap. 3.) he endeavors to prove by several Reasons. And because this is
proper to conglomerated Glandules, that besides the Arteries, Veins, and
Nerves, they enjoy their own proper emptying Vessel (as is apparent in the
Parotides, Sweetbread, and others) which is dispersed through their Substance,
and extracting and carrying off the designed Humor; he asserts this Vessel in
the Liver to be the Porus Biliarius with the Gall Bag. Most certainly these new
Observations of the famous Malpigius dispel many Hepatic Obscurities, and
lighten us to the inmost knowledge of the Liver. For formerly there was no
question made, but Choler was generated in the Liver; but how it came to be
separated from the Blood, was not known: but now by the Observations of this
quick-sighted Artist, it appears to be done by the small Kernels and glandulous
As to the truth of this Hypothesis, see our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 4. cap. 8.
Sect. 10.. 14. ad 36. where we have, by indubitable Reason, strong Arguments,
and matter of Fact, proved that there is no Choler or B^le separated from the
Blood in the Liver. Salmon.
Balls lying up and down *.

VII. But though Malpigius, by reason Whether the Liver may be called a Bowel.
of these new Golden Inventions seems unwilling to call the Liver a Bowel for
the future, but rather a conglomerated or clustered Glandule; yet I beseech him
to grant us this liberty, that we may still, for a while, call it a Bowel, lest
by too sudden a change of the name, we should render our Discourse obscure,
especially among those who never heard of this Denomination before.

VIII. In the mean time the Condition of the unfortunate Liver is to be
lamented; as being that which formerly was called the Principal Bowel, and by
Galen seated in the highest Throne of Sanguisication, and there has been
worshipped for many Ages by the common consent of Physic; yet that in these our
times it should be torn and deposed from its Throne, and despoiled of all its
Sovereignty; nay that it should be said to be dead, and therefore be buried,
and only remembered with an Ironical Epitaph by Bartholine, and yet contrary to
the expectation of all men, like a Silkworm changed into a Butterfly, so
metamorphos'd into a pitiful conglomerated Glandule, be beholding to a
miserable resurrection in that likeness.

IX. The Color of the Liver obvious Color of the Liver.
to sight, which is ruddy, is not peculiar to it, by reason of its frame, and
composition, but accidental, by reason of the copious quantity of Blood infused
into it, through the Vena Portae, as by the following Experiment of Glissons
may appear. The proper Color of it is pale, slightly inclining to yellow,
which however it seems to be a tincture which it receives from the Choler
passing through it: and hence it is that Malpigius ascribes to it a white
Color.

X. By reason of the vast quantity The Temperament.
of Blood that flows to it, the temperament of it is hot and moist, and by its
heat it cherishes and comforts the Stomach.

XI. It is encompassed with a thin Its Membrane.
Membrane, arising from the Peritonaeum that girds the Diaphragma, and rolls it
self back about the Liver.

XII. It hangs as it were strictly The Ligaments.
fastened above through all its Circumference to the Diaphragma, with a broad
membranous strong Ligament, arising from the Peritonaeum, where it adheres to
the joynted Cartilage. Erroneously therefore wrote Spigelius, that it is
distant a fingers breadth from the Diaphragma. This Ligament is not only
fastened to the outermost Membrane of the Liver, but constitutes it, and to the
end it may sustain the weight of so large a Bowel without the hazard of
breaking, it descends toward the inner parts of it, and is fastened to the
common sheath or swath of the Branch of the Vena Portae, where the Navel Vein
adjoyns to it. To this broad Ligament is joined another peculiar round and
strong Ligament springing also from the Peritonaeum, where the Liver is joined
upon the right and left side to the Diaphragma. But this Ligament we have seen
more than once wanting in Men; and for the most part is not to be found in
Beasts; and there some Dissecters of Beasts, that have not seen many
Dissections of Human Bodies, from their Dissection of Brutes, believed that
Ligament to be frequently wanting in Men. Below, it is fastened to the Abdomen
by the Navel Ligament, that is, the Navel Vein cut off after the Birth, and
changed into a Ligament, by which the massy Bowel is kept fast in its place,
and hindered from ascending higher with the Diaphragma.

XIII. It also adheres to other neighboring Parts, as the Vena Cava and Vena
Portae, the Omentum, etc. Which Ligaments however do not hold it in its hanging
Posture.

XIV. By these Ligaments, although the Liver be fixed in its place, yet is it not
so straightly tied, but that it may be moved with Convenience enough in
Respiration upwards and downwards, and in the Motion of the Body to the Right
or Left, or in any other Posture, as Necessity requires.

XV. It admits into it four very Its (...).
small Nerves; two from the sixth Pair; a third from the Stomach Pair, and a
fourth from the Costal Pair; to which the obtuse Sense or Feeling of that
Membrane or Tunicle only that involves it is attributed; for they do not seem
to penetrate into the inner Substance of it. However Galen 4. de us. part. c.
23. and 3. de loc. affect. c. 3. and 4. has observed two notable Nerves which
accompany the Vena Portae enter the Parenchyma. It wanted not bigger nor more
inward Nerves, as that which needed not to feel, and making the Ferment it
self, might well be without the fermentative Quality of the Animal Spirits.

XVI. It is furnished with very Its Arteries.
small Arteries coming to it from the right Coeliac Branch (according to
Veslingius very few, but according to Walaeus innumerable) and Dominic. de
Marchettis anat. c. 4. writes that he has sometimes seen when the upper
Mesenteric Artery has communicated a large Branch to the Liver. These Arteries
Galen tells us are chiefly dispersed through the Hollow or Saddle Part of it.
Rolfinch says that he has observed 'em very numerous in the Unequal Part of it.
Glisson observes no little Branches of small Arteries extended toward the inner
Parts of the Liver, but all plainly to terminate in the Membrane. Reason
altogether confirms Glissons Opinion; for the Substance of the Liver has hardly
any need of Arteries, seeing that the Blood flows to it in Quantity sufficient
enough through the Porta Vein (which here performs the Office of an Artery)
which Blood by reason of its similitude in Substance, is more convenient for
its own Nourishment and making of choleric Ferment, than the Arterous Blood.
Nor does the Vena Portae with its Branches, nor the Roots of the Vena Cava want
Arteries; as being sufficiently furnished and nourished with their own
contained Blood; nor does it ever appear, that any little Branches of Arteries
are inserted into the Tunicles of any Veins for their Nourishment. Therefore
because fewer Parts of the Liver are nourished with arterial Blood, Veslingus
seems not erroneously to have observed, that only a few Arteries enter the
Liver. Hence Lindan takes notice, and that very truly, that those Arteries seem
rather to stop in the investing Membrane, than to penetrate into the Substance
of the Liver.

XVII. It has double Veins. For The Veins.
in the upper Part, the Vena Cava seems to be joined to it, into which many
Roots being up and down dispersed through the Substance of the Liver, discharge
their Blood. With these Roots, in the lower Part, meet the little Branches of
the Vena Portae, which run likewise through the whole Parenchyma.

XVIII. To these Vessels is adjoined The Choler Vessels.
the Porus Biliarius, which is dispersed through the Liver with innumerable
Roots, receiving the Choler separated from the bloody Ferment: With which
moreover are intermingl'd other very thin Roots afterward closing together,
and in one little Pipe conveighing the Choler to the Vesicle of the Gall.

XIX. Besides these Vessels, Asellius The Lymphatic Vessels.
writes, that he has observed a Branch of the milkie Vessels in the Liver. But
without doubt the Egress of the lymphatic Vessels, at that time altogether
unknown, from the Liver, deceived him. For there are no milkie or chyliferous
Vessels that run to the Liver, as we have a thousand times demonstrated in our
Dissections of Brutes as well alive as dead; but many milkie Vessels issue
forth out of it, carrying a most clear and transparent Juice.

So also Gualter Charleton l. de Oecon. Animal. says, that the same is to him
unquestionable by a thousand Experiments, and therefore he concluded without
any farther Scruple that there was no Portion of the Chylus conveyed to the
Liver. And therefore no Credit is to be given to Gassendus and Backius, who
believe the Chylus to be carried to the Liver through the Ductus Cholidochus.
For the obstructing Valves, and the narrow and oblique Entrance of the Ductus
into the Duodenum, and the contrary Motion of the Choleric, and Pancreatic or
Sweetbread Juice toward the Intestine, in living Animals obvious to the Sight,
sufficiently refute their Opinion.

XX. The Vessels of the Liver are The Intermixture of the Vessels.
intermixed after a wonderful manner through its Substance or little Lobes, as
plainly appears if the Flesh be separated, which is to be done leisurely and
carefully, for fear of tearing the Vessels. For the performing of which
Excarnation, Glisson describes three ways. Anat. hep. c. 21. Formerly it was
asserted by the Anatomists, that the Roots of the Vena Cava ran chiefly through
the upper Part, but that the little Branches of the Vena Portae ran chiefly
through the lower part of the Liver. But by the more indefatigable Industry of
Glisson and Malpigius, it is since discovered, that both the aforesaid Vessels,
and the small Branches of the Gall-Vessels, are equally dispersed and
intermixed one with another through the whole Parenchyma, and reach to every
Part alike: But that the little Branches of the Gall-Vessels are much less than
those of the Vena Cava or Portae: For that through those the fewer and thinner
Choleric Humors glide; through these the more bloody and somewhat thicker are
to be conveyed. And it was but Reason that these Vessels should be dispersed
through the whole Bowel, when all its Parts conspire to the same Performances.
However the Liver is harder in its lower Part, by reason of the Ingress and
Egress of the larger Vessels, as also for that the Conglobated Glandules are
there chiefly seated.

XXI. But how all these little Branches are intermingl'd one among another in
the Liver, there is a great Dispute among the Anatomists. For I say nothing of
the Lymphatic Vessels, for that they take their Rise no farther than from the
Conglobated Glandules, nor enter any farther into the rest of the Substance of
the Liver. The greatest part of Anatomists, following Galen, write that the
little Branches of the Porta with the Roots of the Vena Cava, are joined
together by many Anastomoses, so that sometimes they close together at their
Ends, sometimes their Ends enter into the Sides of other little Branches; and
that to these the interjected Bilarie Vessels are fastened by frequent
Anastomoses. To these Fallopius, Cartesius, Riolanus, and several others are of
a contrary Judgment, who altogether question those Anastomoses, and affirm that
either they are not at all, or else very obscure. Bartholine writes, from the
Observation of Harvey, that the Roots of the Vena Portae creeping through the
Gibbous Part of the Liver, are covered with Sieve-like Tunicles full of
infinite Pinholes, otherwise than the Branches of the Vena Cava, which are
divided into large Arms, and that the various Excursions of each Vessel run
forth into the Bossie Part of the Bowel without any Anastomoses. Bauhinus tells
us of a remarkable Anastomoses, which represents a Channel, and is as it were a
common and continued Passage from the Branches of the Vena Portae into the
Roots of the Vena Cava, admitting the point of a good bigg Bodkin. Into this
apparent Channel others deny that any Branches of the Vena Porta are opened,
because that no such Opening could either be seen or observed. Glisson writes
that this Chanel is a Production or Continuation of the Umbilical Vein through
which, in the Embryo, the Navel-Blood is carried directly to the Vena Cava: But
that it is altogether shut up in Men that are once Born, and together with the
Umbilical Vein supplys the Office of a Ligament, neither do any Orifices of any
other Vessels open into it.

XXII. So that how the Blood flows out of the little Branches of the Vena
Portae into the Roots of the Vena Cava, and Vena Portae, from the foresaid
various and differing Opinions can hardly be made manifest.

XXIII. In this Obscurity not only The Passage of the blood out of the Porta
into the Cava.
Malpigius by his Observations made with his Microscope, but Glisson, an exact
Examiner of the Liver, affords us great Light. Which latter, by his frequent
Excarnations of this Bowel, writes that he has found by Experience, that the
Branches of the Vena Portae and Vena Cava, join one to another, and there grow
close together, but do not open into one another, nor that any little Branches
are inserted into the Side of one another, or close with the Ends of any other,
but only that the Sanguineous Humors are emptyed through the Ends of the
Branches of the Vena Portae into the Substance of the Liver, and from thence
again enters the gaping Ends of the Vena Cava, and Gall Vessels, all which Ends
terminate into the Substance of the Liver; (this Malpigius, as abovesaid,
observed to be performed or done by the means of the Glandulous Balls, of which
the Substance of the Liver chiefly consists) and that there is as much Blood
and Humors sucked up through the gaping Ends of those Roots, as is poured into
the Substance of the Branches of the Porta, always granting a due and just
proportion of the Bowel.

Certainly I believe there is great Credit to be given to the Experience of
this famous Person. For his Treatise sufficiently testifies that he was very
diligent and laborious in making his Scrutinies into the Liver; and therefore
we have thought it necessary to quote his Experiment, by which he solidly
proves that there are no Anastomoses of the Vessels in the Liver, anat. Hep. c.
33. in these Words.

XXIV. For the farther Confirmation, Glisson's memorable Experiment.
says he, of this Opinion, I will bring one memorable Experiment, which gives
a great Light not only to this Passage of the Blood out of the Vena Portae into
the Cava, but to several other things belonging to the Circulation of the Blood.

At a (...) therefore at London, we thought fit to try, how easily Water being
forced into the Porta would pass through the Liver. To that end we took a good
large Ox's Bladder, fitted to a Pipe (as when we give a Glister) and filled it
with warm Water colored with a little Milk, and then having tied it with a
String that none of the Liquor might slide back, we put in the top of the Pipe
into the Porta near the Liver. Presently the Bladder being hard squ^ez'd, the
Water passing through the Pipe, enters the Vena Cava, and thence carried into
the right Sinus of the Heart, goes to the Lungs through the Arterious Vein, and
passing through them slides down into the left Ventricle, thence is carried
into the Aorta; and lastly we discern clear Milkie Footsteps of this Humor in
the Kidneys. The Liquor thus transmitted into the Liver, washed away the Blood
by degrees, not only from the larger Vessels, but also from the Capillaries and
the Parenchyma it self. For the bloody Color seemed to vanish by degrees, and
by and by all the Blood being washed away, the Liver turned from a white and
dark Brown into a kind of Yellow. Which Color, as seems most probable to me,
is nearest the natural Color of the Liver, than the Ruddie which it borrows
from the Blood continually passing through it. After this Experiment made, we
cut pretty deep into the Parenchyma it self, that we might know whether the
inner Parts of it were likewise changed, and there we also found all the Blood
so washed away likewise, that it could hardly be done in such a manner any
other way: For that the whole Parenchyma was all of the same Color before
mentioned. Now if the injected Liquor had penetrated the Liver by the help of
the Anastomoses, how came it to pass that all the Blood was thence washed away,
and that the Parenchyma having lost the bloody Color, should presently of its
own Accord put on the new Color. Certainly the Water could add no Color to
it, which it wants it self. Nor could the Milk impart to it that dark Brown
Color, although by that means it might retain something of its Whiteness. But
for the avoiding of all farther Dispute, I often tried this Experiment with
Water alone. Yet still the Color appeared to be pale and dark Brown; and
because it appeared to be alike in all the parts of the Parenchyma, it was a
certain sign, that the Water washed all the Parts alike. Which could not any
way have been done, if part of it, having made its Passage through the
Anastomoses had slid immediately into the Vena Cava. Now that the Blood
naturally takes the same Road with the Water, I do not believe there is any one
that questions. And therefore I think it fit thereupon to conclude that the
Blood does not glide through those feigned Anastomoses, but runs thorough the
Parenchyma of the Liver it self.

XXV. This celebrated Experiment, added to the celebrated Observations of
Malpigius, so clearly illustrates the Understanding of a thing hitherto so
obs^ure, that now there can be no farther Doubt concerning the manner of the
Passage of the Blood out of the Porta into the Vena Cava, nor of the natural
Color of the Liver it self, which being boiled, appears to be of a pale
yellowish Color, inclining to a dark Brown. And hence moreover it is most
clearly apparent, how in other Parts also, the Circulation of the Blood is made
not only through the Anastomoses of the Arteries with the Veins, but through
the Pores of the Substance of the Parts themselves. Of which more at large l.
2. c. 8.

XXVI. As the Trunk of the Porta Vein entering the Liver in the hollow Part,
sends forth a thousand Branches into it, so likewise a thousand Roots of the
Vena Cava are dispersed through those interjacent Ramifications, and there by
little and little meet together toward the uppermost and inner part of the
Liver, and become fewer and larger, till at length they close into one Trunk,
Continuous to the Vena Cava: Which, according to Riolanus, is fortified with a
Valve preventing the Ingress of the Blood out of the Vena Cava into the Liver.
Concerning which see l. 7. c. 10. But before they close together into that
Trunk, certain membranous Circles on the inner Side, like Valves, are opposed
to the Boughs of the larger Roots meeting together, sometimes thicker,
sometimes thinner, which Bartholine has observed looking toward the greater
Tunicle. These hinder the Return of the Blood going forward toward the Vena
Cava.

XXVII. Concerning the Office of The Office of the Liver.
the Liver there are various Opinions, of which the Ancientest and the most
received is from Galen, who says that Sanguification is completed in the
Liver, and that it is the true and primary sanguifying or bloodmaking Bowel.

But this Opinion, after the Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood, has
been wholly abolished; since it is found that the Blood is only made in the
Heart. Which Hippocrates himself clearly signifies L. 4. de Morb. where he
says, The Heart is the Fountain of Blood; the seat of Ch^ler is in the Liver.
Moreover, Reason contradicts that Opinion: First, Because there are no Milkie
Vessels that reach to the Liver, and consequently nothing of the Chylus is
carried thither to be changed into blood; for that the Chylus neither ascends
nor passes through the Mesaraic Veins, we shall farther show L. 7. c. 22.
Secondly, Because in the Embryo the Heart and the Blood are seen before any
Rudiments of the Liver are seen: whereas the Liver, if it were the Efficient of
Sanguification, of Necessity, it ought to precede its Effect, that is to say,
the Blood. Thirdly, Because when all the Bowels are formed, and that in the
beginning of the Formation all the Vessels are filled with Blood, then is the
Liver still of a whitish color, and inclining somewhat to yellow; which is a
sign it does not generate the ruddy blood, seeing that of necessity it ought to
be colored from the beginning by the blood which it generates and contains,
before all the other Parts. But in the beginning it is of a pale color,
afterward somewhat yellowish, which afterward it preserves in its Substance,
though clouded by the copious mixture of the blood.

XXVIII. Bartholine at first was of opinion that the more refined and concocted
part of the Chylus was carried through the Milkie Vessels, and that out of the
Chylus the cruder blood is generated, which is afterward to be brought to
perfection in the Heart. And Deusingius, a stiff Defender of this Opinion,
believes the Chylus comes to the Liver through the Mesaraic Veins, Tract. de
Sanguific. Nay, that some of the Milkie Vessels reach from the Sweetbread to
the Liver, and enter the hollow parts of it: of the former of which Opinions
was Regius. But afterward Bartholine renounced this Opinion, and that with
good reason, because it could be no way defended. 1. Because no Milkie Vessels
reach the Liver. 2. No Chylus passes through the Mesaraics.

3. Because if the Heart should make blood of the crude blood made in the
Liver, and not of the Chylus it self, of necessity all the Milkie Vessels must
run to the Liver, and carry thither all their Chyle, to be turned into blood,
and none would run to the Subclavial Veins, and a good part of the Chylus would
ascend through the Mesaraics to the Liver. But our Eyesight convinces us of
the truth of the first, and Reason of the latter. See l. 7. c. 2.

XXIX. Glisson believes the Parenchyma Whether it be a Streiner.
of the Liver to be a certain Streiner through which the Blood and Humors
pass, and that those alterations which they undergo in the Liver, are
accomplished by percolation. True it is, such a simple streining may separate
the thin from the thick, but occasion no other alteration worth speaking of.
Besides, where there is any streining, there the thin pass thorough, and the
thick remain behind. But through the Liver not only all the Blood passes,
neither is there any thing of thick that remains behind; but also some part of
the ruddy Blood passing thorough, losing its own nature and sweetness, is
changed into bitter and yellow Choler. If Glisson should perchance object, That
that same Choler is the thicker part, and therefore it does not pass with the
rest of the blood, but is evacuated thorough the Ductus Biliarius; I answer,
That the Choler indeed does often acquire a certain thickness in the Gall-bag,
through its long standing, and the dissipation of the most thin parts by the
heat; but that the said Choler, so long as it remains in the Liver mixed with
the blood, is thinner than the blood it self. And this I will prove by the
Roots of the Porus Biliarius, and the Gallbladder, which are much less, much
thinner and narrower, than the Roots of the Vena Cava inserted into the Liver.
For if it were thicker, it could never be sucked in, and evacuated through
Vessels much thinner than the rest; and leave the thinner to be received by the
bigger and larger Roots of the hollow Vein. Besides, the Choler sweats through
the Tunicles of the Gallbladder, and dies the neighboring Bowels of a yellow
color, whereas the blood never sweats through any Tunicles of the Veins, which
are thinner and softer than that Bag; and this is very likely to be true,
because it is much thicker.

XXX. Therefore the true office of The true office.
the Liver is to moisten the Blood with a sulphury Dew, and together with the
Spleen to perfect the Ferment of that and the Chylus. And therefore all Men,
all Creatures, as well by Land as by Water, are furnished with the Liver,
because without that Ferment the spiritous blood could never be made.

XXXI. From all that has been said, it appears, that the Liver was always
reckoned among the principal parts, when Galen ascribed to it the office of
Blood-making; and though in our Age it be deposed from that Employment, and
reckoned among the Ministerial Parts; yet is it to be ranked among the Noble
Parts, the Use of which we cannot be without, and which officiates in one of
the highest Offices, and whose Diseases are most dangerous, and destructive to
the health of the whole Body. Especially the Wounds that are given it, are by
Hippocrates and Celsus numbered among the deadly and incurable, by reason the
copious efflux of Blood kills the Patient before it can be stanch'd by any
Medicaments; or if the Blood happen to be stopped, yet the Ulcer that follows
the Wound is very rarely or never to be cured; so that of three thousand
wounded in that part, hardly one escapes. Yet I remember five Cures of that
Bowel, which are reckoned however next to Miracles.

The first is related by Gemma l. 1. Cosmo^rit. c. 6. of a Spaniard cured of a
Wound in his Liver.

The second Bertin says he saw L. 13. c. 7. of a Noble Man, whose Liver was not
only wounded, but some part of the Liver carried away by the wound, and yet
cured contrary to all expectation.

The third of a Patient cured by Cabrolius himself; which Patient had a wound
that reached the deepest part of the Liver, Observat. 18.

The fourth related by the same Cabrolius out of Rochus of Tarragon.

The fifth mentioned by Hildan, Cent. 2. Observe. 34. of a certain Helvetian,
who after a piece of his wounded Liver was taken out, and terrible symptoms of
approaching death, yet recovered.

XXXII. But these are Miracles of None wounded in the Liver escape.
Nature which Averrhoes formerly asserted to happen sometimes in Cures. For my
part I have seen several Wounds of the Liver, as well in the Field as in other
Places, but never yet saw any man so wounded escape.

XXXIII. Things unusual are seldom Worms and Stones in the Liver.
found in the Liver, yet we find in some Writers the Relations of Stones and
Worms that have been seen therein. Among the rest Hierome M^ntu is reports that
he has seen a Liver full of Worms I once saw the Liver of a great Drinker of
Canary, which when it was cut in two with the Knife, abounded with many
thousands of Worms; and above a quart of small living Worms were taken from it:
this man usually drank two, three, or four quarts of Canary in a day, and that
for some years together, by reason whereof he grew fat, and dyed suddenly
without any premonitory Sickness: indeed the whole Substance of the Liver was
nothing but Worms. Salmon.
: and such kind of Worms Wier is and Bauhinus have observed. Borell is found a
Hairy worm in the Liver of a Dog.

Then for Stones, the Experience of several convinces us that they have been
found in the Liver: but they are rarely generated in the Liver; yet the Author
of the German Physical Ephemerides cites one Example out of George Greiselius,
of a certain Lady in the lower part of the Lobe of whose Liver there grew a
Bladder a hands breadth in length, wherein was contained a shining black
glutinous Humor, and in the middle of it a Stone as big as a Hens Egg, shining
also, as if it had been full of Niter, but insipid and without any smell,
weighing an onnce and eighteen grains. The same Author cites another Example
out of James of Negropont, of a Liver of an unusual bigness, weighing above
twelve pounds, which was hard, yellow, and here and there strewn with hard
Stones; and in the Gallbladder, besides much yellow small sand, were contained
two round, yellow, rough Stones, about the bigness of a Musket-bullet: besides
which, another lesser Stone stopped up the Meatus Hepaticus to the
Gallbladder. But though Stones are rarely found in the Livers of Men, yet in the
Livers of diseased Oxen and Sheep, we have sometimes found 'em very numerous,
some red, some yellowish; others white like Tartar of Wine.

XXXIV. To this Story of the Liver The Liver sometimes joined with the Lungs.
may be added a certain Conjunction of the Liver with the Lungs, and a
wonderful situation of both of them, and the parts adjoining, which D.
Wassenaer, a famous Physician at Utrecht, imparted to me in writing, as seen by
him in a little Child of Cornelius de Mirop, Governor of Wingenlangenraeck.
This Child was in his life time Asthmatic, and vexed with a frequent and
terrible Cough, upon every slight occasion; and at length died of a Fever at
seven years of Age. Whose Body being opened the 2d of Febr. 1665. in the
presence of D. Goyer, the said Wassenaer, and two or three Chirurgions and
others.

XXXV. The Abdomen being laid A History.
open, says he, and the Breast, there was no Diaphragma to be found by which
the Thorax is separated from the lower Belly. Nor was there any more than one
Lobe of the Lungs, which being continued on the right side with the Liver,
seemed to be like it both in color and substance. There was no spunginess in
that Lobe, which crossing the middle of the Liver, under the hollow part of it,
stuck out like an Appendix. Out of the midst of the Liver certain Passages,
like the Gristles of the Windpipe, derived themselves into the Aspera Arteria
it self. There was no skin or cover that appeared about the Ribs; for the Liver
and right part of its Lobe, stuck every where so close to the Ribs, that they
could not be separated but by a Penknife. The Pericardium, in which there was
but very little Liquor, enfolded but half the Heart, which about the bottom,
together with the left and upper part of the Lobe of the Lungs, was so firmly
united to the Spine of the Back, as the Liver and right side of the lobe of the
Lungs was fastened to the Ribs. In the Unequal and lower part of the Liver,
about the ninth Rib was an Ulcer, full of well concocted Matter. The Stomach
also, considering the proportion of the Body, and the Age of the Child, was
twice as big as it ought to have been.

XXXVI. And thus sometimes we meet with wonderful things, as to the situation,
structure, and connection of the Bowels.

As for Example; No less rare and Another Rarity, where no Liver or Spleen
could be found.
monstrous is that, which upon his own, and the testimony of several other
Physicians and Chirurgions, Schenkius affirms, Observe. l. 3. viz. that in the
Year 1564. in the dissection of the dead Body of Ortelius, a Merchant of
Antwerp, there was not so much as the footstep to be seen of any Liver or
Spleen; but that the substance of all the Intestines was fleshie, and much more
solid than the flesh of the Muscles, that it seemed to resemble the flesh of
the Heart. That the Vena Cava had taken its rise from the Original it self,
which was thought to be the Cause that the Patient in his life time was so
frequently tormented with an Inflammation and Aposteme in his Lungs. Malpigius
therefore conjectures, and that not without reason, that the glandulous
substance of the Liver, contrary to the order of Nature, was extended all the
length of the Intestines.

CHAP. XV. Of the Choler Vessels, and the Choler it self.
I. FOR the discharge of the Choler Two passages in the right and hollow part
of the Liver.
there are two Passages appointed in the right and hollow part of the Liver,
that is to say, the Gallbladder, and the Porus Bilarius. Thorough the latter
the more feculent and milder Choler flows into the Intestines. Into the former
the thinner Choler Rather a kind of Lymphatic Juice, f^r in the place
above cited of Synop. sis Medicinae, it is there demonstratively proved, that
there is (...) such thing in Nature, as the separation of Gall from the (...);
but a kind of Lymphatic Juice, which by the Fermentum of the Gallbladder is
changed into Gall. Salmon.
flows, and staying there a while, by that stay cuts off the proper quality of
the part, but more from the remaining Liquor that sticks to it, acquires a
sharper and more fermentative quality.

II. The Gallbladder is an oblong The Gallbladder.
Bladder, fashioned like a Pear, somewhat round, hollow, and seated in the
caveous or hollow part of the Liver.

III. At the uppermost and middle Situation.
part it is joined to the hollow of the Liver; the rest of it hangs forth
without the body of the Liver; where touching the right side of the Ventricle,
and the Gut Colon, it frequently moistens and stains both with the Choler
transpiring through its Tunicles.

IV. It is furnished with a double Membranes.
Membrane. The one exterior without Fibers, rising from the Peritonaeum, which
invests the pendulous part without the Liver, and fastens it to the Liver, and
is the same with the exterior Membrane of the Liver. The other proper and more
thick, strengthened with a slippery Slime against the Acrimony of the contained
Humor. This several Anatomists, with Laurentius, affirm to be interwoven with
all manner Its Fibers.
of Fibers, and that with the right Fibers it attracts the Choler to it, with
the oblique, it retains the Choler in it, and with the Transverse expells it.
Yet to others these Fibers seem to be imaginary, in regard they cannot by any
way be demonstrated; and therefore Fallopius and Riolanus explode 'em; and
Glisson both rejects and refutes their Use described by Laurentius. But
Laurentius's Cause may be well enough maintained, if we say that although these
Fibers cannot be manifestly demonstrated, yet they may be discerned by Reason,
seeing this part stands no less in need of Fibers to maintain and strengthen
it, than the Veins, Arteries, the Piss-bladder, and several others, which when
they are dilated, contract again by means of their Fibers, and so return again
to their former Condition. Which distention happens in the Gallbladder by
reason of the redundancy of the Gall, or else its Effervescency; which, a
Contraction by means of Fibers, though invisible or obscure, must be of
necessity, not only to press forth the Choler out of the Bladder, (which
Glisson grants) but also to reduce the Gallbladder to its first condition. To
this we may add, that Fibers are admitted by Anatomists in Veins, which
nevertheless no man can easily demonstrate, though it be manifest from their
crooked swellings that they have Fibers.

V. It has two sorts of Vessels, some Two sorts of Vessels.
that open into the Cavity of it; of which more anon. Others, which run
thorough its Tunicles or Membranes, which are fourfold.

1. Small little Arteries, proceeding from the upper right Branch of the
Caellac. 2. Many Capillary Veins, bringing back the remainder of the blood
after Nourishment supplied, and at length closing in two small Branches,
through which it pours forth this blood into the Vena Portae. 3. A little Nerve
hardly conspicuous, deduced from the branch of the sixth Pair creeping through
the Tunicle of the Liver. 4. Some few Lymphatic Vessels propagated from the
Liver, running through its exterior parts. The Arteries and a Nerve enter it
about the Neck of it. The Veins go forth the same way toward the Porta^ The
Lymphatic Vessels in Men enter the same way, and running thorough the bottom of
the Gallbladder, at the lower part are joined with the rest of the Lymphatics
proceeding from the Liver. But in those Creatures where the Gallbladder hangs
forth out of the Liver, they enter at the Neck, and fetching a Circuit about
the bottom, return the same way toward other Lymphatic Vessels proceeding out
of the Liver.

VI. This Bladder is divided into The division.
bottom and neck.

VII. The bottom is larger, round, The bottom.
or shaped like a Pear, dangling below, of the color of the Gall contained in
it; sometimes yellow, sometimes rustcolour'd, sometimes black, and sometimes of
a Garlic green.

VIII. In the bottom of this same Stones sometimes found in it.
Gallbladder are found several Stones, but so light, that being thrown into
Water, they will swim at the top. Of these I have observed sundry colors:
sometimes yellow, sometimes black inclining to green, and sometimes speckl'd
like Marble. These seem to be generated out of Choler, void of any Acrimony,
which in regard it never boyls, never breaks out of the said Gallbladder, but
is hardened within it by degrees into Stones, by the heat of the Liver.
Formerly Observation.
I dissected a Person that died of the Jaundice, after he had been for some
years troubled with a black and green Iaundice I have twice in my life seen
Patients afflicted with a green Iaundice: the one I cured; the other dyed,
being given over by other Physicians, as uncurable. The Patient whom I cured,
was all over of a yellowish green: he which dyed was of a dark or deep green.
The cause or reason for this Distemper is rendered in our Synopsis Medicinae,
lib. 4. cap. S. Sect. 10. 26. ad 36. to which I refer you. Salmon.
, in whose Gallbladder I found a Stone somewhat black, and of an indifferent
blackness.

Fernelius Patholog. l. 6. c. 5. gives us a Relation of a certain old man, who
had such a large Stone in his Gallbladder, filling the whole Concavity of it
to that degree, that he might be thought to have no Bladder at all. Other
innumerable Examples there are of Stones found in the Gallbladder, frequent to
be seen in the Writings of Physicians.

IX. The neck of the Bladder is The Neck.
narrower, and toward the upper parts is straightened into a thin passage, which
ends in a common passage leading to the Intestines.

X. In this neck, according to the Whether any Valves in it.
Opinion of Andrew Laurentius, Veslingius, and Bartholine, there are Valves to
be discerned, sometimes two, sometimes three, preventing the Return into the
Bladder of the Choler which ought to flow into the Intestines. But I could
never observe any such things; however, I observed the Egress of the Bladder to
be most strait, and the Neck of it to be full of many wrinkles, lest the
descent of the Choler should be too easy and too slippery, and therefore to
render the Evacuation the more slow. In like manner neither could Riolanus and
Glisson find those Valves. For the said narrowness of the Neck seems to be
ordered by Nature to that end, that the Choler being once got into its Bladder,
should not presently return again, but stay for some time within, to acquire a
sharper Acrimony, and more fermentative quality This is something of the
Doctrine which we have maintained in the places aforecited of our Synopsis
Medicinae; which thing is worthy the serious consideration of all the Sons of
Art: and it is without doubt, the same kind of Juice, which being conveyed to
other parts (as the Amygdalae, maxillary Glandules, Women's Breasts,
Piss-bladders, Pancreas, Seminal Vessels, and Pores of the Skin,) by the
Fermentum of the same parts is converted into the Humor proper to the same; (as
Spittle, Milk, Urine, and Juice, Seed, and Sweat.) Salmon.
, from the nature and property of the place, and by the mixture of the sharp
Choler still remaining in the Bladder, which being once well mingled with it,
and thence raising a slight Effervescency in the Choler it self, it happens
that the wrinkles of the Neck being dilated and gaping by means of that
distension, some part of it being attenuated and made more fluid by that
Effervescency, cannot conveniently be contained, but is forced down to the
Intestines. Of which see more C. 17. following.

XI. The Choler is carried to the The way of the Choler to the Bladder.
Bladder through many small Roots, scattered up and down in the Liver among
many little Branches of the Vena Cava and Vena Portae, ( as has been said in
the foregoing Chapter,) which closing together into one passage, through that
passage pour forth the Choler That is, the Serous or Lymphaphatic Juice, which
by the Fermentum of the Bladder, as aforesaid, is changed into the Choleric
Humor, for several and various intentions of Nature. Salmon.
into the Gallbladder. But these Roots are so small, that they are hardly to
be seen; only the Trunk into which they all run, is to be found. And Glisson
describes the way of searching for it, and finding it out, Anat. Hep. c. 13.
This Trunk we have often seen very apparent with some Roots in an Ox Liver,
admitting a good big Bodkin; to which, at the entrance into the Bladder of the
Gall, sometimes a small, and sometimes a large Valve is affixed, which hinders
the return of the Choler out of the Bladder into the Liver. In Dogs, whose
Liver is divided into several Lobes, we have often found, and visibly shown to
the Standers by two or three Trunks. If you ask then, how it returns in Persons
that are troubled with the Jaundice? I answer that it does not return, but that
the Choler which is generated in the Liver, for want of convenient
Effervescency and Fermentation, is not separated from the blood, and therefore
never flows into the Bladder, but remains mixed with the blood, and together
with that is carried to the hollow Vein, the Heart, and the rest of the Body.

XII. The Use of the Gallbladder The use.
is to collect the Choler with which, in healthy Persons, it is moderately
replenished, yet not filled so full, but that it might contain half a spoonful
more. In a sickly habit of body it is sometimes swelled and stuffed with
Choler; sometimes, but very rarely, altogether empty.

XIII. The other Choler Vessel is the The Bilary Porus.
Porus Bilarius, called the Bilary Passage, which is an oblong Chanel, twice as
large as the neck of the Bladder, proceeding from the Liver not far from the
Vena Portae, and conveighing the Choler received by the Liver into the common
Chanel, which glides not only somewhat thicker and more dreggy through the
broader Chanel, but also milder; where it does not tarry by the way, or acquire
a more eager Acrimony, either by a longer stop, or from the nature of the
place, as the other already collected in the Bladder.

XIV. To this there are some that The Valves.
appropriate double Valves, preventing the regress of the Choler into the
Liver; the one at its Exit out of the Liver, and the other at its Entrance into
the Ductus Communis. But oothers deny there are any such Valves, because they
cannot be found by Anatomists. But Reason seems to persuade us, if there are
not two, yet that there ought to be one, seeing it is manifest that there is
such a Valve in the Trunk which hinders the regress of the Choler. Por our
parts, we shall forbear to determine the Controversy, till our Eyes, and
certain Demonstration shall give a definitive Sentence.

XV. Now here a Question may arise, Whether two sorts of Choler.
Whether there be two sorts of Choler generated in the Liver, of which the one
sort, being the sharper, flows into the Gallbladder; and the other milder
flows through the Choler Passage? I say, No; but that it is one and the same
Choler, whose somewhat more feculent parts nevertheless more easily pass
through the Porus Bilarius, as being broader, and by reason of their feculency
are less eager; but the more thinner parts are conveyed into the
Gallbladder; to the end they may there be made more sharp, and acquire a more
efficacious fermentative power, as well from the Specific Temper of the Body,
as from the Mixture of the sharp Choleric Juice remaining in the Bladder.

XVI. But that the Choler, which Differences of Choler.
glides through the Porus Bilarius, differs in some qualities from that which
is contained in the Gall, Malpigius has experienced, Lib. de liene, c. 6. and
found that which flows through the said Porus to be more mixed and less sharp,
nor colored alike, and being heated by the fire, yields a most strong scent,
which the other does not do. Perhaps it may be objected, That many times there
is a thick and slimy Choler found in the Gallbladder, which for the most part
is very insipid, and void of Acrimony. I answer, That it is not so thick when
it first enters the Gallbladder (for being thick and viscous, it could never
pass through the narrow Passages of the Roots, but when the Gallbladder is
obstructed, or that the Choler for some other cause is detained within it
longer than is requisite, then the thinner parts being dissipated by the heat
of the Liver, the Choler becomes thick and viscous in it, contrary to its
natural temper; and sometimes is dried to a stony hardness: which for the most
part happens for this reason, because it has not a fermentative quality, strong
enough to stir it up to the Effervescency, and so to timely expulsion. In like
manner, I say, that the Choler becomes whitish and insipid in the Bladder, for
want of that saltish and sow'rish Liquor that comes from the Spleen, by reason
of the corruption or defect of which Liquor, the Liver begets vicious Choler Or
rather Juice, for the generating of Choler, as aforesaid. Salmon.
, which may easily happen in a sickly Constitution, wherein any other Humors in
any other part of the Body, may alter from their natural habit.

XVII. Now the Porus Bilarius receives The way of the Choler into the Bilary
Porus.
that milder sort of Choler by means of innumerable Roots that are dispersed
through the Liver, which accompany the little Branches of the Vena Portae to
all parts of the Liver ( some excepted, to which the Roots of the Gallbladder
are extended,) nay, they are wrapped about with one and the same Tunicle, arising
from the Membrane that enfolds the Liver, in like manner as the Spermatic Vein
and Artery; and by means of that so closely stick one to another, that they
cannot be separated one from another without tearing; in so much that at first
sight they seem to be one and the same Vessel, and can only be discerned to be
distinct from the variety of the Color, if they be held up to a clear light,
which cannot be done but when the Liver is excarnated.

XVIII. Franciscus Sylvius de le Sylvius his Opinion.
Boe is of opinion that they are not the little Branches of the Vena Portae
which are covered with one common Tunicle with the Roots of the Bilary Porus,
but that they are the little Branches of the Hepatic Artery, which he reports
that he saw discovered and demonstrated by John van Horn, Disputat. Med. 6.
These. 52. But without doubt, in that demonstration the little Gall Branches,
which because of the Liquor contained in them, are not so ruddy as the Veins,
were by Van Horn taken for Arteries. But that which Sylvius adds, That the
Hepatic Artery, for the most part enclosed within the common Covering, is
inserted into the little Branches of the Hepatic Bilary Porus, I will believe
it when I see it. I know there is a very close conjunction of the little
Branches of the Porta and the Gall Vessels, but of no Artery. And hence, that
there is any Insertion of any Artery by Anastomoses into the Bilary Vessels,
must be proved before my Eyes by demonstration, before I can give The Choler is
taken from the Substance of the Liver.
credit to it.

XIX. And therefore the Roots of the Porus receive the Choler or Juice
generating of it from the Substance of the Liver it self, into which several
little Branches of the Vena Portae, few of the Hepatic Arteries empty their
Blood, which is presently altered therein, and by the mixture of sulphury and
saltish Particles is concocted after a new manner, and in many of its Particles
grows bitter, and turns into Choler. Which Choleric Particles, by means of the
Glandulous Balls (of which Malpigius asserts the Substance of the Liver chiefly
to consist) are separated from the other bloody Particles, which are less
altered by that Concoction, and sucked up by the Roots of the Porus Bilarius
and Gallbladder.

XX. And, as has been already said of the Arteries, there are many that feign
several Anastomoses between the Extremities of the Twigs of the Vena Portae and
the Bilary Roots, although there are no such things as we have shown in the
foregoing Chapter. And which Glisson clearly evinces by many Reasons and
Experience, ought not to be; in regard that the whole Alteration of the Blood
into Choler, and separation and transfusion of it out of the Veins into the
Bilary Vessels, is made by means of the Glandulous Balls.

XXI. Now the Choler flowing as The Ductus Cholidochus.
well from the Liver through the Bilary Porus, as out of the Gallbladder,
meets in one common Chanel, called the Ductus Cholidochus, which is a Meatus
Chanel or Passage made out of the Necks of the Bilary Porus, and the
Gallbladder meeting together.

XXII. This goes for the most part It is for the most part solitary.
alone, sometimes admitting the Pancreatic Chanel at the end of it (which is
very frequent in a Man, seldom in a Dog,) toward the end of the Duodenum, or
beginning of the Jejunum, obliquely between both Tunicles of the Intestine, for
the most part single, seldom double about the end, with an Insertion of about a
fingers breadth, opens toward the hollow of the Intestine, and empties its
Choler into the Guts, as well immediately out of the Liver, as out of the
Vesicle of the Gall. Others, and not without reason, rather believe that this
whole Chanel is no more than the Bilary Porus, extended from the Liver to the
Guts, into which, on the side, is inserted the Neck of the Gallbladder.

XXIII. Vesalius and Sylvius assert Its Valves.
that there are certain loose little Membranes fixed to the Orifice of this
Chanel like Valves, preventing the Return of the Choler from the Guts to the
Liver. But if we inquire more diligently, there will be no membranous Valves to
be found here, only an Internal loose Membrane of the Intestine, depressed by
the concocted Nourishment passing thorough, so shuts up the way, that no Liquor
can enter the Chanel from the Guts, which when the Choler descends and seeks to
go forth out of the Chanel, presently opens and gives it a free Passage.

XXIV. Glisson allows to that part Glisson would have it to be a Sphincter
Muscle.
of the Chanel which obliquely enters and bores the Gut, Fibers like Rings,
which he believes are opened like the Sphincter Muscles, when plenty of Choler
makes its way, but are then contracted again when that Choler is passed away,
till more new Choler comes. And these Fibers, as he says, prevent any Humor
from ascending from the Guts to the Liver or Gallbladder. But perhaps Glisson
took that little piece of Flesh which bunches out at the Exit of the Ductus
Cholidochus into the Guts, for some little Shincter Muscle.

XXV. But because that some oblique An Objection ^swer'd.
Passage into the Guts is very narrow, and the Channel broad, hence the other
seems not able to transmit hardly the tenth part of the Choler through a
Channel no wider than a Goose-Quill, therefore Glisson thought that the
foresaid Ductus Cholidochus, did not only do the Duty of Channels to conveigh
the Choler, but also performed the Office of Receptacles or Bladders, to
contain and keep it for some time. But in the Dissections of dead Carcasses
it is very rarely seen that any Choler is contained in those Vessels. And
therefore it is more probable that the Choler most usually descends in a small
Quantity from the Liver and the Gallbladder (for a small Quantity serves to
procure Effervescency or Fermentation of the Chylus, together with the
Pancreatic Juice) and therefore by reason there is so little of it, it may
easily pass through the Streights of the oblique Passage. Which Passage however
being obstructed contrary to Nature, then the Choler happens to stop in the
Ductus Cholidochus, as it were in some Bladder, which never happens according
to Nature in a a state of Health. For then a little Choler somewhat sharp,
suffices to provoke Evacuation, to cause a Distention of the Ductus, and to
open the Passages.

XXVI. Here we must observe by An unusual Constitution.
the way a certain Constitution of the Gall Vessels seldom happening, which we
saw in the Year 1668. in the Dissection of a Woman about thirty Years of Age,
who having been long troubled with a Dropsy not very terrible, but partly an
Anasacra, partly an Ascites, at length died of it. In this Body we found the
Liver not Ruddy, but inclining to Yellow: In the rest of the Bowels there was
hardly any Yellowness to be observed, and an overabounding serous Humor filled
the hollowness of the Abdomen. The Gallbladder A white Gallbladder.
was White both within and without, as also the Chanel running forth toward the
Ductus Cholidochus Communis; and so large as to admit almost a Man's little
Finger. But neither in the Bladder, nor in the Chanel was any Choler at all,
but a white kind of Juice, very Viscous, and not very much. Nevertheless in the
common Ductus Cholidochus (which is the Bilarie Porus extended to the Guts)
just entering into the Duodenum, there was contained an indifferent Quantity of
yellow Choler, which by the yellow Choler within, was plainly discovered to
have flowed into the Duodenum.

XXVII. Hence we may raise a great An Argument for the Passage of Choler
through the bilary Pore.
Argument against those who affirm that no Choler at all flows from the Liver
through the Bilary Porus to the Guts, but that part of the Choler flowing from
the Vesicle, breaks forth into the Duodenum, and part ascends through the
Bilary Porus, and so enters the Liver. Which that it cannot be done, is
manifest from this Observation. For seeing that no Choler was contained in the
Vesicle, nor in its Chanel, and yet the Choler was carried to the Duodenum, it
could be conveyed from no other Part than from the Liver, through the Bilary
Porus, and the common Ductus Cholidochus, wherein there was Choler also found.

XXVIII. Here a Question arises, Whether the Choler ^ows continually.
whether the Choler descends to the Guts continually, and with an equal Course?
For Resolution of which Question, I think it proper to distinguish between that
Choler which flows from the Liver through the Porus, and that which falls from
the Gallbladder. Now that some Choler, though but a small Quantity continually
flows to the Guts, and is presently mixed with the Pancreatic Juice, flowing
also in a small Quantity, is apparent to Sight in the Dislection of living
Creatures. But I should think that to be the milder sort, descending from the
Liver through the Bilary Porus; not the sharper and more fermentative Sort that
comes from the Bladder, as being that, which by reason of the narrowness of the
Neck of the Bladder, does not seem to glide out of its place, unless when by
its Effervescency it dilates the Bladder and its Neck, and makes way for it
self. And so I think that this Sort does not flow but by Intervals out of the
Bladder; and more especially when the Gallbladder is pressed by the Stomach
full of Meat, as resting upon the right Side of it: And when by reason of the
Concoction and Fermentation so near it, the Choler also begins to boil in the
said Gallbladder. For that same sharp Choleric Ferment is not flowing
continually, nor do the Intestines always require the same Quantity of it. But
chiefly then (when a new Chylus, being to be separated from the Guts) it either
slides, or is about to slide down into 'em, Glisson on the other side,
believes, that when the Stomach is full* or that the Chylus is descending to
the lower Parts, the flowing of the Choler is not thereby promoted, but rather
hindered. But according to the Opinion of Galen and the Ancients, he asserts,
that the Choler stays for some time in the Gall-Vessels, and afterward of a
sudden is forced down from thence into the Guts; and does the Office of a
Clyster to purge 'em. Which was that which before Glisson, Spigelius both
believed and maintained: Though according to the Opinion of these two Persons the
Choler would flow into the Intestines when there was no need of it. But the
Ground of this Error was this, That Galen and his Followers thought the Choler
to be a mere Excrement, and that it only promoted the Evacuation of the Dreggs
of Nourishment, but were ignorant that it is altogether necessary to the
Fermentation of the Chylus. Of which more in the following Chapter.

XXIX. Besides the common Chanel The unu^ual Chanel.
already mentioned, in the Year 1655. in April, I publicly showed in the
Anatomy Theater another unusual Chanel, thinner than the other usual Chanel,
which nevertheless was there at the same time, and full of Yellow Choler, which
had no Correspondency with the Bilary Porus, or the common Ductus Cholidochus
already mentioned, but had its Rise apart above the Neck of the Gallbladder,
where the Bladder begins to be streightened toward the Neck: Besides that it
was carried apart by it self to the Duodenum, into which it was inserted about
a Fingers breadth from the Insertion of the common Ductus Cholidoch is. The
next Year in another Body we observed something that was rare, that is to say
besides the usual Ductus Cholidochus, another unusual Meatus or Chanel,
extended from the middle of the Gallbladder, directly to that part of the Gut
Colon adjoining to it. And thus sometimes we shall observe a Chanel to extend
it self from the Gallbladder to the Pylorus, and sometimes to the bottom of
the Stomach. But these are the unusual Sports and Varieties of Nature, seldom
to be seen.

XXX. From what has been said, A Digression.
it is apparent that Choler is made in the Liver, That is to say the Juice
generating Choler more specially, because the same Juice cannot be brought from
other remote Parts at the same time. Salmon.
and from hence flows forth from the Choler Vessels into the Guts. It remains
now that we speak something of its Generation and its Use.

XXXI. Choler then is a Fermentaceous What Choler is.
Juice prepared in the Liver out of the Venal Blood, and specific splenetic
Juice. That is to say, the said Juice is prepared and fitted in the Liver for
Separation, to be received into the Gallbladder, and there by the Fermentum
inherent, to be perfected, and made that choleric Juice, which is bitter, and
so sent into the Iejunum. Salmon.


XXXII. It is generated as well out of the Sulphury and Unctuous Particles of
the Venal Blood, as the Salt and Acid Particles of the sowrish Liquor coming
from the Spleen, together with those that flow through the Vena Portae, being
beforehand Concocted, mixed and prepared in the Liver after a specific manner.
For the sulphurous Juice, although it be sweetish of it self, being for some
time concocted with the saltish Ferment, grows bitter and changes its Color.
Now that this is the matter of which Choler Consists, the Art of Chemistry
teaches us, as being that by which but little fixed Salt and Water, but much
volatile Salt and Oil may be extracted from the Choler of the Bladder, if in
its natural Condition.

XXXIII. This Choler concocted in The M^ion of C^ler.
the Liver, one Part of it, being the thinnest, remaining mixed with the Blood,
is carried to the Vena Cava, and therein, infuses into the Blood a certain
fermentative Quality, by which it is made fit to be presently dilated in the
Heart. The other Part more bitter and more fermentaceous, partly of a milder
Quality, flows through the Bilary Porus to the Intestins; and partly forced
into the Gallbladder, from the Property of the Place and the Juice abiding in
it, becomes yet more bitter and sharp, and acquires a stronger fermentative
Quality.

XXXIV. From the Ignorance of Whether Choler be generated in (...) Part.
this Motion of the Choler, some famous Physicians, as Galen, Lud. Mercator,
Helmont, Krempsius, Hoffman, and others made a Doubt whether some Choler were
not generated in the Stomach, Heart, Head, and Kidneys, as well as in the Liver
and Gall-Vessels; which seems to be proved by the Vomiting of Choler, in the
Disease called Cholera, and the yellow Froth sometimes swimming upon extracted
Blood, the Bitterness of the Excrements contained in the Ears, and the choleric
Color of Urines. But their Mistake proceeded from hence, that they thought
Choler to be a mere Excrement, and that it was all of it sent through the
Gall-Vessels to the Gutts, and from thence evacuated; and were ignorant that in
the Distemper called Cholera, being forced out of the Bladder into the Guts,
the greatest part of it ascended into the Stomach, and so was vomited up; as
also that a good part of it was carried to the Heart, and mixed for
Fermentation sake with the Blood, and circulated with the Blood through all the
Body, and hence the Color of it appeared in the Froth swimming upon the Blood,
and in Urines; Hence also the Color and Taste of it proceeded in the Excrements
of the Ears, though it be not generated in the Parts that evacuate those
Excrements.

XXXV. The property of Place The Place generating Choler, depends upon the
inner Tunicle of the Gallbladder, and the Choler residing therein.
conducing to the Generation of Choler, depends partly upon the inner Tunicle
of the Gallbladder it self, which is endu'd with a peculiar fermentaceous
Quality: Partly upon the Choler residing in that Bladder, which by a longer
Stay, being there fermented and Boiling, becomes more sharp and bitter, and by
that means ferments and renders more sharp the fresh milder Choler flowing out
of the Liver into the Bladder; and so by continuance the sharper Choler
boiling, flows out of the Bladder, and the milder taking its Room, and staying
there, becomes more sharp. Nevertheless the Choler acquires either a more
intense or remiss Acrimony, according as more or fewer, and those more sharp or
milder, saltish and sowrish Juices, flowing from the Spleen to the Liver, and
there are intermixed with the sulphurous Juice, and are more or less concocted.
For if the Juice that flows from the splenetic Branch, be either less in
Quantity or less Sharp, the Choler becomes less Sharp and less effectual to
promote a Fermentative Effervescency; which growing Clammy in the Choler
Vessels of the Liver, and Bladder, as not being sufficiently attehuated by that
weak Effervescency, causes the Jaundice and many other Obstructions. But if the
Liquor that flows from the Spleen be too sharp, then the Choler becomes too
sharp and eager as well in the Vasa Bilaria of the Liver, as in the
Gallbladder, and that Acrimony corroding too violently in the Fermentation,
causes great Pains, Cholera's, Dysenteries, and other Distempers, especially if
a sour Pancreatic Juice flow into the Intestins at the same time.

XXXVI. Francis de le Boe Sylvius, A new Opinion.
considering the very small and almost invincible Passages, through which the
Choler is conveyed from the Liver to the Gallbladder, conceived quite
another Opinion of its Generation. For he imagins Choler to be generated out of
the most similar Parts of the Blood conveyed through the Cystic Arteries to
the Gallbladder, and penetrating by degrees through the Pores of its Tunicle
into the Concavity it self, and there presently changing into the same Nature
with the rest of the Choler; in like manner as a Iugg of Wine, being poured
into a Tub of Vinegar straight becomes Vinegar. This Opinion of Sylvius comes
very near the Truth, if it be considered as to the Particles or Matter of which
Choler is generated: But as to the Ways and Passages leading that Matter to the
proper Place, I am very confident he is wide from the Mark* For the Passages
out of the Liver into the Gallbladder (whi^ are indeed Strainers)* are evident
in many Persons to the (...) Eyes; but with a Microscope, they appear famous.
So (...) deny them, a man must absolutely deny his Senses. Salmon.


Regius is also of the same Opinion, Philos. Nature. l. 4. c. 12. who
nevertheless seems to acknowledge the Bilarie Roots, extracting the Choler out
of the venal Blood infused into the Liver. But these three things destroy the
Fiction of Sylvius. 1. For that never any Signs appear of any Blood infused
into the Hollow of the Gallbladder; no, not so much as the least Drop ever
observed by any Anatomists; whereas in all other Parts wherein any Juice,
Liquor, or Spirit, is to be made of Blood, there are some marks of Blood that
manifestly appear, as in the Brain and Testicles. 2. Because that Choler is
generated in some Creatures that are said to be destitute of a Gallbladder, as
in the Heart, the Fallow Deer, the Camel, etc. In which Creatures it cannot be
generated in the Vesicula Fellis, out of the Blood that glides through the
Arteries, but being generated in the Liver it self, flows through the Bilary
Porus. 3. Because those Vessels are sometimes obstructed through which the
Choler is conveyed to the Porus, and Gallbladder, which is the cause of the
Jaundice, by reason of the great Quantity of Choler diffused over the whole
Body; when as it is apparent that no Choler was generated in the mean time in
the Porus, or empty Gallbladder, tho* the Cystic Arteries conveyed Blood
sufficient to the Bladder as they used to do. 4. Because that in Gluttons and
great Drinkers, the Jaundice proceeding from a hot Distemper of the Liver,
cannot be caused by the arterial Blood being changed into Choler, which was
equally both before and then carried ^o the Gallbladder; nor is there any
Reason it should then be more copiously conveyed thither to be changed into
Choler, than at any other time. 5. Because this Opinion seems to presuppose as
if all the whole Mass of Choler were generated in the Gallbladder, whereas it
is all generated in the Liver I beg the Diversion of the Author in believing of
this, since the contrary can be proved by ocular Demonstration. Salmon.
before it comes to the Bladder: As is apparent from hence, for that very much
Choler flows through the Porus to the Intestin, which never comes near the
Gallbladder; and therefore could not be generated out of the Particles of the
arterial Blood, gliding into the Bladder. 6. Because this Opinion seems also to
maintain, that real Choler does not pre-exist in the Blood, and that the
Particles of it being separated from the Blood, flow down into the hollow of
the Bladder, and are there made perfect Choler. But the Vanity of this Opinion
we have at large demonstrated. C. 10. artic. de generat. Suc. pancreat.

XXXVII. Moreover what Sylvius, The Insertion of the Hepatic Artery into the
Branches of the Porus uncertain.
in his Addition to his Disputation, alleges for the Support of his Opinion,
do not seem to be of so much Weight, as to establish his Doctrine. For the
Insertion of the Hepatic Artery into the Branches of the Porus does not prove
it, because the Insertion it self is as yet very much questioned, as being
grounded more upon uncertain Belief than certain Sight, and therefore to be
laid up among those Doubts which are not to be credited unless visible to the
Eyes. In like manner also his Experiment made in a Dog, by means of a little
Pipe thrust into the Hepatic Artery, and blowing through it into the
Gallbladder, is very uncertain, even by the Confession of Sylvius himself,
These. 54. Moreover if the Wind could be so easily blown into the Concavity of
the Gallbladder, store of Blood might easily be also forced into it by the
Protrusion of the Heart and the Cystic Arterys, which never was yet observed by
any Person.

XXXVIII. But Malpigius absolutely Whether Choler be only separated and not
generated.
denis the Generation of Choler, l. de hep. l. 3. believing that Choler is not
generated out of any Blood by the Mixture and Concoction of several Humors in
the Blood; but that it is only separated from the Blood by means of the
Glandulous Balls of the Liver it self, and that such as it is, it pre-exists in
the Blood, and therefore has need of nothing more than Separation. Which
Separation he thinks to be thus brought to pass* Neither, says he, is there any
Necessity for Suction, to the End the Choler should be sent to the Intestins or
Gallbladder through the Porus, for a strong and continued Compression of the
Glandules of the Liver, caused by continual Respiration, and the Impulse of the
Blood running through the Arteries, and the Branches of the Portae promote the
Office of Separation in the Glandulous Balls, and its Propulsion through the
Branches of the Porus, as it happens in other conglomerated, and conglobated
Kernels, in the Parotides and the like.

XXXIX. But herein the learned Gentleman is very much mistaken, for there is in
the Blood coming to the Liver and bilarie Vessels, a certain Substance intended
for Choler, but not Choler it self. This Assertion of the learned Author agrees
with Truth it self, and with what we have before (in several places) declared
concerning this matter, and without doubt in this Sense he is always to be
understood, when he speaks at any time of the Separation of Choler from the
Blood in the Liver, viz. That it is a certain Substance intended for Choler,
but not Choler it self: The which Substance or Juice is neither Yellow nor
Bitter, nor Choler, nor contains any Choler till it is transmitted thereinto by
the proper Ferment of the Part. Salmon.


As there is in the Nourishment a certain Matter, out of which a Chylus is to
be prepared by the mixture of a specific Ferment, and the specific Concoction
of the Stomach, which is not the Chylus it self: And in the Chylus there is the
Substance of Blood, but not the Blood it self: And* as these Humors the Chylus
and Blood are made by specific Fermentations and Concoctions in the Bowels,
designed for that purpose, of those things which before they were not; in like
manner the yellow and bitter Choler* is made out of sweet Blood, and acid
splenic Juice (of which neither is yellow or bitter, neither of 'em is Choler,
or contain any Choler in themselves) being mixed together in the Liver, and
fermented and concocted after a specific Manner: And the chiefest part of it
(for some of the thinnest remains mixed with the Blood, is carried to the Vena
Cava and the Heart, is separated from the rest of the Blood, being unfit to be
changed into Choler, and is carried to the Roots of the bilary Vessels, and so
by degrees proceeds to the Porus and bilarie Bladder. In like manner as in
Chemistry, various Bodies are changed into Metals, which before were not
Metals: And out of things void of Color, mixed and boiling together, a new
Color is raised, which was not in the Substance before; as out of white
Salt-Tartar, and transparent Spirit of Wine is produced a red Color. And hence
it may be certainly concluded, that there is not any single Separation of
Choler pre-existent in the Blood, but a new Generation of Choler which was not
before. As to the Arguments which Malpigius alleges of the pre-existency of
Urine in the Blood, and other things too prolix to be here cited, they are not
of so much Moment as to prove that pre-existency of Choler in the Blood, and
single Separation from it; when as there is not the same Reason for the
Separation of the superfluous Serum pre-existent, and the Generation of
necessary Choler not pre-existent. Of this see more in C. 10. already cited.

XL. The natural Color of Choler Color and Taste.
is yellow, the Taste bitter, and somewhat tart, the Substance Fluid. But by
several Causes, all these three in a sickly habit of Body suffer Alteration, as
the Blood is either in a bad or good Condition, or the splenetic Juice
conveyed to the Liver is more or less Salt, Acid, Sour, or Austere. For
hence arise many preternatural Qualitys of Choler, and as they vary, happen
Fevers, Choleric Distempers, Dysenteries, Iaundice, Colic Pains, and several
other Diseases. Which Regner Graef affirms to arise only from the Corruption of
the Pancreatic Juice; but contrary to Experience, for the Dissections of Bodies
that have been brought to the Grave by those Diseases, frequently tell us, that
when the Sweetbread has been firm and sound, the Cause of the Disease has lain
hid in the Liver, Bladder, and other Bilarie Vessels; though we do not deny but
that the same Diseases may arise from a vicious Pancreas. Hence there are
several Alterations of the Color of the Choler, which is sometimes Pale,
sometimes Saffron Colored, sometimes Red, sometimes Rust-coloured, and
sometimes inclining to Black. Nevertheless Regner de Graef, not considering the
Flux of the splenetic Juice to the Liver, has conceived a quite different
Opinion concerning these preternatural Colors: Believing that same variety of
Colors happens to the Choler not in the Gallbladder, nor in the Choler
Vessels, but in the Duodenum, and that by the Mixture of the Pancreatic, acid
or sour Juice, no otherwise than if it should change its natural Yellow into
any other Color in the Gallbladder it self. But in the Dissections of Bodies
that have died in our Hospital, we have demonstratively and frequently shown a
Green Eruginous or Rust Colored, and sometimes a blackish Color in the
Bladder it self before the mixture of the Pancreatic Juice; nay in the Daughter
of the Lord V^ich, who died of an Eruginous Flux of the Belly, and after her
Death by me dissected in the sight of several Physicians, we found the
Gallbladder swelled to the bigness of a Hens Egg, and full of an Eruginous
Choler: Which we have also observed in some other Infants that have died of the
same Diarrhoea, as also in others who have died of the Disease Cholera. So that
the various Colors of the Choler do not always proceed from the Mixture of the
Pancreatic Juice in the Intestins, but are often acquired in the Gallbladder,
and Bilary Vessels, in the same manner as we have already rehearsed. Of which
see more in the preceding C. 7.

XLI. But now that the several Variety of Colors from variety of Humors,
confirmed by Observation.
Humors engendered in the Body being mixed with the Blood, according to the
diversity of Qualitys, occasion a great Variety of Color, is apparent from
these Experiments which we have observed in the Gall of an Ox. Which being
mixed with acid things, as Oil of Vitriol, or Tartar, or Vinegar first boiled
a little, then growing very thick, became of a green Color, but being strongly
shaken in a Flaggon with these Acids turned to a whitish Color. Being mixed
with ordinary Cinnamon Water, it became more Thin, more Yellow, and more Fluid:
But being mixed with Spirit of Wine; presently separated from it, and settled at
the Bottom. Lastly, being mixed with fair Water, a little Gall dyed a great
deal of Water of a Saffron Color.

XLII. Of the motion of the Choler Whether the Choler ascend to the Liver
through the Porus.
we have spoken; that is to say, that some part of it mixed with the Blood,
tends from the Liver to the Vena Cava, but that the greatest Part is carried to
the Bilary Vessels, and so through the Porus and Gallbladder to the
Intestines. But the Opinions of others are far different concerning this
Matter. Vesalius (following the Judgment of Golen) writes that the Choler is
drawn out of the Porus to the Gallbladder, and from thence is forced down to
the Intestines. But this Opinion fails, because it does not demonstrate the Way
through which the Choler comes from the Porus to the Gallbladder. To which it
cannot ascend through the Chanel of the Gallbladder, and through that descend
again from the Gallbladder to the Intestines, for that in the parts of our
Body there is neither any drawing of Humors, nor any natural going and
returning the same way. Fallopius l. 3. Observe. c. 7. believes that the Choler
of the Liver does not ascend, unless when the Mouth of the common meatus
Cholidochus is stopped by some Cause or other, but that upon such an Occasion
it may be done. But the Wrinkles and Narrowness of the Neck of the Gallbladder
contradict this Opinion, altogether impeding the Ingress of the Choler
ascending this way; so that the Choler thrust forward from the Gallbladder it
self by compressing into the common Ductus Cholidochus, can by no means be
repelled back into the Gallbladder by a contrary Compression of the said
Ductus. From these Backius very much differs, Dissert. de cord c. 3. and 6.
who asserts that the Choler is carried directly out of the Cystis to the common
Ductus Cholidochus, but that the Extremity of it, which ends in the Intestines,
is so framed, that it does not permit the Exit of the Choler, but readily gives
way to the Chylus descending from the Stomach; and suffers in like manner its
ascent to the Liver. And that it communicates as well the Chylus, as more
especially a part of the Choler through the same Hole to the Pancreatic
Wirtzungian Ductus. But the very Sight it self evinces and destroys the Opinion
of Backius, by which it appears to the Eye in the Dissections of living
Animals, that as well the Choler as the Pancreatic Juice break forth from their
own Places into the Duodenum, but that nothing of the Chylus can enter through
that way out of the Guts by a contrary Conveighance. Francis de le Boe Sylvius,
introduces still another Motion of the Chylus, and asserts that the Choler
which is bred in the Bladder flows to the common Ductus Cholidochus, and is
carried from thence partly to the Guts, partly ascends through the bilary Porus
to the Liver, and there being mixed with the Blood renders it more thin; but
that no blood flows from the Liver through the Porus to the Intestines. And
this in his Additament he proves from hence, because that by blowing through a
Reed there is a Passage open from the Porus to the Liver. A most egregious
Consequence; and this is such another. The breath blown through a Pipe into the
Ureter, passes into the Kidney, and farther into the Emulgent Vein, and Vena
Cava, therefore the Urinous Serum is carried out of the Bladder through the
Ureter to the Kidney. Certainly it would be very strange, if the Choler which
is bred in the Liver, and from thence once emptied into the Vesicle, should
return through the Porus to the Liver. But the Falsehood of this Opinion appears
from many things already said. First from the rare Constitution of the Gall
Vessels: And the Force of it is quite enervated by the Experiment of the
perspicacious Malpigius, l. de hep. c. 7. In a Cat, says he, of a few Months
old, where the Gallbladder is conspicuously prominent, I have tied the Neck of
the Cystis with a Thread, and emptied it out of a Wound in the Middle. Then
have I again bound the Extremity of the Ductus Cholidochus, where it opens into
the Intestin: Then the Creature still living for some convenient space of time,
I have found the intercepted bilary Porus extremely swelled, and a Portion of
the common Ductus Cholidochus. And that I might prevent all Possibility of
Separating the Choler by the help of the Cystis, after I had first tied a hard
Knot in the Neck of it, I cut off the Cystis it self, and threw it away. And
yet I found the same Swelling follow in the hollowed Pores by reason of the
flowing Choler. Moreover I tried with my Finger to drive upward the Choler
contained in the Vessels that so swelled, yet would it return with a Force, nor
could be kept back unless with an extraordinary Violence. A little after he
adds, It is most certain, from many times repeated Observation, that the
Extremity of the Cystic Passage being bound, so that not the least part of the
Substance of the Cystis or of its Neck, remain beyond the Ligature, but that
only the common Ductus Cholidochus, and the bilary Porus may run directly
toward the Intestines; and then tying another Knot near the Jejunum, a
remarkable Quantity of Choler will be collected together, and evacuated out of
a small Wound made beyond the Ligature in the mid Way; which Knot may be
several times untied, that the Porus Bilarius being plentifully filled may be
emptied again.

XLIII. To which Experiment may be added three or four Observations of
Riolanus, Anthropog. l. 2. c. 22. From whence it appears as plain as Day, that
the Choler flowing from the Gallbladder never ascends thorough the Bilary
Porus to the Liver; And that no Choler often descends from the bladder, yet in
the interim flows in great quantity from the Liver through the Poras Communis
to the Intestines, and therein, if it be endu'd with bad qualities, produces
Diarrhoeas, Dysenteries, the Disease Cholera, cruel Gripings, and other
Distempers.

XLIV. Concerning the use of the The use of the Choler.
Bladder, there have been hitherto great Disputes among the most Eminent
Doctors. Aristotle thought it to be separated from the Blood, as a mere noxious
Excrement; whose Opinion is followed by many. And hence it is that Bauhinus,
Anat. l. 1. c. 45. makes a doubt whether the Collection of the Choler in the
Bladder be necessary to Life; when the ancients affirmed the cause of long life
to be the emptiness of the Gallbladder, deducing their Argument from Hearts,
that have no Gall, and yet live long. Haly Abbas, and Avicen, say that it heats
and strengthens the Liver, and helps its Concoction. Zirbus writes, that it
defends the Liver and other parts from Putrefaction. Which Opinion, though it be
exploded by Vesalius, yet does it not displease Riolanus. Helmont asserts it to
be the Balsom of the Liver, and all the Blood. Glisson asserts that it does not
only preserve the Liver from Putrefaction, but prevents its Obstructions,
purifies the Blood, and hinders its Coagulation. Veslingius also says that it
preserves the very Chylus from Putrefaction. Many Neoterics, according to the
Opinion of Galen, have designed only to promote the Evacuation of the
Excrements out of the Guts; which Bartholine says, are thereby made fluid, and
fit for motion. And thus all have made a doubt concerning the Use of this Noble
Juice, which is found to be wanting in no Man, and which no Man can live
without: and of which Fernelius writes, that many People have died, in whom
there has been found no other cause of their Death, than that the Gallbladder
was altogether empty of Gall.

XLV. Manifest therefore it is, that Its chief use is for Fermentation.
Choler has a more noble Use, than hitherto has been ascribed to it by
Physicians and Philosophers. And indeed the chiefest Use of it is to be
serviceable to Fermentation. Of which more at large c. 17.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Spleen.
I. THE Spleen, called by the The names.
Latins Splen, by the Greeks (...), is an Organic Part, or Bowel seated in the
left Hypochondrium, under the Diaphragma, between the Stomach and the Ribs.

II. It is very rare, or rather prodigious, Unusual Situation.
as both Aristotle and Pliny testify, that the Spleen should change places
with the Liver, that is, that this should be in the left, and the other in the
right Hypochondrium, which nevertheless has been observed by Cornelius Gemma,
and Talentonius. And such an unusual Accident Cattierus describes; and
Bartholine relates two or three Histories to the same purpose, Observat. Anat.
Rar. Cent. 2. Hist. Also it is as unusual for the Spleen to be wanting; which
defect nevertheless Hollerias reports that he saw in a certain Woman, and was
found in Ortelius, as has been said c. 14. Andrew Laurentius also makes mention
of a Body dissected at Paris, that had no Spleen; in which the Splenetick
Branch ended in a small Glandulous Body. Thus Kerckringius in his Anat. Observe.
writes, that in two Births dissected at Amsterdam, he observed the Spleen to be
wanting. Aristotle also testifies that the Spleen is wanting in several
Creatures, L. 3. de part. Animal. All Creatures, says he, that have Blood have
a Liver, but all have not a Spleen. And c. 24. All most perfect Creatures only
have a Spleen. Thus Riolanus, following Aristotle's Opinion, Creatures that
have none or very small Lungs, have none or a very small Spleen. Ent also in
Apolog. writes that he has observed several Birds to have no Spleen.

III. In Men it is generally but one, The number.
and seldom exceeds that number. Nevertheless Cabrolius, Observe. 15. as also
Posthius, and Dominic de Marchettis, have fo^nd two. Fallopius observes, in
Observe. that he has seen three; frequently in Dogs there are two, not so often
three; unequal in bigness; out of each of which there is a vessel extended to
the Splenetick branch. And the same thing perhaps may fall out in other
Creatures. For Aristotle de Generat. Animal. l. 4. c. 4. writes that some brute
Creatures have a double Spleen; and that some have none at all.

IV. The Unequal part of it is knit The Connection.
to the Diaphragma, not so fast and tite as the Liver, but superficially, as
also to the left Kidney by small membranous Fibers springing from the
Peritonaeum. And yet in November. 1668. we found so fast a Connection of it to the
Diaphragma, the left Kidney, and the left Lobe of the Liver, extended so far,
that the Connection could hardly be severed without dilaceration: but this
rarely happens. The flat part adheres to the Caul, and the adjoining Parts, and
being so bound, in sane bodies seldom descends beyond the lowest Rib: but the
Ligaments being loosened, it is felt in a lower place, to the great disturbance
of health; but the Ligaments being quite broken, sometimes it slides down into
the Hypogastri^m; which Cabrolius observed to have happened to a certain Noble
Man; whose Spleen swam upon the whole Concavity of his belly Not many months
ago I had a Child under my cure who had a Spleen so large, that it covered
almost the whole Abdomen, and reached down to the left Groin: it was so
apparent, that it might outwardly be felt, being above nine Inches in length,
and about seven Inches in breadth. The Child died, and was opened; by which we
were confirmed in the extravagancy of this Bowel. Salmon.
And which by Riolanus was seen in a Parisian Woman, whose Spleen rested upon
her Womb, and for two years deceived the Physicians, who took it for a Mole;
whereas when the dead body was opened, the cause of the Swelling, and the
Woman's Death, were both found together to have proceeded from the Spleens being
fallen down out of its place.

V. The bigness of the Spleen in The bigness.
Men is various, according to the diversity of Bodies and Constitutions. For
generally it is six Inches long, three broad, and about the thickness of the
Thumb. I^ diseased bodies it sometimes grows to an enormous bigness; so that
its protuberancy beyond the Ribs may be both felt and seen. The^ that inhabit
moist Regions and Fenny Places, have large Spleens. Lindan reports also, That
the Common People of Friezland, that use for their common Drink sour
Butter-milk, have great Livers. In the Year 1657. I dissected a body, wherein I
found a four square hard Spleen, about the bigness of a man's head. Fernelius
also writes that there was a Liver seen, that for bulk and quantity exceeded
the Liver. Wepfer found a Spleen in the body of a Noble Woman, that in length
exceeded five hands breadth, four in breadth, and one and a half in thickness,
and weighed about six common pounds, and so exceeded the Liver in bigness.
Aetius l. 7. c. 10, 16. writes, that in Splenetic Persons this Bowel sometimes
reaches in length to the Groins, and with its breadth touches the Liver. Such
great Spleens as these Vesalius also and Marcellus Donatus testify that they
have seen themselves. And Cabrolius makes mention of one that weighed five
pounds. Schenkius also relates out of Gamerus the Story of one that weighed
three and twenty pound. But such prodigious bulks are very unusual. In the mean
time, the more preternaturally big this Bowel is, the worse it is with the
Patient whose body is the more extenuated thereby, because it does not afford
matter sufficient to accomplish convenient Fermentation in the Liver, of which
the blood being destitute, cannot be attenuated and brought to persection as it
ought to be; but is left, sour, acid, thick, and otherwise unprofitable for
the Nourishment of the Parts. From whence arises the Scurvy, as Hippocrates
first observed, l. 2. Poreth. They, says he, are troubled with bad Gums, and
stinking Breaths, who have large Spleens: but they who having large Spleens are
subject to bleed, and yet have no ill smell in their mouths, they are troubled
with bad Ulcers and black Spots in their Legs.

VI. Spigelius has observed, That Lean people most subject to (...) Spleens.
they who have large Veins, have larger Spleens, and therefore lean People are
more subject to swollen Spleens than they who are fat.

VII. Rarely the Spleen is less than Small Spleens.
its natural proportion, and yet I remember some Examples of such. 1. Vidus
Vidius the younger, L. 12. de Curat. Morb. c. 10. in the Body of a Man very
cachectic, found a Spleen no bigger than a Pigeons Egg, almost as hard as a
Stone. 2. Salmuth Cent. 2. Observe. 21. in a Woman that dyed in Childbed,
otherwise very healthy while she lived, had found a Spleen so small, that it
hardly exceeded the bigness of a Man's Thumb. 3. Riolanus also reports that the
Spleen of Thuanus the Historian hardly weighed an Ounce. 4. Conringius asfirms,
that hardly any footstep of a Spleen appeared in the Princess of Luxemburgh.
The Shape.


VIII. The shape of it is oblong, like an Oxe's Tongue, whence some have called
it the Tongue-Bowel, as being not unlike it in Oxen, Dogs, and many other
Brutes: it is somewhat full of Crinkles within side; but the outside is
somewhat bunchy or bossie. But in Man the shape of it is found to receive
sundry Figures: as being in some triangular, in others gibbous, square, round,
sharp pointed; and in others distinguished into Lobes. The uppermost and
thicker part of it is called by Hippocrates and Ruffus the Head, the thinner
part the Tail.

IX. The Color in a Child in the (...) Color.
Womb is ruddy; in Persons grown up to maturity of a lead Color, or black and
bluish. And Spigelius has observed it, and sh^wn it in dissection of grown
Persons, when it has been as red as the Liver, which has been also observed by
Vesalius, Bauhinus, and Conringius. The cause of which variety of Color
proceeds from variety of Diet, and alteration of Temper and Heat; for thereby
is caused a great alteration of the Humors of the whole Body, and so of those
Humors that are carried to the Spleen, whence the variety of Color. Membraces.


X. It is surrounded with a double Membrane; one exterior from the Peritonaeum;
the other thin and proper to it self, proceeding from the exterior Membranes of
the Vessels entering the Spleen, and interwoven with a neat and wonderful
contexture of Fibers. Which Tunicles or Membranes have their Arteries, Veins,
and Nerves from those that pass through the inner Substance.

Malpigius l. de Lien. c. 1. remarks a wonderful hardness of the inner
Membrane, not yet observed by Us. It is observed, says he, by many, that that
Membrane becomes bony; and Boschius has seen it so hard toward the Muscles of
the Abdomen, that he suspected some scyrrhosity to be within it. And many
times, especially in Sheep, I have observed little Stones of a Pargetty
Substance, Ulcers ^all'd Melicerides, and other Tumors, proceeding perhaps
from the various conglutinating matter breaking forth from the Extremities of
the Vessels. In the next Chapter he writes, that he himself once saw that
Cartilaginous or Gristly Membrane in an Ox, and that the same was observed by
Spigelius.

XI. Between both Membranes shoot Various Lymphatic Vessels, formed like a kind
of Net.
forth various Lymphatic Vessels, like a kind of a Net, furnished with several
Valves, which according to the observation of Malpigius, contain a yellowish or
somewhat reddish Liquor, but by my own, and the observation of others, a
Limpid, and by conspicuous passages carried through the Cawle, cast forth into
the Receptacle of the Chylus. All which arise from many very small
conglomerated Kernels contained in the Spleen. It is furnished with Fibers.


XII. It is also furnished with innumerable Fibers thin and strong, composed of
little Strings twisted together with a wonderful piece of Workmanship, without
any hollowness in themselves. Glisson indeed attributes something of hollowness
to 'em, and misguided by that Error, that he thought they contributed to
conveigh the Alimentary Juice to the Nerves. Malpigius altogether doubtful as
to their Cavity, confesses he could not perceive it, and yet leaves it to more
piercing and fortunate Inventions to determine the matter. Others, less
accurate Inspectors, believed those Fibers to be a Contexture of the smallest
Sanguiferous Vessels.

XIII. Besides the forementioned Its Vessels.
Lymphatic Vessels conspicuous among the Tunicles, it receives also other
Vessels, as Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, dispersed thorough its whole Body.

XIV. It is watered with two Arteries, Its Arteries.
one entering the upper part, the other the lower part: which Malpigius observed
to enter the Parenchyma, or Substance of the Spleen in an Ox and Sheep with one
Branch, but in a Dog, a Horse, and several other Creatures, with three or four
Branches. These Arteries are carried from the Branch of the left Coeliaca,
which they call the Splenetick Artery, and sometimes from a certain Branch
going forth from the Trunk of the Aorta, and with a winding Course proceeding
to the Spleen by the side of the Pancreas, and being there divided into a
thousand Branches, are dispersed all over it. Through these Arteries the Blood
is forced, for which if there be not a passage sufficiently free, to the Roots
of the Veins and the Splenetick Branch, so that it comes to boil too much in
the Spleen, there happens a Pulsation in the Spleen no less than that in the
Arteries. Of which Tulpius relates a miraculous Story, L. 2. Observe. 28. of a
Pulsation of the Liver that was heard at the distance of thirty foot.

XV. It sends forth a great Vein Its Veins.
from the flat part, called the Splenetic Branch, which sticks close to the
Parenchyma with numberless Roots, out of which insensibly closing together,
sometimes three, sometimes four or more greater Branches are found, by and by
concurring altogether into that one Splenetick Branch which runs forth athwart
under the Ventricle, through the upper parts of the Caul, to the Vena Portae,
and discharges it self into it.

XVI. Highmore denies so many Highmore denies the great number of the Veins.
Veins, or that they run so far into the Bowel, and asserts the numerous
Sanguiferous Vessels to be only little Branches of the Arteries dispersed
through the whole Bowel, and believes the Anatomists to be deceived, as
mistaking Fibers for Veins. But this same Bowel, of so remarkable a bigness, in
respect of its Function, cannot but have many blood-bearing Vessels of both
sorts, which though they can hardly be demonstrated perfectly distinct, yet may
they be comprehended by the Understanding. For if there be so many Arteries
that pour blood into the Bowel, there must be also many Veins to assume that
infused Blood, and to carry it into the Splenetick Branch; for otherwise there
would be a Restagnation of the blood, and consequently a Tumor and Inflammation
of the Bowel.

XVII. Highmore has also observed Its Valves.
in the said Veins at the Exit out of the Spleen, certain little Valves looking
forth from the Spleen, and soplac'd, as to suffer nothing to flow from the
Splenetick Branch to the Spleen, but only the Humors from the Spleen into the
Splenetick Branch. Which Valves, though by reason of their extraordinary
thinness, they can hardly be demonstrated, yet are they presently perceived, so
soon as the Splenetick Branch is puff't up, or that Water be injected into it
through a Syringe; for then they hinder the breath and the water from
penetrating into the Spleen.

XVIII. Bauhlnus, Bartholine, and Its A^* moses.
some others write, that in the inner part of the Bowel, several Branches of
Arteries close together with the ends of the Veins by Anastomoses, by which
means the Blood is transfused out of them into these; and so flow to the
Splenetick Branch. But this seems not so probable, seeing that the blood in
such a Passage or Transfusion only cannot acquire a requisite subacid
fermentative quality. And hence it is necessary, that that transfusion of the
blood be made by some interceding Medium (as happens in the Liver, of which we
shall say more below, when we come to discourse of the Function of the Spleen.
In the mean while one remarkable Anastomosis is to be observed (rarely two) by
which the Trunk of the Artery, before it enters the Spleen, closes with the
Splenetick Branch. Which seems to be formed to that end, partly that the
Arterious Blood* by its mixture, may render the Humors more fluid that are
carried out of the Spleen to the Splenetic Branch, and excite 'em to more
speedy motion. Partly, that the redundant and superfluous blood, which by
reason of the narrowness of the Passages cannot pass with that requisite
swiftness through the Spleen, may flow through this Anastomosis into the
Splenetick Branch.

XIX. Now there is a Vessel called The Vas breve.
Vas venosum breve, which enters the Splenetick Branch, not far from, or rather
just at its going forth, frequently in Man at the very Exit of the Branch out
of the Spleen; in Beasts, a little farther off, the Roots of which Vessel
sticking to the Ventricle, meet together about the bottom of it, seldom joining
into one, frequently into two or more Channels, and so constitute sometimes one,
sometimes two or three Vasa brevia, which all shoot forth into the Splenetick
Branch. In Dogs and other brute Beasts, rarely one, frequent several Vasa
brevia, descend into the said Splenetick Vessel.

XX. Sometimes a certain Vein ascending Internal Haemorrhoid V^
upwards from the inner part of the Podex, enters the Splenetick Branch at the
lower part, and pours forth its blood into it. The Roots of which adhering to
the inner part of the Podex, are called Venae Haemorrhoidales internae, the
Internal Haemorrhoidal Veins, of which nevertheless the Trunk is most
frequently inserted into the le^t Mesenteric Vein. These Vessels, that is to
say Arteries and Veins, before their Entrance, are covered with a double
Tunicle; the outermost of which they put off when they enter, and cast next
about the Spleen, and by that means the Tunicle of the Spleen is made out of it.

XXI. Besides the forementioned No Chylus goes to the Spleen.
Vessels carrying manifest Humors, some there are who tell us of milkie
Vessels. But it is most certain that no milkie Vessels shoot forth to the
Spleen. For if the Chylus were carried thither, it would run the hazard of a
Coagulation, by reason of the acidity of the Splenetick Liquor. And therefore
they are also mistaken who think that part of the Chylus ascends from the Vena
Portae, through the Splenetic Branch to the Spleen, as was formerly asserted by
the Ancients, and lately by Ent, Apolog. Art. 23. But through that Branch, as
well the blood that remains out of the Nourishment of the Stomach, as that
which is after a peculiar manner concocted in the Spleen is swiftly carried
through the Vena Portae and the Liver. Which is most apparent in the
Dissections of living Animals by a knot fastened upon that Branch. For
presently a swelling will arise between the Ligature and the Spleen, and a
lankness toward the Vena Portae. Which Ligature, if it be tied in live Dogs,
somewhat before the Entrance of the Vas breve into the Splenetick Branch, then
the swelling will appear between the Spleen and the Ligature, and the lankness
on the other side. Which is a certain sign, that none of the thinnest Chylus,
which nevertheless Regius inculcates is carried from the Stomach to the Spleen
through Vas venosum breve, or other Gastric Vessels, to be there altered into a
fermentaceous matter; but that the venal blood only descends from the Ventricle
through that Vessel, and flows directly through the Splenetick Branch to the
Vena Portae. Moreover if the said Ligature be tied upon the Vas breve it self,
then are we taught another thing; for then presently the swelling appears
between the Ligature and the Vessel, and the lankness toward the Splenetick
Branch. By which it is plain, that the blood descends from the Veins of the
Ventricle, as has been said, but that no Melancholy or Acid Juice ascends this
way to the Ventricle, and is poured forth to create hunger, according to the
Assertion of the Ancients. Lastly, if the short Vessel be opened by Incision
above the Ligature, and the Liquor flowing out be taken up in a Spoon, any man
may see that it is only the pure Venal Blood, without any mixture of Chylus;
and that it differs not a jot either in Substance or in Color, from any other
Venal Blood; and this whether you look upon it warm or cold. Which plainly
overthrows the Opinion of those, who affirm part of the Chylus to be carried to
the Spleen through those Passages. An Opinion which we have sufficiently
refuted in the seventh Chapter above.

XXII. Besides the foresaid Vessels, Its Nerves
the Spleen also receives two little Branches of Nerves, derived from the
Costal Branch of the sixth Pair, which do not only pass through the outward
Tunicle, and not lose themselves there, as was formerly thought by many, but
penetrating further inward, are distributed through the innermost parts of the
Bowel, with a manifold Ramification, which little Branches accompany the
Blood-bearing Vessels, and are enfolded in the same Covering with them, being
formed out of the proper Membrane that covers the Spleen, which at the entrance
of the Vessels turning inward, and shaped into the fashion of a Pipe,
accompanies, and as it were gathers into a Bundle the Ramifications of the said
Vessels Glisson also observes that these Nerves, the nearer they approach to
the Spleen, the larger they grow; as they likewise do in a little space after
they have entered the Spleen.

XXIII. Moreover, Glisson writes, Whether they carry any Alimentary Liquor?
that the ends of these Nerves are united with Nervous Fibers, and by that
means a certain Alimentary Liquor is infused out of the one into the other, and
carried from these to the greater Nerves ( which Alimentary Liquor, he says
withal, is poured forth through the Parenchyma of the Spleen, being first
extended by the Fibers themselves) afterward this Liquor is conveyed into
the Folding of the Nerves adjoining to the Renal Glandules, from thence, as
occasion shall serve, to be distributed into all the Nerves of the Body, either
immediately through the Nerves of the sixth Pair, or by the means of the Brain
and Spinal Marrow; and so to be carried to all parts of the Body. But the most
learned Person is in this particular altogether out of the way. For, as has
been said, the Fibers are not hollow, nor have the Nerves sufficient Cavities
through which any Liquor prepared in the Spleen can pass: nor was ever any
Anatomist so quick-sighted as to see any Liquor in the Nerves, or that after
Dissection could squeez the least drop out of 'em. Besides, it is
unquestionable, and no more than what is received and established by all
Philosophers, that the Animal Spirits are thrust forward through the Invisible
Pores of the Nerves from the Brain and oblong Marrow into all the parts of the
Body: Now then, shall any other visible Alimentary Liquor, thicker than the
Spirits, ascend from the Spleen to the Brain, or its Marrow through the same
Invisible Pores by any other Chanel or Stream? Will the Nerves receive the
Alimentary Juice from the Spleen into themselves, not only to be cast forth
into other parts, but also to be remitted back into the Spleen it self? Shall
at another time the smallest drop of Liquor falling upon the Nerves beget a
Palsy, and shall this entering in abundance out of the Spleen produce no harm?
These are very great Absurdities, and therefore an Opinion supported by such
slender Props must fall of Necessity. See more of this L. 8. c. 1.

XXIV. Here some one perhaps may Wherefore the Spleen is not so quick of
Feeling.
put the Question how it comes to pass, that the Spleen furnished with so many
little Branches of Nerves should be so dull of Feeling, seeing that the Nerves
are not only endued with a most quick Sense, but also contribute to all the
membranous Parts by the animal Spirits a most acute Feeling? The reason of this
is, because there is a continual Numness upon those Nerves occasioned by the
subacid Substance of the Spleen, which is perceived in the Taste of the Spleen
being boiled, and Sour withal, as also by acid fermentative Juice which is
bred therein, encompassing the Nerves. As the chewing of acid and sour things
begets a Numness in the Teeth, so that their Sense of Feeling is much less, or
at least more obtuse than at another time.

And thus much concerning the Vessels, whose State and Condition, how they were
found out by accurate Inspection into the Spleen of an Ox, Malpigius describes
l. de lien. c. 3.

XXV. After the Fibers and the The Substance.
Vessels, the Substance it self of the Spleen is to be enquired into; which in
a sound Spleen is somewhat hard and firm; and endures handling without any
harm; but in a sickly Condition of Health grows softer and is easily dissolved.
Thus in Scorbutic and Hypochondriacal Persons I have often found it so soft
upon Dissection, that with the least Touch the Finger would enter into it: And
the external Air would easily dissolve it; though outwardly at first sight there
was nothing to be discovered amiss either in Bigness or Color. I dissected a
Scorbutic Thief that was hanged in March 1651. The Substance of whose Spleen
was very soft; yet neither exceeding due Proportion nor ill Color; and at that
time, being cold Weather, within two days, it was dissolved by the external Air
into a frothy Liquor of an obscure red Color, so that unless it were several
Fibers and thin Vessels, there was nothing solid appeared within its Membrane.
From whence appears the Mistake of many, who in the Scurvy and Hypochondriacal
Distemper, Quartan Agues, and other Diseases arising from the Spleen, always
lay the Fault upon the Obstruction, Hardness, and Tumor of this Bowel, when for
the most part there is nevertheless no such Fault in it to be found in those
that dye of those Distempers, and only some specific Dyscrasis or peculiar
Disposition of the Part receding from its natural Sanity, are the cause of
these Distempers; while that peculiar Indisposition begets some Matter either
too Acid or too Sharp, too weak or too fixed, or some other way out of Order.
Yet we do not deny but that in a preternatural State, sometimes it becomes so
brawny and hard, that it may be felt without side of the Body. Nay George
Queccius, a Physician of Norimberg and Schenckius, have seen Spleens that have
been crusted in the Middle with a Cartilaginous Substance.

XXVI. Many have affirmed that Whether ^ be li^ (...) Substance of the (...)
ver.
this Substance is like the Substance of the Liver, and that this Bowel
performs the same Office with it, and that when that Bowel is out of Order,
this Bowel alone does its Duty. But the Dissimilitude of each Part is
sufficiently apparent both from the Color and the Taste. For the Color, which
in a raw Liver is Ruddy and altogether Sanguine, in the Spleen is Black and
Blue, or of a leaden Color. And that which in a boiled or roasted Liver is
somewhat Yellowish, in a roasted Spleen is like the Dreggs of red Wine. Then
the Taste of a boiled Liver is between bitterish and sweetish; the Taste of a
boiled Spleen is somewhat acid and sowrish.

XXVII. It is commonly held, that Whether it be bloody.
the Substance of the Spleen is a certain Mass of clotted Blood, supporting the
Vessels that run through it; because it is easily made fluid by a slight
Attrition. But Malpigius, utterly destroys this Opinion, who having accurately
searched into the Mysteries of this Bowel with his Microscopes, writes that the
whole Body of the Spleen is a membranous Mass distinguished into little Cells
and Apartments, and not so thick a Body as it has been formerly described to
be, but loose and thin. And to this Knowledge he attained by a particular
Experiment: That is by blowing up the Spleen through the Splenetic Artery and
Branch, till it was very much swollen, and drying it swelled as it was; for so,
he says, it may be plainly seen, that the whole Mass of the Spleen consists of
Membranous Ends or Cells like the Cells of Hony-combs. And as for the Original
of these Cells, and their wonderful Structure, he elegantly and at large
describes it in his Book de Liene, where it is to be read.

XXVIII. The same Malpigius was Little Glandules in the Spleen.
the first that observed in the Substance of the Spleen several little
Glandules worthy Observation: Of which he thus writes. In the Spleen, says he,
are to be observed several numerous Clusters of little Glandules, or rather
little Bladders or Baggs dispersed through the whole Spleen, that resemble a
Cluster of Grapes exactly. The least of these Glandules are of an Oval Figure,
and in bigness little differ from the* Glandules of the Kidneys. Their Color
as I have always observed, is White; and although the Vasa Sanguinea of the
Spleen by the pouring in of Ink swell and play about 'em, these preserve the
same Color. Their Substance seems to be Membranous; but soft and subject to
crumble. Their Hollowness by reason of their extraordinary Smallness, is not
perceptible to the Eye, and only to be apprehended by Conjecture* while being
slit they seem to fall one into another. They are very numerous and almost
innumerable, and are wonderfully placed in the forementioned Cells of the whole
Spleen, where vulgarly its Parenchyma is said to be. Also from the Slips there
hang little Boxes, or else from the Fibers that arise from it: And besides the
ends of the Arteries like young Vine Shoots, or crawling Ivy creep about 'em,
which is to be observed in a fresh Splee^, the Arteries being blackened. They
hang for the most part in Clusters, every Cluster containing seven or eight.
Yet they do not so easily appear in the Spleen of every Creature. Nay in the
Spleen of an Ox, a Sheep, or a Goat, they are only to be discovered upon
Laceration of the Bowel; or by a slight shaving with a Penkife, and long
washing with fair Water. They are not so eas^ly discrib'd in a Man. But if by
the occasion of any Disease the whole Body of the* Glandules swell, they appear
more manifest, being enlarged in Bigness, as I observed in a Girl that died,
whose Spleen was full of little Globes dispersed in Clusters. More than this in
the same place he tells ye his Opinion of the Use of Glandules, and what
separation of Humors is made therein in a Discourse at large.

Certainly we are much indebted to this quicksighted Malpigius, who by his
Microscopes, has so clearly dispelled the thick Clouds that hung over the
Knowledge of the Spleen, to the end the use of it, which was doubtful before,
may be the better understood.

XXIX. Sometimes unusual things Unusual things found in the Spleen.
have been found in the Spleen, Vesalius l. 19. de Corp. fab. c. 9. writes that
he found in the Spleen of a certain Person, small enough, but of an
extraordinary Hardness, Fat growing to the gibbous or bunchy Part, compacted
together like a hard white Stone. Schenkius, Observe. l. 3. relates that there
was found in the Body of a Spoletan Lord a Spleen without any Juice or Pulp at
all, empty like a Purse, and fixed to the left Ribs. T^rneiferus in Exam. Urin.
writes that he found a Stone in the Spleen of a certain noble Woman, of the
Bigness of a Chestnut, soft as Alabaster, weighing two Ounces and five Drams,
consisting as it were of thin places wrapped one within another like Eggshels. In
like manner Fallopius has observed Stones to be bred in the Spleen. In the Year
1667. in January, we dissected a Woman in the presence of several Spectators,
whose Spleen was exact, as to its Proportion, and for heat and hardness well
enough; but in the forepart, where it looks toward the Stomach, we observed a
white Substance much different from the Substance of the Bowel, hard and firm,
and which would scarce give way to the crushing of the Fingers, about the
bigness of a Goose Egg, not growing withoutside to the Bowel, nor swelling
outward from it, but plainly and truly continuous with it, and being a part of
it, though nothing like the other Particles of the Bowel; neither could it be
called Fat or a Glandule, from whose Service it differed altogether.

XXX. Concerning the Temper of The Temper of the Spleen.
the Spleen, some question whether it be to be called a hot or a cold Part? To
which I answer that it ought to be called a cold Part. Not that it is really
cold, but less hot than the Heart, Liver, and many other Bowels; and besides,
because it refrigerates the arterious Blood that flows into it, and makes it
subacid; and fixes and dulls its sulphury hot Particles, and deprives 'em of
all their Volatilitie.

XXXI. Concerning the Action of The Action.
the Spleen, various are the Opinions of the Learned.

Erasistratus, and Ruffus the Ephesian will allow it no Office or Function.
Aristotle affirms it to be necessary by Accident, like the Excrements of the
Belly and Bladder. Hippocrates calls the Spleen a Fountain of Water. And hence
perhaps Wharton affirms that it sucks forth a watery Liquor out of the Blood,
but to what end cannot be discovered, unless it be for the Nourishment of the
Nerves: Which Opinion we have sufficiently refuted; to which he adds several
other things of little Moment concerning the use of the Spleen.

XXXII. Many according to the Whether it separate Melancholy from the Chylus.
Opinion of Galen and the Ancients, believed the Office of it to be, to
separate the feculent or melancholy part of the Chylus, and to attract it
through the splenetic* Branch, and to collect it into its self (as the
Gallbladder receives the yellow Choler) and to concoct it somewhat, than to
empty it again partly through the Vas Breve into the Stomach to excite Hunger,
and partly through the splenetic Branch into the Intestins, and through the
Haemorrhoidal Vein to the Podex. Which Opinion Bauhinus, Riolan, and
Bartholine, have refuted by many and almost the same Reasons; though there were
little need of so many, when these three are sufficient to destroy it. 1.
Because there is no such large Hollowness in the Spleen, where such Excrement
should be stored up. 2. Because there is no way through which it may be
commodiously evacuated, since it neither ought nor can pass and repass through
the same Splenetic Branch. 3. Because if in a living Animal you tie a Knot upon
the Splenetic Vein, the Vas venosum breve, and the Haemorrhoidal Vein, it
demonstrates the contrary, as we have already shown, which Demonstration alone
is sufficient to destroy that fond Opinion.

XXXIII. Vesalius, Plater, Charles Whether it make Blood.
Piso, Bauhin, Spigelius, Jessenus, and many others, affirmed the Spleen to be
a sanguifying Bowel, no less than the Liver, and called it, as Aristotle does,
Hepar Vicarium, the Deputy-Liver: believing when the Liver was distempered,
that this Bowel did execute its Office. Chiefly enduc'd by this Argument,
because the Spleen in the Birth is of a ruddy Color, just like the Liver, and
for that the Spleen being depraved, Sanguification is annoyed. Then they
thought, that that same Blood which was made in the Spleen served for the
Nourishment of Bowels contained in the Abdomen, as the Liver-blood serves for
the Nourishment of the rest of the Parts. Which splenetick Blood they affirmed
was made of the watery feculent Chylus, which some believe to be carried thither
through the Milkie Vessels, others from the Stomach through the Vas Breve, and
others, that it was attracted by the Spleen through the Splenetic Branch. But
this Opinion by many things already said, is most plainly overturned: Seeing
the Work of Sanguification is not accomplished either by the Liver or the
Spleen, but only by the Heart: there being no Vessels that proceed from the
Liver through which any Blood can conveniently flow to the Nourishment of the
Parts seated in the Abdomen: Neither are there any Passages that convey the
Chylus to the Spleen, as being a Part to which no Milkie Vessels run: Neither
is any thing carried through the Vas venosum breve from the Stomach; seeing
that the said Vas breve is not inserted into the Spleen, but into the Splenetic
Branch without the Spleen; nor can any Attraction be made of the Splenetic
Branch toward the Spleen, as is before proved. Veslingius therefore observing
this Difficulty of the Access of the Chylus, flies to the Invisible Pores of
the Ventricle; through which he says, there is a watery Chylus conveyed to the
Spleen; but proves it by no Reasons. Lastly this Opinion is totally refuted by
the circular Motion of the Blood, by which it is apparent that no Blood is
carried to the Parts from the Liver or Spleen through the Veins for the Ends of
Nutrition; nor can be carried by any manner of Means by reason of the
obstructing Valves; but that the Boold is all trans^uted from the Heart through
the Arteries to all the Parts.

XXXIV. Emilius Parisanus, Subtle. Whether it prepare blood for the ^eart.
l. 6. Exercit. 2. c. 3. following the Opinion of Ulmus, believes that the
Spleen prepares Arterious Blood out of the best part of the Chylus for the left
Ventricle of the Heart; which Blood is carried through the Arteries into the
Aorta, and thence into the left Ventricle of the Heart. Which Fiction Ent
deservedly derides and explodes, Apolog. Artic. 23. Galen also writes, that
some of the Scholars of Erasistratus believed that the whole Chylus was carried
to the Spleen, by which it was made into a courser sort of Blood for the Liver.
But both these Opinions are so absurd, that if we only consider the Passages
and Motion of the Blood, they want no farther Refutation.

XXXV. Walaeus observing that Whether it (...) the (...) part of the blood.
there was no motion of the Humors through the Splenetick Branch to the
Spleen, nor that any milkie Vessels reached thither, concluded rightly, that
the matter concocted in the Spleen is Arterial Blood infused into it through
the Coeliaca. Only in this he failed, that he thought the Spleen attracted to
it self the acid part of the blood, and not the rest, as if the Spleen being
endu'd with judgment and taste, was more pleased with the acid than the sweet
part, and not only could distinguish, but knew how to separate the one from the
other. Moreover, he considered not, that in Arterial Blood there are no
Particles actually acid, but that acid Particles are generated in the Spleen
out of the saltest Particles of it, which being mixed with the Venal Blood,
serve instead of a Ferment, whose slightest acidity concocted in a specific
manner in the Liver with the sulphurous Particles, changes it into a biliary
Ferment, which by that Effervescency that is made in the Heart, perishes again
and vanishes.

XXXVI. Glisson asserts that the Whether it nourish the Nerves.
chief Action of the Spleen is to make Alimentary Liquor for the Nourishment of
the Nerves, which Opinion we rejected when we discoursed of the Nerves of the
Spleen.

XXXVII. As for Helmont's Opinion, Whether the seat of the Soul.
who places the seat of the sensitive Soul in the Spleen, it is not worth a
Refutation.

XXXVIII. The most accurate and An Experiment of Malpigius
industrious Malpigius, being very much dissatisfied concerning the Action and
Use of the Spleen, to the end he might be able to assert something more certain
than others had done, resolved to try an ingenious Experiment, hoping thereby
to discover some light in this obscure darkness.

In a young Dog (says he) having made a wound in the left Hypochondrium, the
bloody Vessels of the Spleen bursting forth at the gates of the Spleen, were
tied with a string, then thrusting back what was coming forth into their
places, the Peritonaeum and Muscles being sowed up together, and the skin
loosly united, in a few days time the wound was cured. In a weeks time the Dog
recovered, and ran about as he used to do, so that as long as he lived there
was no sign observed that any harm had been done him, or of the hurt of his
health: But becoming more hungry, he greedily devoured his Meat, and eat Bones
or any thing of that nature; and his Excrement observed the exact course of
Nature. One thing only I observed, that the Dog piss't frequently, and very
much; which though it be customary to other Dogs, yet this seemed to exceed the
common custom. The habit of body every way healthy and fat; and in nimbleness
and briskness equal to others of his kind. But this was peculiar in the
external habit of his body, a swelling of the right Hypochondrium, so that the
extreme Ribs burgeon'd out beyond the rest. Thereupon, fresh hopes encouraging,
a second Dissection is designed. The Spleen then in the slit Abdomen whose
Vessels were fast tied, appeared very slender, so that being wrapped with the
Caul, there hardly remained any footstep of it behind. For it resembled a small
bag interwoven with Membranes: the Blood Vessels numerously dispersed to the
Stomach, and through the Caul, were entire and flourishing, and full of blood.
The Splenetic Branch open, and natural, surrounded with its natural fat. The
Liver to sight, as to substance, color, and shootings forth of the Branches,
all in good order: only you might have said it exceeded a little in bigness, in
regard it spread it self largely over the left Hypochondrium. Neither was there
any thing found amiss in the Breast or the Abdomen, or the fleshy part: the
blood brisk, ruddy, and fluid. All these things being found in a Dog, gave us
not the least light to find out the use of the Liver.

Certainly it is a wonder that nothing could be learnt or found out concerning
the Use of the Spleen: Nevertheless I put down this, that I might excite others
to make the like Experiments; that so at length the true use of the Spleen may
come not only to be taught by Reason, but to be shown and proved by
Demonstration.

XXXIX. From what has been said, The true Action of the Spleen.
it is abundantly apparent how various and uncertain the Opinions of most
Doctors are concerning the Use of the Spleen, so that hardly any one has hit
upon the true use of it; which is no other, than to make acid matter out of the
Arterial Blood, out of which being again mixed with the sulphurous Particles in
the Liver, and concocted after a specific manner, the bilious Ferment of the
Blood and Chylus is made. But how that acid Matter or Juice is generated within
it, is not so easy to be explained. That Operation seems to proceed in this
manner. In the Substance of the Liver, which is acid by nature, are contained
many Glandules; now the blood is poured into those small Glandules through the
ends of the Arteries; and into that the Animal Spirits are infused through the
ends of the Nerves, concluding in those Glandules, which taming the sulphurous
spirit of the blood, give it a slight Acrimony; with which being once endu'd by
the compression of the adjoining parts, it is squeezed out of the said
Glandules, and swallowed up by the Roots of the Splenetick Vein; and so flows
through the Splenetick Vein through the Porta and Liver. But before it runs
under the Roots of the Veins, it seems to stay in the adjacent Cells, whose
Substance is acid, and by that stay acquires in them a more eager acidity, as
Wine standing in a Vinegar Vessel, acquires a more acid Acrimony.

XL. Here arises a Question, Whether Whether a man may live with his Spleen cut
out.
the Spleen be a Vessel necessary to Life; and whether it may be taken and cut
out of a Man's Body, and the wound healed again without any damage of Life or
Health? For the Affirmative part the Authority of Pliny offers it self, who L.
11. c. 37. thus writes, It is certain that the Bird called Aegocephalus has no
Spleen, nor any of those Creatures that want blood. It is many times a peculiar
impediment, and therefore they that are troubled with it, have it burnt out;
and Creatures are said to live after it is taken out by Incision. Trallian
seems to prove Plinies Opinion by a Practical Example, who L. 8. relates that a
Soldier was once cured by him, the whole region of whose Spleen had been burnt
with barbarous hot Iron-Tools. Bartholine also Cent. 4. Anat. Rar. Hist. 51.
endeavors to confirm the Authority of Pliny, by the Experience of Fierovantus,
boasting that he had cut the Spleen out of a certain Woman, and so restored her
to health; of which he writes there is no question to be made, because of the
Witnesses, whereas he produces no Witnesses of any credit. This Experiment of
Fierovantus, Deusingius both quotes and admires, and out of Francis Rousset,
brings the Testimonies of two inconsiderable obscure Surgeons, who affirmed
that they had taken out Spleens that were altered and wounded, and had healed
the Patients with success; and giving undoubted credit to these Testimonials,
he concludes concerning the Spleen; This Bowel is not necessary for Life, but
only for a more happy Constitution of Health; not so much to being, as to
wellbeing; not to Nutrition and Preservation simply, but to a better Nutrition,
as the generation of a thinner, more elaborate, and more spiritous Blood. To
the Confirmation of which Opinion, the foregoing Experiment of Malpigius very
much conduces, taken out of the same Author. And that same new way, lately
first invented in England, of cutting the Spleen out of Dogs that live for all
that, seems very much to favor this Opinion. As we also, with several others,
have seen a whole Spleen taken, or cut out of a Dog, the Abdomen of the left
side being slit by Regnerde Graesf, and the Vessels of the Spleen well tied
with a strong Thread: afterward the wo^nd being cured, the Dog was recovered,
for which reason we called the Dog Spleenless. At the same time the same
accurate Dissecter R. de Graesf, told us, That the English gave him an account,
how that those Dogs after their Spleens were taken out, were afterward always
barren: and that therefore he resolved to try the Experiment in a Bitch, which
he kept after he had cut out the Spleen and cured the wound: but thls Bitch
growing proud was lined by a Dog, and whelp'd two Puppies, by which he refuted
the observation of the English. All these things seem to show that there is no
great necessity of this Bowol for Life, nor so noble a use as hitherto has been
attributed to it.

The Negative is maintained, not only by the Ancients, but also by Levinus
Lemnius, Toby Knoblock, Lindan, and innumerable other Neoteric Physicians; nay,
of six thousand you shall hardly find one that does not altogether explode the
former Opinion. Of which C^lius Aurelianus thus writes; That the Spleen may be
cut or taken away, we have heard indeed related in words, but never actually
performed. Reason also and Experience support the same Negative.

XLI. Reason: For that the chief The former Opinion re^ed by Reason.
Architect never made any thing in our Bodies in vain, and therefore all the
Bowels, none excepted, and all the parts are found and given to some necessary
Use. What man then in his Sen^s can believe, that so eminent and large a Bowel
as the Spleen is, and with which all Creatures that have blood, except some
few, are endu'd, should be given in vain to Men and Beasts, without any
necessity for Human Life. Of whose true Function and Use, although we in these
darknesses of Nature, may not perhaps so rightly judge, and raise sharp
Disputes upon this Subject, yet this does not take away the Use of the Bowel it
self for the support of Life, seeing that not only its remarkable bigness, and
admirable connection and society with other Bowels, sufficiently show, but also
Health proceeding from its soundness, and several Diseases arising from its
depraved Constitution, daily teach us the Necessity of it.

XLII. Experience: For that never, By Experience.
that I know of, it was ever seen, heard, written or observed by any Physician
of any Credit or Authority, that ever any man had his Spleen cut out and lived.
The Story of Trallian proves nothing; for he does not say that his Patients
Spleen was cut out, or consumed and wasted by Ustion; but only that the
exterior Region of the Spleen was cauteriz'd. As for Fierovantus, he was a
strowling Mountebank, of no Authority, and very little Credit, who endeavored
to impose upon silly People, that he might appear a greater Physician among the
Vulgar than he was. As for those obscure Surgeons cited out of Roussettus,
there is the same Credit to be given to them. And we remember a thousand other
such like little Fables related to us, by certain ignorant and vainglorious
Surgeons, to whom there was no Credit to be given. Certainly, if the thing were
really so, we should not need in this Age to fetch Testimonials from
Mountebanks and stupid Barber Surgeons, since we have had so many thousand
eminent and famous Physicians and Philosophers, who have made it their business
to dive into the Mysteries of Nature, of whom, though not all, yet some would
have seen and observed something concerning this matter. But now the whole
Confirmation rests upon the uncertain Testimonies of some obscure Authors,
which are contradicted by other more ponderous Reasons, besides the former
alleged; so that the said Opinion can no longer be propt by any more such weak
Supporters: For that besides the Nerves, large Blood-bearing Vessels enter the
Spleen of a Man, and go forth again; two Splenetick Arteries and various Veins
meeting in one Splenetick Branch, of which the sole resection is sufficient, to
kill a man with a vast Flux of blood. For it is not probable that these Vessels
can be so straightly bound by any Knots, or other astringent Remedies, but that
the Flux of blood must be very great for all that. Or if they be bound with
Strings (which in that hidden part of Man cannot conveniently be done, as is
known to them that understand the Constitution and Connection of the Bowel) yet
then not long after, the Threads being putrified, either a deadly Flux of blood
or a Gangrene, must of necessity follow. Moreover, I my self have more than
once seen Spleens wounded with Swords and Spears, but never knew any man so
wounded escape, notwithstanding all the diligence that I and other Surgeons
could use. Now if only the wounds, and those slight ones too, of this Bowel are
Mortal; nay, if only its being out of order, its obstruction, or any other
Distemper so grievously disturb the whole body, and many times occasion death;
how much more deadly will it be, how much more destructive to the body and to
life, when it is all taken away? As for Dogs, whose Spleens are cut out, they
do not all live; nay, of many so served, very few recover; and they, the rest
of their lives, dull, heavy and slothful, nor do they live long. And that for
this reason without doubt; for that for want of convenient matter to be
afforded from the Spleen, convenient Ferment cannot be prepared in the Liver,
which causes a thicker blood to be generated in the Heart, out of which blood
but few Animal and Vital Spirits can be raised, and those very thick. Besides,
what may be done safely and conveniently in a Dog, to attempt that in Man, to
the hazard of Life, would be a Villainy. For that which in this particular
proves not mortal in a Dog, would certainly kill a Man. Without doubt, there is
no Person of sound Judgment but must suffer himself to be persuaded, but that
this Bowel executes a more necessary Action in Man, than in a Dog, in whom the
Pancreas, or other part, may better supply the office of the Spleen, than in a
Man, as in whom the whole Bowel is furnished with so many Arteries, Veins, and
Nerves, and furnished with its own Parenchyma, and consequently cannot be
created in vain.

XLIII. Hence it is apparent what The Spleen* not of so great use in a Dog as
in a Man.
is to be answered to that Experiment of Malpigius, that is to say, that
because there is a lesser use of a Spleen, and not so necessary an action
required from it in a Dog as in a Man: hence it happens that some Dogs may want
the use of it, and yet not all; Experience teaching us, that several have
perished in a short time, whose Spleens have been cut out, and few have
escaped. Whereas it is otherwise in Man, in whom seeing the least disorder of
the Spleen many ways, and after a wonderful manner disturbs the whole
Microcosmical Kingdom, much more damage would it receive from the taking it
out of the Body.

XLIV. And therefore we must conclude It is a most necessary Bowel for Life.
the Spleen to be in man most necessary for Life, and that it cannot be cut
out, and the life of man be still preserved.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Function of the Liver and Spleen; also of the use of
Choler, the Pancreatick and Lymphatick Juice.
I. HOW various the Opinions A Dig^sion.
of several Men have been concerning the use of Choler, the Pancreatic Juice,
and the Lympha, we have shown in the foregoing Chapters. But since no Body has
as yet perceived, or at least described the Dignity of those Bowels, nor the
necessity of those Juices, it will be now time that those Mysteries that have
lain hid for so many Ages, should be brought to light, from the knowledge
whereof will arise the greatest light to Physic, and the obscure and unknown
Causes of many Diseases will be discovered.

II. The Actions of the Liver, the The ^ons of the three ^els.
Spleen, and the Sweetbread all conspire to the self same end, and prepare the
Ferment of the Blood and Chylus together, in the making whereof the Functions
of these three must of necessity concur, when the one cannot perfect this
business without the other.

As Leaven is mixed with Flower of Wheat kneaded with warm Water, that thereby
the more thick and earthy Parts of the Wheat may be dissolved, and the
spirituous Parts asleep and lying hid in that terrestrial Mass may be
attenuated and stirred up, and so the whole Mass of Bread being thoroughly
besprinkl'd with those attenuated Spirits is made more light and easy for
Digestion: Thus there is a necessity for the Ferment to be mixed with the
Chylus and Venal Blood, by means of which the spirituous Particles lying hid
therein, may be attenuated and quickened up, and so the whole Mass be more fit
for Sanguification and Nourishment.

III. Now that same Leaven of The Ferment of Bread^, (...) (...) (...) (...)
operates.
Bread, which will bring us more easily to the Knowledge of the Ferment of the
Blood and Chylus, is generally made of some Quantity of Meal which is kneaded
together with warm Water, to which is added a small Quantity of Salt and
Vinegar, and so kept in a warm Place, till the salt or acid Spirits are
somewhat volatiliz'd by the Heat, and pierce through the Particles of the Mass
of Flower, and dilate and separate 'em, and so render the whole Mass* Subacid
and Fermentative. Then a little Piece of this acid Ferment being mixed into the
Mass of Meal kneaded with warm Water, causes the whole Mass to ferment. For
those Fermentaceous Particles diffuse themselves through the whole Mass, and
cut and attenuate all the Parts of the Dough, and the Spirits therein lying
hid. Our Country Folks mix also Yest with their Dough to the same end; and
others perhaps may use another Ferment; but all Ferment, whatever it be,
consists of Salt, Acid, Sour, and Corroding things, melted and somewhat
volatiliz'd with a moderate Heat: Which if they be thicker and closer, are more
slowly dissolved, and their Power shows it self more slowly, and must be mixed
a longer time with the Dough before they can ferment it, as happens in the
first Ferment, which must be mixed for many Hours, and sometimes a whole Night,
to perfect its Work. But if by the Mixture of certain sulphury Particles they
become Spirituous and more Volatiliz'd, they ferment presently as we find in
Yest, which within an Hour, or half an Hour, and sometimes sooner, accomplishes
its Operation. For the more spirituous sharp Particles be in this more free
from the Matter wherein they are lodged, and for that Reason are endued with a
more penetrating Power, operate more suddenly, and in a short time dissolve
the thick Particles of the Dough, and more swiftly rouse the latent Spirits,
which they do yet more violently, if a little Honey be added to N^te this
(...), viz. (...) Honey (...) the Ferment.
the Yest: For the Honey contains in it self sharp Particles, but lately
dissolved by the Sulphury, and involved within 'em. But nothing of this is
performed without a moderate Heat, as being that by which the salt Particles
must be brought to a moderate acid Quality, and something of Volatility.

IV. In the same manner it is with Chyle and (...) fer^ in (...) same (...).
the Chylus and Venal Blood, which if they be not attenuated and prepared by
the Mixture of convenient Ferment before Sanguification, then they fail to be
full of spirits in the heart. That is to say, the Spirits lying asleep therein,
are not sufficiently separated from the more thick and serous Matter, but lie
drowsy still, which produces thick and watery blood, of little use to nourish
the Body and strengthen the Parts; whence the Body becomes languid, and both
Natural and Animal Actions go but slowly forward.

V. This Ferment of the Blood and The Liver causes the Ferment.
Chylus is made by the Liver, with which Hepatic Ferment however, the
Pancreatic Juice is mixed in the Duodenum, for the more special preparation of
the Chylus flowing out of the Stomach.

VI. The matter out of which the The matter of the Ferment.
Liver makes this Ferment, is the Venal Blood flowing into it from the Gastric
and Mesaraics through the Vena Portae, and a small quantity through the small
Branches of the Epatic Artery, with which is mixed a sour, salt, acid Juice,
made in the Spleen of the Arterial Blood flowing into it through the Arteries,
and the Animal Spirits through the Nerves, which is carried through the
Splenetic Branch to the Vena Portae, and together with the Blood with which it
is mixed is conveyed to the Liver.

VII. And by means of this sharp Preparation of the Ferment.
and corroding Juice, by the specific power of the Liver, the spiritous
Particles, as well the sulphury as salt, latent in that Venal Blood, are
dissolved, attenuated, and also made somewhat sharp and fermentative, and some
certain thinnest part of' em, like fair and clear water, by means of the
conglomerated Glandules seated chiefly in the hollow part of the Liver,
separating it self from the remaining thicker part of the Blood through many
Lymphatic Vessels, is carried from the Liver into several Veins, to prepare the
Venal Blood flowing toward the Heart. But the greatest part of it is carried to
the Vasa Chylifera, in them to prepare the Chylus for succeeding Fermentation
in the Heart. To which end also a certain fermentative Spittle, as also a salt
and somewhat acid Lympha is also carried thither from the Glandules of the
Armholes, Groyns, and other Glandules, and somewhat of the thinner Pancreatic
Juice out of the Intestines, together with the Chylus, enters the Vasa
Chylifera.

VIII. But as in Ale that works, Yest, or the Ferment of Beer.
many spirits already raised, are already mingled with the whole quantity of
Ale, and render it spiritous, strong, and fit to be attenuated and digested in
the Stomachs of those that drink it: So also many spirits being still
intermixed and cooped up within the more thick and viscous Particles of the
Ale, ascend with them to the top, and boiling, or rather fermenting and frothy,
burst forth out of the Vessel with a noise. Which frothy Substance has a kind
of bitterish sharp, intermixed with something of a sweetish taste. And this is
that which our Houswives call Yest, and we the Flower of Ale, which being
preserved, served to ferment new Ale, or new Dough.

IX. Thus the Operation also proceeds Generation of Choler.
in the Liver, and the more sharp fermentative spirits, being mixed with the
thicker and more viscous sulphury Juices, (for Sulphur is clammy) and strongly
boiling or fermenting, when by reason of the viscosity of the Juices wherein
they are lodged, they cannot enter the conglomerated Glandules, and from thence
the Lymphatic Vessels, and yet by reason of their sharp Ebullition they are
parted, together with the Juice wherein they are lodged, become bitter, and are
called by the name of Choler. Which Choler, by the means of the Glandulous
Balls, flows by degrees to the Intestines thorough the bilary Porus and the
Gallbladder, to the end that there, together with the Pancreatic Juice, it may
be mixed with the thicker Mass; that is to say, with the Nourishment concocted
in the Stomach, and now descending to the Intestines, that it may also cause
that to boil, and by that means dissolve and separate the thinner parts of the
Chylus from the thicker, and attenuate to that degree, that they may be forced
into the narrow Orifices of the Milkie Vessels.

X. To that purpose this Choler Choler slides down the Ductus Cholidochus into
the Jejunum.
slides down through the Ductus Cholidochus to the beginning of the Intestines,
that is, the Duodenum, and is there presently mixed with the Pancreatic Juice
flowing thither through the Wirtzungian Chanel, from the Sweetbread, and by
that means is by and by mingled with the Alimentary Mass concocted in the
Stomach, and descending from it, and causes it to boil.

XI. And because at the beginning Why the Jejunum is empty.
it is sharper, and retains its full vigor, and for that by reason of the
mixture of the Pancreatic acid Juice, it is presently ready for Ebullition;
hence in that very beginning, the Effervescency is most intense; which is the
reason that the Milkie Juice, lodged in the Mass, concocted in the Stomach, is
for the most part immediately separated in the Jejunum, and through the
innumerable Milkie Vessels belonging to this Gut more than to any other, with
an extraordinary speed pushed forward to the Receptacle of the Chylus, for
which reason that Gut is for the most part found empty and fasting. But in the
next Guts, by reason of the most thin fermentative Spirits dissipated at the
beginning, the Effervescency is somewhat slower and less effectual, and the
separation of the Chylus from the thicker Mass that remains is more tardy,
which is the reason they have fewer Milkie Vessels. Lastly, The remainder of
that fermentaceous Matter being mixed in the thick Intestines, with the thick
dregs of the Nourishment, being now slowly dissolved, by reason the more subtle
parts and strength of it are wasted by a long Effervescency in the thin Guts,
causes a more slow and less frequent (and that not without a longer stay)
fermentative Effervescency in them, which moving and distending the feculent
filth, and rendering it more sharp, molests the Guts, and so provokes 'em to
evacuation. And now because this Effervescency happens to be late, therefore
those Provocations are not frequent, so that men in health seldom go to stool
above once or twice in a day. And as that remaining Ferment is more or less
acrimonious, hence it causes in the Excrement a swister or later, a more
intense or remiss Effervescency, whence more frequent or more seldom going to
the Stool.

XII. But how it comes to pass that How (...) Choler (...) com^ (...) sharp.
the said Choler becomes more sharp and fermentative in man, proceeds from
hence, that all the milder Choler does not presently flow directly from the
Liver through the bilary Porus into the Intestines, but a good part of it, and
that the thinnest is carried from the Liver through the gaully Roots into the
Gallbladder, and there stays a while, that by the specific Property and Temper
of the Place, the more sharp Spirits, through that Stay, may be the more
vigorously roused up and exalted, and thence, boiling a little in the Cystis,
may flow to the Intestines: Into which Place being brought, and being either
too little, or too sharp, it may there be the cause of Diseases of both kinds.

XIII. But the superfluous and chiefest The farther Progress of the
Fermentation.
part of the Venal Blood, of which the Ferment is made in the Liver, which
neither could nor ought to be changed into the Nature of Choler or Lympha,
being plentifully furnished with the fermentative Quality of the made Ferment,
flows into the Vena Cava, with which from above out of the subclavial Veins, it
meets a prepared and attenuated Chylus, or in the absence of that the Lymphatic
Liquor alone, mixed with the Blood of the Subclavial Veins, and so by degrees
enter the right Ventricle of the Heart, and there by reason of that previous
convenient Preparation, or attenuation, are presently dilated into a Bloodlike
spirituous Vapor; as Gunpowder presently flashes into a Flame when touched by
Fire. Now that the Blood flowing out of the Liver into the Vena Cava, is mixed
and endu'd with a Fermentative, and chiefly Choleric Quality appears from
hence, that if in a Creature newly killed the Liver be cut from the Vena cava,
and the Blood flowing out of it saved, put but a little Spirit of Niter to that
Blood, and presently it becomes of a Rust-Colour, which happens in no other
Blood, and by that means the Bilious Ferment concealed within it, is discovered.

XIV. But that that same bloody (...) (...) of (...) Blood.
Spirit may be more perfect, and retain its Vigor the longer, by the beating of
the Heart it is forced immediately through the Pulmonary Artery into the Lungs,
and there by the Cold of the Air breathed in is condensed into Liquor, and
flows through the Pulmonary Vein into the left Ventricle of the Heart, wherein
again (as Spirit of Wine is rectified by a second Distillation) it attains the
utmost Perfection of spirituous Blood, and so is forced into the Aorta, that
thereby it may be communicated through the lesser Arteries, and through all the
Parts of the Body, to nourish and enliven 'em. Out of which Nourishment, that
Blood which at length remains, being deprived of the greatest part of its
Spirits, enters the lesser Veins, and by those is carried to the greater, and
by them again to the Heart, to the end it may be there again attenuated and
become Spirituous. But because in that Circulation, many parts of the Blood are
consumed in the Nourishment of the Parts, whose Substance also is continually
consumed and dissipated by the Heat; hence it is necessary that a new Chylus
fit to be changed into Blood be again mixed with the venal Blood returning to
the Heart, to supply the place of what is wasted. And thus our Life consists in
such a continual Nourishment, which failing, presently Health is impaired, and
the Oil of our Lamp being wasted we go quite out.

XV. It may be questioned whence The Original of Ferment.
those sharp hot fermentative Qualities arise in our Nature. I answer, out of
Sulphur and Salt. The first Emotion is from Sulphur, but the primary Acrimony
is from Salt, which besides Sulphur is lodged in all Nourishment. For there is
nothing which we eat that does not naturally contain a Salt in it, though some
things contain more, some less: and Sulphur dissolves the Salt, and renders it
fluid. Which being dissolved and attenuated, corrodes, penetrates and dissolves
by means of its Acrimony, all the Particles of the Nourishment, and so disposes
'em for the Extraction of the Spirits that ly hid within 'em. Which Operation
is Fermentation, without which Man could not live; and with which being weak or
depraved, a Man lives miserably. Now to advance this Fermentation the more
prosperously, by instinct of Nature to the natural Salt which is in our
Nourishment we add the help of Sea Salt, which we mix with our Meat, and with
which we powder our Flesh: And so much the harder the Substance of the Meat is,
and consequently the more violent Fermentation, and effective Ferment they
require for Digestion, so much the more we desire to have 'em well salted; as
Beef and Pork. For that the Salt in such Meats causes a more easy Digestion. So
that the sulphury Spirits that are to reduce that Salt to Fusion, are
sufficiently redundant and effectual in Man, as in young and choleric People.
And of this we have a manifest Example in a Herring, which being salted and
eaten raw eastly digests in the Stomach, but not being salted, though boiled, is
with great Difficulty digested. Moreover that the Fermenting Spirits lying hid
in that thick Salt may be roused up to Action, we boil our Meat in the
Kitchen, that the more fixed and solid Parts of it may be the better dissolved,
and so prepared to Fusion and Volatilitie, that they may be the more easily
tamed and vanquished in the Stomach, when we feed upon those harder sorts of
Food, we make use of sharp spirituous and sulphury Sawces, as Spice, Turheps,
Anise, Carrots, Mustard; many times drink strong Wine, and Spirit of Wine after
Meals. For the sulphury Spirits being mixed with the Salt, potently dissolve
and penetrate the thick and sixed Particles, and a fitness to melt, and so
advance the Energie of Fermentation. Which chylifying Operation is very much
assisted partly by the Spittle which flows from the Mouth to the Stomach and is
endued with a fermentative Quality; partly by a peculiar Ferment, which is made
out of some part of the Chylus, remaining after its Concoction and Expulsion of
the greatest part to the Intestines, in the Stomach, and sticking to the Folds
and Pores of the innermost Tunicle, and there turning sour. And so by that
first Fermentation the more spirituous and profitable Parts of the Nourishment
come forth of the thicker Mass like Cream, and assume the Name of Chylus.

XVI. Out of this Chylus endu'd Blood is made of the Chylus in the Heart.
with many salt and sulphury Particles from the Nourishment received by means
of a new fermentative Preparation, caused by the Choler, Pancreatic Juice, and
Lympha, the Blood is made in the Heart, which contains in it self those salt
Particles of the Chylus, but more attenuated and mixed more exactly with the
Sulphurous.

XVII. Out of the salt Particles of Another Ferment in the Spleen.
this Blood, flowing to the Spleen, the splenic Artery, and to the Sweetbread,
and many other Glandules through peculiar Arteries, and somewhat separated by
the Afflux of Animal Spirits, there is another matter of Ferment to be composed
in the Spleen and Parts aforesaid, to be the greatest part concocted into a
more perfect Ferment by the Liver for the Venal Blood and Chylus.

XVIII. And thus the first Original Fer^ (...) (...) degrees (...) be (...).
of Internal Ferment is from the Nourishment, which afterward is more and more
attenuated by various Concoctions, and altered in our Body into a more subtle
Ferment.

XIX. Now that it is the true Office The true Office of the Liver, Spleen,
(...) (...) to (...) (...).
of the Liver, Spleen, and Sweetbread, to make Ferment in the manner aforesaid,
is apparent from hence, that when those Bowels are perfectly Sound, and perform
their Duty according to Nature, the whole Mass of Blood is better and more full
of Spirits, and thence the Body more Lively and Active, and all the Natural and
Animal Operations are rightly performed. On the other side, when these Bowels
are out of Order, a thousand Diseases arise from the Blood and Chylus ill
fermented.

XX. As we have already said there (...).
is a sharp Salt, acid Juice which is made in the Liver out of the artery
Blood, copiously forced through the splenic Artery into this Bowel, which by
the plentiful pouring in of Animal Spirits through the Nerves, and by the
specific Temper of this Bowel is soon altered, and the sulphury Spirit that was
before predominant in it is dulled, fixed, and suffocated, so the salt acid
latent Spirits comes forth into Action, and the salt Particles, somewhat
separated from the Sulphury, get the upper hand: And hence it comes to pass,
that the hot sweetish Blood flows through the Arteries into the Spleen, but by
and by the sulphury Heat being extinguished, together with the Sweetness, it
becomes Saltish, or somewhat Acid, and flows through the Splenic Branch from
the Spleen to the Liver: Which is the Reason a boiled Spleen tastes somewhat
Sowrish. And thus it happens in this Matter, as in a Vinegar Vessel, Vinegar is
made out of Wine; for the Vinegar Vessel is laid in a warm Place, commonly in
the Garret, where the Sun may come at it. Into this Vessel, not quite full,
they pour a moderate Quantity of good strong Wine (for weak Wine will not make
good Vinegar.) Which done, presently the sulphury sweet Spirit of the Wine is
fixed and suffocated by the salt and acid Particles predominating in the
Vinegar, and the salt and acid Particles which are lodged in the Wine are
melted, dissolved, attenuated, and forced to Action by the sharp Acidity of the
Vinegar, and so the Wine turns Eager, and becomes Vinegar. And thus the
sulphurous Spirit of the Arterial Blood, is fixed and stifled, partly by the
Animal Spirits flowing through the Nerves, partly by the acid and salt Spirits
prepared and contained in the Spleen; and the salt and acid Spirits that are in
it get the upper hand; which afterward, new sulphury Spirits that ly in the
Venal Blood, being mixed therewith afresh, are to be by the Liver altered into
perfect Ferment.

XXI. Now that the first Matter The first Matter of the Ferment prepared in the
Spleen.
of the Ferment to be perfected in the Liver is prepared in the Spleen, may be
in some measure demonstrated by Experience. For if the Spleen of an Ox, Hog, or
other Male Creature be cut into small Bits, and macerated in lukewarm Water,
and afterward mixed with a small Quantity of Dough, it dilates it, and causes
it to ferment, like Yest or any other Leven: Which it does so much the more
effectually if the smallest Quantity of Vinegar be added to it.

XXII. Now if this Function of the The rise of Diseases from the Spleen.
Spleen be interrupted, there are two Causes of Diseases which arise from
thence. Some by reason of the salt and acid Juice too thick and fixed: Others
when it is too thin and volatile. For when the salt and acid Juices in the
Spleen are not sufficiently dissolved and attenuated, then the Spirits which
are extracted out of them are too sharp, corroding, and in too great Abundance,
and this Diversity produces Diversity of Diseases.

XXIII. If the Spleen be weak, either In a weak Spleen the acid Juice is not
enough concocted.
through its own or the Fault of the Nourishment, or through any other Cause,
then the acid Juice that is concocted in it, is not sufficiently dissolved,
attenuated, and volatiliz'd, but remains thick, and tartarous, or earthy, and
the greatest Part of it lies heaped together in the Bladdery Substance of the
Spleen, and adjoining Parts, by reason of its crude Viscosity, which causes the
Spleen to wax great, and to swell, in regard the Spirit that lies hid within it
is not sufficiently roused up, but boiling a little in the narrow Passages in
the Spleen and about the Spleen, distends the whole Spleen and Parts adjoining
to it, and raises a thousand windy Vapors with rumbling and roaring, and a
troublesome Distemper familiar to Hypochondriacks. Which Mischiefs are very
much increased by a depraved Condition of the Pancreas, proceeding from the
Blood corrupted by the vicious Humors of the Spleen, and brought to it through
the Arteries. By reason whereof it concocts its own Juice but ill; and of over
Salt, leaves it too Acid or Austere, which partly begets great Obstructions in
the Pancreas, the Disturbe^s of the Function of that Bowel: Partly flowing into
the Intestines, causes an undue Effervescency therein, and infuses a bad
subacid Quality into the Chylus; whereby it becomes liable to fixation, or
coagulation; nor cannot be sufficiently attenuated. Whence by reason of the
more fixed and thicker Chylus remaining in the Abdomen, and less prepared to
farther Solution, are generated Obstructions in the milkie Vessels, in the
Mesentery, and Glandules of the Mesentery, and therein a great Quantity of
crude and ill Humors is heaped together, from the Quantity and Corruption of
which a thousand Diseases arise, which are vulgarly called Melancholic, and are
said to arise from the Spleen, but how they are bred by it, has not been as yet
sufficiently Explained. But when the Blood remains too thick for want of
effectual and convenient Ferment, and Spirits not supplied in sufficient
Quantity, the whole Body grows dull and languid, and many Diseases arise. For
the Blood being thick and not sufficiently Spirituous, and having salt crude
and slimy Parts intermixed with it, by coagulating the Humors in the Liver and
other Bowels of the Abdomen, it breeds Obstructions and Scirrhosities. It is
not sufficiently dilated in the Heart, but is forced too thick into the Lungs,
and there being yet more refrigerated by the Air drawn in, it difficultly
passes through the narrow Passages of 'em, and so stuffing the Lungs, and
compressing the Gristles of the Windpipe, causes difficulty of Breathing. In
the Heart it self by reason of the inequality of the Particles, and the
difficult Dilatation of many, it produces an unequal, and sometimes an
intermitting Pulse. In the Brain passing difficultly and disorderly through
those narrow Channels, it causes Noises and Heaviness of the Head; and because
it endammages the natural Constitution of the Brain, and because it tears it
with its remaining Acrimony, the principal Animal Actions are thereby impaired,
the Imagination and Judgment are depraved, the Memory is spoiled, and thence
Madness, and Restlesness, Watching, and such like Inconveniences arise which
cause true Melancholy. But if that thicker Salt be somewhat more exalted and
fluid, and yet is not sufficiently Spirituous, then the Blood requires an acid
and austere Disposition, as in the Scurvy; and then the nervous Parts are torn
and racked by it, the thin Skins invelloping the Bones are pained, and the
softer Parts are corroded, the Guts also are terribly gripped, and Ulcers arise
in the Thighs very hard to be cured: Moreover the Blood becomes unfit for
Nutrition, and thence a slow Atrophie of the whole Body. The aforesaid salt
Particles being coagulated in colder Kidneys and separated from the serous
Humor, harden into Stones; but being separated in the Joints and fixed to the
sensitive Parts, and corroding 'em, they cause the sharp Pains of the Gout: And
lastly, heaped together in greater Quantity, they breed knotty Bunches and
Corns. All which things happen if the fermentaceous Juice in the Spleen be too
raw and thick.

XXIV. But if the same Juice be The said Ferment too thin and full of Spirits
causes other Diseases.
too thin and full of Spirits, and be prepared too sharp, then other Diseases
arise. It excites in the Blood a great Heat conjoined with some Acrimony, which
because of the quick and disorderly Motion of the Animal Spirits causes
Restlesness, Watchings, high Deliriums, and Madness. Sticking lightly,
coagulated in the Guts, it breeds the running Gout, for that sharp Humor being
by reason of its Tenuity easily dissipated in one Part, presently the Pain
arises again in another Part, to which some other Particles of the same Blood
happen to adhere.

XXV. The Spleen Scirrhous, or The Spleen vitiated begets many Evils.
Obstructed, or any other manner of way vitiated by breeding a bad
fermentaceous Juice, begets a thousand grievous Mischiefs.

All which things sufficiently make manifest the Office and Duty of the Spleen.

XXVI. And in like manner, the The Functions of the Liver are apparent from the
Diseases that proceed from it.
Function of the Liver is apparent, from the Diseases that proceed from it when
the Liver is colder than ordinary, it is not able duly to digest the said
Splenetic Juice, and together with the Venal Blood, and the sulphury Diseases
arising from the Spleen.
Juice intermixed and sticking to it, to alter the splenetic Juice into a due
Ferment: Whereby there can never be a due Fermentation. The Chylus is not
sufficiently concocted, nor sufficiently prepared for future Fermentation in
the Heart. The venal Blood becomes Crude, Serous, neither does it get Spirits
sufficient in the Heart, but is attenuated only into a watery Vapor, which
turns to a watery Liquor in the The cause of Anasarca.
Vessels and sost Parts, and so filling the whole Body with Serum, begets the
Dropsy called Anasarca, attended with continual Drought, by reason of the salt
Particles lodged in the Serum not well mixed with the Blood, which together
with the Juices flowing from the Salival Vessels, and at that time also
saltish, being carried to the Chaps and Gullet, by reason of their dry
Vellication, or twitching of the Part, occasion continual Drought.

XXVII. But when the Liver is hot, and consequently weak, then by exalting the
sulphury and oily Spirits out of the Blood, it raises 'em in too great a
Quantity; by which the Force of the acid Juice coming from the Spleen is very
much weakened, and a bad Ferment generated. which produces Inflammations,
Corruption, Fevers, and other hot Diseases arising from an over depraved
Fermentation, and begets over much Choler. Which Choler if it grow milder by
reason of the Mixture of a little acid Juice, then it breeds the yellow
Iaundice. But if sharp by reason of much Salt or acid and sharp splenetic Juice
concocted with it, then it occasions the Disease Cholera, Diarrhaea Dysentery,
and other like Diseases.

XXVIII. The Liver obstructed and The Liver Scirrhous.
scirrhous not causing the Generation and due distribution of good Ferment, is
also the Cause of several Crudities and many Diseases arising from Crudities.

As for the fermentaceous Quality of the Pancreatic Juice, and what Diseases
arise from a depraved Sweetbread, has already been discoursed C. 10.

XXIX. In the Birth, while it is Ferment in the Birth.
in the Womb, there is no need of any such Ferment at the Beginning, because it
is nourished by the Dissolution and Fusion of the Seed, which contains in it
self a Spirit moderately Fermentaceous; and then by the milkie Juice contained
in the Amninium that needs less Ferment. Afterward when it requires somewhat
stronger Nourishment, brought through the umbilical Vein, and begins to enjoy
it, then the whole Uterine Placenta supplies the Office of the Spleen and
Liver, and makes a more mild Ferment, more proper for the Birth in the
Beginning. In the mean time the Liver and Spleen increase their Ferment to
future Uses, that is, to prepare a more sharp Ferment afterward, that is, when
the Child being born should feed upon more solid Nourishment. Which Duty
however those Bowels do not perform presently after the Birth of the Child, as
it were by way of a Leap, but were also by degrees accustomed to it in the
Womb. For the more the Heat of the Heart increases, and Blood is generated more
full of Spirits, and the more the Brain is brought to Perfection and becomes
stronger, the more sharp Spirits are generated in the Womb. And out of these
two things, Blood and Animal Spirits meeting every day stronger and stronger in
the Spleen, which by Degrees is brought to greater Perfection together with the
Spleen, and preparation of the fermentaceous Matter begins to be made; and as
for the manner of preparing the same Matter, the said Bowels have gained to a
sufficient Perfection; as appears by the Choler, which you shall find well
concocted in the Gallbladder of a newborn Infant.

XXX. And thus I think I have Conclusion.
set forth the true, and never as yet sufficiently demonstrated Duty of the
Liver and Spleen: As also the Use of Choler, Pancreatic Juice and Lympha. Many
more things might be alleged for farther Proof, but to the Learned what has
been said may suffice.

The impartial Reader may confer these things with the Opinions of other
Doctors that have wrote before us; and then he will perceive how far they have
erred from the Mark.

XXXI. And now from what has The ^ derac. twee^ Live^ Splee^
been said it is manifestly apparent what a necessary League and Confederacy
there is between the Liver and the Spleen, and what and how many Diseases arise
from the bad Constitution of either of these two Bowels. How unlikely it is for
a Man to live after his Spleen is cut out of his Body. It is also apparent how
erroneously the second grand Concoction is said to be made in the Liver,
Spleen, and Sweetbread, when of necessity it must be made in the Heart. For the
forementioned Ferment is only made of the Blood, and the Blood must be first
made in the Heart before it can come to the Liver, Spleen, and Sweetbread. And
therefore the second general Concoction is made in the Heart, the third in the
Liver, Spleen, and Sweetbread.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Serum and Kidneys.
I. HAving thus explained the Of rum Rei^
Office of the Liver and Spleen, it follows that we discourse of those Parts
which evacuate the Serum, which is necessarily mixed in great Quantity with the
Blood, when it is too redundant.

II. Now the Serum is a watery The give cessa thin flux to (...) Bloo^
Part of the Meat and Drink, concocted together with the salt and sulphury
Juices of the Nourishment, and plentifully mixed with the Blood, to give
perfect Mixture and necessary Thinness and Fluxibility, by means whereof it may
penetrate the narrowest Passages; to wash away and mix with it the Impurities
of the same and the more crude salt Particles, that together with it self they
may be evacuated by Spittle, Sweat and Urine.

III. And here it is that the Opinion Whether it be an Alimentary Juice.
of Jerome Barbatus, and some others, is to be rejected, who endeavor by many
Reasons to prove that the Serum is a Humor no less Alimentary than the Blood,
and that it nourishes the Spermatic Vessels, as the blood nourishes the fleshy.
But their Arguments are so weak, that it is not worth the while to refute *em.
For though the Nourishment cannot be distributed to the Parts without the Serum,
and that there are contained in it some salt and sulphurous Particles,
nevertheless it cannot thence be concluded, that that same Serum nourishes the
Spermatic Vessels, and that the Blood is excluded from that performance. But of
this more at large L. 2. c. 12.

But for this Serum, because there is a necessity for an abundance of it to be
mixed with the blood, and to be daily renewed, and yet it is not applied to any
Substance of the Parts, therefore it is that Emunctories are requisite for the
Evacuation of its too much redundant Superfluity.

IV. These Emunctories or Evacuatories, The Emunctories twofold.
are twofold, External or Internal.

V. Again, the External are twofold: The external Evacuatories.
First, these, thorough which there is a manifest, but not perpetual
Evacuation; as the Eyes, Mouth, and Nostrils. From the Eyes fall the serous
Humors of Tears. Through the Mouth and Nostrils the greatest part of the
serous and flegmatic Humors and Vapors are expelled, in Hawking, Spitting,
Salivation, and the Murrh; as also in Respiration, which is conspicuous in the
Winter. Secondly, Those Evacuatories through which there is made insensible
Transpiration, that is to say, the Pores of the Skin, through which day and
night there is a continual and insensible Exhalation of the serous Vapor,
which is often perceived in the form of Sweat. Now this Evacuation of the
serous Humor through the Pores, far exceeds all other sensible Evacuations of
what Excrements soever. As for example; If a Man have taken in one day twelve
pound of Nourishment, he shall evacuate through the Pores of the Skin, and by
Transpiration near nine pound of Excrement in vapor, and hardly two by
sensible Evacuation. Which Sanctorius taught us by an ingenious Experiment. He
to that purpose weighed in a pair of exact Scales, a young Man in the Morning,
after he had been at the House of Easment; and besides that, he weighed apart
all the Meat which he was to eat that day. Then he as exactly poised the weight
of his Spittle, Urine, and Stool, collected all together, and then weighed the
same Person at the same hour fasting, as he did before. By which means he found
that the Excrement insensibly evacuated through the Pores, exceeded far in
weight all other sensible Evacuations.

VI. The Internal Evacuatories are The external Evacuatories of the Serum.
the Reins and Piss-bladder, with the Parts thereupon depending.

VII. But before we begin with Whether any difference between the Serum, Sweat
and Urine.
them, here is one Scruple to be removed; Whether the Serum and Sweat, under
which ought to be comprehended Exhalations and Vapors, consist of the same
Materials, and agree in Substance: Which is that which the generality of
Physicians unanimously consent to. Though Lodowic Mercatus differs from all the
rest, as he that believes these four Humors to be distinct in Substance. But
this Doubt may be easily resolved, by alleging that the Serum of it self is a
mere watery Liquor; but that the Urine and Sweat are not Liquors so simple as
the Serum so properly taken, but Liquors endued with a certain saltness, and
concocted with salt Particles, differing little or nothing, in respect of
Substance, one from the other, yet in the mean time their chiefest part is
Serum, from whence the serous Humors, which are not erroneously for the most
part called Serum, the word being taken at large, and the Denomination from the
greater part of the Substance.

VIII. The Reins are so called from The Reins*
(...), to flow, because the Urine, like so many Rivers, flows from them, and
(...) from (...) to piss.

IX. They are in number two; seldom Two in number.
more or less: For it is looked upon as a Prodigy, that there should be more
than one Kidney upon one side, and none in the other, *or two Kidneys upon one
side; which nevertheless has been sometimes found to be true. Cabrolius in two
Bodies by him dissected, found one Kidney leaning upon the Vertebers of the
Loins.

X. These two Kidneys are seated Their place
behind the Ventricle and the Guts, under the Liver and Spleen, on both sides
near the Spine, at the head of the Psoa Muscle. Whence it comes to pass that
that Muscle, being compressed by the Stone in the Kidney, there happens a
numbness in the Hip. However Riolanus in Animadvers. in Bartholin. alleges
that that numbness proceeds from hence, that the Compression is made in that
place, where those three Nerves are inserted into the musculous part of the
Psoa, of which that remarkable Nerve is made in the Thigh, which is thence
extended to the Foot: But in regard that Nerve in the Thigh is composed, not
only of three, but of seven Nerves, that is to say, the four lower Nerves of
the Loins, and the three upper of the Os Sacrum, some of which abscond under
the head of the Psoa. I do not see how the head of the Psoa, being compressed,
it should follow that the Nerves of the Thigh, seated in a lower place, should
come to be compressed, and that thence a numbness of the Thigh should follow.

XI. They lie upon the sides of the The Situation.
Aorta and Vena Cava, between the two Membranes of the Peritonaeum; the right
being placed a little lower than the left. But the situation is very seldom
alike; for either the right is somewhat higher than the left; nevertheless in
Beasts the left is many times the lower.

XII. They are both seldom of an equal bigness; for the most part the left The
Bigness.
being somewhat bigger than the right. They generally take up the length of
three Vertebers, and sometimes four: three fingers broad, and equalling the
thickness of the Thumb. Sometimes the whole bulk is found to be lesser, and
sometimes bigger, which Bartholine believes he has observed in those that were
most prone to Venery. Sometimes the bigness increases to Monstrosity; such was
that which we saw in the Carcass of a certain Person in the Year 1658. both
whose Reins surpassed the bigness of half a Man's head: For that Nature
wonderfully sports her self in bigness, number, figure, and vessels. Of which
there are various and remarkable Examples in Eustachius, Fernelius, Vesalius,
Carpus, Botallus, Bauhinus, and others. Yet this Variety is very rare, and
hardly to be found in one among six hundred.

XIII. In Figure they represent a French Bean, or the expanded Leaf of wild The
Figure.
Spikenard. On the Outside they are gibbous, and bowed backward: On the inside
somewhat hollow at the ingress and egress of the Vessels. The Superficies in a
Man of ripe years is smooth and equal; otherwise in a Cow, Sheep, and many
other brute Creatures, in whom it is unequal; as if the Kidneys were composed
of many round fleshy little Lumps or Buttons. Which external shape they also
show in newborn Children, which remains for three years, and sometimes for six
years after the Birth, as Riolan witnesses. Eustachius reports that he never
observed that shape in Men grown up, but only twice. But Dominic. de Marchettis
writes that he showed the same Figure twice or thrice in the Theater at Padua.
Once I remember I saw the same in a Man run thorough the middle of the Abdomen
above each Kidney with a Sword: In whose body, when at the request of the
Magistrate, I inquired into the Cause of his death, and the Nature of the
wound, by chance I found such a Figure of the Kidneys, as if composed of small
Buttons.

XIV. They are clothed with two Their Membranes.
Membranes; of which the outermost is common, proceeding from the Peritonaeum,
called the Fatty, because that in fat people it is surrounded with a great
quantity of fat. Into this the Arteria Adiposa runs, from the Aorta: out of it
proceeds the Vena Adiposa, which the right Kidney sends to the Emulgent, rarely
to the Trunk of the Vena Cava; the left sends forth to the Vena Cava. This
Membrane knits both Reins to the Loins and Diaphragma; the right also to the
blind Gut, and sometimes to the Liver; the left to the Spleen and Colon. The
innermost and proper Membrane is formed out of the external Tunicle of the
Vessels being dilated, (which Vessels enter the Kidney with one only Tunicle.)
Into which little Nerves are inserted, proceeding from the Fold of the sixth
Pair, and the Thoracical Branch, affording a dull sense of feeling to the
Kidney: which being nevertheless extended further into the Ureters, endue them
with a most acute sense, and for that reason are the Cause that in Nephritic
Pains the Stomach having a fellow feeling, has oftentimes a desire to vomit.
But very few Nerves, and those very small, and hardly conspicuous, enter the
Substance of the Kidneys it self.

XV. Both the Kidneys have two The Vesse
large Vasa sanguifera; that is to say, an Artery and an Emulgent Vein; among
which are sprinkled certain small Lymphatic Vessels, as some imagine.

XVI. The Emulgent Artery, produced The Emulgent Artery.
from the Trunk of the descending Aorta, being first doubled, enters the flat
part of the Kidney; thence it is dispersed through the Substance of it with
diverse Branches, and therein vanishes into extreme small and invisible Twigs.
Through this Artery, which is very large, great store of blood is carried to
the Kidney, partly to nourish it, together with its Urinary Vessels; partly
that a good part of the serous Humor may be separated from it in its Glandules,
and that being emptied through the little Urinary Fibers, and Papillary
Caruncles, or the ten little Bodies in the Reins, into the Pelvis, or
Receptacle of the Reins, the blood may become less serous. This Artery we have
once seen in the right Kidney, inserted into the lowermost part of the Kidney.

XVII. The Emulgent Vein is a little The Emulgent Vein.
larger than the Artery. This, with innumerable Roots meeting together in this
Trunk, adheres to the Kidney and its Glandules, and thence proceeding out of it
from the flat part, runs on to the Vena Cava, into which it opens with a broad
Orifice, so situated as to give a free passage for the Blood into the Vena
Cava; but hindering it from flowing out of the Vena Cava into the Emulgent.
Whence it is certain, that the Blood is forced into the Kidney by the Emulgent
Artery only, and part of it remaining after the Nourishment of the Kidney,
being freed from a good quantity of the serous Humor in the little Glandules,
flows through the Emulgent Vein into the Vena Cava. I think it was never
observed that two Emulgent Veins proceeded out of one Kidney; yet once it was
seen, and publicly demonstrated by us in a dissected Body, in November. 1668.
Both were of the usual largeness; and one proceeded from the middlemost flat
part of the Kidney, after the wonted manner; the other from the lowermost part
of the same right Kidney, and about the breadth of half a Thumb one below the
other, was inserted into the Vena Cava. And something like this I find to be
observed by Saltzman in Observe. Anat. The left Emulgent Vein higher and longer
than the right.


XVIII. The left of these Emulgent Veins in a Man enters the Vena Cava somewhat
in a higher place, and is longer than the right, by reason of the higher and
remoter situation of the Kidney from the Vena Cava. In many Beasts the right is
the higher. Sometimes their number is unequal, and their Progress unequal, as
shall be shown more at large L. 7. c. 6.

XIX. The dissemination and dispersing The dispersing of the Vessels through
the Kidneys.*
of both the Emulgent Vessels through the Kidney, cannot be exactly
demonstrated, because of the extreme slenderness of the Branches, and the
dimness of the Sight. In the mean while several Anatomists have written various
Speculations concerning this matter, according to the diversity of their
Opinions. Among the rest, Rolfinch asserts that the Roots of the Emulgent Veins
meet together with the ends of the Emulgent Arteries by Anastomoses, and that
he reports to be first observed by Eustachius, L. de Ren. But Malpigius lately
has sufficiently demonstrated the vanity of these Conjunctions, who by his
Microscopes observed that several ends of little Arteries end in very small
Glandules, adhering to the little Urinary Fibers or Vessels; and that so some
part of the Serum is separated from the Blood of those small Arteries, and
carried by the Urinary Vessels to the Pelvis, or Receptacle of the Kidneys: but
that the rest of that Blood is sucked up by the ends of the Veins, and so flows
to the Emulgent Vein, and thence to the Vena Cava.

XX. In the inner part of the Kidney The Pelvis.
is contained the Pelvis or Infundibulum, which is nothing else but a
membranous Concavity, composed of the Ureter, expanded and dilated in the
hollow of the Kidney, and reaching thither with open and broad Branches,
sometimes eight or ten, like Pipes:

XXI. Over which lie little pieces The Papillary Caruncles.
of Flesh or Carunculae, vulgarly called Papillares, by Rondeletius,
Mammillares, ( over each one) like small Kernels, not so deep colored, but
harder than the rest of the Flesh, about the bigness of a Pea, somewhat broader
above, unequal below, with holes bored through, but so small that will hardly
admit a hair. Malpigius observed over and above, that innumerable Fibers also
extend themselves toward the gibbous part from the Appendixes of the Pelvis
formed into a Bow; and that some portions of the Pelvis, like extended Vessels,
accompanying the Vasa Sanguifera, extend themselves toward the Circumference.

XXII. The Substance of the Reins, The Substance of the Reins.
as far as occurs to the sight, appears to be as it were fibrous, formed out of
the concourse and intermixture of the smallest Vessels joined together,
together with something of Carnosity interventing, endu'd with various slender
little Channels. To the outward touch somewhat hard, but within side
indifferently spungy; without of a dark ruddy color, but toward the Pelvis or
Kidney Receptacle, more pale.

XXIII. This is as much as generally The Superficies smooth in Men, rough in
Children.
is obvious to the sight in the Reins. But not very long ago Malpigius was the
first who discovered more Secrets in the Reins, which were unknown to the
preceding Anatomists; and because all Anatomists are upon this score much
beholding to that great Man: of necessity the Mysteries by him revealed are
here to be added. Neither is any thing to be detracted from the Honor of this
first Discoverer.

He writes L. de Ren. that though in Men The Discoveries of Malpigius
grown up the Superficies of the Kidneys appears generally smooth, yet that in
Children new born it is unequal (as has been already said,) and that that same
Conjunction of the Buttons or Balls in grown People is still to be discerned on
the inside from the diversity of the Color, which in the little Balls without,
and toward the sides to which they are conjoined, is ruddy, toward the inner
parts is more pale. But as in Beasts those little Glandules are round, but
toward the inner parts, being extended to an obtuse narrowness, are joined
together sometimes quadrangular, quinquangular, and sometimes sexangular; so
likewise in Men there is plainly to be observed from the diversity of the
Color, the like, but a closer Conjunction of the little Balls. Then he adds,
That the Membrane being taken away in a new, and as yet soft Kidney, certain
round and very short Bodies rolled up like Worms, may be discerned by the help
of a Microscope; not unlike those that are found in the Substance of the Kidney
when cut asunder in the middle; and that this Connection of Vermicular Vessels
composing the external Superficies of the Kidneys, is the same with the Vessels
descending to the Renal Receptacle. And that by the same Microscope are to be
observed wonderful Branches of the Vessels lying hid under the outward
Superficies, with little Glandules appendant, and dispersed through the
Superficies of the Kidney toward the Renal Receptacle: as also certain
continued winding spaces and little Concavities running through the whole
outward Superficies of the Kidneys, conspicuous by the pouring in a little Ink
through the Emulgent Vessels: as also innumerable little Channels, which
resemble, as seems to the Eye, a sort of Fibers or Liver-like Flesh, but are
really membranous and hollow, and by their being crowded together, constitute
the Substance of the Reins, and are the Vessels that discharge the Urine.
Moreover, he says, That the Membrane of the Kidney being taken away, and an
Injection of Spirit of Wine died of a black Color, being made into the
Emulgent Artery, innumerable small Kernels are to be observed, annexed here and
there to double forked Arteries, and died of a black Color by the said
Injection; as also several others between the bundles of the Urinary Vessels,
and the Spaces intervening, which little Kernels hang as it were like Apples
upon the Vasa Sanguifera, swelling with the black Injection, and spread into
the form of a fair Tree. From these Kernels, where the ends of the Arteries
lose themselves, he believes it also profitable that the Orifices of Veins
arise, and that the smallest Nerves are produced from hence, and that the
discharging Vessels are extended so far from the Ureter, seeing this is always
the property of the Glandules, that the several Berries or Buttons produce
their proper discharging Branch, besides the Veins and Arteries, as is done in
the Liver, according to what we have said. He has also observed that those
little Channels or small Urinary Fibers being very many in number, lose
themselves in every one of the Papillary Caruncles seated in the Renal
Receptacle, and through those sweat through the Urine into the Receptacle;
which Piss descends into the Papillary Caruncles, not thorough any of the
little Pores of the Pelvis, as was formerly thought, but through these Channels
only, and out of them into the Renal Receptacle. And as for those Papillary
Tunicles (of which some are round, others flat or oblong) he believes 'em to be
nothing else but the Concourse of many small Channels united together. He adds,
That he certainly knows by diligent and frequently repeated Dissection, that in
the Kidney of a Man, the Urinary Vessels that resemble solid and compacted
sleshy Fibers, and yet are hollow, end in the said apparent Papillary Tunicles,
which with a swelling protuberancy open into the Renal Receptacle, and each
receive or admit so many little Pipes or Vessels as amount to the number of
twelve, and that the same Urinary Vessels are extended from the Circumference
to those Teats, as to the Center.

Lastly, Malpigius annexes a Question, How Gravel and Stones can descend into
the Receptacle of the Kidneys thorough those Fibtes and Teats which are so
extremely narrow? To which he answers, That small Gravel may pass through,
because the Vessels are membranous and apt to dilate. I rather think he should
have said, that the tartarous Substance sticking to the Serum that passes
thorough, hardens into Gravel and Stones in the Renal Receptacle, after it is
slid through those slender Vessels, which frequently happens: Sometimes it
hardens also in the Vessels themselves, and having broken 'em, fall into the
Receptacle afterward; and if much of that matter be hardened in those Vessels,
and there remain, then the Substance of the Kidneys becomes gravelly and stony.

XXIV. The Use of the Kidneys is The use of the Reins.
to separate and evacuate the redundant serous Moisture from the Blood, which
is carried to 'em, together with the Blood, through the Emulgent Arteries; from
which Blood, in its passage through the Glandules of the Reins, the Urinary
Fibers, and the Papillary Caruncles, a good part of the Serum is separated, and
distills into the Renal Receptacle or Pelvis, and thence slides through the
Ureters to the Piss-bladder. But the remainder of the Blood and mixed serous
Humor (for all the Serum is not separated from the Blood) that is sent through
the Emulgent Veins to the Vena Cava.

XXV. But how that separation of The first Digression.
the Serum is made, is hard to explain. For that the two first things upon
which the Explication depends, are altogether obscure, that is to say, the
Specific Fermentation, and the peculiar disposition of the Pores in the Reins.

XXVI. For, that there is a certain How the Separation of the Serum is made.
Specific Effervescency or separating Fermentation in the Reins, or about the
Reins, by which part of the Serum, together with the Impurities mixed with it,
is separated from the Blood, three Reasons teach us. 1. First, For that most
Diuretics abound with Salt, which causes that Fermentation; nay, many of these
Diuretics are Salts themselves, as Salt of Beans, Vine-stalks, Juniper,
Prunella, etc. 2. Because Sudorisics (by which the Serum is separated from the
Blood) are very effectual, whether Salt of Wormwood, Carduus, Mother-wort, etc.
or such as are endued with an acid Salt, as Vinegar, Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur,
Spirit of Salt, and the like, which cause or increase that Effervescency. 3.
For that in cold Distempers, as the Anasarca, by reason of the weak
Constitution of the Liver, because there is not a strong and sufficient Ferment
prepared, for which reason the crude Serum is not sufficiently separated from
the Blood, nor yet attenuated; thence it happens that very little Urine is
discharged, though the Serum abound in all parts of the Body, and distends all
the parts with a sensible Tumor.

But how by that Effervescency part of the Serum, with its Impurities, comes to
be separated, and what form it assumes to pass alone through those narrow and
porous passages of the Kidneys, the Blood being excluded from 'em, whoever can
demonstrate this, deserves the Laurel.

XXVII. Here the Glandules of the When (...) the K^nels?
Kidneys assume to themselves a great privilege, in which very few doubt but
that there is a peculiar power of separating the Serum from the Blood. But in
regard that besides the Serum, Matter also, slimy Phlegm, and other Humors This
(...) be much doubted whether that which after ^sing, when the internal hea^ of
it is vanished, appear to be Matter, slimy Phlegm, or other very thick Humors,
came so thick out of the Reins, or that Gravel or Sand should be sent out of
the Blood i^ that largeness: I think, yea know the contrary; and that ^ose so
thick Humors, Matter, or Phlegm, are as thin as the rest of the Urine from the
internal heat of the parts; after the same manner as it happens in
Gelly-broths, which while very hot, will be liquid and fluid, but having lost
their heat, become thicker: the (...) happens in the Reins, but with this
difference, that the glutino^ Substance is less in proportion to the quantity
of Urine, than it is in Gellies, and therefore being ^old cannot be so thick
and (...): so Sand or Gravel, while in the Blood, is no such thing, but a (...)
Paste or Tartar, which after hardens in that form. Salmon.
much thicker than the Blood it self, nay, Gravel and Stones are discharged
with the Urine; hence whether this Separation of the Blood be to be ascribed to
the Glandules alone, was questioned by many; who therefore joined to their
assistance a specific disposition of the Pores in the Kidneys, no less obscure
and unknown than the foresaid specific Fermentation, and peculiar power in the
Glandules to separate the Serum. For who, I would fain know, will unfold to us,
wherefore the Serum, with the Humors contained in it, separated from the Blood
by the foresaid specific Fermentation, descend through the Pores of the Kidneys
and Glandules, without any Blood, when in the mean time, the purulent Matter
brought from the Breast, and altogether mixed with the Blood, has been often
seen to pass through the same Pores without any Blood? Thus in the Year 1638. I
cured a Merchant of Observe. 1.
Nimmeghen, who was troubled with an Imposthum^, which was at length discharged
through the Urinary Passages in two days time, with some pain in his Ureters,
two Chamber-pots full of white Matter well concocted, and somewhat thick, and
so was freed from his Aposteme. Whereas before the same Matter (the
Fluctuation of which was not only perceived by himself, by reason of his
difficult breathing, but also was easily heard in the stirring of his Body
backward and forward) threatened him not only with a Consumption, but with
certain Death.

XXVIII. Something to the same Observe. 2.
purpose I also observed in the Year 1639. in a Servant of the Lord of Soulen,
who being troubled with an Aposteme in his Breast, all the Matter was
discharged through the Urinary Passages, with a terrible pain in the Loins and
Ureters, by reason of the distension of the parts caused by the passage of the
thick Matter. Andrew Laurentius also, Anat. l. 9. quaest. 12. Observe. 3.
relates a Story of the same nature, by him observed in a certain Person
troubled with an Empyema, whose Body being opened, he found a certain sort of
stinking Matter in great quantity in the Concavity of the Breast and the left
hollowness of the Heart, of the same nature with that which came from him with
his Urine, which was a certain sign that it came from the Breast through the
Heart to the Kidneys.

XXIX. These and such like things, The thing farther considered.
while others consider and observe a difficult Explication of the Matter, they
reject the Glandules, and affirm the whole Business to be done by the sole
peculiar disposition of the Pores in the Kidneys, that is to say, their
Aptitude and Structure, which they cannot describe, neither by means whereof
the thick Matter finds a passage through them, but the thinner Blood cannot
pass. Fling, say they, thin Chaff, Pease and Beans, into a Country Farmers
Barn-Sive, the thicker Pease and Beans easily pass through the Holes, but the
long thin Chaff remains in the Sive. But though the aptitude of the Pores in dry
things may occasion such Accidents, it is much to be doubted, whether in liquid
and fluid Bodies mixed together, the same thing may happen, especially when
neither exceeds the other in fat; that is to say, whether a Substance four
times thicker than the Blood, by reason of the said Structure of the Pores
alone, may be able to pass through such narrow Pores, which do not only not
give passage to the blood that is mixed with it, and is much thinner, but stops
it. Whether also the blood which is so thin and fluid, that it has been
sometimes seen to sweat through the Pores of the Skin, coming to the Pores of
the Reins, cannot as easily, or rather much more easily be shaped to the form
of the Pores of the Reins, than Matter which is so thick, that it can hardly
pass thorough the Ureters, but many times extremely torments 'em by their
distension. And so that Reason, as to the particular Structure of the Pores of
the Reins, seems hardly sufficient to explain the said Evacuation; therefore
there is something yet lies hid which no body yet could ever discover: In the
mean time, though the Cause of this thing do not manifestly appear, this is
certain as to the thing it self; and we our selves have seen Matter carried
from the Breast to the Kidneys and Bladder, discharged in great quantity,
without any intermixture of blood.

XXX. But we shall not insist altogether The thing considered in solids.
upon Liquids; what shall we say of things that are solid and hard, are they
also shaped in like manner, so as to be strained through the Pores of the
Kidneys, without any concomitancy of Blood? Yet there are several Examples of
hard things that are discharged with the Urine, without any blood attending.
Thus Longinus relates a Story of a Virgin, that being surpised with a sudden
laughter, swallowed three Needles which she held in her Mouth, which came from
her again in three days with her Urine. Alexander Benedict. l. 3. Anat. c. 9.
writes another Story of a Pack-needle, four fingers breadth long* which
descended into the Bladder, and was afterward found in the dissected body.
John Matthaeus also relates, that a small Iron Nail being swallowed unawares,
was taken a long time after, cut of the Bladder with a Stone cut out at the
same time, (the Stone cleaving round about the Nail, as if the Nail had been
the groundwork of the Stone. My Wife swallowed a small Needle that carried an
ordinary Thread, which in three days came from her again with her Urine, August
8. 1665. N^r did the Needle put her to any pain while it lay in her Body.
Julius Annot. ad c. 14. de Substan. fac. Natural.
Alexandrinus has observed little pieces of the Roots of Parsley, as big as a
farthing, swallowed the day before, discharged again with the Urine. Nicholas
Florentine Sermon. 4. Tract. 4. c. 29.
reports that a Person, who had eat Mushrooms not exactly concocted, pissed out
again remarkable Bits of 'em with his Urine. Plutarch relates the Story ^. 8.
Sympos. Prob. 9.
of a Man, who after a long difficulty of his Urine, at length voided a knotted
Barly-stalk. George Jerome Velschius Observat. 60. relates another Story of one
that was wont to void Grape-stones, bits of Lettice, and Meat, together with
his Urine. And of another, that when he drank the hot Bath-waters, frequently
voided with his Urine whole pieces of Melon-seeds which he was used to eat.
Pigraeus and Hildan tell ye of some that have pissed out Aniseeds and
Alkekengi. All which things, it is both said and believed by most hitherto, do
pass through the narrow streights of the Kidneys, where the blood cannot make
its way. How then will the adapted disposition and structure of the Pores
aforesaid suffice? I hardly believe it. For that such hard and large Bodies,
passing the milkie Vessels, should first pass the Vena Cava, and ^igh the
Cavity of the Heart, thence through the narrow and scarcely visible passages of
the Lungs, to the left side insensibly, without any pain or prejudice, and then
be conveyed through the Aorta and Emulgent Arteries to the Kidneys, and be
strained through their Urinary Fibers and Papillary Pores, and that no blood
should go along with 'em, surpasses both Belief and Reason, nor can be proved
by any Experience, seeing that no Physician or Anatomist ever found Needles,
Seeds, Straws, or any such like things swallowed, either in the Vena Cava, the
Ventricles of the Heart, the Lungs, the Aorta, or the Kidneys.

XXXI. These things when formerly Other passages supposed leading to the
Bladder.
I seriously considered with my self, and withal bethought my self that they
who in great quantity drink the Spaw Waters, and other sharp and diuretic
Waters, in half an hours time evacuate forth again three, four, or more pound
of Serum, without any alteration of the Heart; and that it is very unlikely
that so great a quantity of crude and uncoloured Serum should so suddenly pass
through the Heart, Lungs, and Kidneys, without any prejudice. I began to think
that of necessity, besides the Veins, there must be some other Passages through
which the more copious Serum, and those hard Substances already mentioned come
to the Bladder.

XXXII. And these ways or passages The milkie Vessels to the Bladder and Womb.
I suspected to be certain milkie Vessels, which are carried to the Bladder
through occult and hitherto unknown ways; and though not in all, yet in some men
are so open toward the Bladder, that they are sufficient to transmit the milkie
Chylus and plentiful Serum, but also solid, hard, and long Substances. And this
Conjecture of mine the Observations of Physicians seem to confirm, who have
sometimes seen the Chylous milkie Matter evacuated with the Urine. Nicholas
Florentine Sermon. 5. Tract. 10. c. 21. reports that he knew a young Man about
thirty years of Age, who every day voided, besides a great quantity of Urine,
without any pain, about half a Urinal full of Milk. Capellus the Physician, by
the Testimony of Bauhinus, saw a Woman that evacuated half a Cup full of Milk
out of her Bladder. Andrew Lawrentius has observed several Childbearing Women
to have voided a great Quantity of Milk out of their Wombs and Bladders. Whence
it is manifestly apparent that some milkie Vessels run forth, not only to the
Womb, but to the Bladder, and may discharge themselves into those parts, if
there be no Obstruction, that is, if those Vessels are not obstructed,
compressed, or stopped up by some other means, as they seem to be in most men;
which is thought to be the reason that the milkie Chylus so rarely flows to the
Bladder. But in regard these Passages are short, and not so winding as many
others are, it may easily happen that other solid Substances, besides the
Chylus, may pass through 'em, as Seeds, Needles, Straws, etc. But much more
easily may a great part of the crude Serum, increased by much drinking, flow
through these Passages, and be evacuated through the Bladder, in regard so
large a quantity of blood cannot be so suddenly run through other Vessels, and
circulate through the Heart. And hence it is that such Urine proves of a watery
Color, differing much in Color and Consistence from that Urine which is
concocted with the blood, which follows well colored after the Evacuation of
much copious crude Serum, and manifestly shows that it passed through other
parts, (than the other crude Serum,) that is, through the Lungs, Heart, and
Kidneys, and there obtained a larger Concoction. I also conjectured that those
Liquors which we drink, and whose color and smell remains in the Urine, are
carried the same way; for should they pass through the Heart, they would lose
both. Actuarius l. 2. de Iud. Urin. c. 20. relates the History of a sick Person
to whom he had given a black Medicin, who soon after made black water without
any prejudice. And many times Midwives, by the color and smell of the
Excrements that flow from Childbearing Women, know what the Woman with Child
has been eating before. Saffron being given in drink to a Woman in Labor, in a
quarter of an hour died the Birth of a yellow Color, and yet the Saffron could
not pass through the Heart in so short a time, nor from thence be sent to the
Womb, much less preserve its Color entire in passing through so many several
Channels. John Ferdinand Hertodius, fed a Bitch for some days before she whelp'd
with Meat died with Saffron, and after he had opened her, found the Dissolution
or Liquation among the Membranes, and the Puppies died of a yellow Color, and
yet the Chylus was white in the milkie Vessels, not tinctured with any other
Color. I my self have seen those who have eaten the fat growing to the Kidneys
of Lambs, roasted, and in a short time voided it all again with their Urine. Oil
of Turpentine immediately imparts its smell to the Urine. And Asparagus
provokes Urine, crude, muddy, and retaining their own smell. Whereas if such
Juices should make a long Circuit through the Heart and other Bowels, they
could never come to the Bladder so suddenly, so raw, and yet retaining their
own smell. Which are certain Indications that there are certain milkie Vessels
occult, and taking another Course than the rest, which extend themselves, some
to the Womb, and some to the Piss-bladder, and that Liquors of this nature, and
other solid Substances, may sometimes through those more open Channels, reach
those parts. Which Vessels, though hitherto they were never conspicuous to the
sight, nor demonstrated by any Anatomist, yet of necessity must be there. Such
milkie Vessels extended toward the Teats, are not to be seen, and yet that
there are such Vessels, stalks of Herbs eaten the day before, and voided
through the Paps, and Broth died with Saffron, flowing out at the Teats of the
same Color, sufficiently declare. Now if these Vessels in the Teats are
invisible to the Eyes* what wonder that they which tend to the Womb and Bladder
should not be discovered? However, for the better clearing of this difficulty,
I would desire all Anatomists, that they would use a little more than ordinary
diligence in the search of these Vessels for the common benefit, to the end
that what is now but merely conjectured at, may come to be evident by solid
Demonstrations.

Others there are who never thinking of the milkie Vessels, have invented, or
at least imagined other ways.

XXXIII. Bartholine l. de Lact. Bartholine's Opinion, that there is some other
and shorter way.
Thorac. l. 6. and 9. believes that this same thick Matter, Needles, the milkie
Juice, and the like, and in great Drinkers, and those that cannot hold their
Water, the Liquor they drink, nothing or very little altered, are carried by a
direct and short way to the Emulgent Arteries, and so through the Kidneys to
the Bladder. But these Passages are not confirmed by sight, because those
Channels from the Chylebearing bag to the Emulgent Arteries are not to be found,
nor any Branches carried to the Sweetbread and Liver, of which he also
discourses in the same place: and therefore the Lymphatic Vessels seem to have
deceived this learned Person, as well as many others. Moreover, grant that the
milkie Vessels reach to the said parts, yet how is it possible that Needles,
Bodkins, and the like, of a great length, and not to be bent, should pass
through those narrow and winding porous Passages of the Substance of the Reins?
And therefore of necessity this Invention of so famous a Man, must fall to the
ground. Clemens Niloe his Opinion.


XXXIV. Clemens Niloe writes that some of the milkie Vessels are carried to the
Vice-Reins, or black Choler Kidneys, called Capsulae Atrabilariae, and that
from those the serous Liquors flow to the external Tunicle, and thence farther
through the Ureters to the Bladder. But the Hypothesis falters, or rather fails
altogether in this, that the Hypothesis was first to be proved that the milkie
Vessels are carried thither. Besides, there is no passage from these black
Choler*Ca^kets to the Ureters, but they discharge themselves into the Em^lgeut
Veins, or Vena Cava, and so nothing can come from them to the Ureters.

XXXV. Bernard Swalve going The Opinion of Bernard Swalve in this m^r.
about to show more manifest and shorter ways, writes, that the Bath- waters,
acid Juices, and any Liquor plentifully drank is easily s^ck't up in the
Stomach by the Gastrick Veins, gaping presently upon their approach, and so are
immediately carried to the Heart. But the vanity of this Fiction is every way
apparent. For the more plentiful draughts of acid Liquors, whether Wine, or any
other Liquid Juice, were received by the Gastrick Veins in the Ventricle, must
of necessity be carried then to the Vena Portae, the Liver, the Vena Cava and
the Lungs, and in so long a way, and passing through so many Bowels, must of
necessity be subject to a remarkable change; and alter their colors, whereas
before they are presently pissed out without any color at all. Nor could they
retain the ^ inctures of Saffron, Rubarb and other things, and be pissed out as
they are with the same hue and smell as they went in. Moreover, by the
Confession of Swalve himself, there is nothing thick or chylous canpass through
those ways, by reason of their extraordinary narrowness; whereas we find by
experience, that Matter, Needles, Milk, and black Physic, has been presently
discharged by Urine. Then again, if so great a quantity of cold Acids, as is
commonly consumed in a short space, should be carried through the forementioned
passages, certainly the heat of the Liver, Heart, and Lungs, would be
extinguished by that same actual Cold, and the whole Body would become colder
than Marble, and so shortness of Breath, Dropsies, and such like Distempers
would presently seize all those that drink those Liquors: whereas experience
tells us that those Distempers are cured by Acids.

Thus the Opinions of Doctors concerning a shorter way to the Bladder are very
uncertain, among which nevertheless our own above mentioned seems to be most
probable, till another more likely be discovered.

XXXVI. Forestus, Duretus, and Whether there be a consent between the Kidneys.
after them Beverovicius and Laselius, write, that one Kidney being obstructed,
the other becomes useless, and losing its own action, intercepts the f^owing of
the Urine; which Riolanus Second digression.
says has been more than once observed by himself; which he also believes comes
to pass by reason of the sympathy between each other, by reason of their
partnership in duty; and hence if the one be out of order, the other growing
feeble, immediately languishes: Which Veslingius also intimates in few words.
But in this particular I take Experience to be preferred before the Authorities
and Opinions of the most learned Men, which has many times taught us the
contrary; that is to say, That one Kidney being obstructed, or any other way
distempered, the other remains sound, and makes sufficient way for the Urine,
of which I could produce several Examples, which for brevities sake I omit.
Sometimes indeed we have seen, that by a Stone falling down upon one Kidney,
the passage of the Urine has been stopped; which has not happened by reason of
any sympathy, but because unfelt by the Patient, the other Kidney had been long
obstructed before, and yet the Urine having sufficient passage through the
opposite Kidney: which opposite Kidney being by chance obstructed likewise,
presently the passage of the Urine is quite stopped up. Which the Dissections of
dead Bodies apparently teach us. For many times we have found one Ureter quite
obstructed near the Orifice, which the sick Person never perceived in his life
time, while his Urine passed freely through the other. Nor did we ever observe
a total suppression of Urine, where the Kidneys were faulty, but we found upon
Dissection both Kidneys obstructed. The Lord Wede, a Noble man of Utrecht,
often at other times subject to Nephritic Pains, found his Urine of a sudden
suppressed by reason of an Obstruction in his Kidneys, and yet without any pain:
Presently that same whimsey of consent came into the Physicians heads,
believing that one Kidney was suddenly obstructed, and that the other failed
in its Office by consent. At length all Remedies in vain attempted, in fourteen
days he died. But then his Body being opened, in both Kidneys was found a Stone
of an indifferent bigness, shaped like a Pear, that was fallen upon the Orifice
of the Ureter, and had quite damm'd up the urinary Passage. Who would now have
thought that in both Kidneys two Stones should be fallen at the same time upon
both the Orifices of the Ureters? And therefore it is most probable that long
before, one Kidney had been obstructed, though he felt no great Prejudice by it,
so long as the other was open; but when the Stone fell upon the Ureter of the
other Rein, then the Urine was altogether suppressed. Certain it is, that that
Suppression of Urine was not caused by the Obstruction of one Kidney, and
consequently not by any sympathetical Affection of the other. It is also
farther to be noted that in the Dissections of Dogs, we shall often find in the
one Kidney a long, thick, ruddie Worm that has eaten all the fleshy Substance
of the Bowel, whereas there could be nothing more sound than the opposite
Kidney; which showed no sign of Sympathizing with the Miser^ of the other.

XXXVII. But though it be the only Whether the Kidneys (...) Blood.
Office of the Reins to separate the Serum from the Blood, nevertheless some
more narrowly considering their fleshy Substance and peculiar Bigness,
attribute also to 'em the Function of preparing and farther elaborating and
concocting the Blood; Which Opinion Deusingius, following Beverovicius, most
stiffly defends. But if by Concoction he means that Elaboration only, by which
the secous Excrement is separated from the Blood, then his Opinion may be
tolerated: But if such an elaborate Concoction, by which the Blood is made more
Spirituous and Perfect, then his Opinion is to be rejected, there being no
Bowel that brings the Blood to greater Perfection than the Heart, from which
the more remote it is, the more imperfect it is: Nor can any thing of its lost
Perfection be restored by any other Part, no not by the Kidneys themselves. For
which Reason the Blood must return to the Heart to be restored to its pristine
Vigor.

XXXVIII. Besides the foresaid Office, Another Action.
others according to the Opinion of Sennertus ascribed another Action to the
Kidneys, which is the Preparation of Seed: Which they uphold by several
Reasons, of which these are the Chief.

1. Because the Kidneys have a peculiar Parenchyma as the rest of the Bowels
have; now in regard there is a peculiar Power of Concoction in the peculiar
Flesh of every one of the Bowels, that peculiar Quality must not be denied the
Kidneys, which can be no other than a seminific Concoction, when Straining is
sufficient for the Separation of the Serum, and there is no need of Concoction.
2. Because the emulgent Arteries and Veins are too large to serve only for the
Conveyance of the Serum, it seems most probable that a great part of the Blood
being separated from the Serum, is concocted in the Kidneys into a seminal
Juice, which is to be further concocted in the Testicles. 3. Because when the
Seed is suppressed and over much retained, the Kidneys are out of Order. 4.
Because Topics applied to the Region of the Kidneys, prove beneficial in a
Gonorrhea. 5. Because a hot Constitution of the Reins causes a Proclivity to
Venery, lustful Dreams and Pollutions; and the hotter it is, the sharper the
Seed is.
XXXIX. But these are chaffi^ Reasons, Refutation.
and of no force, to which we answer thus in order.

1. That the Kidneys indeed are certain straining Vessels, whereby good part of
the Serum is separated from the Blood that passes through, and falling into the
Renal Receptacle flows out again. But this Straining can never be, unless a
certain necessary specific separating Fermentation precede, separating the
Blood from the Serum; and so the Kidneys do not simply separate the Serum by
straining, but transmits, as it were, through a Sponge, that which is separated
by the said Fermentation. Moreover because a great Quantity of Serum is to be
separated and transmitted, hence there is a a Necessity for larger and greater
Strainers. For if so much Serum, separated by continual Fermentation, were to
be strained through small Strainers, would they be so loose, that together with
the Serum separated by the said Concoction, the thinner part of the Blood would
also slip through 'em. 2. Much of the Blood were to be carried through the
emulgent Arteries being very large for the Separation of a moderate part of the
Blood only, for the Blood was not to be deprived of all the Serum, to preserve
it fluid. But through the Emulgent Veins nothing flows to the Kidneys, as is
apparent from the Circulation of the Blood, and the Valves which are placed at
the Entrance of the emulgent Veins into the Vena Cava. Lastly, neither does
that Consequence follow. Much Blood flows to the Reins, and therefore out of
some part of it the matter of the Seed is prepared in the Kidneys. 3. Nor does
that other Consequence. The Kidneys are out of Order through Retention of the
Seed; Therefore the Kidneys both prepare and supyly the Matter of the Seed. For
then this Consequence would be as true. The Headache proceeds from the Retention
and Boiling of the Choler, therefore the Head prepares Choler. 4. Neither is
this Consequence true. Topics applied to the Region of the Kidneys are
beneficial in the Gonorrhea, therefore the Kidneys supply seminal Matter. For
then would this be as certain. Cold Water applied to the Testicles stops
bleeding at the Nose, therefore the Testicles made Blood to be carried to the
Nostrils. 5. A hot Constitution of the Kidneys is a Sign of Proneness to Lust,
but not the Cause. For this is usual that where all the spermatic Vessels are
hotter, there the Kidneys are also hotter. Not that the Kidneys add a greater
Heat to the Seed: But the Vapors rising from the hot Seed, heat and warm the
Kidneys. So that in Brute Animals that are ripe and libidinous, not gelt, you
shall perceive a certain seminal Savor and Taste in the Kidneys.
XL. Lastly we may add for a That no Sp^cifick Vessels are extended from the
Reins to the Testicles.
Conclusion, that no specific Vessels are extended from the Kidneys to the
Testicles, through which the seminal Matter can be carried thither. That the
spermatic Arteries carry blood to the Testicles out of the Trunc of the Aorta,
and the Superfluity flows back through the spermatic Veins to the Vena Cava
(whose Valves are so placed, that nothing can slide through them to the
Testicles) and so these Vessels cannot perform that Office, and as for other
Vessels there are none.

XLI. From what has been said it Whether Wounds in the Kidneys be mortal.
appears, that the Kidneys are Parts that evacuate the serous Excrement, most
necessary for the Support of Life. The Question is therefore whether the Wounds
of the Kidneys are mortal or no? We must say, they are Mortal, and that of a
hundred wounded in the Kidneys, scarce one recovers perfect Health. Which
Lethality proceeds not from the Nobleness or Excellency of the Reins, but from
the Concourse of supervening Symptoms. That is to say, a vast Flux of blood
cutting off the Vessels, Obstruction of Urine, or else the Impossibility of the
Retention of it: Great Pain, Inflammation, Exulceration, Apostumation, by
reason of the continual Thoroughfare of the sharp Serum, difficult to be cured;
and other Accidents that wear the Strength of the Patient to Death. For though
the Kidneys are not principal Parts, yet are they such, the use of which we
cannot want, which Use being either wholly suppressed or obstructed, Life
ceases. True it is that some People who have been wounded in the Kidneys have
lived, and to the more unskilful have seemed to be cured, but at last the
reviving Apostumes have carried off the Patient. Thus Fallopius, Cornelius
Gemma, Dodoneus, Forestus, Valleriola, and others, relate various Examples of
Persons wounded in the Kidneys who superviv'd for some Years, but at length
however they died of those Wounds. But that some die sooner, some later, the
Reason is this, that some Wounds are more or less deep, and the attending
Symptoms more or less violent. However for my part in all my five and forty
Years Practice, I never saw any body wounded in the Reins that ever perfectly
recovered, though I have met with many such Wounds to be cured, especially when I
practiced young in the Camp; which makes me admire the Vanity of so many
Surgeous, that dare bragg they have many times perfectly cured People wounded
in the Kidneys. But what shall we then say of the cutting of Stones out of the
Kidneys? To which Avicen inclines, Canon. l. 3. Fen. 18. tract. 2. c. 18. Of
which also Pareus writes, lib. de Affect. When it swells and bunches out
(meaning the Stone of the Kidney in the Loins) at that time you must cut near
the Kidney, and draining out the Matter, cure the Gravel with Medicaments
provoking Urine. But we must say that whoever has a Stone cut out of the Kidney
cannot supervive the Section. It Is reported that such a Cure once was undertook
and accomplished with Success in Spain, upon a Person condemned to die. But if
it were true, as is greatly to be doubted, it is to be numbered among the
Miracles.

XLII. Here by the way we are to A Plexure of Nerves between the two Kidneys.
observe, that there is a certain Plexure of Nerves between the two Kidneys
under the Ventricle, consisting of a double Costal, and Stomachical Nerve; From
which all the Parts of the lower Belly borrow their Nerves, of which more l. 3.
c. 8.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Capsulae or Deputy Kidneys.
I. THE Capsulae Kidneys by The Names.
Julius Casser are called the Deputy Kidneys, by Wharton the Glandules
adjoining to the Nervous Plexure, by Bartholine the black Choler Cases, or
Capsulae Atrabilariae.

II. They are two Glandulous Bodies, Situation.
of which one leans upon each Kidney, where they look toward the Vena Cava
under the Diaphragma, at the upper Part of the Membrana Adiposa, to which it
sticks so close, that oft-times it is overseen by the more Negligent, and the
Kidneys being taken out, is left annexed to the Membrane of the Diaphragma.

The left Glandule is nearest the Diaphragma, the right is nearest the Vena
Cava; and the left is placed somewhat higher than the right: But in Brutes for
the most part neither join close to the Reins, but ly distant about the breadth
of half a Thumb, and placed somewhat toward the Diaphragma, the Fat lying
between.

They are found in that Place where the Nervous Plexure is to be seen, to which
they are firmly knit.

III. They seldom exceed the number The Number.
of Two.

IV. Their Substance is not much Substance.
unlike the Substance of the Kidneys, but looser, sometimes of a ruddy Color,
sometimes like Fat.

V. In Shape they are seldom like The Figure
the Kidneys (and yet I have more than once seen 'em exactly represent the
Figure of the Kidneys) but frequently like a piece of flat Past; between Square
and Oblong: Sometimes also they are Triangular and Oval, but rarely Round.

VI. In grown People they are Bigness.
much less than the Kidneys; extended to the Quantity of a vomiting Nut, and
the right uses to exceed the left in bigness, seldom the left exceeds the
right. In the birth and Children till almost half a Year old, they almost equal
the Kidneys; but afterward they do not grow proportionably to the rest of the
Parts; and when the Privities begin to have Hair, they cease to grow any more.
However they do not diminish again in grown People, as some have averred. For
in Consumptions and Hectic Fevers where all the Parts are emaciated, these
remain sound and untouched, and preserve their wonted bigness.

VII. They are wrapped about with a Tunicle.
thin Tunicle, by which they are strongly fastened to the outward Membrane of
the Kidneys.

VIII. They have an apparent Concavity Concavity;
full of Windings and Turnings, but so little that it will hardly admit a Pea,
and therefore more Conspicuous in the Birth than in grown People, which
contains a black feculent. Matter, with which Color also the Inside of it is
also tinctured.

IX. Wharton observes that a Wharton's Observation.
great number of little Holes proceeding from the very Substance it self of
these Glandules terminate into this Concavity with gaping small Orifices, but
that the Cavity it self opens into the next Vein, and is there fortified with a
Valve, opening toward the Vein, but closed behind. This they send from
themselves for the most part to the Emulgent, sometimes to the Venae adiposae,
sometimes they insert a small Twig of the Vena Cava, proceeding out of their
Cavity with a large and broad Orifice.

X. They also borrow an Artery Artery from the Emulgent,
from the Emulgent, and sometimes one or more Branches from the Trunk of the
Aorta.

XI. They admit very smell little Nerves from the Ramus Thoracicus.
Nerves from the Stomach Branch of the sixth Pair, running to the proper
Tunicle of the Reins.

XII. The use of these Kernels is Use of these Glandules not well known.
hitherto unknown. Some with Veslingius believe that they help to draw the
serous Moisture, and collect the black Choler, which like a Rennet provokes the
Separation of the Serum from the Blood. Spigelius thinks 'em made to fill up
the Vacuum which is between the Kidneys and the Diaphragma, and for a Prop to
the Stomach in that Part, which is above the Emulgent Veins and Arteries;
Others think that they support the Division of the Retiform'd Plexure of
Nerves. Riolanus, That they are of no use in Men grown to Maturity, but that
their Use is only to be sought for in the birth, wherein he believes they
receive a certain Juice appropriated to the Generation of the Kidney Fat; for
that in the body of an Infant there is no Fat generated till after he is
brought forth into the World, at what time that Juice formerly collected is
produced into Act. Glisson believes that they separate the Juice that serves
for the Nourishment of the Nerves from the rest of the blood, that it may be
carried pure to the Nerves. All which Opinions nevertheless are merely
conjectural, and lean upon no solid Foundation. Wharton believes that there is
a certain Juice unapt for the Generation of Nerves exonerated into these little
Coffers from the Plexures of the Nerves upon which they lean; which Juice
however flowing from thence into the Veins, may there be useful for other
Purposes. But neither is this any other than a mere uncertain Conjecture, for
that it is hardly credible that either this or any other thick and feculent
Humor could be conveyed through the most narrow Pores of the more solid
Substance of the Nerves. Others conjecture that there is a certain Rennet
prepared in these Glandules, which flowing from thence to the Kidneys, causes
therein a quick Separation of the Serum from the blood. Which Opinion certainly
carries with it great Probability; if the way from these Pasages to the Kidneys
could be demonstrated. But what if we should say, That that same black Juice is
prepared out of the Arterious Blood, and obtains a certain fermentative Power,
necessary for the Venal Blood, for which reason it flows from them not to other
Parts, but endued with the same Quality flows through the Veins proceeding from
the Capsulae to the Vena Cava: But neither is this any more than a Conjecture.

Hence because the Use of these Glandules is so little known, I am persuaded it
happens, that they were never taken into due Consideration by any of our
Physicians: Whereas we find that many Diseases arise from their being out of
Order. And therefore it is to be hoped that all Practisers, both Physicians and
Anatomists, will for the future observe these Parts more diligently, and by
frequent Dissections of dead Carcasses inform themselves what Diseases their
Disorder and ill Temparature may occasion.

CHAP. XX. Of the Ureters.
I. THE Ureters, (...) from Definition.
(...) to make Water and (...), are certain oblong and white Vessels, or round
Channels proceeding from the Kidneys receiving the Serum strein'd from the
Reins, and carrying it to the Bladder, together with the Gravel, Choler,
Matter, and other Juices mixed with the Serum.

II. They arise from the inward Source.
Concavity of the Kidneys, whose various Pipes meeting and closing together,
form the Ureter.

III. One is generally granted to Number.
each Kidney, seldom any more are found, though it were twice my chance to find
more; which two Ureters however were united on both sides near the Bladder, and
entered it with an Orifice.

IV. They consist of a thick twofold The Substance.
and white Membrane, the outermost common, the innermost peculiar. But Riolanus
more judiciously acknowledges but one peculiar Membrane, for that there is no
outermost common Membrane joined to it from the Peritonaeum. The Ureters
generally are contained under the Peritonaeum, together with many other Parts,
but they are not particularly enfolded by that Membrane, nor receive any
peculiar Tunicle from the Peritonaeum, as the Ventricle, the Vena Cava, the
Liver and many other Bowels and Vessels do. But the peculiar and only Membrane
of which they consist, is a Membrane strong, nervous, strengthened with some
Fibers, oblique and straight, and Arteries and small Veins from the
neighboring Parts; and furnished with Nerves from the sixth Pair and the
Marrow of the Loins, which endue it with an exquisite Sense of Feeling: Which
little Nerves however Riolanus will not allow the ^reters, believing it enough
to excite Pain, that they are Membranous, seeing that from the distension of a
Membrane by a Stone or any sharp Substance, there follows a Pain severe enough
to be endured. Wherein he mistakes, for that any such thing can happen without
the flowing in of the Spirits through the Nerves, is proved from the Palsy* in
which Distemper the Membranes do not feel, through the Defect of Animal
Spirits, nor do they display the least sign of Feeling that may be thought to
proceed from their Structure and Composition.

V. These are very small in a Man; Bigness.
about a Handful in length, and about the breadth of a Straw: Though sometimes
they are very much dilated by Stones passing violently through and with a
tormenting Pain; so that sometimes they have been seen as broad as the small
Gut.

VI. They proceed downwards from Situation.
the Reins above the Pso^ Muscles that be in the Hip, between the double
Membranes of the Peritonaeum, somewhat reflex'd toward the lower Parts, and in
some manner, by an oblique Course between the Membranes of the Bladder, are
inserted about the hinder parts of the Neck of the Bladder, and are continued
with the inner Substance of the Bladder, in which place some believe 'em to be
fortified with Valves at their Ori^ices, hindering the Return of the Urine from
the upper Parts. Which Valves however Riolanus, Andrew Laurentius, and Plempius
call in Question, and say that their oblique and winding Ingress into the
Bladder stops the Return of the Urine out of the Bladder, for which Opinion we
also give our Vote.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Piss-Bladder.
I. THE Piss-Bladder, (...), Definition.
is a Membranous Organical Part of the lower Belly, which retains the Serum
received from the Kidneys, and at length discharges it as being troublesome
either through its Weight or Acrimony.

II. It is seated in the Hypogastrium, Situation.
between the double Tunicles of the Peritonaeum, in the Cavity which is formed
by the Os Sacrum, the Hip-Bone and Share-Bone. In Men it leans upon the
Intestinum Rectum, and is joined to the Prostatae Glandules; in Women it sticks
to the Neck of the Womb, and in both is fastened to the Share-Bone before; and
it is also annexed to the Navel by the Urachus.

III. It consists of a threefold Membrane, Membranes.
of which the outermost in Men, but not in Brutes, being surrounded with Fat
proceeds from the Peritonaeum. The middlemost, which is thicker is endued with
fleshy Fibers for Contraction and Expulsion of the Urine: and hence by
Aquapendens, and Bartholine, called the enfolding Muscle, by Spigelius the
Thruster downward of the Urine. This if it be too much distended by ^oo great a
quantity of Urine, occasions a total suppression of Urine, because the Fibers
of it being too much distended are so weakened, that they cannot contract
themselves again. Which sort of Suppression of Urine Forestus writes that he
himself was troubled with l. 25. Observe. 14. The innermost is thinner, and
being of a more exquisite Sense of Feeling is protected by a kind of Slime from
the Corrosion of the Liquor contained in it. This is found very much wrinkl'd
in People that are troubled with the Stone.

IV. The Figure of it, is oblong, The Figure.
globous, or round, and sometimes, sharp like a Pear.

V. The Bigness is not alike in all, Bigness.
but in some larger, in some less; which extraordinary largeness is occasioned
by its frequent and violent Distensions, by too long a Retention of the Water.

VI. It has one Cavity, which by Its Concavities.
the Observations of Physicians in some few has been seen distinguished into
two, by a Membrane or Fence in the middle.

VII. There are three Holes belonging Its Holes.
to it, of which the two lesser before the Neck are open to the Entrance of the
Ureters: The third, which is the bigger, in the Neck gives way to the Urine
going forth.

VIII. It receives Arteries from Its Vessels*
the Hypogastries, entering the sides of the Neck, and carrying thither Blood
for its Nourishment: The remainder of which it pours forth through little Veins
into the Hypogastric Vein. It admits Nerves from the sixth Pair and the Marrow
of the Os Sacrum.

IX. It is divided into Bottom Its Division.
and Neck.

X. The Bottom comprehends the The Bottom.
upper and broader part of the Bladder; from which the Urachus is extended
upwards to the Navel; which Urachus together with the adjoining umbilical
Arteries in People of ripe Years proves a strong Ligament, preventing the
falling down of the Bottom upon the Neck. Of the Urachus see more, c. 32.

XI. The Neck is the lower and The Neck.
narrower Part, which in Men being longer and straighter is carried to the Root
of the Yard, and opens into the Urinary Passage or Piss-Pipe. But in Women
shorter and broader; hanging above over the Neck of the Womb, and opens itself
under the Clitoris, a little above the Entrance of the Sheath or Matrix between
the Nymphae. In both Sexes fleshy, woven out of many Fibers, chiefly Transverse
and Orbicular, lying hid among the right Fibers encompassing the whole Body of
the Bladder, which constitute the Sphincter Muscle, pulling together the Neck
of the Bladder to prevent the Urine from coming away unseasonably, and winding
about the Prostatae, as may be seen in the following Chapter. As for those
Anatomists that describe several other Muscles of the Bladder, they do but make
themselves ridiculous: As the External Sphincter, the Thruster down, etc. which
are nothing else but the fleshy Membrane of the Bladder.

XII. Over this Neck in Men toward Its Valves.
the Piss-Bladder, a little Membrane overspreads it self, like a small Valve,
which prevents the Seed which is forced toward the Piss-Pipe from flowing into
the Bladder, and the falling of the Urine which flows out of the Bladder into
the seminal Pipes. Which may be demonstrated if a Bodkin be put into the
Bladder toward the Piss-Pipe, into which it enters easily without any Obstacle;
but not the contrary way, unless by the Force of Dilaceration. This little
Membrane is broken by the Immission of a Catheter into the Bladder, and
sometimes is corroded away in a Gonorrhea. Bartholine reports from the
Observation of Riolanus, that this Membrane is to be found in Boys till twenty
Years of Age, but not after that. Which Observation I do not take to be any
perpetual Rule. For in Practice we have many times broken this Membrane not
without great Pain ensuing, in older Men by immission of the Catheter. Perhaps
Riolanus might observe this in the Dissections of dead Bodies in France. For
the French Youth being extremely Lustful, and abandoning themselves to their
Venery, and frequently Clapped, it may easily happen that this Membrane may be
eaten away by the corroding Seed, as it passes through the Channel.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Parts in Men serving for See Table 3. and 4.
the Generation of the Seed.
I. AFter the Organs of Nourishment, Preamble.
by which the Food is prepared for the Support of the Body, which would else
decay, Order and Method require that we should proceed to the Description of
the Instruments of Generation, by which the Perennity of human kind which
Nature has denied to Individuals is preserved by Procreation.

II. These Parts are called Pudenda The Privities.
from Pudor Modesty, as being those Parts of which Man was not ashamed before
Sin. But after he had sinned he took notice of his Ignominious Nakedness, and
was ashamed. Theophrastus Paracelsus writes, that Men before Sin wanted these
Parts; but that after Sin committed they were added by the Creator, in
perpetual Remembrance of the shameless Fact he had committed: And because our
first Parents fell through the Temptation of the Devil, therefore to Adam was
given a genital Member or Yard like a Serpent, and to Eve a Member of
Generation like the Serpents Den. Now whether this be the Reason that the
Adamite's Serpent is never at rest but when he is entering Eve's Den, and that
Eve's Den with so much Love and Desire receives and admits the Adamite's
Serpent, I leave to others to dispute.

III. These same Privities, which Genitals.
are also called Genitals, being in both Sexes not framed alike, necessarily we
must discourse of both apart: And first for the Generating Parts of Man, in the
same Order as the Seed is generated, moves within 'em, and is ejected.

IV. The Genital Parts in Men are The Genital Parts of Men.
such Parts as are designed for a Man to beget his own Likeness in a Woman.
These Parts are divided into Internal and External; of which some ly hid in the
Cavity of the Abdomen, others are conspicuous without: However all these both
outward and internal Parts that serve for Generation are twofold: Others
prepare the Seed, of which in this Chapter; others conveigh the Seed into the
Womb, of which in the following Chapter.

V. Among those which make the The spermatic Vessels.
Seed in the first place occur the Spermatic Vessels: Which are vulgarly called
preparing Vessels, because that formerly it was thought the Blood was there
prepared for the Generation of Seed. These are twofold: That is to say, two
Arteries, and as many Veins which are more conspicuous and bigger than the
Arteries. Some write that they have seen the Arteries bigger than the Veins,
which must be preternatural, and contrary to the Circulation of the Blood (for
then through large and broad Arteries more Blood would be carried than could be
returned back through smaller and lesser Veins; whence it is probable that such
a thing never happened, but that the Anatomists that writ so had a Mist before
their Eyes.

VI. The spermatic Arteries carry Spermatic Arteries.
Blood for the making of the Seed and the Nourishment of the Testicles: Of
which, the Right a little below, the Left close by or a little above the
Emulgent, sometimes both together about the Distance of two Fingers under the
Emulgent, arise out of the Trunk of the great Artery before. But then the Right
ascending the Trunk of the Vena Cava proceeds obliquely to the Vein of the same
side, and the Left proceeds directly to the Vein of its own Side. Nevertheless
Riolanus has observed that both sometimes proceed from the Emulgent; and
sometimes not two but one only to have sprung out of the Trunk of the Aorta,
and to have performed the Duty of the two. In like manner, George Q^ck a
Physician of Norimbergh, observed this single Artery in a dead masculine Body
springing from the forepart of the Aorta, which being divided into two Branches
above the separation of the Crural Branches, joined afterward on both sides to
the descending spermatic Vein. And by the Relation of Hoffman, Peter Paw, in
the Year 1598. in the dead Body of an old Man, found no more than one spermatic
Artery, proceeding from the middle Trunk of the Aorta, ten times bigger than
those Arteries wont to appear in others, and ending in the Testicles, being
without question double fork'd before. But these Accidents rarely happen, as in
that Person of whom Cornelius Gemma writes, Art. Cyclog. lib. 2. Often, says
he, we have seen three or four seminal Arteries. In the place of often, I had
rather he had said sometimes: For the increased Number is so seldom found, that
of six Hundred Anatomists scarce one has seen it: But generally two spermatic
Arteries of each side one, spring from the Trunk of the Aorta.

VII. Bauhinus, Riolanus, and Whether the Arteries may be wanting.
others report that these Arteries sometimes are of one side, and sometimes
both in both sides are obsorv'd to be wanting, and this they affirm to be the
cause of Barrenness. Which thing Reason convinces us, can never be true, seeing
that the Blood cannot be carried to the Stones through any other Passages, than
through these Arteries; the Veins, by reason of the Obstructions of the Valves,
sending no Blood to the Testicles. And so for want of Matter (which they affirm
to be the cause of Barrenness, not only no Seed can be made, but neither can
the Stones be supplied with Nourishment; and by that means would wast and dry
up: Or else surpised with a Sphacelus (which is an Extinction of Life and
Sense, would fall down; whereas in those Bodies where one or both Bodies are
said to be wanting, the Stones were found to be sufficiently swelling and
juicie, and a copious Quantity of Seed conspicuous in the seminal Vessels. And
therefore there must be some Deceit or Mistake in what they allege, which
proceeds from hence, which may often happen by reason of the extraordinary
thinness of the Arteries, that those Arteries might be cut off either through
the Imprudence or overhasty Dissection of the Anatomists; and so could be
neither found nor demonstrated, which is the reason they readily persuade
themselves and the Spectators, that they are wanting through some defect of
Nature.

VIII. The Spermatic Veins carry Spermatic Veins carry the Blood to the Vena
Cava.
the Blood to the Vena Cava, which remains after the Nourishment of the Stones,
and making the Seed. Of these, the right Vein from the right Stone ascending
the Trunk of the Vena Cava before, a little above the rise of the Emulgent,
enters the Vena Cava; and the left enters the Emulgent on the same side, rarely
the Vena Cava. Riolanus also writes that he has observed the right Vein
inserted into the right Emulgent, which I never happened to see. Into both
these Spermatic Veins within the Abdomen, several slender Branches proceeding
from the Caul and Peritonaeum, open themselves, by the Observation of Regner de
Graef; as also that the Veins do not proceed in so straight a Line as the
Arteries. And Do minic de Marchettis, anat. c. 6. writes that he twice or
thrice saw the Spermatic Vein, ascending from the Stone into the Abdomen,
divide it self in the midway into three Branches, which singly entered the
Trunk of the Vena Cava.

IX. But least the Blood ascending Valves.
through them, should slide back to the Stones, they are furnished with many
semicircular Valves, like half-Moons, disposed in a double Order, and looking
upwards, and so preventing the Return of the Blood. Also at the Entrance of
each into the said great Veins, there is to be seen a little Swelling, which is
raised by the Valve when distended with Blood, looking toward the Vena Cava, as
Rolfincius not without reason, as he believes, conjectures, and Highmore shows
that Valve in Delineation, in the right Vein one, and double in the left.

X. To each Stone belongs one Artery The Progress of the Spermatic Vessels.
and one Vein, and these two Vessels, more above, at their beginning about the
Reins, are somewhat distant one from another, but by and by in their Progress
join together, and are somewhat writhed one into another, and so firmly
fastened together with a Tunicle rising from the Peritonaeum, that they can
hardly be separated by Art. John Saltzman tells us of three human Bodies,
wherein he observed a left Artery, rising* a little above the Emulgent, which
did not presently join to the Vein, but first ascended upward toward the
emulgent Vein, passed over it, and wound it self about it, and thence being
presently joined with the Spermatic Vein, descended downward after the usual
manner.

XI. Thus joined above the Ureters The Way they make.
they are carried down to the Groyns, where together with a slender Muscle from
the Fold of the sixth Pair latent in the Abdomen ( and sometimes another is
added from the 21st. or 22d. Pair of spinal Marrow) and the Cremaster or
hanging Muscle, they pierce the Peritonaeum, enter its Process, which is the
Extension of the outward Membrane of the Peritonaeum toward the Scrotum,
forming the Sheath, wherein several Spermatic Vessels are contained together
with the Testicle; In which Process being divided into several small Branches
complicated one among another with infinite Windings and Circumvolutions, they
proceed to the Testicles. Nevertheless the inner Membrane of the Peritonaeum at
that same Opening or Entrance, sticks most close to the side of the Vessels:
For that Membrane being broken, Burstenness follows, the Gutt, the Caul, Water
and Wind falling down through the Rupture into the Production of the
Peritonaeum and the Scrotum. Now these Vessels aforesaid having thus reached
the Stones, separate themselves again, and with a winding Course of the Artery
quite through the whole length of the Artery, run out as far as the lesser
Protuberance of the Epididymis, or winding Vessel, fixed to the Back of the
Testicles, and there again divided first into two, then into several small
Branches, return partly to the opposite Extremity of the Testicle, partly lose
themselves within the Substance of the Stones. But the Veins divided into very
small Roots, are inserted into the little Branches of the small Arteries, and
with a kind of Network are joined together one to another; sometimes by a mere
leaning and touch, sometimes by Anastomoses. But that here are neither observed
nor allowed any Anastomoses of the little Arteries with the slender Veins is
apparent from the Injection of the Liquor into the Arteries, which never enters
the Veins. Neither ought these Anastomoses to be there: For if the Blood could
pass through those Anastomoses from the Arteries, nothing of it or very little
would go to the Stones, but pass to the Vena Cava far more speedily and more
easily by those broader ways or Anastomoses, than through the narrow and
invisible passages of the Stones themselves.

XII. Andrew Lawrentius, Bauhinus, The Error of the Anatomists.
Veslingius, and many other Anatomists were grossly mistaken in this, that they
thought the Spermatic Artery and Vein ended in the Parastate or Epididymis; and
there was changed into the deferent Vessel, as a Body continuous to it self.
Whereas it is apparent to those that look more narrowly, that those Vessels do
not enter the Epididymis or Parastate, but the Testicle it self, and that the
Parastate may be there separated from the Stone, those Vessels still remaining
whole, and adhering to the Testicle it self; For the blood enters the Stones
themselves, as Regner de Graef, by an ingenious Experiment apparently
demonstrates, lib. before cited. That Opinion, says he, which holds that the
Blood does not enter the Stones, appears to be false, as clearly as the noonday
light, by the following Experiment. Thrust in a small Pipe into the Artery, and
immit with a Syring, a Liquor tictured with some Color toward the Testicle,
and you shall very neatly discover the Progress of the Arteries, for that the
same Liquor having reached the supreme part of the Stones, or that part where
it first enters, diffuses it self, leaving the Epididymises untouched within
the inner tunicle of the Testicles, and runs onward toward the bottom, where
while it turns again, it divides it self, and as it were wantons into several
small Branches, which sometimes to the Right, sometimes to the Left, diffuse
themselves through the very substance of the Testicles.

XIII. These Vessels thus complicated The Fold representing the Form of the
Tendrils of a Vine.
and connexed constitute that Plexure, which the Anatomists call Pampinoformis,
as resembling the Tendrils of a Vine, or Varicosus, from its similitude to the
crooked windings of the Veins: Also the Pyramidal Body, from its Shape and
Figure; as being more narrow at the beginning, and multiplying as it descends,
till it ends at the Stone with a broader Basis. Herophylus, as Galen testifies,
calls this Fold the Cirsoides Parastate, resembling the winding dilatation of
the Veins; which Name Rio^anus also gives it. Others call it the Variciform
Parastate, by reason of the Windings and Turnings of the Vessels, which Name or
Appellation Vestingius erroneously attributes to the hinder part of the
Epididymis: Whereas there are no such writhed and complicated blood-conveighing
Vessels to be seen in that part.

XIV. In this same Fold sometime Hernia varicosa.
happens that sort of Burstenness called Varicosa, when a thick and Melancholy
Blood happens into those Meanders. Sometimes also a Fleshy Burstenness Hernia
Carnosa.
is here occasioned by the bruising this Fold by a fall, a blow, or by hard
riding; through which Contusion a spungy Flesh grows up, and that frequently to
the bigness of two or three Fists: which is rarely perfectly cured, but by
cutting away the Stone of the side affected.

XV. However, Regner de Graef De Graef's Opinion.
lib. de part. Genesis Viror. affirms, That such a Complication of the said
Vessels forming a Pyramidical or winding Body, is not plainly to be discerned
in Men, but that a Trunk of the Artery, without any Net-shap'd divarication
runs directly to the Testicle, and is divided into two Branches three or four
singers breadth above the Testicles; of which, one is absconded under the
Epididymis, and the other proceeds forward to the Stone; of the truth of which
his own Eyes have been witnesses. And hence he does not believe there is any
such Net-shap'd Contexture of small Arteries with the little Veins; which
happens otherwise in many Brutes, in which he confesses the Artery to be
wreathed into several Curles and Tendrils with the Trunk of the Vein. But the
fleshy Burstenness which happens in this part, as also the Contexture of the
Blood-bearing Vessels, conspicuous in the same place, and in the same manner in
Men, as in many Beasts, seem to evince the contrary: Unless it were that
perhaps Regner de Graef would have said, that although that same contexture in
Brutes seems to consist of Veins and Arteries complicated together, that the
same in men is formed of small branches only of the Vein, returning from the
Stone. Which whether it be otherwise in Men than in Brutes, I believe to be a
very great Question; the Artery crossing it only directly. But because we have
not yet so exactly observed it, we will leave the Question undetermined, till
we have an opportunity to inquire more diligently into it.

XVI. The Anastomoses of these Arteries No Anastomoses.
one into another, and of the Veins with the Arteries, as unquestionable, have
been described by many. But Regner de Graef, by Injection of some sort of
Liquor into the Artery, and several strong Arguments, affirms and proves, that
there neither are any such An^stomoses, nor ought, nor can be.

XVII. From what has been said, it The Office of the Vessels.
is apparent, what the Arteries, what the Veins perform in reference to their
use; that is to say, that the one bring blood, and the other carry back the
blood that is superfluous. Whence appears the vanity of the Opinion of Galen,
Bauhinus, Spigelius, and several others, who extend the Office of these Vessels
too far, and talk of I know not what preparation of the Blood, and alteration
of the Color to white, whereas there is no such thing performed in these
Vessels, as appears by Inspection it self; but that the Blood is of a ruddy
Color, which is extracted out of these Veins, as well as out of other
Blood-bearing Vessels, neither is there any thing of a whitish humor contained
therein.

XVIII. These Vessels thus mutually The Stones.
connex'd together, run forward to the Stones or Testicles, which are Genital
parts hanging down in the Cod or Scrotum without the hollowness of the Abdomen,
ordaind for the making of Seed. They are called ^estes or Stones, because they
are a testimony of Virility or Manhood; and hence it was that the Romans of old
admitted only Men to give testimony in all Causes and Trials, rejecting those
that were deprived of their Testes, as not Men.

XIX. They are two in number, Their number.
therefore by Herophylus called (...), or Twins, partly for the more perfect
Generation of the Seed; partly that if one should be lost or maimed, the other
might supply the place and office of both.

The number is rarely ^ewer or more; in regard it seldom happens that any one
is born with one Stone; though such accidents have happened: of which Riolan,
Borellius, and Regner de Graef, produce several Examples. Very seldom also more
are found in one Person, though it is said to be a thing familiar to some
Families. And Fernelius tells us of a certain Family known to himself, of which
all the Males had three Stones. And Forestus, Borellus, and Regner de Graef,
and others, afford us several Examples of People that have had three Stones.
But seldom of all it happens that any Man is born without any Stones, and yet
perform the Act of Manhood in Copulation; yet Cabrolius gives us an Example.

XX. The Stones are pendulous at Situation.
the Root of the Yard, and there absconded in the Scrotum or Cod; seldom and
preternatural it is that both should be included within the Cavity of the
Abdomen, which nevertheless has been seen by Regner de Graef; to which he adds
another seen by Francis de le Boe Sylvius.

Riolanus also observed one to have been absconded within the Abdomen, in a
noble Person, who nevertheless had a numerous Offspring by his Wife. The same
was also observed by my self in a strong Man, who nevertheless had several
Children. Paraeus, likewise Martin Ruland and Bartholine, prove by several
Examples, that both Stones have lain hid for some time, either in the Groyn, or
in the Cavity of the Abdomen, which that after the hair began to appear, fell
down naturally into the Cod.

XXI. In shape and bigness they are Shape and ^igness.
like a Pigeons Egg, and sometimes a small Hen-egg, somewhat flat of each side.
Yet in both there is some variety, according as the Vessels adjoining are more
or less swelled. Generally likewise the left exceeds in bigness the right, and
hangs down somewhat lower; rarely the right is bigger than the left. Sometime
in Veneral Distempers now and then one, or both, grow to an usual bigness,
which afterward when the Disease has been cured, I have observed to continue
as long as the Party lived without any prejudice; but this is preternatural: as
is also that which Lazarus Riverius reports, of one whose Testicles exceeded
the Stones of a Horse in bigness, from which afterward fell very hard pieces of
a stony Substance. And no less extraordinary is that which Hildan observes of a
certain Person that was troubled with a Dropsy, whose right Stone being grown
as big as a Goose Egg, was found stufft full of Hairs intermixed with a
purulent, oily and white matter. Plater likewise gives us an Example of Stones
as big as a Man's head in a Person that was very bulky and fat.

XXII. Their Substance is peculiar, Their Substance.
there being none like it of all the other parts of the Body, whitish and soft,
consisting of innumerable very little small Ropes of the Seminal Vessels joined
together in a continued Series: in which, although there be no manifest Concavity
to be perceived, yet that the said little Ropes are hollow, and conveigh the
Seed invisibly, is apparent, if they be made visible. Now Regner de Graef was
he that first taught us the way to make 'em visible to the sight: for he in a
Dog, or other living Animal, ties the Deferent Vessel, by which means the
innermost little strings of the little Vessels of the Testicles, otherwise
imperceptible, will easily become conspicuously distended, and fill with
Seminal Matter. He tells us also that these Vessels appear through a whitish
Tunicle full of white Seed in the Testicles of a larger Dormouse: he adds also,
that if you put the same Testicles into Water after you have stripped off the
Tunicle, and stir them a little in the Water, the little Vessels of their own
accord, without the help of Instruments, will separate one from another, and
the whole Substance of the Testicles appear to be composed of nothing but small
Vessels; which he had often made out to the Physicians and Surgeons of Delph.
And the same thing he also showed me lately in the Stone of a Dormouse, which
was so dissolved into little small whitish Vessels, that it seemed to consist
altogether of such. Though in the mean time it be very probable that in a living
Creature there may be some peculiar, tender, marrowy Substance, with certain
imperceptible Glandules, intermixed with those Vessels, which in the washing,
dissolution, and preparation of those Vessels, is separated from 'em, and
disappears. For it can hardly be believed that the Stones should consist of
little Vessels alone, supported and connected without any other Substance,
seeing that in all the rest of the Bowels, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Brain, etc.
the Vessels that run thorough are supported and fastened by the Peculiar
Substance of that Bowel, and the Humors contained in 'em, by reason of the
Property, or peculiar Temper and Formation of the Substance adjoining to those
Vessels, undergo a very great and specific Alteration, which is no more than
what may The Seedbearing Vessels extended to a great length.
probably happen, as well in the Stones as other Bowels.

XXIII. The said Seed-bearing Vessels of the Stones being once loosened from
each other* are to be extended to a wonderful length, requisite in those
places, to that end that the Seminal matter by a longer stay, and a slower
passage, being more exactly and diligently prepared, may attain to a greater
perfection.

They are in an Error who write that the Stones are little small Glandules, as
not having neither temper, their frame or fashion, their substance nor their
use; but are noble Parts that give both strength and vigor to Men. Nay, they
may indeed be said to be the principal Parts, as contributing so effectually to
the Procreation and Preservation of Mankind.

XXIV. They receive, as has been Vessels.
said, very small Arteries from the Spermaticks, and send forth small Veins to
the Vena Cava and left Emulgent. Nerves also they have, according to the Vulgar
Opinion derived from the sixth wandering Pair, and the twelfth Pair of the
Breast. In November. 1668. and again in December. 1670. seeking more narrowly for
these Nerves in public Dissections of Humane Bodies, we observed only one
little Nerve belonging to each Stone, a little above that place where the
Spermatick Vessels seem to make their Exit out of the Abdomea, which joined
themselves with the Spermatick Vessels, and so entering their common sheath,
ran forward to the Stone, but by reason of its extraordinary slenderness, we
could not well observe whether it were some little small branch of the sixth
Pair of Nerves, or of the twelfth Pair of the Breast, or as others, not without
reason, will have it, of the twentieth or one and twentieth Pair of the Spinal
Marrow; which last seems to me most probable. And so, upon view, very few small
Nerves, and perhaps but only one, seem to run out to every Stone. On the
contrary, Glisson however has lately written that he has seen several Nerves in
the Stones contributing Matter to the Generation of Seed: which great quantity
of Nerves we could never observe in 'em; but very few, and those such as we
could hardly get to reach beyond the whitish Tunicle. For they are not
conspicuous in the inner Substance of the Stones, as well by reason of their
extreme Tenuity, as through their whitish Color; though it is most certain that
they give Animal Spirits to the blood that flows thither through the Arteries.

XXV. But whether the Bloodbearing Distribution of the Vessels.
Vessels enter the Substance of the Stones it self, or terminate in the whitish
Tunicle, is by some disputed. Hippocrates seems to be or the first Opinion,
Lib. de Loc. in Hom. and Lib. de Oss. Not. where he writes that certain Veins
do run to the Testicles. Where by Veins he understands some of the
bloodconveighing Vessels, that is to say, Veins and Arteries. Others, by reason
that the Ingress of these Vessels is so obscure, thought those Vessels did not
enter the inner parts of the Stones; they not appearing within the Stones, but
only disseminated through the white Tunicle. But this Doubt will vanish, if we
look a little more narrowly into the Use and Formation of the Stones.

XXVI. Their Use and Office is The use and Office of the Stones.
to make Seed, and to that end they are composed of a peculiar Substance and
innumerable Seminal Vessels wherein Seed is made. But because Matter is
requisite for the making of Seed, hence Reason teaches us, that of necessity
there must be Blood-bearing Vessels, and little Nerves inserted into those
Seed-bearing Vessels, for the supply and infusion of matter, by degrees to be
changed into Seed.

But some perhaps will object, that the ruddy Color of the Blood-bearing
Vessels demonstrates, that there is Blood in them; which Color however is
hardly ever seen in the substance of the Stones, and therefore no Blood-bearing
Vessels seem to enter that substance. I answer, that happens through the
extraordinary thinness of the Arteries, pressed by the white Seed-bearing
Vessels; for which reason in a thousand other parts the little small Arteries
and Veins are imperceptible. Besides if a Stone be newly taken out of the Body,
and any ruddy Liquor be injected through a Syringe into the Spermatic Artery,
several Blood-bearing Vessels will swell up in the midst of the Stone, and so
become conspicuous. Lastly, I shall add what I have learnt by experience in
Man, That is, in cutting out the Stones of vigorous and healthy Men that have
been slain; that for the most part no Blood-bearing Vessels are to be
discovered in the inner Substance, no nor in the Stones of living People cut
out after the Cure of Burstenness; or at most only some small Footsteps of
such Vessels appear in those sound persons. But in Bodies emaciated by
Diseases* I have observed several small Branches of Blood-bearing* Vessels
slightly manifest, but very slender, running through the inner parts of the
Stones, which we did not only show privately to several young Students in
Physic, but in March 1663. November 1668. in two Human Bodies emaciated by a
long Distemper, showed the same to diverse Spectators publicly in our Anatomy
Theater. The cause of which seems to be this: For that as there is in the Brain
a peculiar Specific power, by virtue of which Animal Spirits are made of the
Blood in its Vessels, Fibers and Pores, so also there is in the Testicles a
peculiar Seminifick Power, by virtue of which the Blood being carried into
their Vasa Sanguifera, is altered into Seed. Now this active Power being strong
and vigorous in sound People; hence the more subtle and more salt Particles of
the Blood, carried through the little Arteries to their more inward parts,
together with the Animal Spirits coming through the Nerves, fall into those
Plexures or labyrinth-like, and most wonderfully interwoven Vasa Sanguifera,
and being there received by them lose their ruddy Color, as the Chylus loses
its white Color in the Heart, and is changed into white Seed, But as for that
small remainder of Blood remaining in the Vasa Sanguifera, it is so obscured
and discolored by the whiteness of the substance of the Stones, and the said
Vasa Sanguifera, that it is not preceptible to the sight. But in sickly People
whose Stones as well as other bowels are weak, the separation of those
Particles of blood which are necessary for the making of Seed, is neither well
performed, nor with sufficient speed, for which reason the Sanguiferous Vessels
are more tumid, and containing more blood than ordinary, and more visible to
the Sight. Moreover at the same time the ill separated, and over ruddy
Particles of the blood, being affused into the Seminiferous Vessels, are but
ill and slowly concocted, and altered into Seed therein, and therefore the
Sanguine red Color appears in some measure here and there in these Vessels.
For the same cause it also happens, that in those that are too frequent in
Copulation, there is sometimes an Ejection of blood instead of Seed; the Stones
being so debilitated by frequent Venery, and over much spending of the Seed,
that the convenient Particles of blood flowing into those Vessels, cannot so
soon be separated from the rest, nor changed into blood; Now the forementioned
Power proceeds from an apt, convenient and proper formation and temper of the
Stones, which temper being either altered or weakened by Diseases, or overmuch
use of Women, they also suffer in their Seminific Power: as for the same reason
the Power of making Spirits is weakened in the Brain.

XXVII. Here a great question arises, A Question, How the Separation of various
Particles from the Blood are made?
How the more salt Particles of the Arterial Blood infused into the Stones, and
most apt for Generation, and the watery or white Particles come to be separated
from the red Particles? Which is a thing so dubious, so obscure and intricate,
that never any Man as yet durst go about to unfold it: or at least they who
durst attempt to say any thing, flying to peculiarity of Substance and Pores,
seem to have hardly said any thing at all. In the preceding 14 Chapter we have
told ye, how that in the Liver the Separation of Humors to be segregated from
the rest of the sanguin Humors, is performed by small invisible Glaudulous
Balls, formerly unknown, but in our times discovered by the diligence of
Malpigills, with the help of his Microscopes. Also c. 18. We have likewise
shown ye, that the blood passing through the Ash-colored Substance of the
Brain, in that passage, by reason of the peculiar property of its Glandulous
Substance, and its Pores, loses its most subtle and spirituous saltish
Particles, which being imbibed by the beginning and roots of the small Nerves,
are there by degrees more and more rarefied and attenuated and exalted to a
more refined Spirituosity, while the other ruddy and more Sulphury Particles
are sucked up by the more small Veins, and so by degrees return to the Heart.
And thus it seems probable, that the same Operation is performed in the Stones.
How Nature performs this Operation we have demonstratively shown in our
Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 4. cap. 8. Sect. 10.. 14. ad 36. to which I shall
refer you. Salmon.
For either some very small, and hitherto by reason of their extraordinary
Exility, invisible Kernels, or Glandulous Balls are intermixed and scattered
among the small Vessels of the Testicles, by means of which such a necessary
Separation is made: Or else there is a certain white marrowy peculiar substance
surrounding the small Vessels of the Testicles, of which the Stones chiefly
consist, into which Substance the Arterious Blood being infused, loses in its
passage, the most subtle saltish Particles, of which the Seed chiefly consists,
most apt for the generation of Seed, to be thereupon sucked up by the peculiar
Vasa seminifera of the Testicles, and more exactly to be prepared, while the
other Particles entering the Orifices of the small and imperceptible Veins,
return to the Spermatick Veins, and so farther to the Heart. But which of these
ways is to be asserted, or whether any other third way is to be determined
upon, we shall leave to them, who by a more accurate Inspection, or by the help
of Microscopes, shall be able to make a clear discovery. In the mean time there
must be something certain and assured of necessity, by means of which the
aforesaid Separation is to be performed. For otherwise, if by Transfusion alone
the blood should immediately flow out of the Arteries into the Seminal Vessels,
there would be no reason why it should not all be converted into Seed, but that
some part of it should return through the little Veins to the Heart; and
moreover, why its red Color should not alwa^s appear in the said Vessels.

XXVIII. Besides the Vessels already Lymphatic^ Vessels observed in the
Testicles.
mentioned, by more accurate Inspection of Anatomists, and that not so lately
neither, many Lymphatick Vessels have bin observed, arising within the Tunicles
of the Testicles, meeting one another with several Anastomoses, and ascending
with the deferent Vessels upward into the Abdomen, and there emptying their
Lymphatic juice into the Vasa Chylifera. They are furnished with several Valves
looking upward, preventing the falling back into the Testicles of the Lymphatic
juice, ascending from the Testicles. These little Vessels are easily visible to
the Eyes of the Beholders, if the Vasa Sanguifera be but tied a little above
the Stones, and then the Stones be but stirred, for then these Vasa Lymphatica
shall be observed to swell between those tied Vessels, as is daily to be
experimented in living Animals, and human Bodies that have not bin long dead.
Now because there is a correspondence between all the Lymphatick Vessels and
the Glandules, and that their Original is derived from them; hence because they
arise from the inner Substance of the Testicles, that is mainly confirmed which
I spoke before, of the invisible Glandules intermingl'd among the Vessels of
the Testicles, and separating a Salsugi^ous matter proper for the Generation of
the Seed from the Arterial Blood.

XXIX. A strong, thick, hard, slender The Tunicle called Albugineous.
proper Tunicle is the first Covering that involves the substance of the
Stones, called the White or Nervous Tunicle, which being a little rough
withinside, sticks every way close to it, and binds it together, being somewhat
soft, for fear of being broken. Withoutside it is somewhat moist, and bedewed
with a watery Humor, and rather in the Extremities than in the Middle, has the
Epididymis's clinging to it. By means of this Tunicle, the Vasa Sanguifera,
together with the Nerves that penetrate it on every side, more safely reach to
the innermost parts of the Stone, and the Lymphatic Vessels more conveniently
spring out of 'em.

XXX. Round about this, for its The Vaginal Tunicle.
better defense, is enwrapt another strong and slender Tunicle like a sheath,
and therefore called (...), or the Vaginal Tunicle, which is formed by the
Process of the outward Membrane of the Peritonaeum. Riolanus writes that this
Tunicle again is enfolded by another slender and red Tunicle springing from the
Cremaster dilated. But in regard it is nothing but the Cremaster Muscle
dilated, it cannot well be taken for any peculiar Membrane enfolding the Stone.

XXXI. The Stones are furnished The Muscles.
with two Muscles, called (...), or hanging Muscles; of which each Stone has
one, which both together arise from the Spine of the Share-bone, or as Riolanus
will rather have it from the fleshy extremity of the Oblique ascending Muscle;
slender, smooth within, and be dew'd with a watery Humor; withoutside rough
and fibrous, with their fleshy Fibers encompass outwardly almost the whole
Process of the Peritonaeum, especially the hinder part, and so hold up the
hanging pendulous Stones; and in Copulation bring 'em upward, that while the
Seminary Vessels are evacuated, presently the Seminal Channels being
abbreviated, and the Stones moderately compressed with the Parastates, new Seed
may be carried more easily and speedily into the emptied Vessels.

XXXII. The Testicles thus fortified The ^od, called Scrotum.
and clothed, hang forth without the Abdomen, in a Purse or soft wrinkled
little Bag, called by the Latins Scrotum and Scortum, by the Greeks (...) and
(...), which by a middle Line or Seam being divided into the right and left
part, and interwoven with several Vessels, is formed out of a Cuticle, and a
more soft and slender Skin; and within another slender Tunicle adheres to it,
rising out of the fleshy Pannicle, called (...), which cleaves to the Vaginal
Tunicle with many membranous Fibers. Regner de Graef writes that he knew a Man,
who by virtue of this Tunicle (for it could not be done by the Skin, drew up
his Scrotum, as he listed himself, and caused a Motion in it, at the request of
the standers by at any time, not unlike the Peristaltic or crawling Motion of
the Entrails. But because voluntary Motions are only performed by the Muscles,
I am apt to believe that the Cremaster Muscles in that Person stuck to the
Tunicle; which Muscles are in some men so strong, that they will move their
Testicles and the Scrotum too, if adhering to them, as they please themselves.
But there is no Fat between either Tunicle of the Scrotum, which would be but a
burden and impediment to the part.

XXXIII. Some Symptoms of health Signs of Health.
or sickness are wont to be taken from the Scrotum. For as a Scrotum wrinkled
and contracted is a sign of sane health, so a relaxed Scrotum is frequently a
sign of weakness, provided such a relaxation proceed not from any External
Cause; by which sign Nurses and Women judge of the health of Infants.

XXXIV. The Seed being prepared The Seed flows from the Testicles through the
Deferent Vessels.
and made in the Stones, flows from thence through the Vasa deferentia toward
the seminal Vesicle. But which way it comes out of the Stones into the
Parastates does not so manifestly appear: For as the Entrance of the Vasa
Sanguifera into the Substance of the Testicles is very obscure, so the way
through which the Seed flows out of the Stones into the Parastatae is hardly
perceptible to the Eye, which is the reason Anatomists do not agree in
describing it. Highmore writes that in the middle of the Stone he found a
certain Body round, white and thick, not unlike the Vasa deferentia extended
from the bottom of the Stones to the upper Part, and strongly inserted into the
inner part of the Albuginous Tunicle, and penetrating the Tunicle, and
thrusting itself into the Head of the Parastatae. That same whitish Body
appeared likewise to me long before I saw Highmore's Writings, into which all
the winding Fibers of the Testicles seemed to throw themselves, but I durst not
assert it to be the Ductus that conveyed the Seed to the Parastatae; because
I could not perceive any Concavity in it. I saw sufficiently that same strong
ingra^ting of it into the inner part of the white Tunicle of which Highmore
speaks; but I could not discern the Perforation of the Tunicle by that white
Body; and therefore I thought it ordained for some other use, that is to say,
to the end that together with other crooked Fibers annexed to it, it might
serve to strengthen the Vessels, as well those that enter the Testicle, as
those that are therein contained; and thence they hastened toward the outward
parts of the Testicle to the Epididymis, to prevent a Confusion of all the
Parts together: In like manner as in the Inside of an Orange or Citron, certain
whitish harder Bodies are observed, by which the Vessels that convey the Juice
and the Vesicles containing the Seed are fortified and upheld. Spigelius has
another Conceit as concerning this very thing: For he says that between the
Stones and the Parastates, at the upper part where they are joined together,
several slender Vessels pass thorough. In like manner Riolanus also writes,
that there is a small Hole to be found through which the seminal Humor enters
the Substance of the Stones, and other three little Branches that run out from
the Stone into the Vas deferens. These learned Men seem to have seen something
as it were thorough a Cloud, and to have added every one a Chip of their own,
according to their own Conjectures. But Regner de Graef, through his singular
Diligence has illustrated all these Incertainties and made 'em much more
perspicuous, who has observed these things of the Egress of the Vasa
Seminifera. We have clearly seen, says he, their Egress out of the Stone, and
have found it to be quite otherwise than Highmore has described it to Us. For
they do not go forth from the Testicle with one thick Channel, but in many
Animals with six or seven slender Channels, each of which being bent from side
to side, from the bigger Globe of the Epididymis; and meeting together therein
with one single Channel run forth to the seminary Vessels. He adds that those
slender Channels, while they break forth through the Albuginous Tunicle, can
hardly be seen but when they are swollen with Seed.

XXXV. The Seed therefore flows The Parastatae.
out of the Stones into the Parastatae, so called because they stand by or are
attendant upon the Stones, and being variously writhed and contorted like those
crooked Windings of the Veins called Varix's, are by the Greeks called (...),
because they stick to the Stones, and as it were lie upon 'em. Now the
Parastatae or Epididymidae, (for by both Names we design the same thing,
notwithstanding the Distinction of Riolanus) are two white, somewhat hard,
oblong Bodies, of which one lies upon each Testicle while they are as yet wrapped
up, but still in the Albuginous Tunicle, and is infolded in the Tunicle common
to the Spermatic Vessels, and toward both Extremes of both Testicles is most
closely fastened to the Albuginous Tunicle, but in the middle sticks but
loosely to it and is easily parted.

XXXVI. The beginning of these The Beginning.
Parastates rises up somewhat swelling in that place where the Varicose Body
approaches to the Stone; to which it adheres so close that many Anatomists,
have formerly thought that that same Body did not enter the Stones but the
Parastates, and questioned by which way the Blood should come to the Stones.
This Beginning is somewhat hard, furnished with no manifest Hollowness, but
arising with six or seven Roots from the Stone.

XXXVII. In their Progress the The Progress.
Parastates descending to the lowermost Parts of the Stone, are for the most
part of an equal Figure and Shape, and are folded and twisted together with
several serpentine Courses or Windings, and contain a white Seed. Then turning
upward again with a wrinkled and somewhat swelling circular Progress, after
their Reflection; they are freed from their closer Connection to the Stones, and
only rest upon their Tunicle, and go forth into one Passage continuous to the
Vasa deferentia. From which Vessel they differ no otherwise, only that this
proceeds with a straight Course, and they with many Windings and Turnings, and
also by reason of their thinness are somewhat softer.

XXXVIII. Vesalius ascribes to 'em Their Substance.
a Nervous Substance, Fallopius a Glandulous. But Regner de Graef has lately
taught us that neither is true: Who by a singular Dexterity untwisted the
winding and folded Body of each Parastate, by warily cutting first the
exterior, then the second Membrane, and so extended this Body into a prodigious
Length, which he writes did apparently appear in an ordinary Creature to exceed
the length of five Else, and to be one entire Vessel containing Seed,
straightened in its Situation by lateral Contorsions to and again twisted one
upon another. He adds moreover, that at the upper part of the Stones, in its
Original it is so slender, that it may be compared to a small Thread, but by
degrees it grows so thick, that being increased to the bigness of a small
Packthread, at length it makes the Vessel that carries the Seed: And from hence
he also believes that the Stones differ no otherwise from the Parastates, only
that the former consist of sundry minute Vessels, the latter for the most part
of one Channel or thicker Vessel, and that the Parastates differ from the Vasa
deferentia only in this, that the latter proceed with a right Course, the
former with many Oblique or Windings and Turnings, and are somewhat softer by
reason of their extreme Thinness. From which Experiment it is abundantly
apparent, that there is nothing of a glandulous Substance in the Parastates,
nor any thing of nervous, as having a conspicuous Cavity containing Seed
apparent to acute Eyes, which is not to be found in Nerves. But it is necessary
that the Seed being concocted in the Stones should pass through those
serpentine Windings, to the end it may by a longer Delay and a slower Passage,
not only be better elaborated but acquire a greater Perfection.

XXXIX. As to the Use of these The Function.
Parts, it is erroneously described by Spigelius, who attributes a seminific
Power only to the Parastates, excluding the Stones from that Office, which he
will have only to collect the serous Excrements of that Concoction, because
that in the Stones there is no Seed, but only a serous Humor to be found.
Dominic de Marchettis, because there does not seem to be any Hole manifest to
the Eye, through which the Seed made in the Stones, may be emptyed out of 'em
again, concludes from thence, that the Stones were only made to cherish the
Epididymises with their Heat for the more easy and speedy Alteration of the
Blood into Seed in those Vessels. But the former tells us no reason wherefore
Nature should ordain a greater Part for the separation of Excrement, and less
part for the seminific Action. Neither does he show through what ways those
collected Excrements are again evacuated out of the Stones. Nor does the Latter
make it appear, how the Stones, which are the colder Parts, should cherish the
Epididymises with their Heat. But they both seem to have fallen into the same
Error with many others, for that they were both of Opinion that the Arteries
and spermatic Veins did enter the Parastates and not the Stones, which Vessels,
seeing they enter the Stones themselves and not the Parastates, it is
sufficiently apparent that the spirituous Seed being made in the Stones, and
from thence ascending thorough Vessels hardly perceptible, is yet farther
prepared, and by a long and winding Labyrinth gains a greater Perfection, and
so by degrees is poured forth into the Vasa deferentia.

XL. Now the Vasa deferentia, Vasa deferentia.
deferent or ejaculating Vessels are two white Bodies, somewhat hard, round, in
some measure like a bigger sort of Nerve, extended from the Parastates to the
seminary Vesicles porous within, without any seeming conspicuous Hollowness.
And yet Regner de Graef, a most perspicacious Enquirer into the Mysteries of
these Parts, gives us some farther Proof of this Hollowness, in these Words.
The Vas deferens, says he, is endu'd with a manifest Hollowness; which that it
may be discerned, this Vessel is to be opened six or seven Fingers breadth
above the Testicle; then force the Breath blown in, or the colored Liquor
syring'd into it toward the Testicle, and you shall find the Vessel distended,
and discern the colored Liquor through the middle of it run in a right Channel
to the Stone. Then you shall perceive the Cavity in the Vessel it self roll
from side to side, and lastly to be bowed by degrees with the Vessel, in the
same manner as Serpents and Eeles when they strive to creep with more than
usual Swiftness, and so with Windings, not circular, but Sideways, runs on to
the Bodies of the Testicles. Thus its Hollowness appears toward the Stones, now
how it may be observed toward the seminary Vesicles, he tells us a little
after. This, says he, if ye desire to know clearly and distinctly, thrust only
a little Pipe into the Vas deferens, which being distended either by blowing
into it or injection of some Liquor, you shall observe those seminary Vesicles
to be speedily distended before any thing breaks forth into the Urethra. Hence
appears their Error, who affirm that the Vasa semen deferentia, or Vessels that
carry the Seed, have no Communion with the seminary Vesicles, as being
absolutely different from 'em, and that they evacuate themselves through two
peculiar Holes into the Urethra, distinct from those through which the seminal
Matter breaks forth from the Vessels.

LXI. John Swammerdam, sharply Other Opinions.
reproves this last Experiment of Regner de Graef, and asserts for a certain
that the Vesiculae Seminariae, or seminary Vesicles have no Communion with the
Vasa deferentia, nor receive any Moisture from 'em; and for the more solid
Proof of this, he tells us of a seminal Vesicle that he has at home, inserted
in three distinct Places in the Vasa deferentia. This Argument Regner de Graef
derides, and in Opposition, bids him show more than ten seminal Vesicles
wherein he can demonstrate that the seminal Vesicles do not terminate in the
Vasa deferentia, but the Vasa deferentia in them. John Van Horn, swayed by the
Opinion of Swammerdam, writes that the Seed breaks forth through peculiar Holes
out of the Vasa deferentia, but through other Holes out of the Vesicles into
the Urethra. But Swammerdam rejects this Opinion of Horn, saying that it is
only true in Bulls, and not in Men, in whom the Vesicles have an Exit into the
Vasa deferentia in three distinct Places, but no other Communication with 'em.
But I am of Opinion, that that same threefold Egress of the Vesicles into the
Vasa deferentia, assigned 'em by Swammerdam, is rather the Entrance of the said
Vasa deferentia into the Vesicles, through which the Seed flows out of the one
into the other. For in the Dissections of human Bodies we manifestly find, that
the seminary Vesicles being squeezed by the Finger, the Seed does not break
forth out of them into the Vasa deferentia through those three distinct
Openings, but in the same place into the Urethra. Which is a certain
Demonstration, that the Seed flows forth through those three Orifices into the
Vesicles, but does not flow out of 'em again the same way. Lastly, After he has
said all, Swammerdam concludes, that there is a fourfold Matter, out of which
the Seed is made. One out of the Testicles; a Second, from the Ends of the Vasa
deferentia; a Third, out of the seminary Vesicles; a Fourth, proceeding from
the Parastates. But, in regard that Entities are not to be multiplied without
Necessity, I know not why so many Matters of one Seed, and so many Parts should
be alleged for the Preparation of those several Matters. No Man, I suppose,
will deny, but that the Seed is compounded of Arterial Blood, and Animal
Spirits, and seeing that Spermatic Arteries, together with small Nerves, are
carried into the Testicles, and that there is no Progress of either to the Vasa
deferentia, the Vesicles or Parastates any where to be separately discerned, it
seems more likely, that there is but one seminal Matter, that is to say,
Arterial Blood, conjoined with animal Spirits, which is altered and concocted
into true Seed in that wonderful Contexture of the Vessels of which the Stones
consist, and which flowing from them through the Parastates, and Vasa
deferentia, in those Windings and Turnings gains something to its greater
Perfection, by which means it may be preserved in the seminary Vessels
untainted, till the time of necessary Evacuation. And hence it is that the
Experiment of Regner de Graef, seems more consonant to Reason; by which the
Communication of the Vasa deferentia with the Vesicles is confirmed, than that
of Horn and Swammerdam, by which it is opposed. For as they produce the
Testimony of Ocular View, so does he, but where Ocular View is deficient, there
Reason is to be called to our Assistance, and she is to determine concerning
the Truth of the Matter. And this Example may help us; for as Spirit of Wine
being so thin and subtle, that ascending the Alembic, it becomes Invisible, and
cannot be embodied till descending from thence through the Serpentine Brass
Tube set in cold Water, it attains such a Perfection of Condensation, that it
flows down into the Receptacle to be preserved for Use. In like manner the
several Windings and Meanders of the Vasa deferentia, serve to concoct and
thicken the Seed, before it fall into the seminary Vessels. Moreover as Nature
in our Bodies appoints one Part to make the Chylus, which Chylus flowing
through the long Meanders of the Intestines, acquires therein a great Purity,
and Separation from feculent Matter; though the Intestines themselves conduce
nothing to the making of the Chylus it self: So is it in all the spermatic
vessels, which singly make no particular Matter conducing to the Composition of
the Seed, but only the Stones alter the first Matter into Seed, That is to say,
the Lymphatic Matter, (...) or A^eous Juice, call it by what Name you please,
which is separated from the Blood, and sent by the Vasa spermatica into the
Testicles, is there by their own proper Fermentum converted into Seed, as we
have formerly declared concerning the Generation of other Juices destinated to
particular Ends according to the Nature of the Parts and Necessities enforcing
the same. As our Author even in this place declares in so many Words, to wit,
That it is done by a specific Fermentation of Humor in some specific Part or
Bowel, without which it could not be made: the reason of which he renders
immediately, for that the said Bowels, when weak or enfeebled, are not then
able to prepare those new Juices. Salmon.
which in its Passage through the other Parts gains some greater Perfection,
and apter Disposition to be preserved without Corruption for Use.

Lastly, That some new Humor or Juice, as Chylus, Blood, Choler, etc. may be
made, it is not brought to pass by a bare Confusion of various Matters, but by
a specific Fermentation of the Humors in some specific Part or Bowel, without
which no other new Juice or Humor can be made of no Humors, as is apparent
when those Bowels are become weak and enfeebled by any unsound Constitution;
for then they are not able to prepare those new Juices. But now if the most
noble Seed, which contains in it self a Compendium of entire Man, should be
composed out of those four Matters flowing and mixing together in the Ureter
from several Parts, as Swammerdam believes, then a new seminal Liquor would be
made out of those four Matters simply mixed and confused, without any other
peculiar Concoction of those four Matters so confused, appointed and precedent
in any other designed Part or Bowel which is contrary to the Custom of Nature
and Reason. In the last place I would desire Swammerdam to tell me, whether
that Matter by him called the Second distilling from the Ends of the Vasa
deferentia; be diverse and distinct from that first Matter which flows from the
Stones; and if it be different or distinct, as he will have it to be, from
whence those Vasa deferentia receive their Matter, unless it be from the Stones
and their Parastates, when no other small vessels open into their Cavities. But
to the Business.

XLII. One of the Vasa deferentia Their Progress.
rises out of the Parastate of each Stone, and creeping upward through the
Process of the Peritonaeum, enters the Abdomen the same way through which the
spermatic Vessels descend toward the Stone. Now when both are entered the
Abdomen, by and by they are divided above the Ureters, and with a reflexed
Course run along to the hinder Region of the Bladder, and above the right Gut,
near the Neck of the Bladder, before they meet together again, are dilated and
made thicker, and much about the Sides of that meeting together, stick to the
seminary Vessels, into which they open and discharge their Seed, and thence
united together, both of 'em vanish in the Prostatae of its own Side.

XLIII. The Seminary or Seminal Seminal Vessels.
Vessels are as it were little Cells disposed in Clusters, collecting and
preserving the Seed flowing from the Stones to the Vasa deferentia; of which
they contain a great Quantity, till being troublesome either in Quantity or
Quality, or else in Copulation, it be squeezed out, by the Swelling of the
Muscles of the Yard, and neighboring Parts compressing the Vesicles, through
the same narrow Passage through which it fell into the Vesicles; and by the
same Compression be thrust forward toward the Ureter, through two most narrow
Channels crossing through the middle of the Prostates, and so comes to be
evacuated into it, through two very small Holes, through which, the Vessels
being pressed by the Finger, the Seed in dead Bodies is observed to pass
through in small Drops, like Quicksilver strained through a piece of Leather.
Here Swammerdam notes that in Moles the seminal Vesicles, which in those
Creatures are very large, have their particular Muscles with which they are
girded about; but we could never observe any such Muscles in Men. Neither let
any Man think it a strange or unusual thing, that any Humor should flow in or
out of any Part the same way; for in this case there is a double Motion to be
considered; the one ordinary ordained by Nature, acting spontaneously, by which
the Seed flows out of the Vasa deferentia into the said Vesicles: Another
caused by the force of Compression, by which Motion the Vesicles being
compressed, the Seed is squeezed forward toward the Urethra, through the same
Hole it fell in, and is evacuated into it; which Motion is to be called
violent, whether it be done willingly, or by a strong and sharp Provocation
unwillingly.

Some though erroneously attribute to these Vessels the Office not only of
collecting, but of making the Seed; seeing that the thinness of their Substance
renders 'em incapable for such a duty, and for that the Seed is already
perfectly concocted and finished in the Parastates and Vasa Deferentia.

XLIV. They consist of a thin Membrane, Their Substance.
furnished with little Arteries, Veins and Nerves, with which some think the
Lymphatic Vessels to be intermixed.

XLV. In length they hardly exceed Bigness.
three Fingers breadth, in breadth and thickness equalling the breadth of one
finger; but for the most part somewhat bigger in the one than the other side.

XLVI. They are seated on both sides Situation.
at the Ligaments of the Piss-bladder and right Gut, at the sides near the
meeting of the Vasa Deferentia, a little before their meeting, and adhere very
close to the Prostates.

XLVII. They are double, divided Number.
one from another by a kind of Space, and both emit the Seed into the Urethra
through several Channels, and a peculiar hole for the continual supply of
Generation; so that if those in one side should be damnified by Stone, Cutting,
or any other Accident, the others being whole in the other side, may be
sufficient to supply the office of Generation; as we hear and see with one Ear
or Eye, when the Action ceases in the other.

XLVIII. Cavities they have, not only Their Cavities.
one, but full of windings, and composed of several Cells, disposed in
Clusters, exactly representing the little Cells in the Glandules of a
Pomegranate, to prevent the whole Mass of Seed from being wasted in one Act of
Copulation: but that the Windings and Meanders should be able to reserve enough
to serve for several Acts of Coition.

XLIX. To these obscure Passages Whether any Valve.
through which the Seed flows into the Urethra, some Anatomists affix a little
piece of Flesh; and Veslingius thinks there is a Valve to prevent the continual
Efflux of Seed. But certainly there is no need of it in this place, seeing that
the narrowness of almost invisible Passages is sufficient to contain the Seed:
Besides, that in healthy People it cannot flow out without a Compression of the
Vesicles; which being once compressed (whether it be by (...) of Seed, or too
much heat, or Acrimony thereof, which causes a Titillation of the adjoining
Parts, which provokes them to a Contraction, and consequently to a Compression
of the Vessels) it must of necessity flow out, and cannot be hindered by any
Valve. Riolanus better observes that in young Lads, till twenty years of Age,
that never were troubled with the Gonorrhea, there is a Membrane wrapped about
like a Valve, so placed, as not to hinder the Efflux of the Seed out of the
Vessels, but the flowing of it into the Piss-bladder. But it is a wonder that
Riolanus should allow this Valve or Membrane only to young Lads, seeing it is
to be discerned in elder People, it not corroded by the Acrimony of the Seed in
a Gonorrhea, and is also often broken with great pain in elderly People by the
Immission of a Catheter.

L. These obscure Passages from the The Cause of the Gonorrhea.
Vesicles to the Urethra, if they be corroded away by the Acrimony of the Seed
(which Acrimony is contracted by unclean Venery) or if debiliated or dilated of
themselves, they become over loose in that part (which we have observed in old
men too much using Copulation) then follows a Gonorrhea. And in this manner
both Vesalius and Spigelius have observed those Passages very much dilated in
Persons that have died of a Gonorrhea.

Galen and Highmore tell us of a certain oily Humor which is poured forth out
of these Vessels, to smooth and make slippery the Passage of the Urethra, lest
it should be injured by the Acrimony of the Urine or Seed. But for my part, I
could never squeez any thing out of these Vesicles than only Seed; and
therefore I believe it to be a thing beyond all doubt, that there is nothing
but Seed contained in those Vessels, and that the slipperiness of the Urethra
does not arise from any oily Humor flowing from the Vesicles, but from some
slimy part of the Nourishment of the Urethra, with which that innermost passage
is besmeared, which is the reason also of the slipperiness of the Piss-bladder,
Guts, and several other Parts.

LI. Adjoining to the Urinary Vesicles The Prostates.
stand the Prostates, which are two Bodies, but so close joined together, that
they seem to constitute one Body; they are glandulous, somewhat hard, whitish,
and spungy; flat before and behind, round on the sides, and are wrapped about
with a thick Fibrous and strong Membrane, rising from the Vasa Deferentia, and
the lower part of the Bladder, and closely joined to the Piss-bladder at the
Root of the Yard.

LII. They are about the bigness of a The bigness
Walnut, but bigger or less according to the salaciousness of the Party, or the
more frequent use of Copulation.

LIII. They are also furnished with Their Vessels.
some few Nerves, as also Veins and Arteries, chiefly conspicuous in the
External Tunicle.

LIVE. These Prostates, though at first Their Liquor.
sight they seem hardly to contain any Juice, nor to have any Commerce with the
Vasa Deferentia, yet in People extremely Letcherous, that have died presently
after Coition, they appear swelling with a slimy Liquor, and many little
Vesicles are to be found full of that limpid slimy Liquor, which being
compressed flows into the Urethra by the way of the Seed.

LV. But Regner de Graef has The passage of this Liquor.
observed this slimy Liquor to be carried through many Channels absconded in the
inner Body of the Prostates: and at length meeting all together.

In the innermost hollowness of it, says he, several Passages appear, all
which, as many as there are, at the sides of a large little piece of Flesh,
evacuate themselves into the Urethra. The Orifices of these are stopped up with
certain small hits of Flesh, lest the Matter made in the Glandulous Body should
slow forth at other times than in Copulation, or least the Urine should flow
into their Body through those Passages.

LVI. Then he adds a way how How they may be discerned.
these Passages may be discerned.

They, says he, who are so curious as to examine these Passages any farther; let
'em first squeez out their natural Liquor, and then swell 'em up with a hollow
Straw, at what time being distended with the breath, they will display their
Ramifications apparently, at the sides of which little Cells about the bigness
of a Mustard Seed distinctly appear, which when the Passages are blown up,
swell together, so that at first sight you would take the whole Substance of
this Body to be spungy, and to consist of several round oblong, and several
other figured Vessels. Now as to the number of the described Vessels that
terminate in the Urethra, it is not always the same in all Bodies. Yet we never
observed less than ten in a Man: In Dogs we have numbered sometimes ninety and
more, through which this serous Matter flowed out of this glandulous Body,
being compressed. That which is most remarkable in these Channels, is this, That
there is no such communication of 'em one with another, by means whereof the
Wind should burst out of one Chanel into another; for that they are so distinct
one from another, that one Chanel being blown up, only some part of the
glandulous Body is extended; and the other Chanel being puffed up, the other
part swells; so that the Substance of the glandulous Body may be distinguished
into so many Divisions as there are Channels to be found in it. And thus has
Regner de Graef by his singular industry egregiously discovered the great
Mystery of the Prostatae hitherto unknown.

LVII. Riolanus observes that the Its Muscle.
Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder, orbicular, fleshy, two fingers broad,
envelops the Prostatae, and that it is in that place separated from the
Substance of the Bladder, the Prostatae lying between; and thence it happens
that when they are pressed by the Sphincter, the Seminal Liquor is squeezed out
of 'em: and that at the same time by the same Compression the Bladder is closed
to prevent the Urine from flowing out with the Seed. But in regard the Seed
does not flow out of the Prostates only into the Urethra, but out of the
Seminal Vessels chiefly, Riolanus ought rather to have said, that the Prostates
and Seminary Vesicles are compressed together by that same constraint of the
Sphincter, and so the Seminal Liquor, together with the Seed collected in the
Vessels, is at the same time sent from them to the Urethra. Lindan here asserts
two Muscles, of which he calls the inmost the Sphincter, the other the Fascial
or Plaistred; about two fingers broad, wrapped about the neck of the Bladder, and
the Prostates resting upon the Glandules. Upon which, as he says, depends the
power of opening or shutting those parts. But in regard that Lindan has only
described these Muscles from his own Speculative Contemplation, never
demonstratively shown 'em, we think it but reasonable to question the Truth of
'em till farther Confirmation.

LVIII. The Prostatae in the middle The form of the Prostatae.
of the upper part, seem to be somewhat hollowed like a Funnel, and there it is
that they admit the Passages of the Seminal Vesicles penetrating through the
middle of 'em, which being taper'd at this Entrance, run along very small to
the Urethra, into which they are opened with a very slender Exit.

LIX. These Prostatae, as also the They are indu'd with an acute Sense.
Stones, are endued with a most acute sense, and much conduce to the pleasure
of Copulation. But we are to talk with some distinction, when we speak of the
exact sense of these, and of the Stones; for the acute sense is only in the
outward Membrane involving these Parts; for in the Substance it self there is
very little or no feeling: For though both Glisson and Wharton attribute many
Nerves to the Prostates and Stones, for my part I could never observe but very
few, and those very small which are carried thither, and that those are chiefly
dispersed through the enfolding Tunicle.

LX. The use of the Prostates is Their Use.
somewhat disputed. Some think it probable that they add some greater
perfection to the Seed which is made in the Stones, and render it more
fruitful. Which Opinion, however displeases others, by reason of the small
Commerce which they say there is between the Vessels preserving the Seed and
the Prostates. But this small Commerce Regner de Graef endeavors to prove:
For, says he, the Piss-bladder being taken away in the middle, according to its
length, let the glandulous Body be dissected (so he always calls the Prostates)
and the Channels of the Vasa Deferentia and Vesicles be closely pursued to their
Exit into the Urethra, and be separated from the glandulous Body, then putting
a little Pipe into the Vessels carrying the Seed, if any Liquor be forced into
their Cavity by the help of a Syringe, the Seminal Vessels swell with the
Deferents themselves, the Liquor flowing strongly through the Hole into the
Urethra, which if they be stopped about their Exit into the Urethra, nothing
bursts forth out of the Channels in that place where they are annexed to the
glandulous Bodies, though the Seminary Vessels be forcibly disten led; which
would necessarily happen, had they a mutual Commerce with the glandulous Body.

Hence Regner de Graef infers that there is neither any Seed generated in 'em,
nor any thing Seminal contained in 'em; but believes that what is therein
contained, is something peculiar, some slimy Liquor, which serves for a vehicle
to the Seed issuing out of the Vessels, with which he judges the Seed to be
encompassed, lest it should vanish before it comes to the Womb. But in regard
that in dead Carcasses the demonstrations of the Parts are not the same as in
living Bodies; the Pores and narrow Passages being then so closed, that they
will admit no breath to go through, whereas they are passable in living Bodies,
I question whether those things sufficiently prove that Experiment of Graef,
according to his forementioned Opinion. For though he perspicuously explain
thereby as well the little Caverns of the Prostates, as the Liquor in them
contained, and also their evacuating Passages, yet he does not tell us truly
what that Liquor is, of what Matter generated, and wherefore that Commerce
between the Seminary Vessels and the Prostates, is not so little as he
describes it, but rather so much, and so necessary, that those Channels through
which the Seed is squeezed out of the Vessels, ought to run through the middle
of the Prostates to the Urethra, and through them empty the Seed into it, at
the same time that the Liquor of the Prostates flows into it. Here we are at a
stand, and therefore, seeing the Prostates were not placed in vain where they
are, nor in vain admit the evacuating Channels of the Vessels through the middle
of their Substance; seeing they are no way beneficial to the Piss-bladder, or
to the Evacuation of the Urine; seeing lastly that they contain a certain
proper kind of slimy Juice, and being compressed, empty it into the Urethra,
with the Seed of the Vesicles; it seems also probable to us, that there is a
great Commerce between them and the Seminary Vessels, and that the Seed carried
thither through the occult Productions of the Vasa Deferentia, is contained in
them, or else that they add something necessary to the greater perfection of
the Seed, though the foresaid Commerce be not so perspicuous to the sight. That
there is Seed contained in 'em, is apparent from the Observation of Vesalius,
related in one that was troubled with a Gon^rrhea, Anat. l. 5. c. 13. In one,
says he, that was troubled with a Flux of Seed against his will, when we
dissected him at Padua, we found this glandulous Body, when it was divided, no
less full of Seed than the Stones themselves: and if we must confess the truth,
all the while of the Dissection, in no part of the Body so great a quantity of
Seed, as was found in this glandulous Body, though it varied from the Substance
of the Stones in softness and smoothness.

If therefore they contain Seed, they are not to be esteemed such mean Parts as
Regner de Graef seems to account 'em. I^ he object that their Liquor is not
true Seed; however of necessity he must confess, that the Seed without it
cannot have its utmost perfection of Foecundity: for if without that Liquor the
Seed could be perfectly fruitful, the Prostates would not be given to all
Males, but would have been wanting in many as unprofitable and superfluous.

LXI. Here also the Opinion of Whether a threefold Seed.
Wharton is to be rejected, Lib. de Gland. c. 31. and of Antony Everard, who
both allege that there is a threefold different Seed made in diverse parts. The
first and most noble in the Stones; the second more serous in the Seminary
Vessels; and the third more thick and viscous in the Prostates. And that this
threefold matter necessarily concurs to Generation; so that if one of 'em be
absent, the Seed becomes unfruitful and barren. But they affirm this without
any foundation; neither do they consider that the same Seed which is made in
the Stones, in its passage through the Parastates, acquires a greater
perfection; and so some part of it is conveyed through the Vasa Deferentia,
through the occult Extremities of those Parts to the Prostates, but the greater
part of it is carried to the Seminary Vessels, and is there reserved till the
time of Evacuation. Neither is there any other Matter which is to be changed
into Seed, that flows to these Parts, or is concocted or preserved in 'em, than
that very Seed which is concocted and prepared in the Stones. Besides, if there
be such a necessity of this triplicity, how shall the Seed be generated in
Animals, which naturally want Seminary Vessels, as certain in Dogs; and is to
be questioned in Wolves and Foxes: which Animals however have a very fruitful
Seed. This Opinion is by many strenuous Arguments more at large refuted by
Regner de Graef, Lib. de viror. Organ.

LXII. Here two things remain to Two Questions.
be inquired into: First, What is the true ^ction of the Stones? Secondly, How
the Seed, which is thick, can pass through invisible Pores from the Stones to
the Seminary Vessels and Prostates?

LXIII. As to the first, our Opinion The action of the Stones.
from what has been said is plainly made out, that the Office of the Stones is
to make Seed out of the Arterial Blood, and concurring Animal Spirit.

From this Opinion of ours many depart. For Aristotle was the first who taught
that the Stones conduce no otherwise to the generation of Seed, than that they
extend the Seminary Vessels by their weight, for the more convenient
ejaculation of Seed; whose followers are Fallopius, Cabrolius, Spigelius,
Regius, and several others, induced chiefly by these Reasons.

1. Because there is never any Seed found in 'em. 2. Because they have no
Cavities or Ventricles to receive and preserve it. 3. Because they admit no
manifest Vessels through which the Seminal Matter flows in and out. 4. Because
Fish, Serpents, and many other Creatures that want Stones, generate. 5. Because
it is observed that some Beasts have generated after their Stones were cut out:
As Aristotle tells us of a Bull that bull'd a Cow, and got a Calf, after his
Stones were cut out. 6. Because Cabrolius reports Observe. Anat. 3. that at
Montpelier he dissected the dead body of a Man that had ravished a Virgin, in
whom he could find no Stones neither within or without, but only Seminal
Vessels. 7. Because the same Cabrolius saw a young Man that had no Stone, who
nevertheless was married, and had several Children by his Wife.
LXIV. But all these Arguments Reasons against the former Objections.
are easily refuted by the following Reasons:

1. Though the Seed be not ordinarily seen in the Stones, by reason of its
extraordinary thinness, and the extreme thinness of the Vasa Seminifera, or
Seed-bearing Vessels, yet does it not follow that the Seed is therein
generated. For there are no Animal Spirits to be seen in the Brain and Nerves,
by reason of their subtility, yet can it not be thence concluded that they are
not generated in the Brain, or that they do not flow through the Nerves. Now
how the spirituous Seed is in the Stones, is hence apparent, because it passes
invisibly out of them through the narrow straits of the Vasa Deferentia, and is
only plainly conspicuous in the Seminary Vesicles, in which the thicker
Particles of it, being now deposited beyond the power of the concocting Parts,
are more thickened, the better to enwrap the more subtle prolific Spirit, and
prevent its dissipation. In the mean time, that the Seed being invisible in the
Stones, yet may be made visible by Art, Regner de Graef has found out and
taught us by this acute Experiment; who tied very hard the Vas Semen deferens,
or Vessel bearing the Seed in a live Dog; so that no Seed could flow out of the
Testicles, though at the same time the Matter that was to be changed into Seed
flowed in plentifully. In this Dog, after Copulation, he found the Stones and
Parastates so swelled with Seed, that they were distended to a large bulk. 2.
Though they have no manifest Cavities or Ventricles, that proves nothing to the
contrary; seeing there are no Ventricles in the Spleen or Liver, and yet those
Bowels make necessary Ferment for the whole Body. 3. Though they do not seem to
have any Vessels in the Substance it self in sound People, yet that they reach
to the Stones, and pass through 'em, partly may be seen in crazie Bodies,
partly may be proved by Reasons; for they are are nourished, live, and are
sensible, therefore they admit Arteries and Nerves. From that Nourishment there
is something of blood that remains over and above, which is to be remitted to
the Vena Cava, and therefore since they cannot send it but through the Veins,
of necessity they send forth Veins from themselves. Now then, if these Vessels,
which are certainly and necessarily within the said Stones, are not conspicuous
neither in the sound bodies of Men slain, nor cut out of the living bodies of
such as are burst, what wonder is it, if the small whitish Seedbearing Vessels,
or those small Channels through which the Vessels send forth Seed from
themselves into the Parastates, and out of them through the Vasa Deferentia
into the Seminary Vesicles, should be invisible; which nevertheless Regner de
Graef has by his singular dexterity detected and rendered conspicuous. In the
Substance of the Brain there are no Vessels to be found, but several pass
through it, and open themselves, and pour blood into it, as is apparent from
the innumerable bloody little spots that appear in the dissected Substance.
Neither are any passages to be seen in the Nerves, yet that Animal Spirits
perpetually flow through their invisible Pores, is not to be questioned. In
like manner the most subtle Arterial Blood, penetrating through the smallest
Arteries to the inner parts of the Stones, and the Animal Spirits may enter the
Stones through the Nerves, and the spiritous Seed being made, may again issue
forth out of them through other invisible Channels, and so be conveyed through
the Vasa Deferentia to the Seminary Vesicles and Prostates; though the passages
themselves, by reason of their subtility, cannot be discerned by the Eye. 4.
Though some Animals, destitute of Stones, do generate, it does not follow that
the Stones do not make Seed, because those untesticl'd Animals have something
analogous to Stones, wherein their Seed is prepared, and according to their
nature no less prolific than that which in other Creatures is made in the
Stones. Thus in Male-fish we have known that whitish Body, which in our
Language is called Hompsell, supply the office of the Stones; and that they do
copulate is manifest in River-fish, and no less certain in Seafish. Not many
years ago we saw a Whale that was thrown upon our Coast, that had a Yard six or
seven foot long; which Nature, no question had given him for the sake of
Copulation. Hence it is not to be doubted, but that the lesser Fish are also
furnished with Genitals; which though invisible to us, as in Frogs, yet that they
have such Members, is plain by their engend'ring* or else that they have
something else in lieu of Stones. As for Serpents, which as Aristotle says want
Stones, that he speaks not true in all, the Venetian Physicians and
Apothecaries well know, who by the Report of Aemilius Parisanus, distinguish
the Male-Serpents from the Female by the Yard and Stones. And though perhaps
there may be many that want Stones, yet in them, as in Fish, there will be
something found equivalent to supply the place of Stones. 5. That some
Creatures are said to have engendered after their Stones were cut out; this,
(if it be true) proceeds from hence, that before the Stones were cut out, the
Seminary Vessels were filled with Seed, which afterward being deprived of
Stones, they ejected by Copulation into the Womb; and so begot by virtue of a
Seed that was perfected in the Stones before. But such an Act of Generation can
be performed no more than once; for the Vessels being emptied, there can be no
restoration of new Seed, for want of the Stones and new Matter. The last of
which Regius perhaps will deny, who believes that same Seed to be only
generated in the Prostates and Seminary Vesicles, and not in the Stones; and so
though the Stones be taken away, the Generation of Seed may go forward in those
parts. But this Man holds an Opinion contrary to the Experience of all Ages,
which has always taught us, That Men and brute Animals, having lost their
Stones, become altogether barren and unfit for Generation; and that they never
recover new Seed, though the Prostates and Vesicles remain untouched, and
without any damage. Reason also confirms Experience; for out of what Matter
should they make Seed, seeing that when the Stones are cut off, the Spermatic
Vessels are also cut away that bring Blood for the generation of Seed? Seeing
also that the Matter which is to be altered into Seed, can come through no
other parts than through those Vessels first to the Stones, thence through the
Vasa Deferentia to the Prostates and Seminary Vesicles? 6. The first story of
Cabrolius proves nothing against our Opinion, because it ^ges a preternatural
accident that rarely happens: nor is it apparent by the History, whether ever
the Ravisher ejected his Seed. Moreover, if perhaps he did eject, without doubt
there was something in that Person equivalent to Stones, in which the Seed
might be made; which Cabrolius perhaps did not observe, because it was not
either by him discovered or known. John Schenckius writes, Observat. l. 3. that
in Ortelius, a Merchant of Antwerp, there was no Stomach to be found after his
death, but that in stead thereof the first Gut was loose, and very fleshie,
which supplied the office of the Stomach. Now from such a rare Accident as
this, will any Man conclude that the Stomach does not chylifie, but that the
Chylus is made in the Duodene or Iejune Gut? In like manner from this unusual
Accident of Cabrolius, it does not follow that the Stones do not make Seed. 7.
From the latter story of Cabrolius it is manifest, That that same young Man
without Stones, or so thought to be, had his Stones concealed and latent within
his Abdomen, and that he did not procreate without Stones. Thus Bauhinus tells
us of a young Man of about twenty years of Age, who had no Stones pendulous
without, who nevertheless was extremely Lascivious. In like manner I. my self,
not many years ago, knew a Man in Upper Holland, that had more Children than
Money, that had no Stones hanging down in his Cods: and another I knew in the
Territory of Vienna, one of whose Stones is manifestly to be felt in his Groyn;
the other no where: and therefore without doubt it must be latent in his
Abdomen.
LXV. Therefore it must be taken By what power Seed is generated.
for a certain Truth, That the Seed is made in the Stones. Now if any one
should demand by what power, or after what manner the Stones make Seed? I shall
answer, That that same Faculty proceeds from the propriety of their Substance,
their proper Temper and admirable Structure, framed out of the meeting and
complication of small Vessels. Which Faculty I shall then more at large
explain, when he that asks me the Question, shall tell me first by what power
the Stomach, out of the received Nourishments, prepares no other Juice than the
Chylus; the Heart out of the Chylus makes only Blood, and the Brain out of the
Blood makes only Animal Spirits.

LXVI. But seeing that both Stones Whether Males are begot by the right Stone,
Females by the left.
make Seed which is equally good, and that there is no reason why it should be
better in the right than in the left, it is thence apparent in what an Error
they are, who write that Males are begot out of the Seed of the right Stone;
Females by that of the left. The Contrary to which Assertion, besides diverse
Reasons which we here omit for brevities sake, daily Experience makes manifest;
while several People that have had but one Stone, sometimes right, sometimes
left, have had Children of both Sexes. Captain Couper, becoming bursten, by
reason of a violent fall from his Horse, and not being to be cured but by the
taking away of one Stone, had afterward by his Wife several Children of both
Sexes. The same Accident happened to Bernard Z. who when a young Man, had one
Stone taken from him by reason of his being bursten; who therefore was wont to
brag that he could got more Children with one Stone, than others could get with
two: For he was very much addicted to Venery, and had a great number of
Children by five Wives, and several Illegitimates.

LXVII. Now as to the other doubt, How the Seed, which is not only conspicuous
to the sight, but seems to be of a thicker Substance, can issue out of the
Stones through invisible passages, to the Seminary Vesicles and Prostates, that
is done in the same manner in the Seed as in the Blood. For in the Blood some
parts are spiritous and very subtle, others thicker and more viscid, yet all
fluid, which being mixed together, obtain such a thinness of parts, that they
are every where able to pass through the invisible Pores of the Substance of
the Parts. For do but shave the Cuticle slightly, and by and by the Blood*
issues forth through the invisible Pores of the Skin, and so insinuates it self
into other Pores of other parts of the Body. And thus in the Seed the thicker
Particles become so fluid by the thin and spiritous Particles intermixed,
containing much volatile Salt in themselves, as also by the peculiar
Effervescency raised in the Stones, that they may the more easily pass through
the most narrow and invisible passages of the Vasa Deferentia, though the whole
substance of the Seed, when it is ejected forth, seems to be thicker. The thick
and best concocted Seed passes obviously out of the Seminary Vesicles through
the small and scarce visible passages into the Urethra, if the Vesicles be
pressed with the finger, like Quicksilver strained through a thin piece of
Leather; wherefore then may not the Seed, which is now more volatiliz'd before
that condensation which happens in the Vesicles, in like manner pass through
the invisible passages of the Vasa Deferentia? In immoderate Coition,
Experience tells us, That sometimes instead of Seed Blood is ejected, which
Blood if it pass through the invisible passages of the said Vessels, why not
the Seed? Nevertheless I will not in the mean time deny but that the Seed may
be corrupted in the Testicles, upon some Accidents, as unclean Coition, etc.
and be then so coagulated and thickened, that it cannot pass thorough, and then
Tumors in the Testicles happen, and other inconveniences. But how any
spiritous Humor, containing in it much of volatile Salt, can pass through
invisible Pores, we shall show more at large Lib. 3. Cap. 11.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Yard.
I. THE Seed being made in The Yard.
the forefaid Organs, has need of a peculiar Instrument, through which to
inject it into the Womb, to which end Nature has formed the Yard to perform
that Office.

II. Now the Yard (by the Latins The Names
called Priapus, Virga, Mentula, Veretrum, Coals, and Membrum Virile, or
Genitale; by the Greeks (...) and (...) and (...)) is an Organic part primarily
appointed by Nature for the injection of Seed into the Womb, and secondarily
for the evacuation of Urine.

This is that Priapus who is the Tutelar Angel of Nature's Garden.

Whom Virgins and the youthful Maids implore;
But married Women on their backs adore.
That same Inchanter who by his Incantations a thousand ways bewitches the
Female Sex. This is that part which makes ripe Virgins run mad, leads honest
Women oftentimes astray, exhilirates the sad and melancholy, and infuses new
vigor into 'em: That by its fellowfeeling warms the colder sort, by its
ingress weakens the drowsy, and by its rubbing to and fro, makes the torpid
lively and cheerful, and raises 'em to a high pitch of pleasure. That by virtue
of its sweet influence thickens young Maidens about the Hanches, and infuses
wit and knowledge into ignorant Girls, by making 'em the nursing Mothers of
Children.

III. By reason of these wonders Wheth^r a living Creature.
which it works, Plato in his Timaeus, thought the Yard to be a sort of living
Animal, and to have its own Motions and Inclinations, oftentimes rebellious and
opposite to the Rule of Reason, because it is endu'd with an inbred quality so
desirous of Generation. Aristotle also agrees with Plato, who calls the genital
Member an Animal, Lib. de Animal. mot. c. ult. But in regard this longing
Motion is not only inbred in the Yard, but also in the Brain, and is from
thence infused into the Yard: and whereas one Animal cannot be the intregal
part of another; and whereas the Yard is only part of a Creature, completing
the whole with other Parts, it cannot certainly be called a living Creature,
but only a Part and Member of a living Creature.

IV. It is seated at the Root of the Situation, Figure, and Bigness.
Sharebone. The shape of it is oblong, and for the most part round, yet
somewhat flat on the upper side. The thickness and length of it is proper for
the Venereal Act, though in some larger, in others less. Generally however Men of
short stature, who live abstaining from Venery, also such as have large Noses,
are furnished with a larger Yard: And hence it is that the more salacious sort
of Men and Women make a judgment of the largeness of a Man's Yard from the
bigness of the Nose in Men; and by the wideness of the Mouth in Women of the
wideness of their Privities, according to these Verses:

Ad formam Naris noscetur Mentula maris,
Ad formamque Oris noscetur Res Muliebris.
Men's Tools according to their Noses grow,
Large as their Mouths are Women's too below.
Also Fools and the most blockish sort of People are said to have great Tools.
Which Rules however does not always hold, but are subject to many Exceptions.
Spigelius Anat. l. 1. c. 10. judges from the bigness of the Yard, of the Man's
more or less proneness to Venery. A larger Yard, says he, rather fills the Womb
with its bulk, than waters it with a fertile Seed. For it is not so proper for
Venery, which it neither vigorously undertakes, nor long ^tustains; the Muscles
that should stiffen the rigid Spear being enfeebl'd by its weight. A smaller
one therefore, on the other side is more furious and more f^uitful, in regard
that by tickling of the neck of the Womb, it provokes forth the Women's Seed
with more delight, and maintains the Combat longer.

Alexander Petronius, Lib. 2. de Morb. Ital. c. 17. conjectures at the Wit and
Parts of the Person by the bigness of his Yard; and says that a large Tool
demonstrates a thick stupid Scull, like that of the Ass.

V. The Yard consists of a Cuticle, Its Subs^nce.
a Skin, a fleshie Membrane, and its own peculiar Substance: But it has no fat;
for that by its weight and bulk would be a hindrance to the part, and by
stupefying the quickness of Sense, would hebetate and take away a great part of
the pleasure. But its own proper Substance is most convenient for it; not bony,
as in a Dog, Fox, or Wolf; not cartilaginous nor fleshie; but such as may be
relaxed or extended properly for the ejection of Seed. Which therefore four
parts constitute, the Urethra, two nervous Bodies, and the Nut.

VI. The Urethra or Piss-pipe is The Urethra.
the lower part of it; the inside of which is clothed with a thin and
sensible, the outside with a fungous and fibrous Membrane; and it is continuous
to the neck of the Bladder, but not of the same Substance with it: for it is
somewhat more spungy, and of a darker color. So that in the erection of the
Yard it may swell and be distended, and then fall again; which things cannot
fall out in the neck of the Piss-bladder. Moreover, it is separated by
Concoction from the neck of the Bladder, and then the difference of its
Substance most apparently manifests it self. From whence appears the Error of
Andreas Laurentius, who writes that the Urethra is nothing else than the
Substance of the Yard prolonged to the end of the Yard, or the more extended
neck of the Bladder. In the mean while, that it has a great commerce with the
nervous Bodies, is hence apparent, that it swells and flags together with them.

VII. The Urethra is of an equal The largeness.
largeness through its whole passage, except in its forepart near the Exit,
where the Nut is joined with the nervous Bodies; as being the place where it
has a little superficial hollowness, into which the sharp Urine falling in the
Stone, while it is moved about in that place, causes great pain, and is a
shrewd sign of the Stone: and therein sometimes a sharp Liquor stopping in
those that are troubled with the Gonorrhea, causes a very painful Exulceration.

VIII. The Use of it is to conveigh Its use.
the Seed and Urine: to which purpose several small and almost imperceptible
Channels open into it from the Prostates, and two narrow Vessels from the
Seminary Vessels transmitting Seed, of both which we have spoken in the former
Chapter, and the neck of the Piss-bladder; and there is in it also a little
membranous Valve, of which Cap. 20.

IX. Upon the upper part of the The nervous Bodies.
Urethra rest two nervous Bodies constituting the greatest part of the Yard.
Withoutside they are thick like an Artery, also thick and hard; withinside thin
and spungy, of a black color inclining first to red, as it were filled with
blackish Blood.

X. They arise on each side from the Their Rise.
lower parts of the Hipbone, and are fastened to 'em with very strong
Ligaments, and meet together about the middle of the Share-bone, to which they
are fastened with a nervous Ligament underneath, but distinguished one from
another by the coming between of a thin, pellucid and fibrous membranous
Partition. Which Partition, the nearer it comes to the Nut, the thinner it
grows; so that before it comes to the middle of the Yard, it ascends by degrees
from the Urethra toward the back, and thence proceeding a little farther,
insensibly becomes so thin, that near the Nut it is hardly to be seen, and so
those so nervous Bodies seem in that place to embody into one.

XI. The inner spongy part of these The Vessels of the nervous Bodies.
Bodies is framed of little Arteries, little Veins, and little Nerves
interwoven together in the form of a Net, and the spiritous Blood (which flows
thither through the Nerves, running thither out of the Privity) being there
collected, and growing hot with the Itch of Concupiscence, dilates and extends
those parts, as Bauhinus, Riolanus, and Veslingius agree. Fallopius makes no
mention of the Net, but writes that there are two large Nerves, and between as
many dilated Arteries that extend themselves as far as the Nut; in like manner
that double Veins run forth to the nervous Veins; but that generally in the
midst of the separation they meet together in one Vein, which runs through the
middle of the back of the Yard among the Arteries to the Nut: and that these
Vessels arise from much about the fourth Vertebra, the Aorta and the great
Veins that run toward the Thighs, and about the Conjunction of the Sharebones
penetrating through the forked Original of the Yard, are carried to the back of
the Yard. This is a very exact description by Fallopius of the Vessels, of
which the smallest Branches open toward the inner spungy Substance of the
nervous Bodies: and when the Animal Spirits, with the hot Arterious Blood, flow
more plentifully into it out of the Nerves and Arteries, then the Yard grows
hot and extends it self: but when the Spirits cease to flow into it, then the
more copious Blood and Spirits already within it, are sucked up by the little
Branches of the small Veins, and then the Yard falls again. Now that the Yard
is extended by the influx of Blood and Spirits, is easily demonstrated in
Bodies newly dead: for if you immit Water through a Syringe thrust into the
Orifices of the Veins, and then force that Water forward toward the nervous
Bodies, we shall find the Yard to be extended in the same manner, as we find it
stiffen'd in those that are alive by the Influx of Blood and Animal Spirits.
Nevertheless this same inner Substance of these Bodies is not a mere weaving of
these Vessels into the likeness of a Net, as Bauhinus, Riolanus, and Veslingius
assert, but it is a fibrous Substance, composed of innumerable little Fibers,
running and spreading this way and that way, equally restraining the
surrounding Membrane from too much dilatation, and underpropping the little
Vessels that are interwoven betwixt 'em; and so receiving within their hollow
spaces the Blood and Spirits wandering out of the Vessels through that same
Substance. Wharton writes that those Bodies have a glandulous Flesh within,
which after a certain manner fills and stuffs up its little Boxes, and defends
from too much falling and weakness in the Interstitiums of Coition. But Regner
de Graef demonstrates and evinces by Ocular view, that there is no such thing
as that glandulous Flesh in the little hollownesses, which he proves by an
egregious Experiment there at large set down.

XII. At the end of the Yard is the The Glans.
Nut, in Latin Glans, in Greek (...), in which the two foresaid nervous Bodies,
with the Urethra, end. The lower part of which, that exceeds those three Bodies
somewhat in compass, is called (...), or the Crown.

XIII. The Figure of it is somewhat Figure and Color.
like a Top; the color of it, when the Yard is fallen, somewhat bluish; when
erected red.

XIV. It has a Substance peculiar to Substance.
it self, fleshie, soft, spungy, exquisite for its sense of feeling, and
enfolded with a thin Membrane, and hollowed with a long hole before. The
enfolding Membrane is produced from the inner Membrane of the Ureter, which
going out at the hole, turns back and spreads it self over all the Nut, and
endows it with a most acute sense of feeling, which it ought to have first to
that end, to excite the greater pleasure in Copulation, which unless it should
be, hardly any one would mind the Act of Generation, and so the race of Mankind
would in a short time be extinct. Of which thing Andreas Laurentius thus
elegantly writes, Anat. l. 7. c. 1. Hence, says he, the Titillation of the
obscene Parts, and the most exquisite sense of feeling: for who would desire
such a nasty thing as Copulation, embrace and indulge with so much eagerness?
With what face would that Divine Creature Man, so full of Reason and
Consideration, be brought to handle the obscene Parts of Women, desild with so
many Nastinesses, and for that cause placed in the lower part of the Body, like
the Sink? What Woman would throw her self into the Embraces of the Male,
knowing the Terror of her nine Months burden, and the Pain of her Labor,
which many times also proves no less fatal than painful, or endure the Cares
and Toyls of breeding up her Birth, were it not for that incredible sting of
tickling pleasure with which the Genitals are endu'd.

XV. The outward part of the Nut The Foreskin.
is covered with a Praeputium; which is composed of a Cuticle and a Skin, a
little nervous and thin Skin proceeding inwardly from the fleshie Pannicle.

XVI. This toward the lower part, The Bridle.
below the hole, is tied to the Nut with a little Bridle.

XVII. This is that Praeputium or Praeputium.
Foreskin which is cut away by the Jews and Mahometans: and it is a wonderful
thing, what diverse Persons of great Credit have related to us from their own
Observation, that this Part is six times bigger in the Children of Jews and
Turks, than in our Christian Infants: And in some is of a prodigious bigness,
even to the breadth of a Thumb, and hangs down below the Nut, till cut away.
And Veslingius testifies the same thing of the Children of the Egyptians and
Arabians.

This Foreskin in Copulation rolls back from the Nut, and slips below the
Crown, by which means the whole bulk and thickness of the Yard is made equal
without any roughness: and this repeated drawing forward and slipping back of
the Foreskin in Copulation, is thought to increase the pleasure of Women in
Copulation: and hence Riolanus tells us out of Fragosa's Spanish Surgery, that
the Turkish and Ethiopian Women covet more eagerly the Company of Christian
Slaves, than of their Circumciz'd Husbands, as much more delightful.

Sometimes it happens that this Foreskin is so strait and narrow, that it
cannot be slipped from the Nut, which causes the standing of the Yard to be very
painful, while the Nut is straightened within that narrow enclosure: of which sort
of Patients I have met with many in Practice, and cur'd'em by Incision of the
Foreskin in the upper part: the Lips of which Incision are easily cured, but
the Nut will never come to be covered with the Praeputium afterward; which is
not a straw matter; seeing I have known several who have had so short a
Foreskin, that it never covered the Nut, who suffered however no Inconvenience
for all that.

XVIII. The Yard receives all manner The Vessels of the Yard, and first the
Arteries.
of Vessels. It has two remarkable innermost Arteries from the Hypogastrics,
dispersed first through the Nervous Bodies, at the beginning of whose Meeting
they enter, and run along quite the length of the Yard, sending forth little
Branches to the Sides: But the outermost Arteries it receives from the Pudenda.

XIX. It sends forth the inner Veins The Veins.
to the Hypogastrics; and the outer Veins to the Privities.

XX. It has outer and inner Nerves The Nerves.
from the Marrow of the Os Sacrum; of which two, of a moderate Bigness, run
quite the length of the Yard at the lower Part, together with the Arteries and
Veins.

XXI. It is moved with four Muscles: Muscles.
Of which two shorter and thicker, proceeding from the Tuberous Nervous
Beginning of Hip or Hucklebone, not far from the Exit are fastened to the
Bodies of the Yard, and serve for Erection. The other two longer and slenderer
rising from the Sphincter Muscle of the right Gut, and carried underneath, are
inserted into the Sides of the Urethra about the Middle, which they dilate for
the more ready Emission of Seed and Urine, and also compress the Seminary
Vessels seated in the Perinaeum, or Space between the Cod and the Fundament.
And because they hasten forth the little Drops of Seed and Urine, they are
called Accelerators. This Use of the Muscles Regner de Graef absolutely
rejects, and ascribes to 'em a far different Function, that when they swell
they may compress the Nervous Bodies on both sides, and by that means suddenly
thrust forward toward the Nut, the Blood flowing in through the Arteries, and
for some time stop the same Blood being about to flow back again, by
compressing the Veins, thereby to preserve the Yard stiff for some time. But in
regard the Office of the Muscle is only single, by contracting it self to draw
the Part to which it is fastened, and that the Muscle was primarily ordained
for that sort of Action, and whatever happens from it besides that Action of
its own, that happens only by Accident; of Necessity, as in all others, so in
the Muscles of the Yard, that Action is to be held unquestionable, and we must
of necessity maintain that these Muscles cause the Erection of the Yard, and
Dilatation of the Urethra. If by Accident, while they swell, they may somewhat
compress the Nervous Bodies, according to Regner de Graef, that does not take
away their peculiar and primary Action, nor can it be concluded from thence,
that they do not erect the Yard, but only serve for that accidental Use.

XXII. When in the heat of Lust Erection of the Yard.
the Animal Spirits plentifully flow into these Muscles and the two nervous
Bodies, then the Yard stirred with venereal Violence is extended and becomes
stiff. The manner and Bulk of which Extension all Men understand that are not
in the number of bewitched and srigid. But that certainly must be a vehement
Extension beyond the usual Measure in the young Man of two and twenty Years of
Age, which Schenkius speaks of in exercit. An. who without any trouble for half
an hour together carried a Pewter Flagon containing five Measures of Ale, upon
his standing Yard, not without the Admiration and Laughter of those that beheld
it.

XXIII. The Office of the Yard Its Office. Whether any Generation without the
Immission of the Yard.
sufficiently appears from the Definition, and what has been already said.

XXIV. But in regard that Generation cannot be accomplished without the Yard,
by the Consent of all Philosophers and Physicians, the Question is whether it
can be perfected without Immission of the Yard into the Sheath of the Womb?
Reason dictates that it cannot otherwise be performed, since without the
Immission of the Yard, the Seed of the Man cannot be injected into the Womb of
the Woman. Yet Experience has sometimes taught the contrary, viz. That Women
have conceived without the Immission of the Yard. Of which Riolanus gives us
four Examples, one upon his Knowledge, and three upon the Report of others.
Lately, says he, we saw a Woman at Paris, who by means of a hard and difficult
Labor had her genital Parts torn and dilacerated, whose Nymphae, and four
Caruncles were so closely grown together, that they would hardly admit the end
of a Probe, and yet this Woman conceived with Child: For the Womb covetous of
that Food, had attracted within the Lips of the Privities, the Seed that was
shed round about it; as a Heart draws Serpents out of their Holes by the Breath
of his Nostrils. When she was ready to be brought to Bed, the Hole was opened
by the means of a Speculum Veneris, to that wideness which was requisite for
the coming forth of the Birth, and so she was delivered of a perfect Birth safe
and well.

A Second he cites that was seen at Paris in the Year 1609. A Third, he cites
out of Clementina 1. Quest. 15. de Consang. of a certain Maid impregnated, the
Fences of whose Virginity were all firm and untouched. A Fourth he quotes out
of Fabricius's Surgery, of a Woman that conceived merely from the Embraces of
the Man, without the Immission of the Yard. A History like to which of a Roman
Virgin, to whom the like Accident happened, is related by Henry a Monichem in
Lyserus Observat. 13. I my self remember in the Year 1637. being then at
Nimmeghen, that I was sent for to a poor Woman's Labor, living near the Crane
Gate, of whom the Midwife related, that a strong transverse Membrane with a
little Hole in the middle, was extended at the Entrance of the Sheath, so
strong that she could not burst it with her Finger: This hindered the Midwife
from getting in her Finger; and in regard she was much less in a Condition to
receive her Husbands Yard, all wondered how she could be got with Child. Upon
which the Husband confessed that he frequently tried whether he could make way
through that Obstacle when he was at the stiffest, but that he never could
penetrate or get farther in; however that in the Attempt he had several times
spent against that Membrane. Whence I conjecture that the same Seed ascended
through the aforesaid Hole in the Membrane toward the Womb, and by that means
the Woman came to Conceive. I advised the cutting away that Membrane, and
dilating the Part, but her Modesty not willing to admit a Surgeon in the midst
of bitter Pangs of Childbed, the Passage being shut against the Birth by that
sturdy Membrane, she lost both her own and the Life of the Child. By all which
Examples it appears that sometimes there may be a Conception without Immission.
But these are Accidents that rarely happen, whose Examples constitute no Rule,
in regard that Husbands rarely complain of such kind of Obstacles.

XXV. The Parts next adjoining The Parts adjoining.
to the Yard are called by various Names. The Part above is called Pubes; to
the Parts on each Side are given the Name of Inguina or the Groyns: The Part
from the Root of the Cod to the Fundament is called the Perinaeum, from (...)
to flow about, because that Part is generally moist with Sweat. All which
Parts, the Pubes, the Groyns, Perinaeum, Scrotum, to the Circuit of the Podex
in People grown to mature Age abound with Hair, with which Nature would in some
Measure cover the secret Parts. Which Hair both in Men and Women, begins to
appear about the fourteenth Year, when riper Reason distinguishes Vice from
Virtue. Riolanus also observes that in Women who have no Perinaeum; seldom any
Hair grows about the Podex, unless when they come to be very Old.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the secret Parts of Women serving to the Generation of Seed and
Eggs.
I. IN the foregoing Chapters we A prooemial Discourse.
have explained the genital Parts of Men: Order therefore requires that we
should now proceed to the generative Parts of Women, that is, to the
Description of those Parts, that involve Women in a thousand Miseries, enervate
Men a thousand manners of ways, by means of which weak and feeble Women triumph
over the strongest of Men. Parts which have ruined many the most potent Kings,
destroyed Emperors, made wise Men Fools, deceived the Learned, seduced the
Prudent, thrown the Sound into most shameful Distempers, impoverished the Rich,
and vanquished the stoutest Hero's: That hurried holy David into Sin, led away
Solomon to Idolatry, prostrated the Strength of Sampson, and compelled the
stoutest Hercules to the Distaff; for whose Sake Sichem was laid wast, Ilium
ruined, and many Kingdoms have been depopulated: I say to the Description of
those Parts, which alone by some peculiar sorts of Enchantments are able to
drive the Minds of most Men, and those the most Prudent, to Distraction, while
they think these to be the sweetest and the fairest Parts in Women, which are
the most foul and nasty in her whole Body, sordid and diseased Parts; besmeared
with ugly Blood and Matter, defiled with hourly Piss: Smelling of Sulphur and
Puddle-Water, and as if unworthy to be seen placed by Nature in the most remote
and secret Part of the whole Body, next to the Anus and its Dung; being the
Sink of all the Nastiness and Uncleanness of her Body. To the Description of
those Parts in which, though the Barathrum of all the Nastiness of Woman's Body,
the proudest of Creatures, in a short time to ascend Heaven it self, even Man
himself is conceived, delineated, formed and brought to Perfection by the Will
of the first Creator; that afterward calling to mind his abject Beginning, his
sordid and unclean Domicil, he might not swell with Pride, nor erect his
Bristles against his Creator, but with all Humility admire the Omnipotency of
God; and adore his Divine Sublimity and Majesty with due Veneration; and
implore from him another better, more blessed, and eternal Habitation for his
Soul in Heaven, not to be obtained but through his Immense Clemency and Mercy.

II. Now these Parts serving for The Division.
Generation in Women, are twofold; some are ordered for the making and passage
of the Seed or Eggs; and others for Conception.

III. In the making of Eggs sundry The preparing Vessels.
Parts are of great Use: Among which we meet first with the preparing Vessels,
which are twofold, Arteries, and Spermatic Veins.

IV. The Spermatic Arteries are Spermatic Arteries two.
two, proceeding under the Emulgent from the Aorta, and carrying spirituous
Blood to the Stones for their Nourishment and the making of Eggs. The left of
these Arteries Riolanus reports that he himself has seen in many Women to
spring from the Emulgent, which I could never see in my Life. Bartholine also
writes that he has observed a Defect of both. What is to be thought concerning
this Matter has been above declared C. 22. Regner de Graef has accurately noted
how these Arteries descend from their Beginning to the Stones. The Spermatic
Arteries of Women, says he, differ from the Spermatic Arteries of Men, for
those which in Men hasten with a direct Course to the Stones, in Women are
sometimes wreathed into various Curles, imitating the Shoots and Tendrils of
Vines; and sometimes winding from side to side, with a Serpentine Course
approach the Stones, and that more numerously in the one than the other Side,
and seldom are ordered after the same manner as in Men.

With these Arteries descending by the Sides of the Womb, on both sides meets
the Hypogastric Artery; ascending by the same sides with a winding and
serpentine Course, which as some thought, closed together by Anastomoses with
the Spermatic Artery; but quite contrary to all Sense and Reason, when the
Blood of the Arteries forced upward and downward by the Pulsation of the Heart,
cannot be forced upward and downward out of one Artery into another: For so
either two contrary Motions must be granted in the same Artery, which is
absurd; or the Blood of both Arteries would meet one with the other, and so
not be able to flow any farther, but of necessity must stop by the way.

V. The Spermatic Veins are likewise Spermatic Veins.
two, carrying back the Blood that remains after the Nourishment of the Stones
and Eggs, to the Vena Cava. The Right Vein of these two ascends from the
Testicle to the Trunk of the Vena Cava, below the Emulgent, but the Left
ascends to the Emulgent it self, and opens into it after the same manner as in
Men. Saltzman observed these Veins double on both Sides in a certain Woman, as
he testifies in his Observat. Anat. But this happens very rarely.

Both these Vessels are shorter than in Men, because that the Stones of Women
do not hang forth without the Abdomen; and somewhat separated above, but in
their Progress toward the lower Parts, they go joined both together, and are
closely knit together with a Tunicle proceeding from the Peritonaeum.
Nevertheless they do not fall out of the Peritonaeum, but are divided into two
Branches near the Stones, of which the uppermost is inserted into the Stone
with a threefold Root, and in its Entrance constitutes a watery Body, but
somewhat obscure, according to the Opinion of Ruffus Ephesius, to which Dominic
de Marchettis subscribes: The other is divided below the Stones into three
Branches, of which the one goes to the bottom of the Womb; another approaches
the Tube and round Ligament; a Third, creeping through the sides of the Womb
under the common Membrane, ends in the Neck of it, wherein being divided into
most slender Branches, it mixes with the Hypogastric Vessels turned upwards, in
the form of a Net. Through which Passage sometimes the Flowers flow from some
Women with Child, and not from the inner Concavity of the Womb. Which Blood
however at that time, flows not thither so plentifully through the Spermatic
Vessels as through the Hypogastrics.

VI. Besides these little Vasa Sanguifera, Nerves.
there are very small Nerves that run forth to the Stones from the sixth Pair,
and the Lumballs.

VII. Wharton also believes there Lymphatic Vessels.
are some Lymphatic Vessels that run between the rest of the Vessels; which
also was observed by Regner de Graef.

VIII. To the Spermatic Vessels below The Spermatic Vessels adhere to the
Testicles.
adhere the Stones, whose History before we begin, it behooves us to promise a
few things. That is to say, that in our times, wherein many Secrets lying hid
in the Body are brought to Sight by Anatomy, by the same Diligence of
Anatomists, the unknown Ovaries, and Eggs in Women's Privities have been
discovered, by which means it has been found that their Testicles are real
Ovaries, wherein real Eggs are bred and contained, as in the Ovaries of Fowl.

This new Invention easily drew to it self the Lovers of Novelty: But others
desirous of a more accurate View joined with Reason, could not be so easily
persuaded to believe it. But afterward, when upon a clearer Demonstration of
these Eggs, men still took more Pains, it came to this at length, that no
Anatomists of Repute and Experience make any farther Doubt of them.

IX. The first Discovery of these The first Discoverer of these Ovaries.
Ovaries and Eggs we owe to John Van Horn, an Anatomist of Leyden, who
published this his Discovery in an Epistle to Rolfinch, printed 1668. By whom
other Anatomists being incited, resolved to go on with what Van Horn, snatched
away by an untimely Death, could not live to bring to Perfection: Among whom,
Regner de Graef, Physician of Delph, deserves the Laurel, though to the great
Damage of the Art of Anatomy, snatched away likewise in the Flower of his Age,
who put forth his accurate Discovery with elegant Cuts, and his own
Speculations upon the History of Eggs, in the beginning of the Year 1672. Whom,
some Months after followed John Swammerdam, a Physician of Amsterdam, who
nevertheless in his little Book which he calls the Miracle of Nature, contends
most sharply with Regner de Graef for the first little Honor of putting forth
Cuts, and that with so much Heat, that he seems to besmear the whole Ovary
together with the Eggs, not with Honey, but with most bitter Gall, complaining,
that he could not prevent the other with a more early Edition of his Book.

That Women's Stones are ordained for the generating of Seed, though not so
perfect as is the Seed in Men; and that this Seed is infused partly into the
Womb, partly into the Uterine Sheath, from these Stones through the Fallopian
Tubes, and other Passages described by other Persons, in former Ages even till
our times, was written and taken for granted by all Physicians and Anatomists,
so that it was by my self held for a thing not to be controverted: Which was
the reason that I wrested some Arguments against this new Invention of Eggs and
Ovaries, which till then I never saw or heard of. But afterward examining the
thing more diligently, and comparing the Observations of others, printed upon
that Subject, with my own ocular Views, I found that my own, and the Opinion of
the Ancients could not hold: which I am forced to confess in this second
Edition of my Anatomy.

X. These Stones are two, more Their Number.
soft, more flagging, more unequal, and less than in Men. But sometimes
somewhat bigger and softer, sometimes lesser, harder and dryer, according to
the Age of the Party, and her moderate or immoderate use of Venery.

XI. Their Bigness according to Weight and Magnitude.
Diversity of Age Regner de Graef describes by weight. For he observed in
Children and newborn Infants, the Stones to be from five Grains to half a
Scruple; in such as had attained to Puberty, and were in the Flower of their
Age, that the Stones generally weighed a Dram and a half, and so were much
about half the Bigness of a Man's Stone: By this account it appears that the
Testicles of a Man weigh but three Drams: However whether they may be accounted
as the more general Weight or Magnitude in all Men, I will not determine. This
I can tell, that in two Men opened, neither of which were extraordinary great
or large Persons, a Testicle of the one weighed six Drams, and of the other
five Drams: So that I believe there is a great Diversity, ^s to the Weight of
them, in all Mankind. Salmon.
That in more elderly People they became less and harder: In decrepit Persons
that they weigh still a Scruple.

But it is very probable this Rule cannot be so exactly set down, but that it
may suffer some Exception, and that in Women's as in Men's, there may be some
Variety of the Bigness. For in Persons that have died in the Flower of their
Age, according as they have been more or less prone to Venery, we have observed
the Bigness, and consequently the Weight to vary, by our Inspection of dead
Bodies, nor have we found 'em to be alike small in old Women.

XII. They are seated within the Situation.
Concavity of the Abdomen, adjoining on both sides to the sides of the Womb, at
the upper part of the Bottom, in Women that are clear, about two Fingers, or
one and a half remote from it; (but in Women with Child, the Bottom swelling
recedes upwards by degrees) and fastened to it with broad membranous Ligaments.
On the other part, adhering to the Spermatic Vessels, by the help of the
Membranes wherein those Vessels are infolded, about the R^ion of the O^ Ilium,
they stick closely to the Peritonaeum, and observe the same hight with the
bottom of the Womb in Women that are empty, but in Women with Child are removed
more and more from it, ascending by reason of its Increase. But they hang by no
Cremaster Muscle, for that not being pendulous without, they need not those
Muscles to draw 'em up to the upper Parts, so that they are only held and
strengthened by the broad Ligaments.

XIII. Their Figure for the most Their Figure.
part Semi-Oval, in the fore and hinderpart somewhat broad and depressed.

XIV. They are infolded with a The Tunicle.
strong Tunicle, called in greek (...), which some aver to be single and proper
to themselves; others single, but produced from the Peritonaeum; others double
and consisting of one proper, and another common, proceeding from the
Peritonaeum, strongly annexed to the former. But this Division of it into two
Membranes, seems to be a thing hardly to be seen, and difficult to be affirmed.

XV. They differ in Substance very Difference from men's T^icles.
much from the Stones of Men, whereas the one are formed of little seminary
Vessels joined and interwoven one within another with a wonderful Order: But
these consist of Membranes, Vessels, and other Bodies.

XVI. This Substance of theirs, Their Substance.
Regner de Graef has with great Diligence inquired into, discovered and
described in these Words.

Their inward Substance, says he, is composed chiefly of many little Membranes
and small Fibers, loosely united one with another, in the space between which
are found several Bodies, which are within either naturally or preternaturally.
The Bodies naturally found in the Membranous Substance of the Stones, are
little Vessels full of Liquor, Nerves, and preparing Vessels, which r^n forward
almost in the same manner as in Men, to the Stones, and creep through their
whole Substance, and enter the Vessels, in whose Tunicles numerous Tunicles
vanish after they have copiously dispersed and spread themselves, as we find in
the Yolks of Eggs annexed to the B^ch of the Ovary. And, says he, the
Lymphatic Vessels found in the Stones, whether they enter their Substance we
have not so clearly discovered as to affirm it; though we believe it agreeable to
Truth. And he adds farther, That what things are sometimes only naturally found
in the Stones of Women are little Buttons, which like the Conglomerated
Glandules, consisting of many Particles tending in a direct Course from the
Center to the Periferie, and are infolded with their own proper Membrane. We do
not say these little Glandules or Buttons are always in the Stones of Females,
for they are only discovered in 'em after Copulation one or more, as the Female
is to bring forth one or more Creatures into the World after that Copulation.
Nor are they alike in all Creatures, nor in all sorts of Creatures. For in Cows
they are of a yellow, in Sheep of a red, in other Creatures of an Ash Color.
Moreover some few days after Copulation they come to be of a thinner Substance,
and the middle of 'em contain a lympid Liquor included in a Membrane, which
being thrust forth together with the Membrane, there remains a small Hollowness
only in 'em, which by degrees is so entirely defaced, that in the last Months
of Childbearing they seem to be composed of a solid Substance: At length the
Birth being born, those little Glandules diminish, and at last quite vanish.

Now those things that are observed to be Preternatural in the Stones of Women
are watery Bladders, called Hydatides, little stony Concretions, and
preternatural Swellings, called Steatomata, and the like.

XVII. Sometimes other preternatural Preternatural things in Women's Stones.
things are found therein, in a sickly Condition of Body. In the Years 1656,
1658, 1663. I dissected three Women, wherein one Stone exceeded the other the
bigness of a Stool-Ball, and contained a viscous Humor, the other Stone being
sound and well. In several others that were much troubled with the Mother while
they lived, for the most part I found some excess of Bigness indeed, but far
less, than in that before mentioned, and sometimes in one, sometimes in both, a
certain Saffron colored, or yellowish sort of Liquor. Dominic de Marchettis,
in a certain Woman, saw the right Testicle swelled to the bigness of a Hens
Egg, and full of Serosity: And in another the Stones so entangled with the
Ligaments and Tubes, that they seemed to be one fleshy Mass without
Distinction. Bauhinus writes that Stones have sometimes been seen bigger than a
Man's Fist: And there he makes mention of the Dropsy in the Stones, in a Woman
that died of such a Dropsy; out of the swelling of whose right Stone he drew
out nine Pints of Serum, the left exceeding the bigness of a Quince, and
abounding with many watery Bladders. To these he adds the Story of another
Woman, whose right Testicle he found to be as big as a Goose Egg, full of long
white Hair sticking in the Tunicle, encompassed with a kind of slimy Matter
like Suet.

The aforesaid Vesicles which are found in the Stones, according to the Nature
of which Regner de Graef makes mention, were also long before observed by
Fallo^ius, and Caster, but what they were, or to what Use they served they
could not tell.

XVIII. These things afterward Eggs.
Van Horn, Epist. ad Rolfinc. was the first that called Eggs, and that most
convenient Name succeeding Anatomists deservedly retained, seeing that they are
really Eggs, and that while they were yet but very small, there is nothing but
a certain thin sort of Liquor contained in 'em, which is like to the White
contained in the Eggs of Birds, and those Eggs being boiled, it hardens in the
same manner like the White in the Eggs of Birds. Neither does it differ in
Consistence or Savor from this White. Quite otherwise than the Liquor
contained in the Hydatides or watery Bladders (which Fallopius, Vesalius,
Riolanus, and others, erroneously took for these Eggs) which will neither
harden with boiling, nor savor at all like the White in the Eggs of Birds.

XIX. The Eggs of Women and of The Membranes of Eggs.
all other Creatures that bring forth living Animals, are wrapped about with a
double Membrane, one thicker, the other thinner. The one in Conception makes
the Chorion, and the other the Amnion. Now in Creatures bringing forth living
Conceptions, there was no need that the outward Membrane should be hard and
crusty, as in Birds: For in the one it was to be preserved without the Body,
and therefore to be defended by that outermost Rind from external Injuries. But
this hardness was not necessary to preserve 'em while within the Body, as in
which external Injuries are sufficiently kept off by the hot Parts that ly
round about it, the Womb, the Abdomen, etc.

XX. But that Eggs are found in Eggs in all sorts of Creatures.
all sorts of Creatures, is now certainly taken for a thing ratified and
confirmed on all Hands, which as it is accorded as to Birds, Fish, and several
sorts of Insects, so by innumerable Dissections, the same is now as
unquestionable as to Creatures that bring forth living Conceptions. Though
according to the diversity of Creatures, the variety of Bigness is not the same
but very different; and more than that, besides greater already brought to
Maturity, in many there are found several lesser, that would by degrees have
grown to their full bigness. Nor is the Number always the same, but one, two,
three, or more, according to the number of Conceptions which the Creature will
bring forth. But in those Creatures where the matter is not apt and proper for
the Engendering of fruitful Eggs, as in old Women and Mules, or by reason of
the ill Temper and Composition of the Eggs, there they become Barren.

XXI. These Eggs are begot in the The Matter of Eggs.
Stones of Females that bring forth living Conceptions, out of a spirituous
Blood flowing through the preparing Arteries, and an Animal Spirit flowing
through invisible Nerves to the Stones; and leaving in their membranous and
kernelly Substance Matter sufficient and proper for their Generation, while the
rest of the remaining Humors return to the Heart, through the little Veins and
small Lymphatic Vessels.

XXII. From all that has been said, Ovaries.
our modern Anatomists conclude, following their Leader Van Horn, that the
Testicles of Women should be rather called their Ovaries than their Stones; and
that chiefly for this Reason, for that neither in Shape nor Substance, nor in
what they contain they have any Likeness or Resemblance to the Stones of Men.
And hence it was without doubt, that they were accompanied by many unprofitable
Parts; though their absolute necessity appears from the spaying of Women, who,
upon the cutting out of these Parts become no less barren, than Men upon the
cutting out their Stones. But whether Stones or Ovaries, it is not a Straw
matter, so we agree in the main about the thing it self.

XXIII. Now how these Eggs come Various Errors of the coming of the Seed to the
Womb.
to the Womb from the said Ovarie, as being most obscure, requires a stricter
Examination. By what Passages the Woman's Seed came to the Womb from her Stones,
before the discovery of Eggs, several have varied in their Explanation. Some,
with Galen, thought those short Processes extended from the Stones to the Neck
of the Womb, were the Vasa deferentia, or deferent Vessels. Others conjecture
that from these Processes near the Womb, there was derived a peculiar* Branch
to the Neck of the Womb, and so the Seed was carried partly to the bottom of
the Womb, partly to the beginning of the Neck; and that the Seed was evacuated
through the upper way in empty Women, but through the lower way in Women with
Child. Riolanus describes a little hard Vessel from the lower part of the
Testicle, white and very slender, and another like it contained between the
Tube of the Womb, through which two being joined together, in the bottom of the
Womb he alleges the Seed to be poured forth into the Concavity of the Womb;
and lastly from these he believes another little slender Branch to be also
derived to the Neck of the Womb. But more modern Anatomy plainly shows, that
the first were deceived by the Divarication of the preparing Arteries.
Riolanus, by his Inspection of the little Nerves running forth that way: And
that through the first Passages nothing but Blood passes; through the latter
nothing of Seed, but only invisible Animal Spirit.

Spigelius, and Veslingius, asserted that part of the Seed in empty Women
passed through the round or lumbrical Ligaments of the Womb; but that all the
Seed in Women with Child copulating flowed through the same toward the Clitoris
and Sheath, with whom formerly I altogether agreed, because I saw therein,
toward the end, a slimy sort of Liquor like Seed; which might be some flegmatic
Excrement, but afterward I forsook their Party, for that being admonished by
the Observations of others, by a more accurate Inspection, I could not find any
Hollowness in those Vessels through which those Vessels could pass.

That the Seed of the Woman is not injected into the Cavity, but into the
Porosities of the Substance of the womb it self: And the Seed of the Man,
either is not injected into the Cavity of the Womb, or being injected into it,
by and by flows out of it again, as of no use, Harvey's Inspections could never
persuade me; for by that means the Seed of the Woman being enfertiliz'd with
the Seed of the Man, in order of Circulation, might easily be driven through
all parts of the Body, and so be matur'd by any convenient Heat; and be adapted
for the Formation of the Birth.

XXIV. These things premised, The true way of the Seed and the Eggs.
from all that has been said, it is clearly manifest that there is no true
female Seed, as the Women's Eggs and the Vasa deferentia of the Eggs
sufficiently declare; but that the most spirituous Parts of the Prolific male
Seed being injected into the Womb, flows through the Tubes from the Womb to the
Testicles and the Eggs therein contained; and that those Eggs impregnated with
this Seed fall from the Testicles, and are received by the Extremities of the
Tubes annexed to 'em, and so through those by degrees are thrust forward to the
Womb.

XXV. These Tubes, from their The Tubes.
first Inventor were called Fallopian, and are the Vasa deferentia, or deferent
Vessels, wherein Fallopius affirms that he has both found and shown before
credible Spectators most exquisite Seed. Which Tubes he thus describes. But
that same seminary Passage, says he, rises very slender and narrow, nervous and
white, from the Horn of the Womb it self, and when it has parted a little way
from it, it becomes broader by degrees, and curls it self like the Tendril of a
Vine, till it comes near the end; then those Tendril-like Wrinkles ceasing, and
being become very broad, it ends in a certain Extremity which seems to be
membranous and fleshy by reason of its red Color; which Extremity is very much
ragged, and worn like the Edges of a worn Cloth, and has a large Hole, which
always lies shut, those extreme Edges and Iaggs falling down together, which if
they be carefully opened and dilated, resemble the extreme Orifice of a brazen
Tube.

XXVI. These Tubes of the Womb, What the Tubes are.
so called from their crooked Shape, are two Bodies adjoining to the sides af
the womb, hollow, stretched out from the bottom of the womb, and composed of
two Membranes.

XXVII. The innermost of these Their Membranes.
Membranes is common with that which closes the womb withinside, but not so
smooth, and that more about the Extremities than in the middle. The outward
Membrane is common with the external Membrane of the womb, and very smooth,
near to the womb somewhat thicker, but about the Extremities thinner or smaller.

XXVIII. The beginnings of the The Figure of the Tubes.
Tubes running forth from the womb, by degrees are more and more dilated, and
having acquired a remarkable Capaciousness, by degrees become more and more
crooked, and run on with a tendril-like Course till they encompass about the
one half of the Substance of the Stones with the other Extremity; and are very
much dilated about the Stones in the first place, and by and by contracted, and
beyond their Contraction slit into many Iaggs, to which Regner de Graef has
observed* many watery Bladders and hard Stones to stick. Now because that after
the said Dilatation, being suddenly narrowed again, they run to the Stones
with a very slender Course, hence it is that in women at first sight they seem
somewhat remote from the Stones; and only fasten to the Stones by a thin
Interposition of Membranes like the wings of Bats. But in many Creatures they
are found to be very near annexed to the Stones, and in many they half embrace
the Stones. And so the Tubes according to Nature are passable from the Stones
to the Womb, but only once Regner de Graef found 'em preternaturally closed up.

XXIX. They are furnished with The Vessels.
spermatic Arteries, and Nerves from the same, that penetrate the bottom of the
womb.

XXX. Wharton ascribes Valves Whether they have Valves.
to these Tubes, so placed that nothing of seminal Matter may flow from the
Stones to the womb, and affirms that he observed it in the Dissection of a
Mare. Others describe to us Valves placed in a contrary Situation, preventing
the Ingress of things contained in the womb, into the Tubes. But besides
Inspection, Reason teaches us there can be no Valves in these Vessels, when the
Contraction of the Extremities alone is such, that they will not allow the
Passage of any thing through 'em, unless in heat of Lust they be dilated by a
plentiful Flux of arterious Blood and Spirits, and so the spirituous part of
the masculine Seed may penetrate from the Womb to the Stones and the Eggs, and
then again permit these Eggs to pass from the Stones to the Womb.

XXXI Some there are that have Whether distinguished into Cells.
conceited several Cells and various Receptacles distinct one from another, and
from thence have ascribed to 'em the use of the seminary Vessels of Men. But
they were deceived by the sight of the contorted Part; whereas in Tubes
dissected and blown up according to their Length, there is only one Cavity to
be seen, distinguished with no Cells or Valves, and here and there somewhat
unequally dilated.

XXXII. The capaciousness and length Length.
of these Tubes cannot certainly be described, in regard that the difference of
Age, the use of Copulation, and many other Accidents cause an extraordinary
variety in these things.

Through the Tubes therefore the spiritous part of the Male-seed injected into
the Womb, is carried to the Stones, and the Eggs therein contained, and these
Eggs again proceed from the Stones to the Womb. But how these come to the Womb
through these narrow passages of the Egg-Chanel; this, though it be hard to be
described, yet by Similitudes it seems not difficult to be conceived in the
Mind, and explicated.

XXXIII. Many Fruits in their How the Eggs come from the Testicles to the Womb.
Seasons, as Cherries, Damsons, Peaches, Walnuts, etc. whose Seeds, which are
like to Eggs, are brought to such a bigness and fitness, as to be impregnated,
gape of themselves, and so those Seeds included in their Rinds (which Rinds at
first stuck close to their Substance, but afterward loosened from it) fall out
of them; but so long as they cease to be irradiated and cherished by the dewie
Moisture of the Earth, and the Influx of the spiritous Solar heat (which are to
them like the Seed of the Male) they lie hid within their strong Shells or
Cases; but when that enfertilizing Influx of the Earths Moisture, and of the
Solar or other convenient heat, entering through the invisible Pores of the said
Shells or Cases, has brought them to a greater perfection of Fertility; by and
by those Shells or Cases grow soft in their Sutures, and so the Stones, tho
very hard, open, and the Seeds included within grow moist and more juicy, and
dilating themselves, quit the Stones, and so thrust forth the Bud, which is the
first thing formed in order to the new production. And the same thing happens
in Pease, Beans, Wheat, Barley, Melons, Cucumbers, whose Seeds are wrapped up in
a little Membrane instead of a Stone. In like manner Women's Eggs, and the Eggs
of all Creatures that bring forth living Conceptions, as also of Birds, in
their Ovary, by means of the Nourishment brought 'em through the small little
Arteries and invisible Nerves, acquire a just bigness, and such an aptitude
that they may be impregnated by the spiritous part of the Male-seed. Which
Fertility if they acquire by Copulation, and so become sealed with the Seal of
Fertility, the little Cells wherein they are included in the Ovary, grow soft,
dilate and loosen themselves (as the stones of Fruits, willing to quit their
Seeds for new Production, open of their own accords) and so when they can no
longer be contained in those little Cells by reason of their growth, and the
loosning of the Cells, they fall of themselves into the Egg-Chanels or Tubes,
which are relaxed to that degree by the increase of Heat and Spirits, in the
Act of Copulation, that they afford the ripe Eggs an easy passage toward the
Womb, which afterward by the gentle Compression of the Abdomen caused by
Respiration, are gently thrust forward through the Tubes into the Womb it self,
wherein, by reason of the narrow Orifice of the Womb, they are stopped and
detained, there to be cherished by its moderate Heat and convenient Moisture,
and the vivific Spirit latent therein, and infused with the Maleseed, may be
freed from its Fetters, and proceeding from power to act, may begin the
delineation of the Infant Structure. Of which more Cap. 28, 29.

XXXIV. Here arises a very singular A difficulty concerning the Windeggs in
Women.
and considerable Question, viz. When Birds, without the Coition of the Male,
lay their perfect Eggs, (which they call Wind-eggs) whether mature Virgins, and
Women deprived of Men, and without the assistance of Copulation, may not be
able sometime to bring forth their Eggs? It Is very probable that in Women of
cold Tempers, and not prone to Venery, such Accidents will hardly fall out,
seeing there is not in them such a copious afflux of hot Blood and Spirits,
which is much promoted by intent venereal thoughts, to the generative Parts,
that the little Boxes of the Ovary and the Tubes, should be sufficiently
relaxed and dilated for the exclusion and passage of the Eggs: But in hot
Women, itching with Lust, prone to Copulation, and continually intent upon
venereal thoughts, sometimes the Parts may be so relaxed by a copious afflux of
Blood and Seed to the Parts, that the Eggs, when mature, may drop of themselves
into the Tubes out of the Ovary, and through them be carried to the Womb: yet
not so as to be there long detained, because of the Orifice of the Womb's being
open, as not being exactly shut, but when it contains the Man's Seed for
Conception, or else the Birth. But why these same Women's Wind-eggs were never
observed by any Person before, happened, I suppose, from hence, for that Women
do not inspect what things slip out of their Wombs, or know what they are; nor
will they suffer Men to view those things, among which, if there should be an
Egg sometimes, it would not be discerned by them. Besides that by reason of the
tender Skin wherewith it is enwrapt, it might fall out broken, or else be
broken among the Linen with which Women dry up their Uterine Excrements, and so
lose altogether its shape of an Egg, which else would be visible to the Eye.
However, in the mean time this has recalled to my memory, what many years since
a Woman, not of the meanest quality, whose Daughter being about four and twenty
years of Age, wanton enough, yet honest, was troubled with vehement fits of the
Mother, related to me; that is to say, That my Prescriptions, which were
administered to her, nothing availing, her Midwife had many times delivered her
from her present Distemper, and imminent danger of Death, by thrusting her
finger into the sheath of the Womb; with which she kept rubbing there so long
till she brought down a certain viscous Liquor out of the Womb, which was often
accompanied with a certain clear transparent little Bubble, and so the Person
in a Swoon came to her self again. This I laugh't at, at that time when I never
so much as dreamed of Women's Eggs; but afterward it came into my mind, that
that same Bubble was a Wind-egg, of which thing I could now give a better
Judgment, could I meet with such a Bubble that were again to be seen. Moreover,
it is very probable that those Wind-eggs are frequently evacuated by those
salacious Women, who lying with Men, through some distemper of the Seed, never
conceive: For why should their Eggs be less carried out of the Ovary to the
Womb, than the Eggs of those of others that conceive? especially when they
themselves have Eggs which are proper for Fertility, if they were but bedewed
with a fertile Male-seed? which is apparent from this, that some Women lying
with their Husbands never Conceive, but lying with other Men presently prove
with Child.

XXXV. This Conjecture of Windeggs The opinion of Windeggs confirmed.
is yet more confirmed by that wonderful Story related by Bartholine of a
Norway Woman, who after eleven kindly Labors, at length in the Year 1639.
being in Labor with her twelfth Child, brought forth two Eggs with
extraordinary Pains, like to Heneggs, only that the Shell was not so white.
Such another sort of Egg it was that the Woman brought forth, with the usual
pains of Childbirth, in the Territory of Vicenza, in the Year 1621. by the
Report of John Rodias, Cent. 3. Observe. 57. Without doubt the Female-seed
contained in these Eggs, was either unfruitful, or which is more likely, by
reason of the unusual thickness of the Exterior Membrane, the Male-seed could
not penetrate through the over-straitned Pores, to the inner parts of the Eggs,
and consequently not be mixed with the Woman's Seed latent within; and by that
means could not frame any Embryo out of it self; for which reason those Eggs
remained unfruitful like the Wind-eggs of Fowl living without their Males. Now
there are three very remarkable things to be observed in the Eggs of the said
Women. 1. That being little as they are, and sliding out of the Tubes into the
Womb, they should stay there so long. 2. That they should grow to the bigness
of a Hens-egg in the Womb. 3. That the Exterior Membrane should grow so hard,
as to harden into a Shell; which is a thing scarce ever heard of, nor ever
observed by any other Physicians that we read of.

XXXVI. We told ye before that The reason of the relaxation of the Tubes.
the Egg Channels or Tubes were so relaxed by the abundani flowing in of the
Animal Spirits and hot Blood, that through them the spiritous part of the
Male-seed might the more easily be able to penetrate to the Ovary and the Eggs;
and the Eggs themselves might the more easily slip into them, be received by
them, and hastened forward into the Womb. Now that this is the true cause of
this relaxation, no man will wonder* who has tried how strait the Genitals of
honest Women are, if that afflux do not happen; that is when they Copulate
without any Lust, so that it is a trouble to 'em to receive the Yard: and then
again, how loose they are, and with what pleasure they Copulate and admit the
Yard, where that afflux plentifully happens; for I do not speak of Curtizans,
who by the overmuch use, or rather abuse of Copulation, have their Genital
Parts so worn and loose, that they can never be contracted and wrinkled again.
He also that shall consider, how much the same afflux relaxes the Orifice and
Sheath of the Womb, when a large and mature Birth, endeavoring to pass through
those narrow passages, by its kicking and motion afflicts and pains those
Parts, will easily confess the same. For then all those Parts dilate
themselves: the former, to transmit the Eggs; the latter, to exclude the mature
Birth; and that not being endu'd with any Art or Knowledge, but as being
relaxed and mollify'd by a copious afflux of Blood and Animal Spirits, at that
time flowing more to those parts than at other times, through the determination
of the Mind. Which afflux afterward ceasing, all those Parts so vastly
relaxed, within a few days return to their pristine constitution and straitness.

XXXVII. From what has been Births conceived and formed in the Tubes.
said, it is manifestly apparent that Eggs are carried from the Women's Stones
or Ovaries through the Tubes to the Womb. Which is confirmed yet more by the
Observations of some credible Physicians, by whom, in the dissections of
Big-belly'd Women it has been found, that by reason of those Eggs being
detained in the Tubes, through some unnatural cause, and not passing through
into the Womb, that the Births were found in the Tubes, and found therein by
dissection after Death; of which Regner de Graef brings some Examples out of
Riolanus and Benedict Vassalius. Which though we looked upon formerly as
Oldwomens Fables, now upon better knowledge of the Eggs and Tubes, we believe
to be true.

XXXVIII. Besides these Observations, This whole business demonstrated at the
Theater in Amsterdam.
this whole business was plainly demonstrated at the Theater in Amsterdam,
April 15. 1673. by Ocular Inspection, by the Learned Frederic de Ruisch, a most
famous Physician and Professor of Surgery and Anatomy. And this in a Woman, who
in a short time after she had conceived died of some sudden Accident, of whom
he thus writes: Not only the Tube of the right, but also of the left side, were
somewhat more ruddy, thicker, and more distended than usual, to the admiration
of all the Beholders. The Tube of the right side was somewhat writhed, toward
the opening of the Ovary. The Womb, without any foregoing preparation, we cut
up in the presence of a noble Company of Physicians: There we observed the Womb
to be somewhat thicker than ordinary, more ruddy and more spungy, and its
Concavity filled with a Lympid Liquor, upon which there swam the beginnings of
a Birth, of a mucilaginous Substance, which rude Mass was afterward so
dissolved by the Air, that there was no footstep of it to be seen. In that same
rude foundation of a Birth, I could not perceive any shape of Human Body. And
therefore, whether that Foundation were an Embryo, or only an impregnated Egg,
I much question. It Is also worthy observation, That the hollowness of the Ovary
out of which the Egg had fallen, was not only of a deep red color, but also
spungy, as we find in the Womb, the Birth being newly delivered: so that to me
the Egg seems to be cherished in the Ovary, as the Birth in the Womb. Moreover,
I cannot but wonder at what I find also in other ingravidated Bodies, why both
the Spermatic Veins, are so much wider than the Arteries: For if the Arteries
should exceed the Veins it would be no wonder, seeing that the Birth requires
much Nourishment. I found the Orifice of a Womb not closely shut within, as
some Authors will have it, but gaping more than usually, etc.

XXXIX. From this demonstration How the Substance of the Ovary becomes spungy
and open.
we may clearly be convinced, not only how the Substance of the Ovary, ready to
quit the Egg, becomes spungy and open, but also how the Fallopian Tubes,
carrying the Egg from the Ovary to the Womb, at that time became more thick and
patent. But why the Spermatic Veins running through the womb, exceed the
Arteries, we shall give the Reason Cap. 27. but why he found the Orifice of the
womb gaping at that more than usual rate, is beyond mine and the common
Observation of other Anatomists. Only this may be said, That being opened to
receive the Egg into the womb but a little before, the sudden approach of
Death gave it not leisure to close again; or being relaxed by the sudden and
disorderly Commotion of the Spirits, continued open.

XL. In a Woman's Egg (for I Three things to be considered in Women's Eggs.
speak not of the Eggs of Brutes) three things are to be considered: 1. Its
External little Skins, which after Conception constitute the Chorion and
Amnion. 2. The plentiful Humors or Liquors contained in those little Skins. 3.
The small Crystalline Bubble appearing in a fertile Egg already conceived in
the Womb. Of all which in their due places.

XLI. After this History of Eggs, Whence the pleasure of Copulation*
one doubt remains; that is, If the Eggs are carried through the Tubes into the
Womb, and nothing else of Seed flows from the Stones, whence proceeds that
pleasure which Big-belly'd Women have in Copulation, at what time no Eggs are
carried anew to the Womb, in regard the Extremities of the Tubes are so exactly
shut? as also in such as have their Womb cut out for the cure of some Disease,
particularly the falling down of the Womb? Also in Women of fifty, who cease to
have any more Eggs in their Ovaries? Moreover, whence proceeds that Seed which
flows from Women in Copulation into their Sheath, and bursts forth in the Night
in Lascivious Dreams? I answer, That that same great pleasure in Coition does
not arise from the Eggs passing from the Ovary to the womb, but rather from the
Eruption of that Seed (if it may be called Seed) which proceeds from that
glandulous Substance encompassing the Bladder, which Seed is equally in
Big-belly'd and Empty-belly'd grown women, and in such as have their wombs cut
out, and may break forth with Pleasure into the Sheaths, as well in Nocturnal
Dreams as otherwise. But we must understand that the pleasure of women in
Copulation, proceeds not so much from the bursting forth of the said Seminal
Matter into the Sheath, as from the rubbing of the Clitoris, as it is with Men
by the rubbing of the Nut.

XLII. There remains to be enquired, Whether Women may be castrated, and have
their Stones cut out?
Whether Women may be castrated, and have their Stones cut out? I answer, That
Women cannot be castrated without great hazard of their lives: for the small
Guts must be cut on both sides, which is very hazardous, in regord that upon
the least wound of the Abdomen, and especially of the small Gut penetrating the
Abdomen, the Guts presently burst forth. Which wounds in this case must be of a
good bigness, for the fingers to be thrust in, the Guts to be removed, to the
end the Stones may be found and brought forth. Besides, upon the cutting off
the Stone, the Spermatic Vessels are also cut away, from whence it would be
very hard to stop the flux of Blood into the lower Belly; which appears from
hence, that it is a hard matter to stop the blood in men, whose Vessels may
however be much more conveniently bound or cauteriz'd. For though, as Galen
testifies, Sows might be spay'd in Cappa^ocia and Asia, and the same thing be
practiced among the Germans and Westphalians: though Bitches in the same manner
may be spay'd; yet the cutting out of women's Stones is not to be attempted with
like security; for Mankind is not to be exposed to the same dangers with brute
Beasts, among which many of the Females dye when spay'd. And therefore I wonder
that Platerus, a man of great Judgment, should think that women might be spay'd
as easily as brute Beasts, not considering the difficulty and cruelty of the
Operation, accompanied with a thousand hazards, which enjoin all men,
especially Christians, to abhor such a wicked piece of Villainy. Though Histories
assure us that it was a Cruelty most barbarously and ignominiously practiced
upon women in former Ages. The Creophagi, a People so called in Arabia, as
Alexander ab Alexandro testifies, not only gelt their men, but castrated their
women, according to the Example of the Egyptians, who were wont to spay their
women in that manner. Xanthus, cited by Athenaeus, relates that Adramytes King
of the Lybians, spay'd his women, and made use of 'em instead of Eunuchs: and
Hesychius and Suidas accuse Gyges of the same Crime.

XLIII. Wierus makes mention of Another sort of Castration.
the other sort of Castration, by cutting out a woman's womb, by which she is
made unfit for Conception; which he relates fell out very successfully to a
certain Sowgelder, who suspecting his Daughter to be guilty of Adultery, spay'd
her by cutting out her womb. But this way of Castration is no less hazardous
than the other.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Womb and its Motion.
HAving explained the Parts that serve for the making and evacuation o^ the
Eggs and Female Seed, we come now to those where Conception is finished, that
is to say, the womb and its several parts.

I. The Womb, which is also called The W^.
Matrix, and Vulva ( by the Greeks (...) and (...), and sometimes (...)) is an
organic part serving for Generation, seated in the middle of the Hypogastrium,
Its (...).
between the Bladder and the right Gut, in the strong Pelvis, formed out of the
Os Ilium, the Hipbone, the Share, and Os Sacrum. Which Pelvis is larger in
women than in men. And in time of Labor, the strong Ligaments about the Os
Sacrum, and Os Pu^is, being loosened, and the Coc^yx, or last portion of the
Backbone giving way, may yet be further stretched to release the Birth out of
the straits of the Uterine Prison.

II. The Substance of it in Virgins Its Substan^.
is white, nervous, thick, and compacted: in women with Child somewhat spungy
and soft.

III. It has two Membranes. The Its Membrane.
outermost doubled and strong from the Peritonaeum; smooth, and smeared over
with a watery Humor, by means of which Membrane it is fastened to the
Intestinum Rectum, the Bladder and the adjacent lateral parts. The innermost,
which is proper to it, is fibrous, and more porous, rising from the inner
substance of the womb, and firmly fastened to it, rough in the larger Cavity,
about the Neck, full of wrinkles or surrows, and full of little Pores.

IV. Between these Membranes is The space between the Membranes.
found a fleshie and fibrous Contexture, which in Big-belly'd women, by reason
of the great quantity of Nutritive Humors flowing to it, swells together with
the said Membranes, so that the more the Birth grows and increases, the more
fleshie, fibrous and thicker the womb grows, which in the last Months of a
woman's Time equals the thickness of a Thumb, and sometimes of two fingers.
Neither does this thickness proceed from the Humors penetrating into the
Porosities of the womb, as many believe; but is a real thick flesh, which
afterward, like Muscles, serves for the expulsion of the Birth.

Such a sort of fleshie Substance of the womb in November. 1653. I publicly
showed in our Anatomy Theater, in the body of a woman dying in Childbed, twelve
hours after her decease; and not long after in another woman that died in
Labor, together with the Child. But this same increased flesh, after the birth
is delivered, the blood and humors flowing out presently with the Birth, or
afterward, drys up again, and so the womb returns to its pristine shape and
bigness.

V. The bigness of the womb is not The bigness
very considerable; but varies according to Age, and the use of Copulation. In
Virgins it is about two fingers in breadth, but seldom above three fingers in
length; which bigness is some what extended in those that make use of men, and
is still bigger in fruitful women that have born many Children. How far it
increases in Big-bellied women is known to every body.

VI. Regner de Graef distinguishes Its weight.
its bigness according to the difference of Age, by weight.

In newborn Children, says he, we have observed the womb to have weighed a
dram, and sometimes a dram and a half. In old Women and Virgins growing Ripe,
it is of that bigness as to weigh from an Ounce to an Ounce and an half. In
stronger Women, that have had many Children, and use frequent Copulation, it
seldom exceeds two Ounces.

But a most monstrous and diseased womb was that which Regner de Graef in the
same place tells us took up the whole Concavity of the Abdomen, and weighed at
least forty pounds.

VII. The shape of it resembles a Its shape.
Pear, or rather a Surgeons ^ucurbit; in Virgins somewhat flat before and
behind; in such as have had Children, more round.

VIII. The hollowness of it is but Its hollowness.
small, as being no more than in women not with Child, especially in Virgins,
and will contain a good big Bean; but after Conception increases and dilates it
self with the whole womb. This is not distinguished with any Cells, as in most
brute Beasts that bring forth living Conceptions; but only by a future, or
rather certain Line extended in length, and drawn along only in the inner part
of the fleshie Tunicle, and so by it is divided into the right and left part;
like the Line which appears in the outside of the Scrotum in men. Which
Concavity however is so ordered, that it is not equal and altogether round, but
toward the right and left side. As it were extended into a Horn, being somewhat
longer toward the little Orifice or Mouth of it, so that it is almost
Triangular. It is very rarely seen that this Cavity is divided by a middle
Separation, though Riolanus brings two Examples of such a Division. In this
Cavity there settles for the most part an oily kind of Liquor in empty women,
defending that secret Shrine of Nature from Drought, and preserving it prepared
for necessary Fruitfulness.

IX. Those parts that seem somewhat The Horns.
to swell from the sides of the bottom, are called the Horns of the Womb. But
these are more manifest in Beasts that bring forth living Conceptions, whose
Womb being parted into two parts, is divided into two apparent and long Horns,
distinguished withinside into little Cells. But it is seldom seen that such
Horns are found in Women, as Silvius found in a certain Maid, and of which
Schenkius cites the Example out of Bauhinus, Observat. l. 4. Riolanus refuses
to call these Horns the swelling Extremities of the womb, but the Tules;
wherein Van Horn and Swammerdam seem to take his part. But what is vulgarly
asserted concerning these Horns, my opinion is, should rather be understood of
the womb it self, than of the inner Cavity of the womb: For a woman's womb is
not horned, but truly round and somewhat flat. But its Concavity is extended
both to the right and left, after the manner of a Horn, as is manifest by the
Dissection of it

X. It is fastened to the neighboring (...) connection.
parts by the neck and bottom. The neck by means of the Peritonaeum, is
fastened before to the Pissbladder and the Share-bones, behind to the
Intestinum Rectum and the Os Sacrum; and about the Privity joins with the
Podex, loosely adhering at the sides to the Peritonaeum. The bottom, as to its
own Substance, is fastened above to no part, that its extension may be the
freer.

XI. At the sides it hangs tied with Its Ligamenis.
two pair of Ligaments. Of which the first, which is the uppermost, resembling
in shape the wings of Bats, is strong, broad, membranous, loose, soft, and
being interwoven with fleshie Fibers, proceeds from the Peritonaeum doubled in
that place (whence Vesalius and Archangelus imagine both parts of the sides to
be so many Muscles) and being fastened to the Tubes, Stones, and Protuberances
of the bottom, joins the Matrix to the Ossa Ilii, which being immoderately
loosened or broken by any outward violence, the Womb descends into the Cavity,
and sometimes slides forth; at least, if the Substance it self of the womb
become loose also through any Accident; which though in perfect health it be
thick and compacted, in a sickly Constitution of body it relaxes, like the
Scrotum in men.

XII. Soranus and Aretaeus assert, The opinions of Soranus and Aretaeus about
the falling down of the Womb, refuted.
That not the whole womb, but its internal fleshie Tunicle only, with the
primary Substance of the womb, slips down to the Groyns, the outward membranous
Tunicle, which is firmly fastened to the neighboring parts remaining whole.
But because this Opinion presupposes a wonderful dilaceration of the body of
the womb into two parts, the outermost and innermost, which is altogether
impossible, it is to be held for most certain that the innermost fleshie
Membrane of the Womb, cannot descend into the Fall, but that of necessity the
whole body of the womb, turned upside down, slides from its place.

VIII. This falling down of the womb, Whether the Womb can fall.
by all Physicians hitherto granted, Theodore Kerkringius an eminent Anatomist,
now strenuously denies; and writing upon that Subject, bitterly inveighs
against Andrew Laurentius, Veslingius, and Bartholine, as if they, among
others, had erroneously judged of this matter, and says that a certain
Relaxation of the Neck, which hangs forth without the Privity, causes all these
idle Mistakes. But let the learned Gentleman recant his words; for, because he
never saw a fallen womb, he over-rashly and petulantly derides others that have
been eyewitnesses of the thing; and most excellent Physicians, as to that
matter, both in Practice and Theory, much more skilful and conversant. Let him
read in Carpus, the Story of a woman whose womb did not only slip down without
the Privity, but was also cut away. Let him read in Paraeus the Example of a
womb fallen down, and cut off by Paraeus himself. Let him also read Hildan's
Cent. 4. Observe. 60, 61, 62. where he will find three Examples of a womb fallen
down, related by a Person of exact Credit. Let him read Dominic de Marchettis,
Anat. c. 7. that he himself three times saw a womb fallen, replac'd it, and
cured it. Let him read many more such like Examples in Avenzoar, Matthew de
Gradibus, Nicholas Florentinus, Benivenias, Christopher a Vega, Paulus
Aegineta, Mercurialis, Bott^n, Lice^, Senn^rtus, and othees. All which Pers^ns,
and many others, were not so stupid, nor so blind, but that they knew a womb
when it was fallen. To these let him add my own Testimony, who in a certain
young woman saw her womb hang out of the Cavity to the breadth of two fingers,
which I handled with my own hands, and with a proper Instrument thrust back
into its place, and afterward so well cured the Patient, that the same part
never fell afterward. Besides that, all that has been said is yet more
confirmed by the Doctrine of Hippocrates, who Lib. 2. de Morb. Mulier and in
several other places plainly teaches, that the womb does sometimes slip forth,
and also adds the Causes and the Cure of such a falling down; with whom Galen
also agrees. Reason also confirms the Experience of this thing: For if a
copious affluency of cold Humors may so relax the little joint of the Hip,
that the head of the Thigh Bone shall fall out of its Cavity, called
Acetabulum, what wonder is it that an affluency of the like Humors should so
relax the womb it self, and its Ligaments, that not being able to restrain it,
the womb should fall down? Hence we find that the same Accident happens in
moist places, especially to women that are of a cold and moist Temper, and
troubled with a redundancy of flegmatic Humors, in which the womb sometimes
descends to the Orifice of the Privities, and sometimes slips down all of it
without.

As to what Kerkringius says, That it is not the womb it self, but a certain
relaxation of the Neck or Sheath; I would ask him this Question, Whether the
womb remaining in its proper place, the sheath can be so much extended downward
as to hang forth without the Privities? And therefore for the future, as to
those things that he has not seen, let him believe those that have.

XIV. Here another Question arises, Whether the Womb be inverted in the fall.
Whether the Womb in the fall be turned upside down? That it must of necessity
be inverted, and cannot otherwise slip forth, Reason teaches. Yet Regner de
Graef thinks this impossible in Virgins, by reason of the extraordinary
narrowness of the Uterine Orifice. But that it is possible only in Childbearing
women, when the Secundine sticking too close, is over-violently pulled by an
unskilful Midwife. Indeed I believe it to be true, that the womb rarely falls
in Virgins; but that it happens to other women at other times than when they
bear Children, I my self have seen; for which I could produce the Examples of
many honest women, if Modesty would permit me: And therefore let the Example by
me already alleged suffice, where the womb hung forth of the woman's body
inverted.

XV. The other lower pair of Ligaments, The other pair of Ligaments whence they
proceed.
round like Worms, somewhat ruddy, proceed on both sides from the sides of the
Womb like Muscles, and so descends to the Groyns; (whence Riolanus thought the
Womb to be wrapped about with the Cremaster Muscle, and Vesalius calls 'em the
Muscles of the Womb) then passing through the doubled Production of the
Peritonaeum, and the Tendons of the oblique Muscles of the Abdomen are
presently strengthened with fleshie Fibers proceeding from the Os Ilium, and
being reflex'd above the Share-bones, approach the Clitoris, and there end.
Some Anatomists assert, That the remaining part of this Pair is extended
farther into the fatty inter^al Membrane of the Thigh, and with that descends
to the Knee, or according to some, descends to the Foot; which Riolanus thinks
to be the reason why women in the first Months of their Breeding complain of
pains within their Thighs. But they were deceived, in not observing that the
said Membrane being extended to the Knee, does not proceed from the Lumbrical
Ligament, nor has any communion with it, but that it plainly arises from the
Cartilaginous Ligament of the Os Pubis or Share-bone. These Ligaments loosl^
bind the bottom of the womb in the parts before and behind. Bauhinus observing
loose Pores within 'em, and sometimes a kind of viscous Humor in the lower
part, believed that they served for two uses; partly to do the office of
Ligaments, partly to evacuate through those Pores the superfluous Humors of
the Genitals. Spigelius likewise observing that viscous Humor, judged it to be
the Seed, which in women, as to some part of it, is carried through these
Ligaments, which he thinks to be the true Vasa Deferentia, to the Uterine
Sheath and the Clitoris. The same viscous Humor after that led me astray into
Spigelius's Opinion, from which afterward I revolted for the Reasons mentioned
in the foregoing Chapter. Veslingius dreamt that beside the Seed something of
uncleanness gathered about the womb, and was evacuated through these Ligaments;
which nevertheless is altogether impossible, in regard they have no hollowness
capable to tra^smit both Seed and such an excrementitious filth: neither is it
probable that those two Substances are ever mixed or flow together through any
other passages, seeing that the Seed must of necessity be contaminated and
corrupted by that nastiness. Erro^eously therefore does Andreas Laurentius
assert, That these round Ligaments are sometimes so dilated, that they cause
the Rupture called B^bonocele; notwithstanding that they can never be dilated
so wide as to receive the Intestine or Caul. But the Rupture Bubonocele is
occasioned in women as in men, that is, when the Gut or Caul slides down into
the dilated or broken Production of the Peritonaeum wrapped about these
Ligaments, and accompanying and embracing 'em without the Abdomen to the
Grovns, as in men it includes the Spermatic Vessels within it self.

XVI. The Womb is furnished with Its Vessels.
several Arteries and Veins, far more numerous and bigger, and more winding
than the Sheath. Nevertheless the Arteries are much more numerous than the
Veins, for the Veins are very few, in respect of the Arteries; and those
chiefly dispersed thorough the outward parts of the womb. Whence that of
Aristotle, that from the greater Vein, no Vein is derived to the womb, but from
the Aorta many and very thick. But in these words the Philosopher does not deny
but that some Veins run along thorough the Superficies of the womb; which every
man that has eyes may see; but he means that very few or none of those Veins
enter the inner Substance of it, but many Arteries do it.

XVII. The Arteries that creep Arteries.
through the upper part of it, descend from the seminal Vessels before they
form the Vasa praeparantia, or preparing Vessels: But those which disperse
themselves through the middle and lower Part, proceed from the crural and
hypogastric Vessels of the same Artery. There is such a Conjunction of these
Arteries, that they can hardly be distinguished one from another, by reason of
their Ends gaping into Branches both of the one and the other: When the
Spermatic or Hypogastric Arteries being filled with Breath, presently the
Arteries of the other side, for the most part swell together, at least in the
same manner as the Arteries of the Sheath.

XVIII. The upper Veins ascend to Veins.
the Vena Cava, and empty themselves into it near the Emulgent: the lower enter
the Hypogastrics.

The upper Arteries are vulgarly said to meet together with the upper Veins,
and the Lower, with the lower Veins, by various Anastomoses: But as yet I could
never observe those Anastomoses: This only I observed, that the little Veins
arising from the Substance of the womb, are intermixed one among another, and
mutually open one into the other; but that none are conjoined with the Arteries
by Anastomoses; and so that the Arteries only meet here and there by
Anastomoses.

For the Arteries with their Orifices enter the very Substance of the womb,
into which they pour their Blood, which is every way distributed therein
through winding Channels and little Pipes: which some thought to be the Cavities
or Glandules called Cotyledons, to which, in Conception, the Placenta or
Uterine Liver sticks, in which at that time they gape, and pour Blood into it
to be prepared for the Nourishment of the Birth; and also contribute copious
alimentary Blood to the very spungy Substance of the womb, seated between both
Membranes, the which causes the womb at that time to swell to a bigger Bulk,
and so as the Birth grows, the womb's Habitation also swells. To which end at
that time large and turgid Vessels are to be seen, by reason of the plenty of
Blood which they contain more at that time than before Conception.

XIX. For at such time as women The cause of the flowers.
are not with Child, the Blood which superabounds every Month at certain
Periods, is forced in great quantity through the Arteries to the womb, with a
certain kind of Effervescency; and when as there are but few Veins in the inner
Substance of it, through which the Circulation of so much Blood can be
conveniently made, and the Orifices of the said little Pipes are now soft and
smooth, hence it comes to pass that the redundant Blood, which by reason of its
quantity cannot be suddenly circulated, as being superfluous and troublesome to
Nature through its quantity, flows forth through the gaping and open Orifices
of the Pipes, also through the ends of the Vessels ending in the neck of the
womb. But in such women wherein those little Pipes are closer shut, in them
their flowers flow only through the ends of the Vessels ending in the Neck or
Sheath of the womb; or else stop, if that fermentative quality be not yet come
to such a perfection, as to raise such an Effervescency in the Blood.

XX. Now what this Uterine Ferment What is the Uterine Ferment.
is, and where it is generated, which provokes that Effervescency of the Blood
at prefixed monthly periods in empty women, but very seldom in women with
child, has been but little inquired into as yet. We shall suspend our Judgment
in this particular, by reason of the obscurity of the thing; and yet we leave
it to be considered, whether the fermentaceous Matter in the Spleen, Liver,
Sweetbread, and Glandules and other parts, and carried with the Blood through
the Arteries to the womb, and there some part of it being left, and collected
together by degrees (for you shall always find a viscous slimy Humor in the
dissected wombs of empty women) gains some peculiar quality, from a certain
specific property of the womb, which provokes that specific fermentation (as
the same Matter is endu'd with a peculiar quality in the Stomach, to extract
the Chylus out of the Nourishment) by means of which, that Humor in healthy
People being matur'd to that volatility in a Months space, to boil of it self,
the whole body of the woman, but especially those parts next the womb are put
into a Commotion, and the superfluous or boiling blood, dilating the swelling
Orifices of the Vessels, is thrust forth; and that same quality or just
volatility of the said fermentaceous Humor ceasing, the menstruous evacuation
also ceases; as in women with child, and women that have lain long sick.

XXI. Aristotle not understanding Aristotle's Opinion.
this ferment of the womb, and the thence proceeding effervescency of the
Blood, asserts that women's flowers are provoked by the influence and motion of
the Moon. Which Opinion, with his leave, stands upon no Foundation, or rather
is plainly contrary to Reason: for according to that Opinion, all women would
have their flowers at the same time, and they would only flow at that certain
time, wherein the Moon being moved to that determined point of Heaven, caused
that specific influence; whereas during the whole monthly Course of the Moon,
there is not any day, nor any hour, wherein here and there over the whole world
innumerable women are not troubled with their flowers.

XXII. Vain is also their Opinion, Whether from the redundant blood?
who believe the monthly Courses to be moved by the redundant blood collected
in the Vessels of the womb; in regard those Vessels are not able to contain so
great a quantity of blood as is evacuated every period. Or if they should
collect it by degrees, and so reserve it for a Month, they must be strangely
swelled, whereas it is apparent by inspection in dissected Bodies, though
plethoric, dying at the very instant of their monthly evacuations, or when it
began to happen, that there appears then no more unusual swelling of the womb
than at another time. Add to this, that in lean women frequently given to fast,
in whom there is no such redundancy of blood, nevertheless the flowers have
their usual Course. Lastly, the continual circulation of the blood does not
permit such a stagnation in the Vessels of the womb, which if it should happen,
the blood would there be in danger of a sudden Putrefaction, and would afflict
the woman long before the time of her Evacuation with most terrible Symptoms
and Effects; whereas the menstruous blood is not putrid, not differs in it self
in goodness from the rest of the blood. This is confirmed by the testimony of
the famed Hippocrates. But the blood, says he, gushes out as from a Sacrifice,
and is quickly congealed, if the woman be healthy. Which Aristotle also asserts
in these words; And those which are called flowers gush forth, which is as it
were the blood of a Creature newly killed. I say, of it self; because, if in
some it be vicious, sharp, noysom to the smell, or otherwise corrupted when it
is evacuated, it has not that imperfection in it self, but contracts it from
the vicious nastiness bred and remaining in a distempered and sickly womb, or
else at the time of the menstruous Effervescency flowing from other parts to
this same Sink, together with the blood, and vitiating the blood by its
mixture. And this is the meaning of Hippocrates, where he says, and it corrodes
the Earth like Vinegor, and gnaws wherever it touches the woman, and
exulcerates the womb. Certain therefore it is that the monthly Courses are
provoked into motion by the foresaid Effervescency of the blood fermenting in
the Vessels of the womb. Which Effervescency, if sometimes it be occasioned,
not by the foresaid Uterine ferment alone, but by other Causes, then sometimes
it happens that the Courses are still in motion beyond the ordinary Period, as
often happens in the Small Pox, malignant and burning Fevers, etc.

XXIII. There also belong to the upper Nerves.
parts of the womb small little Nerves, rising from the inner Branch of the
sixth Pair; to the middle and lower parts, little Branches proceeding from the
Nerves of the Os Sacrum.

XXIV. The office of the womb is to Its Office.
receive the Seed of the man, and to preserve and cherish the woman's Eggs, till
the Birth be formed, and being brought to maturity, and wanting more Air, to
thrust it forth into the world. Moreover, it is ordained for another secondary
use, that is, the Purgation of the woman's body. Which two offices, Aretaeus
comprehends in three words: A woman's womb, says he, is useful for Birth and
Purgation.

XXV. The womb is therefore a (...)
part necessary for Generation; but thence there is no Conclusion to be drawn,
that it is a part necessarily conducing to the life of a woman; seeing that a
woman way live without a womb; as is apparent in them, whose womb slipping out,
is not only ulcerated and corrupted by the external cold, but also cut out, and
yet upon the growing up of a Cartilaginous Substance consolidating within the
hole of the womb cut off, the same women have lived in health for many years;
and more than that, have lain with their Husbands, and almost with the same
pleasure, as if they had a womb; of which there are sundry Examples cited by
several Physicians of great Reputation.

XXVI. But seeing that the womb is Whether it forms the Birth.
a part most necessary to Generation, wherein the Conception ought to be made,
and the Birth formed, the Question is, Whether by any specific power or faculty
the forming of the Birth be there brought to perfection. To which I answer
Negatively; for that the forming power is in the Seed, and the womb contributes
no more to the Generation of Man, than the Earth to the Generation of Plants;
that is to say, it affords a secure Harbor for the Seed and the Eggs;
temperate and sufficient nourishment.

XXVII. Now though it were held for Whether the Birth may be formed out of the
womb.
a thing undoubted and unquestionable by all the Ancients without exception,
that the Office of conceiving wholly belonged to the womb, and that the Birth
could not be conceived any where out of the womb; yet in this Age it has been
discovered and observed by famous Men, though it rarely happen, that the Birth
has been conceived in the Uterine Tubes. But that same Story seems incredible
related by Philip Salmuth, of a certain man that ejected his Seed by a Lip
Copulation into his Wives mo^th, who upon that conceived a Child in her
Stomach, and afterward vomited it up as big as ones finger: as if a Child
could be conceived out of the Seed of the man without the woman's Egg; and that
in the Stomach too, full of fermentaceous Juices and Aliments to be concocted.
I admire that Philip Salmuth, a Learned Man, should give so much credit to an
old Woman's Fable, as to think it worthy to be inserted among his Observations.
Nor does that Story of a Child born at Pont a Mo^sson, conceived and formed in
the middle of the Abdomen, and found there after the death of the Mother,
deserve more credit. Which Story was printed by Laurence Strasius at Dormstadt,
in the Year 1662. with the Judgments of several famous Physicians and
Professors upon it: Which Story I know not how it can be true, unless you will
say, that perhaps the Egg being before impregnated by the dew of the Male-seed
in the Ovary, and ready to fall out of the Stones into the Tubes, coming by
chance to the Borders of the Tubes, should slip into the Cavity of the Abdomen,
before its entrance into the Tube, and so by the cherishing heat of that place
the Birth should be formed therein: which nevertheless seems very improbable;
and therefore such Stories as these not without reason, are derided and
exploded by the Learned Guido Patinus, Bartholine, and others.

XXVIII. Concerning the motion of The Motion of the womb.
the womb, there is a famous Question started, whether it ascend or tumble to
and fro, as it is said to do in the Hysteric Passion, or Fits of the Mother.
The affirmative part is defended by Aretaeus, Fernelius, Laurentius, Spigelius,
and especially by Daniel Sennertus, who Prax. l. 4. part. 1. sect. 2. c. 15.
cites and applauds the Opinions of the foresaid Physicians as infallible
Oracles, and makes a great addition of farther Proof; and rejects the contrary
Opinion of Galen, as altogether repugnant to truth. Now the Reasons that
persuaded those Learned Men into the affirmative, were chiefly these two:

1. The Persuasions of idle women, who affirm that they not only perceive it
within the Globe of the womb as big as a Goos-egg, ascend in the Hysteric
Passion as high as the Diaphragma, but also feel it outwardly with their hands;
nay, some are so confident as to tell you, they feel it as high as their
Throats. Fernelius l. 6. patholog. c. 16. writes, That he, being induced by the
Complaints and Entreaties of the Women, has sometimes felt it with his hand
carried up into the Stomach like a little Globe, by which it has been strangely
oppressed. 2. The Fumes; because that in the hysteric Suffocation, stinking
Smells held to the Nostrils, either diminish or take away the Effect; but sweet
Smells exasperate and bring the fit. Of which the first they say proceeds from
hence, because the womb, which is endu'd as it were with a sort of reason,
flies stinking smells, which being held to the Nose, it presently descends to
avoid 'em. The latter, because it is delighted with sweet smells, and therefore
if they be applied to the Nostrils, it presently ascends to meet 'em. And that
which seems to confirm this Opinion the more, is this, because the same sweet
things being rubbed about the inside of the Privity, immediately abates the
fit; because the womb, as they say, descends to those things with which it is
delighted.
From whence they conclude, That the Womb ascends with a spontaneous Motion,
and may be moved any way; nor ought that to be wondered at, say they, when its
Motion upward in Women with Child, and downward in the falling of the Womb, is
a thing so well known.

These Reasons were thought to be of so much weight by many, that they led men
of great repute into the Labyrinth of Error. But on the other side, That the
womb does not ascend upward of its own accord, nor is moved with a wandering
Motion through the lower Belly, may be demonstrated by several Reasons.

1. The Ligaments prevent it; not only the Vermiform, those in the shape of a
Worm, but chiefly the Lateral, like to the Wings of Batts, which are so strong,
that they can by no means suffer such a sudden Extension. Add to this, That
the Uterine Sheath is also firmly fastened to the neighboring parts, the
Bladder, the right Intestine, the Privity, etc. All which parts in the ascent
of the womb, would be likewise drawn up together toward the upper parts with
great pain and trouble; and yet we never hear those that are troubled with fits
of the Mother* ever complain of any such painful Attraction. 2. The womb is so
small in empty women, that it cannot extend it self to the Diaphragma, though it
should be violently dragged up by the hand; or attenuated by extraordinary
Extension into the thinnest Membrane that can be. 3. In a Woman with Child,
though it be large, yet no rational man will say, that in an hysteric Suffocation
the womb with the birth included in it, is able to ascend to the Diaphragma and
the Throat. 4. In the dissected Bodies of those that have died of the hysteric
Passion, of which I have dissected many, I have often observed that neither the
womb was swelled, nor any way removed out of his place, though while they lived,
at the very last gasp they have complained extremely of its ascent to the
Diaphragma, and their very Throats. Nay more, in the said Distemper I have
rarely met with any fault in the womb, but have ^ound it in one or both Stones.
XXIX. The Globe or Substance What ascends or rises up in sits of the Mother,
is not the womb.
which is said to ascend from the lower Belly to the Stomach and higher, is not
the Womb, nor, as Riolanus believes, the Stones or Tubes of the Womb, swelling
with putrified Seed, and violently agitated up and down; for those parts are
not so loose nor so bigg, as to ascend above the Stomach, or to be felt, as big
as a Hen or a Gooseegg; but the Intestines or Guts, which are struck and torn
by some malignant and sharp Vapors, ascending from the Womb or the Stones; as
in the Epilepsie, a sharp malignant Vapor arises from the great Toe, or some
other part, to the Head, and there by its Vellication causes an unusual and
vehement Contraction of the Nerves. Now this pain in the Guts being
communicated to the Sense in the Head, presently to repel the Mischief, and
exclude the Cause, a great number of Animal Spirits are posted into their
Fibers, by the swelling of which the Guts are contracted, and then if there be
any wind in the Guts, as generally there is, they contract themselves about
that wind, and by compressing and squeezing it together, make that same Globe.
And thus by the Acrimony of the same Vapor ascending higher, the Diaphragma,
the Muscles of the Throat and Jaws, and other parts, are contracted by the
copious influx of Animal Spirits, whence proceeds that Suffocation. Nor does
the hard binding of a broad Swathe or a long Napkin about the belly avail in
such a case, to hinder the ascent of that same Substance or Globe which women
take to be their womb, any otherwise, than only because that by means of that
hard binding, the copious ascent of that sharp malignant Vapor, arising from
the womb or stones, is hindered, which Vapor being then detained below that
Ligature, is dissipated by the heat of the surrounding parts.

XXX. Here by the way we are Whether Hysterical Effects arise from the
Sweetbread Juice?
to take notice, that Francis de le Boe Sylvius, with whom Regner de Graef,
agrees in this Particular, does not acknowledge the forementioned cause of the
Hysteric Passion, but has imagined another quite different; that is to say,
that the Fault of the Pancreatic Juice is the only cause of the Hysteric
Symptoms aforesaid, and so most courageously rejects the Opinions in this case
of all the ancient and most of the modern Physicians, and excuses the Womb and
spermatick Parts from being the Occasion of those Symptoms. But although some
Symptoms having as it were some Similitude with some hysteric Effects, may
sometimes be occasioned by the defects of the Pancreatic Juice, which I am
unwilling altogether to deny, yet by diligent Observation they may be
sufficiently distinguished one from the other, and I my self have observed 'em
no less in Men than in Women: nevertheless always to accuse the unfortunate
Pancreas of this Miscarriage seems a little too hard, when the Dissections of
Women, as well by my self as others, many times instructed us, that the
Sweetbread had no share many times in those hysteric Affections, as being
altogether sound and perfect; but that the Fault lay in the Stones, that were
very much swelled, sometimes one, and sometimes both, half as bigg as a Hens
Egg, sometimes ill colored, and full of a virulent Liquor; and when as also it
has been observed that in such a uterine Suffocation, that all the Symptoms
have ceased upon Copulation, or the evacuation of Seed upon the Midwife's
digitizing the part affected; and that by the use of moderate Coition the
return of the Fit has been prevented, whereas the same Remedies used could no
way avail to remove any Distemper of the pancreatic Juice either easily,
suddenly, well or pleasantly.

XXXI. Neither can any thing be Nothing to be concluded from Scents concerning
the Motion of the Womb.
concluded from Scents in behalf of the said Opinion touching the Motion of the
Womb. For the Womb is not endued with Understanding, and consequently is no way
affected with this or that good or bad Smell. For it has no Nose, nor any other
Organ of Smelling, and therefore makes no Distinction between sweet or stinking
Smells: neither covets or loves, or flies or hates either the one or the other;
neither is sensible of any Smells as Smells; neither is affected by them, as
they are Smells, but by their hot attenuating sharp discussing Quality.

XXXII. Now that stinking Smells Why stinking Smells are profitable.
held to the Nostrils abate the Hysteric Fit, it is not because the Womb
avoiding the Stench of stinking Smells descends, but because the Sense of
smelling being offended by the ill Smells, the Brain contracts it self; and so
not only sends fewer Spirits to the contracting Fibers of the Guts, and Nerves
of the Mesentery, the Diaphragma, and the Muscles of the Iaws, but also stops
the Entrance of the Vapors ascending from the Testicles and Womb into those
Parts, and expells those that were entered before. Which stinking Smells by
virtue of their singular discussing Faculty dissipate as well in the Brain as
in the Jaws, and so the Woman not only recovers herself, but upon the
Relaxation of the Muscles of the Jaws is freed from her Fit.

XXXIII. On the other side sweet Why sweet Smells are hurtful.
Smells increase the Fit, not because the Womb ascends to meet 'em, but because
while their Fragrancie delights the Sense, to the end the woman may the longer
enjoy that Pleasure, the Brain dilates it self, and so not only permits a
greater Quantity of Spirits to flow to the Fibers aforesaid, and increase the
Fit, but also admits more plentifully a greater Quantity of noxious Vapors
ascending from the Womb, through the Pores every way dilated; whence the
Effects of the Hysterical Passion, Anxietie, Raving, Drowsiness, and sometimes
Epileptic Convulsions, etc. But sweet things being rubbed about the inside of
the Privity, because they attenuate the thick and malignant Humors, they
dilate the Pores, and powerfully discuss.

Trincavel, Eustachius Rudius, Hercules Saxonia, and Mercurialis give quite
different Reasons for this thing, which Daniel Sennertus rejects and refutes:
Who nevertheless not being well able to get out of this Labyrinth, and finding
that the Womb is not sensible of Smells, nor is affected by 'em as they are
Smells, flys to a certain hidden Quality affecting the Womb, imperceptible to
our Senses, which he believes to adhere in such a manner to the Odours, as not
to be separated from 'em. But there is no such need in this case of flying to
any such occult Quality, when the whole thing is plainly to be made out by
manifest Qualities and Reasons.

XXXIV. That the Womb in women The Motion of the Womb in Women with Child.
with Child extends it self every way, or slips out in falling down, makes
nothing to prove its spontaneous Motion: For in Women with Child the womb does
not simply ascend, but grows and swells upward and round about through all its
parts: For as the Birth grows, so its Domicil inlarges it self; and the bigger
the Child grows, the bigger, thicker, and more fleshy becomes the womb; so that
near the time of Delivery it comes to be as thick as a Man's Thumb, or the
breadth of two Fingers. Which is not caused by the sole Influence of the Blood
and Humors into the Porosities of the womb, but by a real, firm, and fleshy
Increment. But there is a great Difference between the enlarging of the womb,
and its spontaneous Motion. For the one requires a long time, the other is done
in a Moment, and should and ought to cease: In the one the Substance of the
womb is enlarged and thickened, in the other it ought to be extended and
attenuated.

XXXV. In the falling down of the Its Motion in falling down.
Womb, the Motion is not Spontaneous, for the Ligaments of it being loosened,
and the Substance of it being affected with a cold and moist Distemper, it
falls with its own weight, as all heavy things, and paralytic Members, having
lost their own spontaneous Motion, slip downwards. In the same manner as a Man
who falls from a high Steeple, does not move himself downward of his own
accord, but is moved by his own weight against his will. From all which it is
apparent, that the womb moves neither upward nor downward, nor tumbles about
the lower Belly with a vagous Motion; but sometimes by accident, sometimes
through Lankness slides to the sides and lower parts.

XXXVI. But against this our Conclusion A Child born, the Mother being dead.
another Difficulty opposes it self: That is, if the Womb do not move it self
of its own accord, how comes it to pass, that sometimes after the Death of the
Mother, the Birth in the womb is expelled forth? Thus Bartholinus, in the
Treatise entitled Phinx Theologico Philosophica, relates the Story of an
Infant, that with a loud cry was brought safe and sound out of the womb of the
dead Mother. And such was the Birth of Scipio and Manlius, upon the Records of
History. Eber also produces an Example of a Child born after the Death of his
Mother; and Rolfinch produces another out of the memorable Speeches of Wolfang
Silberus. Three more are cited by Philip Salmuth; Bartholin also testifies the
same thing to have happened at Coppenhagen Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. And I remember
another Accident of the same Nature that was told me at Montfurt. Harvey also
relates another of the same nature, Exercit. de part. A Woman, says he, being
dead in the Evening, was left alone in the Chamber, and the next Morning the
Child was found between her Thighs, having made its own way. Now as to the
Difficulty, we say this, That the Mother being dead, the Infant may for some
time survive in the womb; so that being alive and strong, and the Orifice of
the womb open, and the Genitals being slippery and loose by reason of the
preceding Labors, and the Efflux of the serous Matter, it may so happen that
the struggling Birth may get forth by its own Endeavors, though assisted by no
Motion of the dead womb; and that such Births have been frequently cut out of
the Abdomens of the dead Mother is notoriously known. But the first Accident
rarely happens though frequently it falls out, that women after most bitter Pangs
of Childbearing, their Strength failing, fall into a profound Swoon, so that
they are thought to be dead, and are sometimes buried for such, though it has
been known that they have afterward come to themselves. Which often happens
to those that are troubled with the Hysteric Passion, and for that reason being
thought to be dead, are committed fairly to the Ground, as the Observations of
many Physicians make manifest. Johannes Matthaeus, Physician to the Marquis of
Baden, produces a memorable Example of this. Quaest. medicar. 4. An Accident
deserving Compassion, says he, happened at Madrid in Spain, where a noble
Matron, of the Family of D. Francis de Lasso, after she had lain in a Trance
for three days after a hard Travel, her Relations believing her dead, was
carried into the Vault appointed for the Burial of the Family. Some Months
after the Vault being opened, for the Burial of some other Person, the Carcass
was found in the same place where it was laid, holding a dead Infant in her
right Arm.

Whence it appears that the Matron, when she was buried, was not really dead,
but had been delivered of an unfortunate Infant, which she held in her Arms.
Now in such a case I say it may easily happen, that the woman which was thought
to be dead the day before, the next day was delivered, and in a shorttime after
expired: For in extraordinary Cases of Necessity, Nature sometimes performs
wonders. For which Reason, the woman is thought to have been delivered after
her Death, who nevertheless was not dead at the time of her Delivery. So that
from hence no spontaneous or proper Motion of the womb can be inferred. If
after this, any one will be so obstinate as to believe that the womb is alive
after the Decease of the woman, and is moved of it self by its own proper
Power, of necessity with Plato he will split upon a most hard Rock of
Absurdity, while he concludes that the womb is a Creature of it self, not
living a Life common to the rest of the Body; and hence it will follow that one
Creature is composed of two, or that one Creature is the perfecting part of the
other.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Parts of the Womb.
I. IN the womb particularly are The parts of the Womb enumerated.
to be considered the Bottom, the Neck, the Sheath, and the Sinus Pudoris, or
Mouth of the Privity it self.

II. The Bottom is the uppermost The Bottom.
part of the womb, properly colled the Matrix, Uterus, or Womb, outwardly
smooth and equal, besmeared with a slippery sort of Liquor, in women not
separated by any winding Prominencies of Horns, nor so distinguished with
Cells, as in most part of Beasts that bring forth living Conceptions, It is
harder and thicker in those that are not with Child, about the bigness of a
Pigeons Egg, or somewhat bigger, which varies however according to the use of
Copulation, Conception, and Age.

III. It has one Hollowness, yet not Its Cavity.
exactly round, but somewhat stretched forth on both sides as it were like a
Horn, toward the sides, in Persons deceased, hardly able to hold a Kidney Bean,
but without doubt more loose in libidinous Coition; somewhat rugged with
wrinkles for the better Retention of the Seed, and in women, before they come
to be with Child, besmeared with a viscous kind of Slime. This is distinguished
with a kind of large Seam into the right and left Part: In one of which Males,
in the other Females are conceived, as Hippocrates and Galen have asserted. In
the narrow Streights of this Cavity, the Vivific Spirit of Male Seed infused
into the woman's Egg, finishes out of it self that wonderful Structure of so
many Parts, so that at length a noble Creature, shortly to ascend Heaven it
self, breaks out of this small, close, and nasty Prison.

IV. The Neck of the womb, which The N^.
many confound with the Sheath, is the lower and narrower part of the womb,
containing the innermost Orifice of the womb. Which Hole is oblong and
transverse, or overthwart, like the Hole in the nut of the Yard; in Virgins
narrow and smooth, but in such as have had Children, bigger, and furnished as
it were with two Lips somewhat hard, or little pieces of Flesh somewhat Tumid,
which Lips are hardly or never to be found in Virgins. This Orifice is exactly
shut after the Reception of the Seed, and as it were sealed up with a slimy
viscous yellowish Humor, that by the Report of Galen, it will not admit the
point of a Probe, neither does it open before the time of Travel, unless by
^ervent and libidinous Coition, whence sometimes happens Superfoetation. But at
the time of Delivery for the Expulsion of the Birth it dilates and spreads
after a miraculous manner like a Rose; and then the foresaid Lips of the
Orifice, as I have observed in women deceased when bigg with Child, equal in
thickness half a Finger, very loose, slippery, and hollow Whether the Yard
reach the Orifice of the W^.
like a Sponge.

V. Rarely the Yard of a Man in Copulation reaches so far as this Orifice,
which Riolanus however asserts may happen sometimes. It may be, says he, that a
longer Yard, when the Orifice is open, at the time when the Flowers flow, being
thrust into that Orifice, may be there detained and squeezed, as happens in the
Limeing of Bitches; which that it has happened to some, I am credibly informed.
Thus when I was a Student at Leyden, I remember, there was a young Bridegroom
in that Town, that being overwanton with his Bride, had so hampered himself in
her Privities* that he could not draw his Yard forth, till Delmehorst the
Physician untied the Knot, by casting cold Water upon the part.

Certainly it is a wonder how such a narrow Orifice of the Womb can be so much
dilated, as to receive the Nut of the Yard; which is the reason some think it
impossible to be done, and look upon as Fables, whatever has been said touching
this matter. But this is to be said, that in a very fervent Lust, all those
obscene parts grow very hot, and are relaxed to that degree, as to receive the
Yard with ease: as appears by the Uterine Sheath, which not being heated by
libidinous Ardour, is so strait that it will not admit the Yard without
difficulty, but in the Act of Venery, through the more copious affluency of Blood
and Spirits, stiffens, grows warm, and swells, and then becomes so loose, and
soft, that it easily receives the Yard. Therefore it would be no wonder, if in
some, through extreme Lust, this Orifice of the Womb be so relaxed, as to admit
the Yard, especially if the Sheath be short, and the Yard so long as to reach
and enter the Sybilline Chink. Nor is this more to be admired at, than that the
Orifice it self in time of Labor, should of its own accord be so relaxed for a
large Infant to pass thorough, or for the Surgeon to thrust in his Hand and
part of his Arm to draw forth the Birth, when necessity requires.

VI. Continuous to the bottom and The sheath.
neck of the Womb, is the Greater Neck or Gate of the Womb, commonly called the
Vagina or Sheath; because it receives the Yard like a Sheath.

This is a smooth and soft Chanel, every way enclosing and grasping the Yard in
Copulation, furnished with fleshie Fibers running out in length, by which it is
fastened to the other adjacent parts; and withinside, full of orbicular furrows
or wrinkles, more in the upper part than the lower, and more toward the Privity
than toward the Womb, and unequal, to procure the greater pleasure of
Titillation from rubbing to and fro; of a membranous, and as it were nervous,
and somewhat spungy Substance, which swells in the heat of Lust, the better to
embrace the Yard; about the length of the middle finger, and as broad as the
Intestinum Rectum. Nevertheless, the length, breadth, and looseness of it vary
according to the Age of the Person, her Use of Venery, and her natural
Constitution: and sometimes this length and breadth of the Sheath varies
according to the length or bigness of the Yard in Men. Whence Spigelius thus
writes, Annat. l. 8. c. 22. The Sheath every where embraces the Yard, and
frames it self to all i^s Dimensions, so that it meets a short one, gives way
to a long one, dilates to a thick one, and straitens to a small one: for Nature
so manages all these differences, in respect to the magnitude of the Yard, that
it is needless to endeavor to fit the Tools, or regard their proportion, for
that the great Fabricator has every where done it so admirably.

In like manner in Virgins, and Women not so prone to Venery, as in those that
never had Children or Labor under an immoderate Flux of their Flowers, or
their Whites, the wrinkles are much deeper and thicker, and more numerous; but
in Women that have had many Children, as also in Harlots often lain withal,
they are neither so deep nor so numerous, if not many times worn smooth.

VII. This Sheath in Infants is remarkably The largeness.
capacious, though the Orifice be very narrow: as it is also in grown Virgins
never lain with, which in the first act of Coition is somewhat dilated, with
the rupture of the Hymen; but in Women that use but moderate Copulation, it
remains still in such a condition, that the Yard passes through a kind of
looser sort of Sphincter Muscle toward the innermost Sheath.

VIII. It is furnished with Vessels The Vessels of the Sheath.
of all sorts. It has two sorts of Arteries: some from the Haemorrhoidal The
Arteries.
Arteries, creeping through the lower part of it; others from the Hypogastrics
descending along the sides of it, and then dispersed through the whole Sheath,
and in the upper part for the most part adhering to the Arteries of the Womb.

IX. Several Veins it sends forth from The Veins.
its lower part to the Haemorrhoidals; the rest, far more in number, and every
way dispersed into its Substance, to the Hypogastrics, into which they empty
the Blood which is contained in 'em, from thence to be conveyed farther to
the greater Vessels, and so to the heart. And out of these Bloodbearing Vessels
it is that that same little Net is formed discovered by Regner de Graef.

X. It receives its Nerves from those Its Nerves.
that run out from the Os Sacrum.

XI. Regner de Graef also writes, Lymphatic Vessels.
That he has here observed certain very small Lymphatic Vessels, which in their
ascent penetrating through the External Substance of the Womb, meet together by
degrees, and increase like small Rivulets, till they came to the great
Receptacle of the Chylus, and then open themselves into it.

Besides these Vessels, there run out into the forepart of the Sheath those
Channels sticking to the Substance of the Urinary Passage, of which hereafter.

XII. To the end of it, that is, at The Neck of the Bladder.
its first entrance under the Nymphs, both before and atop adheres the neck of
the Piss-bladder, wrapped about with the Sphincter, having there an Exit; but in
the hinder part it is firmly fastened with the binding Muscle of the Intestinum
Rectum.

Regner de Graef has well observed, that the Sphincter of the Bladder embraces
the lower part of the Sheath with a conveighance of Fibers, three fingers
broad; to the end that in Coition it might be able gently to close it self
about the Yard; which Constriction* he believes to be mainly helped forward by
other Bodies, found out by himself, of which he thus writes: To this
Constriction those Bodies contribute after a wonderful manner, which, the
fleshie Expansions arising from the Sphincter, being removed, appear on both
sides near the Lips of the Privity in the lower part of the Sheath. For they
ascend on both sides to the membranous Substance, which is fastened to the
neighboring Parts, and to the Clitoris* and there terminate and vanish: so
that the Bodies of the right and left side have no Communion one with another;
as may be seen if either be filled with Wine: for the Body of the right side
being blown up, the left never swells; neither if the left be filled, is the
right distended, or the Clitoris erected. The outward Substance of these
consists of a very thin Membrane; the inner, which for the most part, like the
inner Substance of the Clitoris, by reason of the quantity of coagulated Blood,
is of a blackish color, is woven out of several little Fibers and Vessels,
united and twisted one among another, which for its resemblance to a Net is
called Plexus Retiformis, the Net resembling Fold.

This Plexus Retiformis, or Net-resembling The Netresembling Fold.
Fold is in my opinion there placed, that the Orifice of the Sheath may be so
much the closer straightened, and the Virile Member straightly embraced: For being
distended with that plenty of Blood, when by reason of the fleshie Fibers of
the Sphincter Muscle compressing it, it cannot swell outward, it must swell
inwardly, and straiten the Orifice of the Sheath. Now the distension of these
parts will appear to the Eye, if the bloody Vessels running through along the
back of the Clitoris be filled with a little breath, for then the whole Privity
swells together with that same Fold.

Now because this Chanel of the Sheath is narrower in Virgins, many, with
Soranus, believe that the pain which Virgins feel in the first act of Coition,
and the Blood which breaks forth, is caused by the Dilatation of this Chanel by
the Yard, and the Rupture of the little Veins and Arteries passing thorough it;
which others rather ascribe to the Rupture of the Vagina, or Sheath.

XIII. The Use of the Vagina, or The use of the Vagina.
Sheath, is to receive the Yard, to embrace and gently gird it self about it.
To this end it grows warm in the heat of Lust, by reason of the Afflux of Blood
and Spirits to it. So that it is somewhat in a manner erected, and dilates it
self, the more conveniently to admit the Yard. Whereas, when that heat is over
by reason of its laxity and softness, it prevents the entrance of the External
Air; nor if the woman be in a Bathe, will it admit water to enter the womb: but
when a woman has her monthly Purgations, or is troubled with the Whites, as
also in time of Labor it does not dilate it self, but the closing sides of it,
being pressed down by the weight of the Birth, and Humors part one from
another, and so are compelled to give way to necessary Evacuation.

XIV. Now that the Vagina must The reason of that use.
and ought to be dilated in the same manner as has been said, and without that
dilatation would hardly admit the Virile Member, is plain from those women that
take no pleasure either in a violent or unvoluntary Coition; but rather on the
other side, complain of great pains, by reason of the violent forcing of the
sides of the Vagina one from another through the force of the entering Yard: and
is yet more apparent from the pain that some Virgins feel that come to be lain
withal before they have any understanding, and consequently no understanding to
warm them to the Action. In reference to which Plazzonus relates a very sad
Story. Lately, says he, it happened, that a young man being to lie with his
Bride the first night, what with his eager haste, and the robustious intrusion
of his Member, he not only broke the neck of her Bladder, but the Intestinum
Rectum, withal. For which I could give no other Reason, but that her Privity,
not used to erection, slagg'd in its first performance of admitting and
receiving her Husband's first Addresses. Thus, I remember, that I knew a young
Bride in upper Batavia, to whom, by the violent immission of the Yard in the
first Act of Coition, and sudden dilatation of the Vagina, there happened such
a prodigious Flux of Blood, that in three hours she lost her Life, together
with her Virginity. And the like unfortunate Accident some years ago befell the
Daughter of a certain Citizen of Utrecht, who was so wounded the first night,
that before morning, the Flux of Blood not being to be stopped, she expired.

XV. Below the insertion of the A thin nervous Membrane called Hymen.
Neck of the Bladder, in Virgins, there appears a thin nervous Membrane,
continuous to the Neck of the Substance, and sticking orbicularly to its sides,
interwoven with fleshie Fibers, and furnished with many little Arteries and
Veins, and bored through the middle for the Efflux of the monthly Purgations,
that in grown Virgins it will hardly admit the top of the little finger, which
the Ancients called Hymen, others the Claustrum of Virginity, others the Girdle
of Chastity. Which being safe and whole, is a certain sign of Virginity, and
being that which must of necessity be broken by the first irruption of the
Virile Member, and sen^s forth a small quantity of Blood, which they call Flos
Virginitatis, the Flower of Virginity: but being broken, it vanishes, and never
more grows again.

XVI. This Membrane, to the Hymen sometimes not perforated, but like a Sive.
great loss of health, has been observed by Cabrolius, Vesalius, and others,
not thin and perforated, as is before mentioned; but somewhat thick, firm, and
contiguous, and sometimes bored through like a Sive. So in the Year 1666. in
the Month of March, we dissected a young Woman of three and twenty years of
Age, wherein we found that same Membrane continuous, not perforated at all, and
so firm, that the stoutest Efforts of a lusty young Bride grown could never
have pierced it.

Now when it is so extremely strong, then in grown Women, there is a stoppage
of the Flowers, and other Evacuations that way, which is the Death of many
Virgins, unless cured by cutting the Membrane; of which sort of Cure there are
several Examples to be found in Benivenius, Wierus, Aquapendens, Hildan, and
several others. Here some have been of Opinion, That the said Membrane, hard
and unperforated, is a Substance quite different from the Hymen, growing there
contrary to the order of Nature: whereas in truth it is the Hymen it self,
preternaturally hardened to that Solidity, neither will any man ever find any
other.

XVII. Many question the truth of Whether Hymen or no?
this Membrane, others deny that ever it was found, and account as Fables
whatever has been said concerning the Hymen. Others with Oribasius, Soranus,
Fernelius, and Laurentius, conceited Virginity to be nothing else than the
wrinkled straitness of the Female Vagina, overspread with Veins, the
dilaceration of which in the first Act of Coition, and the rupture of the
little Veins, by means of the same violence, causes a light Flux of Blood. But
Vesalius and Fallopius, most expert Anatomists, have found that Membrane in all
Virgins, as have also Columbus, Plater, Picolomni, Iubart, Spigelius, Wierus,
Regner de Graef, and several other eminent Persons, to whose Ocular Testimony
we must give credit. And not only they, but I my self, at the Dissection of a
Virgin about two and twenty years of Age, in December. 1671. showed that Membrane
to several Students in Physic, resembling a membranous Ring orbicularly placed
in the Vagina of the Womb, with a hole in the middle as big as the top of the
little finger, not exactly round, but somewhat oblong in the upper part. And
Swammerdam writes that he took out such a Hymen out of the Body of a Virgin
which resembled the flat perforated small Ring, that is put under the Glass in
Prospective Glasses, and closes all the rest of the opening of the Tube; as
this Membrane shuts up the Tube of the Sheath, and the outermost Neck of the
Womb.

XVIII. It is questioned by some, Whether the want of the Hymen be a sign of
Virginity lost.
Whether upon the want of that Membrane it may be well and truly said, that
such a Maid, where such a defect is found, has been deflowered by another Man?
Riolanus well observes, That the defect of this Membrane is not always a sign
of deflowered Virginity; because* most certainly it is not to be found in all
Virgins: For many times lascivious and wanton Girls break that Membrane
unknowingly, in their imitation of Coition, with their Finger, or any other
Instrument. Besides, that in some it is so thin and so soft, that easily giving
way in the first Act, it neither makes any resistance against the Bridegroom,
nor does it bleed at all.

Besides that, it may be corroded away by the passing thorough of sharp
Humors, or else broken by a fall or a blow, or by the Midwives finger, as in
the Hysteric Passion.

Now that it may be so relaxed and softened by the Afflux of the Flowers, and
other Humors, as to give free passage to the Yard without pain or trouble, and
will dilate rather than be dilacerated, and consequently never emit any blood
in the first Act, Pinaeus makes out by two Examples, which he cites Lib. 1. de
Not. Virgin. c. 6. And thus that Text in Deuteronomy is certainly to be
expounded: that is to say, if the red piece of Linen were showed, then there
was no doubt to be made of the Virginity of the Maid: but notwithstanding, if
it could not be produced, yet however it was not to be concluded that the Maid
had lost her Virginity; but before too severe a Sentence be pronounced, inquiry
was to be made, why that Efflux of Blood failed in the first Coition; whether
she had been broken up before, or whether it might not be an effect of any
other of those Natural Causes by me recited.

But before I leave this place, I cannot but add the elegant Verses of
Catullus, which he writes De slore Virginitatis, to wit, concerning that Blood
which commonly breaks forth upon the Rupture of the Membrane Hymen, in the
first Coition.

Ut slos in septis secretis nascitur hortis,
Ignotus pecori, nullo contusus aratro:
Quem mulcent aurae, firmat Sol, educat imber,
Multi illum pueri, multae optavere puellae.
Idem cum tenui carptus defloruit ungue.
Nulli illum pueri, nullae optavere puellae.
Sic Virgo, dum intacta manet, tum chara suis: sed
Cum Castum amisit, polluto corpore, slorem,
Nec pueris jucunda manet, nec chara puellis.
Which I render into English thus:

As Flowers in enclosed Gardens grow,
Not cropped by Beasts, nor bruised by the Plough:
Whose brighter Glories, Solar Beams invest,
And Fragrancies by gentle Rain increast;
Invites all Human kind, to love, and take:
That same, when cropped, its Beauty does forsake.
Those that before adored it, now despise
And slight the once dear Object of their Eyes.
Such is a Virgin, while she so remains,
While her unspotted Honor she retains.
But when that is blasted, she is no more the same;
Nor to her Virgin Virtues can lay claim.
But like a withered Flower is undon,
And by all Human kind is pist upon.
Those that before adored her, now despise,
And slight the once dear Object of their Eyes.
XIX. Upon this Membrane rest The Myrtle formed little pieces of Flesh.
four Carunculae, or little pieces of flesh, called the Myrtiformes, Myrtle
shaped, because they resemble the Berries of Myrtle; so placed, that every one
possesses an Angle, and answer one another in a square. One of 'em, bigger than
the rest, and forked, belongs to the hole of the Urinary passage, which it
shuts when the Urine is voided. The second stands behind opposite to this: the
other two are collateral.

These Carunculae, or little pieces of Flesh, in some are shorter, in some
longer, thicker or slenderer. Which are said to meet together, with certain
little Membranes, in the outermost part, leaving a hole in the middle, whose
closing together some take for the Hymen Membrane.

XX. They are said to be appointed Their use.
for Pleasure and Titillation while their being swelled and puff't up,
straitens and bewitchingly squeezes the Yard.

These Caruncles are so described by several Anatomists, as if they were to be
found in all Women; when there is only one to be found in Virgins, but all four
are to be found in Persons deflowered. But as for the second Membrane, made by
the closing of these Caruncles, over and above the Hymen, I shall believe it
when any Body shows it me.

Riolanus, the most accurate Anatomist of his time, not without reason suspects
those three lesser Tunicles, not to be real little pieces of Flesh, but little
swellings or warts proceeding from the Rupture of the Hymen, and the wrinkling
the Vagina of the Privity: and reports that he has found that wrinkled
roughness altogether levelled for the passages of the Child, in Women that have
been delivered six or seven days, which, were they true little pieces of Flesh,
would preserve their shape and substance in the distension of the Neck of the
Womb; or at least some sign of 'em would remain, whereas there is nothing to be
seen of 'em, but when the Privity is again reduced to its accustomed
straitness. He adds, that these three little Bodies, were they real little
pieces of Flesh, would be a great impediment to Women in Labor, for that their
roughness and inequality would hinder the Egress of the Infant. He proves the
truth of this Assertion by Ocular view and experience, affirming that in the
Dissections of Virgins, after he had separated the Nymphs, he found a fleshie
or circular Membrane, perforated with a little hole in the middle, big enough
for a Pea to go through, which Membrane being torn, he saw no other Caruncles,
but one always applied to the Orifice of the Bladder; but the other three he
never found; and conjectures the forementioned Caruncle to be the Extremity of
the Sphincter of the Bladder.

XXI. Therefore in regard they only The Woman's Privities.
are to be found in married People, the Hymen being broken, and not in Virgins,
he strongly infers that those three lesser Caruncles, are nothing else than the
Angular parts of this broken Membrane, pucker'd up into a heap by the wrinkling
of the fleshie Vagina. And thus has this most excellent Person, by his great
Experience, unfolded those doubts, which have hitherto occasioned so many
Disputes among Anatomists concerning the Hymen, and the Carunc'es.

XXII. The outward part of the The outward part of the Womb, or Vulva.
Womb, called in Greek (...), in Latin Pudendum Muliebre, Membrum Genitale, and
Vulva, as it were Valva, or a Folding Door, being closed with two Valva's and
Nymphs like Folding Doors; also Orificium Exterius, the Outward Orifice, and
Cunnus, from (...), to conceive; in English, the Woman's Privities or Quaint, is
seated in the foremost Region of the Share-bone.

XXIII. In Virgins it is much less The bigness.
and thicker than in those that have had Children, and in those that are
arrived at years of Maturity, is covered with Hair above and on each side,
while Nature endeavors to hide the obscene Part.

Spigelius believes there may be a certain Judgment made of the bigness of the
Privity by several External Marks. For, says he Anat. l. 1. c. 10. the
proportion of the Woman's Privity is to be taken for the most part from her
mouth: for they that have wide mouths and large eyes, have generally large
Privities; and I have observed by manifold Experience, that all thick and fat
Women that have large Breasts and Bellies, have also large Privities. On the
other side, they that have little flat Breasts, a narrow Mouth, a peeked Chin,
and thin Lips, have likewise straiter and narrower Privities.

XXIV. The outward Lips appear The Lips.
first to the Eye, which toward the Hair are somewhat thicker and higher
raised, and there closing, and more protuberant, compose the Mount of Venus,
The Mount of Venus.
as being seated at the Threshold of Venus's Temple, which they that offer to
Venus must be forced to enter.

XXV. They are composed of a peculiar Of what they are composed*
fleshie Substance, and in some measure spungy, which in heat of Lust swells,
and at the time of Delivery becomes very soft and tumid. It was my hap to see
in two Women newly delivered of the Birth, when the Secundine followed, their
Lips so loosened, and a great part of the Uterine Liver thrust it self into
them; whereupon the Midwife, not understanding what such an unusual Accident
meant, the Physician and Surgeon were called, who observing the Lips to be
stuff't with the said Liver, and for that reason unusually swelled, and withal,
as it were a piece of black Flesh budding forth, thought the Privity to be torn
in the Labor, and the part to be already gangrened. Thereupon believing the
Woman to be in very great danger, I was sought for. But when I came to view the
Privity, I presently observed that black Flesh to be a part of the Vterine
Liver, which had thrust it self into the Lips, being inwardly dilated, which
being drawn out with a pair of Nippers, both Women were freed from the
imaginary fear of any Gangrene.

XXVI. Riolanus attributes to these A slight Motion in the Lips.
Lips a slight Motion of Dilatation and Constriction, which he affirms to have
been often experienced in lustful Women, stimulated more than usually with the
stings of Venery. And farther, he says that the Constriction is made by the
Muscle of the Clitoris, extended under the Lips of the Privity; and the
Dilatation by the other Muscle, which is under the Ligament. Lindan will rather
have these two Muscles extended from the Sphincter of the Podex through the
Groyns, and being thin and broad, to be inserted into the Internal Front of the
Lips, and upon the Evacuation of Urine, that the Lips are by them divided, and
after pissing closed again.

XXVII. Near to the Lips stand The Nymphs.
two fleshie soft Productions, called Nymphae, Nymphs, or Wings; in Greek
(...). These arise at the joining together or commissure of the Share-bones,
where they are joined with an acute Angle, and constitute the wrinkl'd fleshie
Production, that clothes the Clitoris, like the Praeputium; and descend about
half way, the Lips every where touching one another for the most part, and end
in their lower part with an obtuse Angle, as being almost of a Triangular
Figure; resembling somewhat in color that part of the Cock's Comb, that hangs
under his Throat.

XXVIII. They are of a ruddy Substance, Their Substance.
partly fleshie, partly membranous, soft, puffie, clad with a thin Tunicle,
different in thickness and bigness, according to the diversity of Age; being
generally about a fingers joint in length, and thin, nor very broad in Virgins
till five and twenty years of Age. In those of riper years, especially such as
have lain with Man, and born Children, they become thicker and broader; but
never descend above half way the Lips. These very seldom grow luxuriant in our
Regions; but among the Egyptians, by the report of Galen, frequently grow out
to such a length, that through the shame and trouble which they cause, they are
forced to make use of Incision.

XXIX. These Nymphs, together Their Vessels.
with the Lips, besides the little Nerves from the sixth Pair, have very many
remarkable Vessels dispersed through the outer and inner Substance. For they
receive Arteries from the Branch of the Inner Iliac (called the Privity-Branch)
conveighing plenty of Blood in the heat of Lust, which causes 'em to swell.
They also send Veins to the Privity-Vein, into which, when the heat of Lust is
over, they again empty their collected Blood. Which Veins in Women with Child
sometimes swell to that degree, that they resemble those Swellings, called
Varices.

XXX. The use of the Lips and Their Use.
Nymphs is to close and straiten the Entrance of the Privity; and to preserve
the Womb from the Injuries of the External Air.

Concerning the Lips and Nymphs, I An Observation.
observed an unusual Accident at Nimmeghen, in the year 1640. A certain Woman,
a Seaman's Wife, together with her Daughter about four and twenty years of Age,
and after she had shed a great many Tears, out of her modesty, made her
complaint, That her Daughter was incapable of Man, and asked me if I could
remove the Obstacle. She told me that her Daughter's Privity, presently after
she was born, was well shaped, but being after that put to Nurse, and carelessly
look'^ after, her Buttocks, Privities, and Parts adjoining, would be miserably
excoriated by the Acrimony of the Urine and Excrement, by which means her
Privity closed together, leaving only a little hole for the passage of her
Urine and Flowers. When I viewed the Part, I found the Lips and the Nymphs were
exactly grown together, as if there never had been any passage before.
Thereupon thrusting an Iron Probe in at the hole, I found that the closure was
only superficial, but that within there was nothing grown preternaturally
together. Sending therefore for Henry Chatborn the Surgeon, I ordered him to
make an Incision upon the Iron Probe thrust into the hole, and then to cure up
the Wound; which was done in a few days: insomuch that the Maid in three Months
after being married to a Husband, there were no farther Complaints of the
narrowness of the Privity, and the next year she was delivered of a lusty
Infant.

XXXI. Between the closing Lips, The Cleft of the Privity.
appears the Rift, or Clift of the Privity: and the Wings and Lips being
separated, the Cleft appears still deeper, which the Moderns call the Dike, or
the Great Cleft, to distinguish it from the first mentioned. This runs along
from the Share bones to the folding of the Buttocks and the Podex, distant from
it about a thumbs breadth, and the more backward it bends, the broader and
deeper it is; and forms as it were a hollow Valley, or a hollow Dike,
representing the shape of a small Ship, and terminates in the Border of the
Orifice of the Uterine Vagina. This same space, which is generally called
Interf^mineum, and Interforamineum, we have observed in hard Labors most
terribly dilacerated, and by that means the Cleft or lower part of the Vagina
has gaped to the very Podex, difficultly cured in some, and in others, never.
Into the middle of the Dike enters the Orifice of the neck of the Womb, or
Vagina, or Chanel that receives the Yard. To which, at the upper part adjoyns
the urinary Passage, through which the Urine flows out of the Bladder. Which
Orifice of the neck of the Womb or Vagina, is sometimes so straitened by Chaps
and Fissures, or the Scar of some Exulceration, that never afterward they are
able to lie with their Husbands. Sometimes also after violent Labor being
dilacerated, it closes up altogether, and leaves the woman unperforated, or
else with a very small Hole. Of which Bauhinus produces several Examples, Anat.
l. 1. c. 39. And Cabrolius in his Observe. 23. relates the Stoppage of this
Orifice in a Surgeon, and how it was opened again by a Surgeon.

XXXII. Now a little higher in the The Clitoris.
middle part between the Wings, there juts out a small Particle called in Greek
(...), Clitoris, (...), or (...), to wantonize and lasciviously to handle a
Woman's Privities. Avicen calls it Albathara, or a Twigg. By Albucasis it is
called Tentigo. For it answers the Virile Twig, or Rod, in Shape, Situation,
Substance, Repletion with Spirits and Erection, differing only in bigness and
length.

XXXIII. It is a small round Body Its Sulstance.
consisting of two nervous Portions black within and spungy, rising on both
sides from the Excrescence of the Huckle-Bone, as from two Thighs meeting
together at the Conjunction of the Share-Bone. Which Beginnings, or Thighs
Riolanus calls the white Ligaments.

To these Thighs the round Ligaments of the Womb reach with their Ends, which
formerly being led astray by Spigelius, I took to be the Vessels conveighing
the Seed.

XXXIV. The Extremity or Nut The Tentigo.
of the Clitoris, is called Tentigo, having a Substance like that of the Nut of
a Man's Yard, which is covered with a certain thin Skin, like the Praeputium,
proceeding from the Conjunction of the Wings. At the top there appears a long
hole like the hole of a Man's Yard, but not pervious or bored quite through.

XXXV. The Clitoris like a Man's Its Muscles.
Yard, has four Muscles serving for the same Office, two round above arising
from the Hip-Bone; and two below, broad and fleshy, proceeding from the
Sphincter of the Podex, which creeping backward through the Lips of the
Privity, are fastened to the Clitoris. The use of which Regner de Graef
believes to be not so much for the Erection of the Clitoris as for the
Contraction of the Orifice of the Uterine Vagina. Pinaeus acknowledges only
three Muscles.

XXXVI. It receives Arteries from Its Arteries and other Vessels.
the Privitie-Arteries, which in the heat of Concupiscence and Coition, bring
spirituous Blood in great Quantity, which afterward the privity Veins carry
back to the greater Veins. Besides these Regner de Graef has observed such like
Vessels to reach from the Haemmorrhoidals to the Clitoris. Now these Vessels
are communicated to the Clitoris, where the two meeting they constitute its
third body, whose Substance they enter only with small little Branches, and
together with the Animal Spirit flowing through the Nerves, cause it to swell
in the height of Concupiscence. The same Regner de Graef observes that the
Veins of the right and left side for the most part are closed together by
Anastomoses, before they descend to the sides of the Clitoris, and run forward
to the Net resembling Fold and other parts of the Pudendum; but that in the
Arteries of each side Anastomoses are rarely to be found.

XXXVII. Besides the Vasa Sanguifera, Its Nerves.
there is also a small Nerve, proceeding from the sixth Pair, which endues it
with an exquisite Sense of Feeling, and occasions that pleasing Titillation in
the act of Venerie, so that the chiefest Seat of Women's Pleasure in Coition is
in this part. Whence by Bauhinus it is called the Sting of Venus; by Columbus
and others the Sweetness of Love. Nevertheless the most charming and voluptuous
Titillation lies in the rubbing of the Tentigo or Nut.

XXXVIII. Very rarely, or hardly A bonie Clitoris.
ever do we hear of what Bauhinus has observed concerning a Clitoris, that it
became bony in a Venetian Curtesan; which by reason of its extreme Hardness did
so offend and hurt her Lovers in Coition, that many times by reason of
Inflammations they were forced to fly to the Surgeon for Help.

XXXIX. A little below the Clitoris, The Exit of the Vrinary Passage.
above the Mouth of the Uterine Vagina, between the Nymphae, the exit of the
Urinary Passage is Conspicuous; which being somewhat prominent, and composing
the superior Caruncle, is the Extremity of the Sphincter of the Bladder, by
means of which Sphincter, after the Urine evacuated, the Orifice of the bladder
is again drawn together and closed up.

XL. The neck of the Bladder in The neck of the Bladder.
grown Women is the breadth of two Fingers in length, wrapped about by the
Sphincter Muscle, which enfolds the whole length of it.

XLI. But the neck it self consists The Prostates of Women.
within of a thin Membrane, which the Membranous Substance girdles round, being
as it were glandulous, whitish, and about the length of one Finger thick, and
full of Pores, especially near the Exit of the Urinary Passage, through which
several larger Channels running, terminate near the Exit of the Urinary Passage,
and in the forepart of the Uterine Vagina. Some there are who think that the
virious, serous, and phlegmatic Humors that daily flow from many women, are
evacuated through these Channels; but Regner de Graef, a most accurate
Anatomist, not without good Reason ascribing to that thicker Substance
encompassing the Urethra the use of the Prostates, believes that there is bred
therein a kind of seminal and somewhat slimy Juice, endued with a certain
Acrimony and Saltness, which causes Desire, and makes women Salacious, and
breaking forth through those little Channels and Pores, renders the Privities
delightfully Slippery in Coition. The same Regner de Graef, who believes that
viscous Matter coming from the Yard in the Gonorrhea, to be seldom evacuated
from the Stones or seminal Vessels, but most frequently from the Stones,
believes also that in women troubled with the Gonorrhea, the same matter is
evacuated out of these Parts alone, which he calls Prostates, and confirms it
by this Example. Now that the Gonorrhea, says he, slows from the Glandulous
Body, and through the little Sewers in and about the Urinary Passage, the
Dissection of a certain Woman infected with this Disease made manifest, for her
Womb and Vagina being untouched, we found only the Glandulous Body or Prostates
to be faulty.

XLII. But the said Orifice or neck The Orifice may be dilated.
of the Bladder, by reason of the softness of the Substance, may easily be
dilated, for Stones of an indifferent bigness to be expelled and brought away
by the great quantity of Urine rushing out at the same time with little or no
Trouble; or so that the same Stones, Dilatation being first made by the help of
Instruments, may be drawn out of the bladder without any Incision, as we find
it many times successfully done by your Lithotomists.

XLIII. The Clitoris is usually but The Bigness.
small, and lies hid under the Nymphs in the middle fatter part of the
Privities, or in the top of the larger Cleft: Afterward in grown People it
grows somewhat prominent, and when it swells it stirs up Concupiscence.

Riolanus well observes that in living People, where all things swell with Heat
and Spirit, this Part is manifestly to be seen, especially in the more
Lascivious, that have more voluptuously addicted themselves to Copulation; but
that in dead women it hardly appears, by reason of the smallness of its bulk,
that falls upon the Dissipation of the Spirits. And yet we publicly showed it
at the Theater in the dissected body of one not above twenty four Years of Age.

XLIV. Sometimes it happens, that Its Irregularities.
contrary to the common Course of Nature, this part grows out much more in
length like the Yard of a Man, so that Women have made an ill use of it, by
copulating with others of their own Sex, hence called Confricatrices, but
anciently Tribades. Thus Platerus asserts that he saw a woman's Clitoris,
equalling in length and thickness the Neck of a Goose. Riolanus and Schenkius
have observed it as long as a Man's little Finger. Regner de Graef saw a Girl
new Born, whose Clitoris had such a Resemblance to a Man's Yard, that the
Midwife and the rest of the women there present, took it for a Boy; and gave it
a Man's Name in Baptism. Plempius writes of one Helena, that lay with several
Women and vitiated several Virgins with that Part. I my self in a certain woman
at Montfort saw a Clitoris as long and thick as the ordinary Yard of a Man,
which happened to grow to that extent, after she had lain in three or four
times.

XLV. This is that part which in Hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodites thus prodigiously increasing forms the Virile Member, which
appears from hence, that in the slit of the Nut there is no conspicuous
Perforation to be seen; though the Stones seem to join to it at the sides
without. Such an Hermaphrodite I remember I once saw in France near Anjou about
28 Years of Age; who was bearded about the Mouth like a Man, yet went in women's
Apparel, and for a small matter turned up her Coats to any one that had a mind
to satisfy Curiosity. In this Party, the Clitoris at the upper end of the
Privity, was grown out of the Privity about half a Fingers length, and as thick
as a Man's Yard, with a Nut, Bridle, and Foreskin, as in Men; only that the Slit
of the Nut was not perforated. Such another English Hermaphrodite, about 22
Years of Age, in the Year 1668, we saw at Utretcht, whose Governor reported
that he was born a perfect Girl, but that when she came to be about five or six
Years of Age, her Genitals began to be changed, and by that time she came to be
ten Years old, her Yard became conspicuous. We saw the Yard hanging forth about
half a Finger long, but the Slit of the Nut was not persorated, otherwise not
unlike a Man's Yard, the Praeputium of which was formed by the Closure of the
Nymphs: which half covered and uncovered the Nut as in Men. And this Yard would
upon venereal and lascivious Thoughts erect it self a Fingers length, as his
Governor reported. In each of the Lips of the Privity, as in so many Cods, one
Stone was contained. A little below the Clitoris, was the urinary Passage, and
the Sheath of the Womb. His Governor related that he had his monthly Courses
at set times like other women; and in height of Lust the Seed would flow forth:
but that the Hermaphrodite himself could not tell whether it flowed through his
Yard, or from his Female Privities. His Duggs, that were but small, and his
hairy Breast and Thighs, seemed to denote something Masculine, as also his
Voice and his Hair, which was very thick and curling, with the Beard apparently
beginning to shoot forth upon his Lips. At first he wore woman's Apparel, but
the next Year, when I saw him again at my own House, by reason his Beard grew
so notorious, he altered his Habit, and put on Man's Apparel. From whence it
appears that these Hermaphrodites, are not such as partake of both Sexes, but
are really women, whose Genitals are not rightly formed, while the Stones fall
down into the Lips of the Privity, and the Clitoris grows out to an
extraordinary Length.

XLVI. Here arises a very weighty Whether the Seed pass thorough the Clitoris.
Question, whether your Confricatrices and Hermaphrodites, lying with other
women, spend any Seed through their Clitoral Yard, and eject it into the Womb?
I must confess I was once so much for the Affirmative, that I maintained it in
the first Edition of my Anatomy: thinking it might be confirmed by Reason and
Experience. By Reason: Because I thought it no more a Wonder for the Seed to
pass the invisible Pores of the Slit of the Clitoris, than in Men for it to
pass from the Stones to the Urinary Vesicles, through the invisible Pores of
the Vasa deferentia. Add to this, that those female Rubbers do not feel less
Pleasure in that Coition, than Men in their Copulation with Emission of Seed.
By Experience: Because I my self formerly knew a woman, of no mean Quality,
that made her Complaints to me, that when she was young, and feeling the Itch
of Lechery, she was wont often to rub her Clitoris with her Finger, and so was
wont to provoke her self to spend her Seed with great delight: But in progress
of time this ill Custom turned to a Distemper: So that if her Privity were
never so little touched either by the Cushion where she ^ate, or by her own
Drawers when she walked, or by any other manner of way, presently her Seed flew
from her whether she would or no, neither was she able to retain it at her own
Pleasure; upon which she came to me for Remedy. She told me moreover that she
could certainly feel her Clitoris swell and itch upon the least wanton Thought,
and that she certainly believed, that the Seed which was provoked by the
rubbing of her Finger flew out from that part, meaning her Clitoris.

Here comes in a remarkable Story, related by Jacob Duval Tract. de Hermaph.
with the whole Proceedings of the Court upon the Trial: Where among other
things he reports, that a certain Widow woman, who had two Sons living, by her
deceased Husband, and was married the second time, through Ignorance, to a
Hermaphrodite, confessed that the said Hermaphrodite one Night entered her Body
four times, and so strenuously and naturally did her business, that she never
lay with her Husband with more Pleasure. Which Reasons and Examples seemed
formerly to me to prove that your female Rubbers and Hermaphrodites lying with
other women, eject their Seed out of the Clitoris, as Men out of the Yard. But
because in this Age Anatomy grows still to more and more Perfection, through
the great Diligence and Labor of many eminent Persons, hence it came to pass
that by frequent Examination and Inspection, I found the round Ligaments of the
Womb not to be the ways through which the Seed could be carried to the
Clitoris; nor that there was any Urethra, nor any thing like it in the
Clitoris; not that any Seed could pass through its Slit, and therefore of
necessity it behooved me to recant my former Opinion; finding the forementioned
Reasons and Examples not sufficient to defend it. For as to that woman that
provoked forth a seminal Matter by the rubbing of the Clitoris, it is very
likely that that same viscous Matter flew out of the foresaid Prostates, into
the Vagina, as it is frequent with Men to spend upon rubbing their own Yards;
and then bursting forth of the Mouth of the Sheath, moistened the Clitoris,
which deceived the woman and made her think that the Seed flew out of the
Clitoris. The same is to be said of other female Rubbers exercising other
women, as also of Duvals Hermaphrodite, whose wife thought he had spent into
her body through his extended Clitoris. Which Error proceeded from hence, that
while her Husband rubbed the sheath of her womb with his Clitoral Yard, the
viscous Matter being provoked out of her Prostates by the Pleasure of
Frication, flew out into her Vagina, with which Pleasure the woman being
ravished and deceived, thought it had proceeded from the Seed ejected into her
womb by the Hermaphrodite. But all these things being more seriously
considered, most certain it is, that no Seed of women is evacuated through the
Clitoris.

XLVII. Thus having described all (...).
the Parts of Women serving for Generation; here are two Questions to be
answered. First, Whether the Genitals of Women differ from those of Men but
only in Situation. Secondly, Whether a Woman may be changed into a Man.

XLVIII. As to the first, Galen Whether the Genitals of Men and Women differ in
nothing but in Situation.
seem to demonstrate and teach it, in his Book de usu Part. with whom many both
Grecians and Arabians take part, who unanimously affirm that the Genitals of
Women differ only in Situation: The one by reason of the colder temper of Women
and weakness of Nature being concealed within, the other by reason of the
extraordinrry Heat and Strength of Nature, being thrust forth of the Body. For
that if the womb should be thrust forth, it would hang with the inside turned
the outside, and the external smooth and equal part would become the innermost,
and the inner rugged and unequal side would become outermost, and so form a
Cod, and the Stones that cleave to the sides within the Abdomen, would be
contained in that innermost Scrotum, which Scrotum were to be distinguished
with a Seam in the middle, as the womb is distinguished within, to which the
Clitoris being removed would form a Yard above it. Or if the Man's Cod should be
forced toward the inner Parts, then it must have the form of the womb within
the Abdomen; and the Stones contained therein must cleave to the sides on each
side, and the Yard drawn in, must be hid like the Clitoris.

XLIX. But though this most ingenious The instruments of Generation differ in
each Sex, being compared.
Contrivance be adorned with some probability, yet certain it is, that the
Genital Parts of both Sexes, though they seem in some things to resemble one
another, but only in Situation, nevertheless they differ very much in many
things.

For 1. in women, the Arteries and Veins are much shorter, and more twisted
than in men. 2. They want the Pyramidal Body formed out of the Veins and
Arteries, before their entrance into the Stones. 3. Secondly they want the
Parastates and Seminal Vessels. 4. Their Prostates are of a different shape
from those of men. 5. The Tubes are wanting in men; and the Vasa Deferentia are
of another sort than those in women. 6. The Testicles differ in bigness and
shape; being much less, more moist, and lither in women than in men. 7. The
Substance of men's Stones consists of Seminary Vessels (with some few Vasa
Sanguifera) interwomen one within another; but the Stones of women consist of
Membranes, Vessels, Cups, Vesicles, and other Bodies. 8. The Clitoris differs
very much from the man's Yard in length and thickness; neither is it perforated
with any conspicuous hole like the Yard. 9. There is no Urethra in the
Clitoris. 10. The Scrotum differs extremely from the Substance of the womb, as
being that which in the womb is thick, compacted and nervous, and in women with
child grows to the thickness of two fingers: in the Cod the skin is soft,
wrinkled, and never increases in thickness. 11. In Brutes, who have a horned
womb, it is apparent, that the womb turned inside outside, will not form a
Scrotum, though their Males have a Scrotum like the Scrotum of men: in their
Females nothing like a Clitoris or a Yard was ever yet discovered: or if the
Scrotum should be turned to the inner parts, could the Yard supply the place of
a Clitoris, seeing that in a Dog, a Wolf, a Fox, and several other Creatures,
the Yard is inwardly bony. So that if it were true, that the Genitals in men
differed only in Situation, the same also would happen in Brutes; which, as is
obvious to any man, neither is nor can be. When it is apparent that the secret
Parts of men and women differ not only in Situation, but in Substance, Bigness,
and Use.

L. As to the latter, Whether women Whether women may be changed into men*
may be changed into Men, Experience seems to confirm it as a thing most
certain, and the Authority of Histories: For there are several Stories of Women
changed into Men. Pliny writes, that in the Consulship of Licinius Crassus, and
Cassius Longinus, there was a Child born at Cassinum of a Virgin, which by the
command of the Southsayers, was carried into a Desert Island. He also relates
what Mutianus asserts, That he saw a Maid at Argos, who after she was married,
became so much a Man, with Beard and all other Virile parts, that she
afterward married a Wife: and that of the same sort he saw a little Boy at
Smyrna. Pliny adds, That he saw in Africa, L. Cossicius, a Citizen of Trisidis,
now Tensert, who being a Female, and married, upon the very Wedding Day was
changed into a Male. Among our Modern Authors Cardinal Volaterran under
Alexander VI. attests that he saw a Virgin, who had a Yard that fell down upon
her Nuptial day. Pontanus tells us of a Woman of Cajeta, a Fisherman's Wife,
that became a Man, after she had been fourteen years a Woman: and the same
thing happened to Emilia the Wife of Antony Spensa, a Citizen of Eboli in the
Kingdom of Naples; ten years after she was married. With several other Examples
brought, Duval, Merula, Donatus, and others, which seem to confirm the
Affirmative part.

But if we consider the thing more narrowly, it is sufficiently apparent that
all Historians that wrote those Stories, gave too much credit to Vulgar Report,
without inquiring as they ought to have done, into the truth of the Matter.

LI.

1. We read that it has so fallen Observations.
out, that some Males, though very rarely, have had their Yards that have lain
latent within the Abdomen; as we our selves have seen the Stones lie hid in the
Groyns more than once; and hence the Midwives and Women finding the Yard as it
were laid up in a Cleft, took the Infant that was born to be a Girl, and took
care that it should be baptized as a Girl: but afterward Youth and Puberty
coming on, the latent Pintle swelling in the heat of Lust, broke loose from its
narrow Consinement. But such Men were not Women before, though so adjudg'd by
ignorant Women, and Men altogether as idle, till their Genitals making way in
the heat and fury of libidinous desires, they were thought to be changed out of
Women into Men; and such were all the Accidents mentioned in Pliny and
Volaterrane, in which Examples there is no more to be observed, but that the
Yard broke forth upon the Nuptial day, when loose Desires and amorous Flames
had warmed and heated all the Body. 2. As we have already observed, in some
Women of full Age, the Clitoris sometimes grows to the bigness of a Man's Yard,
insomuch that they are able to lie with others of their own Sex; and when that
happens, what wonder is it if the ignorant Vulgar persuade themselves that such
Women are changed into Men: and such as these seem to be the Accidents related
by Pontanus. 3. Many times it happens, especially among Persons of great
Quality, that the Mothers apprehensive of some danger, either from Enemies, or
loss of Inheritance, warily and prudently conceal the Male Sex, dissemble a Boy
to be a Girl, and to that purpose all the time of their Childhood, put the Boy
into Girls apparel: but at length the Sons contemning their Female habit, have
put on Man's clothes, which might cause a report among the Vulgar, that the
Girls were changed into Boys. Thus in the time of Ferdinand the first King of
Naples, Carola and Francisca, the two Daughters of Lewis Guerna, were said to
have changed Sex at fifteen years of Age. I should rather have said, had
changed their Apparel: For no question, but to conceal their Sex, so long they
went in Women's Apparel, which at fifteen years of Age they threw off; fearing
otherwise to be betrayed by their Voices, and the budding forth of their
Beards, whatever Fulgosus invents to the contrary. 4. Sometimes it happens that
some are born Hermaphrodites, and because it is counted an abominable thing to
partake of both Sexes, their Mothers make it their business to hide that defect
from their very Cradles, and to bring up such Children in Women's habit; but
then, if at any time appinted their Beards begin to grow, they are forced to
change their habit: and so are said to be changed from Men to Women. 5.
Sometimes it happens through an extraordinary change of Temper that some Women
come to have Beards and deep Voices, which is the reason the Common People
think 'em to be changed out of Women into Men. Thus Hippocrates l. 6. tells us
of two Women, Phaetusa, the Wife of Pythias, and Larissa the Wife of Gorippus,
who by reason of the suppression of their monthly Flowers, became deep voiced,
and bearded like Men.
LII. And thus most certain it is, No woman ever changed her Sex.
that never any Woman changed her Sex, or can change it; but that whatever
Historians have written concerning these Metamorphoses, are all idle and
ridiculous Fables: while they, being over-credulous, were deceived by Vulgar
report, and not examining the Truth, as they ought to have done, contrary to
what they intended, obtruded Falsities upon their Readers.

Lastly, we shall add this, That if Women at any time were ever changed into
Men, without doubt Men were sometimes changed into Women. Which nevertheless
was never heard of: and the reason is, Because the Yard being hid up in a Chink
resembling the Female Cleft, may swell and break forth in the heat of Youth;
and so the Person thought to be a woman, becomes changed into a Man: but being
once pendant without, can never be drawn back, to form a Woman's Privity.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Constitution and Frame of the Female Genital Parts in
Women with Child.
Though the Generative Parts of Women are so constituted as we have described,
yet of necessity there is something more to be added, how they are altered in
Women with Child, and to show the difference between empty Women and Women with
Child.

I. The Womb in empty Women is The womb in empty women.
about the bigness of a Wallnut, or a good Pigeons Egg; of a fleshie, nervous,
solid, and somewhat hard Substance, the Concavity within being very small;
which Form and Constitution it still retains in the beginning of Conception,
when first it clasps it self about the Seed retained.

II. The Birth increasing, this Substance In women with child.
becomes more soft and spungy; and by degrees, as the birth grows bigger, so
the Substance enlarges it self, and the Womb grows thicker. And so the Birth
and its Habitation increases together to that degree, so that at length about
the upper part of the bottom, it comes to be as thick as a Man's thumb, or the
breadth of two fingers.

III. By that time a Woman is half The swelling of the Breasts.
gone, the Breasts begin to swell, and the Teats being squeezed, the Milk comes
forth at first more watery, afterward thicker. At the same time the place
above the Paps enlarges circularly, and the Teats before contracted grow more
loose and tumid; the Lips also of the Privity swell out fuller and rounder.

IV. The Orifice of the Womb within The straitning of the Orifice.
is closed up, and so continues exactly closed all the time the woman goes with
child, being damm'd up with a kind of viscous Slime; so that nothing can flow
out of the womb, nor any thing be admitted into it: unless by chance, in a very
lustful Copulation, happening to gape somewhat wider than ordinary, it receives
the Male Seed, which occasions a Superfoetation. The same Orifice in the first
Months of Childbearing, is hard, but afterward hard and pulpous.

V. The womb increasing in bigness, The Situation of the Guts.
the small Guts separate themselves to the sides of it: If the Birth incline
more to the right side, the Guts are driven to the left side, and so quite the
contrary: and hence it is that women believe they have Twins. At the same time
the Caul is forced upward; concerning which Riolanus observes, that if it wrap
it self about the Stomach, the woman has no Appetite to her Victuals all the
time.

VI. The Stones, which in empty The Situation of the Stones.
women are rounder and looser, and rest upon the upper part of the womb, in
women with child, by reason of the enlargement of the womb, seem to descend;
and first to rest upon the middlemost, afterward upon the lowermost sides of
the womb. Moreover, after the sixth Month, they became more contracted,
flatter, and somewhat long; and the Spermatic Veins are much bigger than the
Arteries.

VII. The Neck is drawn upward, The condition of the Neck.
longer, but narrower: And two Months before the Birth, the inner The
Relaxation of the Orifice.
Orifice of the womb becomes more loose and tumid, and by degrees dilates it
self as the woman grows nearer her time, unfolding it self like a Rose; as if
Nature were preparing a way for the Birth to grow forth; in which work she is
not a little assisted by the weight and strong motion of the struggling Infant.

In the last Month the Lips of the Privity become more soft and more tumid: and
the neck or sheath of the womb, being pressed by the weight of the Infant, is
so shortened, that the mouth of the womb may be easily felt by immission of the
finger.

In the last two or three weeks before the woman's time, the foresaid Orifice
of the womb is moistened with a certain glutinous and viscous Humor, to render
it more loose, and apt to gape, and be dilated without violence, and give the
freer passage to the Infant in going forth. Bigness of the Vessels.


VIII. From the Stones to the Tubes, the bottom of the womb, and neck, the
Vessels are bigger, and more apparent than usual. For Cornelius Gemma observes,
that Vessels of the womb it self are more distended and tumid after many
Labors. But that seems too hyperbolical which Bartholine writes, that the
Vessels of the womb in time of Childbearing, swell with Blood to that degree,
especially near the time of Delivery, that the Emulgents are half as large as
the Aorta or Vena cava. I have seen 'em very large indeed, but never so large.
But perhaps he wrote this upon the Dissection of some Female Elephant. And yet
Regner de Graef confirms the same thing: In women with child, says he, I have
sometimes seen those Vessels dilated to that degree, that I could easily thrust
my finger into their hollowness; which after the Evacuation of the Secundines,
are so contracted again, that in sixteen days space, together with the womb,
they recover The reason why the Vasa Sanguifera are so much dilated in women
with child.
their wonted proportion; only that they are more t^isted and contorted in
those that have had many Children, by reason of their being extended more in
length.

IX. The reason why the Vasa Sanguifera are so much dilated in women with
child, is said to be the necessity of a greater quantity of Blood, requisite in
that place for the Nourishment of the Infant. But in regard the forcing of the
Blood through the Arteries, is swift enough for the Nourishment of all the
Parts, and that without any extraordinary dilatation of the Vessels, and for
the same reason sufficient for the Nourishment of the Birth in the womb;
therefore there seems to be another quite different Reason of this dilatation:
that is to say, Because that through the increasing of the Substance of the
Womb, and the weighty bulk of the growing Infant, the Veins of the womb being
more than usually compressed, will not permit so free a Circulation of the
Blood as in empty or free Women. And seeing that more flows in through the
Arteries, than can pass through the compressed Veins, and be remitted back time
enough to the heart, hence it is that the Blood, by reason of its slower
Circulation, which in the mean time is forced through the Arteries with an
equal Chanel, being there detained and collected together in greater quantity,
more and more distends the Sanguiferous Vessels, so that toward the time of
Delivery they are more than usually large. Which nevertheless, after Delivery,
the said Compression ceasing, and the Circulation becoming free, within a few
days are contracted by the Fibers themselves, and return to their first
Condition.

In like manner the same thick Substance of the womb, no less than the Vessels,
presently after Delivery, and the Evacuation of the Secundines, begins to fall
and dry up, so that in a few days it recovers its pristine solidity and
hardness; and this sometimes in six or seven, sometimes in fourteen, or more
days.

All which things the accurate inspection of many Childbearing women, and
women with child has taught us.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Seed.
HAving examined the Parts of Generation, Order requires that we should proceed
to the History of the Birth contained in the womb. Which before we begin, we
shall premise some things concerning the first Foundations and Principles of
the Birth: Beginning first with Human Seed; and discoursing in the next of the
Conception, and the Forming of the Birth.

I. The Seed is sometimes called The Name.
Sperm, sometimes Geniture. And though Aristotle seems to make some distinction
between Sperm and Geniture, as if the one were the Seed of those that copulate,
the other of those that never engender; and though others take Geniture for that
Seed only which may properly be call*d fruitful; others for the Seed of man and
woman mixed together: Nevertheless, because the same Philosopher confounds these
Names up and down in other places, as also Galen, and many others do, we also
intend to make use of these Names for one and the same thing.

But because in Generation there are two Seeds that come to be considered, of
which neither can produce any thing apart; but which being duly mixed together
to perfect Generation, I think it will be most beneficial to discourse first of
the Seed of man, and then of the Seed of woman apart, and of what proceeds from
the mixture of both.

II. The Seed of man therefore is a (...).
frothy, white, viscous Liquor, impregnated with a germinating or blossoming
spirit, made in the Stones and other Spermatic Vessels of Arterious Blood and
Animal Spirits, for the Generation of a like Creature.

We think that Opinion to be rejected as unworthy refutation, maintained by
Aristotle, and asserted by his Followers, that the Seed is an Excrement of the
third Concoction, when as it is the most noble Substance of the whole Body, as
it were a Compendium of the whole Man; or at least such a Substance as contai^s
in it self the Compendium of all Mankind.

In what Parts it is generated, we have sufficiently explained Cap. 22. and
Cap. 24.

III. Of the Matter of which Seed, What the Matter of it?
is generated, and the Parts out of which that matter proceeds, various are the
Opinions of Philosophers. The opin^ of the Ancients.


IV. Avicen says, That the Seed proceeds from the Brain, Heart, and Liver. Some
think it falls from the more solid Parts into the lesser Veins, and from those
ascends into the greater, and like a little Cloud or Settlement, swims upon the
rest of the Humors, and at length is attracted by the power of the Stones. The
reasons of which Opinions, and their Refutations, may be seen in Aristotle,
Fernelius, Laurentius, and Vallesius.

V. Many of the Ancients likewise The Ancients say it is made of the Juice
falling from the Brain and Spinal Marrow.
have asserted that the Seed is made of a certain Juice that falls from the
Brain and Marrow of the Backbone. Thus writes Hippocrates l. de Genesis that the
Seed is diffused out of the Brain into the Loins and Marrow of the Backbone.
Thus also writes Plato in Timaeus, That the Seed is a Deflux of the Marrow of
the Backbone; and Al^maeon, that it is a Portion of the Brain.

VI. The more Modern Authors, The opinion of Modern Authors.
who could find no such large Conveyances from the Brain and Spinal Marrow to
the Stones, rejected the foresaid Opinion altogether, and asserted the Blood to
be generated out of the Blood flowing through the Spermatical Vessels to the
Stones. Which Opinion, as most true and indubitable, for many Ages has been
received and taught by all the Philosophers.

VII. But of late Glisson, Wharton, Opposed by some English Physicians without
Reason.
and Charleton, English Physicians, have opposed this received Opinion, who
write that the Matter of the Seed is a more crude and chylous Humor, carried
from the Mesentery to the Brain, and thence to the Stones through the Nerves,
of which they say there are a vast number inserted into the Testicles and
Epididymis: which is contrary however to all Experience; when our own Eyes tell
us, tha^ only very few, and those very small, and scarce visible, Nerves reach
to those Parts.

VIII. Clement Niloe produces another Clement Niloe's opinion erroneous.
Opinion, affirming the Seed to be generated out of the Lymphatic Liquor. But
in regard the Lympha never flows to the Stones out of any other Parts, but
while the Seed is making, is separated out of that Seminal Matter, and out of
the Testicles themselves through the Lymphatic Vessels that take their rise
within the Testicles, ascends to the Abdomen, and so to the Vasa Sanguifera, it
is apparent that the Seed is not made out of the Lympha; but that the Lympha is
only occasioned by the making of the Seed; as it is also an Effect of the
making of bilious Ferment, Cap. 13, 14. Moreover, if the Lympha should be
carried to the Testicles, as it is not, and in them should be mixed with the
Matter that is to be changed into Seed, then it would not hold proportion with
the Matter so to be changed into Seed, but only with the Ferment preparing the
Matter, that it may be conveninently turned into Seed. So that Niloe does not
seem to have observed the Motion of the Stones upward, nor to have understood
the use of it, Cap. 13. and 17.

IX. Hieronymus Barbatus of Padua, Barbatus of Padua his opinion.
seems not to recede far from this Opinion, who Lib. de Sang. and Sero. writes
that the Seed is not generated out of the Seed, but out of the Serum. Which
Opinion he endeavors to support with many, but such insipid Reasons, as are
not worth Refutation. But none of these, either Modern or Ancient Opinions,
have hit the Mark. But he who considers more seriously the Prolific Liquor,
will certainly find, that to the making of the Seed there concurs for Matter,
partly Blood, flowing through The true Matter of the Seed.
the Spermatic Arteries; partly Animal Spirits brought through the Nerves.

X. That the Blood constitutes the The Blood constitutes the first Mass of Seed.
first Mass of the Seed, is apparent from the large Spermatic Arteries carried
to the Stones, which carry more Blood than only serves for the Nourishment of
the Stones. The same is confirmed by the Spermatic Veins, carrying back to the
Vena Cava the Blood that remains after the Nourishment of the Stones, and
making of the Seed. The same is also taught by Experience, when upon immoderate
Copulation, we shall find the Blood to be ejected instead of Seed, not without
some kind of Titillation; as Aristotle himself acknowledges, and the
observation of several Physicians testifies, by reason that the Blood flowing
in great quantity through the Arteries, has not sufficient time to stay in the
Stones, nor Animal Spirit poured out of the Nerves strong and plentiful enough,
that the Blood could be converted into Seed in so short a space. Add to this
that in the Stones themselves, and other Spermatic Vessels weakened by
immoderate Copulation, and the overmuch dissipation of the Spirits, the
Seminific power becomes debilitated so far, as not to be able so speedily to
convert into Seed the Blood which is brought, being destitute of sufficient
Spirit from the Nerves. Which weakness is apparent from hence, that after
immoderate Copulation the Seed first generated is crude and watery. And this
Experience Reason supports, which teaches us that the Blood concurs in the
Seed, as the primary and greatest part of the Matter. For that in our Bodies
all things are enlivened by the Vital Spirit flowing from the Heart; and
inherent in the Arterious Blood, and that decaying, nothing can be revived: for
that if upon any occasion that Blood be stopped from flowing into the parts,
they presently dye away. Hence of necessity that enlivening Spirit must be
infused into the Seed, as containing in it self an enlivening Power, chiefly
requisite in the Seed: which Spirit, since it cannot be conferred without the
Subject to which it is inherent, that is, Arterious Blood, hence it follows
undoubtedly, that the Blood concurs to constitute the Matter of the Seed.

XI. Now that the Animal Spirits, That the Animal Spirits contribute to the
making of the Seed.
brought by the Nerves, and thickened in the Stones into a thin Liquor, and
mixed with the Blood, of necessity concurs to the Matter of the Seed, is
apparent from hence, that there is a great Correspondence between the Brains
and the Testicles, in regard the Brain, the Nerves, and all the nervous Parts
are much weakened by immoderate Copulation; and in regard that the waste of
much Seed, wastes also a great part of the Animal Spirits, attended by lassitude
and a manifest impairing of the Strength, together with sadness and dejection
of Mind; there is thereby a disturbance in a Man's Countenance, accompanied
with a trembling of the Limbs; all which things declare that the Animal Spirits
are plentifully evacuated with the Seed. Which Seed, if it were only made of
the Blood, such Symptoms would never attend the Evacuation of a little Seed;
for that a whole Pint of Blood taken from a Man, does not weaken him so much as
the loss of an Ounce of Seed. To this we may add the Consideration of the
Spinal Consumption, thus described by Hippocrates, Lib. 2. de Morb. The Spinal
Consumption, says he, arises from the Marrow of the Backbone, and chiefly
seizes upon new married and libidinous Brides. Concerning which, if you ask the
Patient, he will tell you, that he feels as it were Flies and Emmets creeping
along from the upper parts, as the Head, etc. down to the Backbone. And when
he goes to Stool, or makes Water, he voids a great quantity of Liquid Genital
Seed; nor can he generate, though he lies with his Wife. He is the Laughing Stock
of Venus, and suffers Nocturnal Pollutions as well as at other times: but
especially when he has traveled a sleep place, or run hard; he draws his
breath short, he loses his strength, his Head aches, and his Ears sound.

By the Description of this Disease, it is sufficiently manifest, that there is
a certain Spirit that flows through the Nerves from the Brain and Backbone to
the Composition of the Seed. For hence it is that the Brain, being weakened
after immoderate Coition, there happens a Deflux of Spirits not sufficiently
concocted, but crude, from the Brain to the Spinal Marrow, whence happens a
Colliquation, and a flagging and looseness of the Nerves. Hence Nocturnal
Pollutions in the sleep, the Spermatic Vessels being weakened by immoderate
Coition, and having lost their retentive Faculty: besides that that same crude
and unconcocted Spirit flowing through the Nerves, becomes somewhat salt and
acrimonious, and with its Acrimony vellicating and tickling the weakened
Genitals, provokes them to an Effusion of Seed.

XII. Now this Animal Spirit diffused Salt the chief Composition in the Seed.
through the Nerves from the Brain to the Stones, and there thickened into a
thin Liquor, there in that same Contexture of small Vessels, of which the
Substance of the Stones consists, is mingled with the spiritous Blood, and by
slightly fermenting it with its Acrimony, and separating the Lymphatic Juice,
which is to be carried upward through the Lymphatic Vessels, rising out of the
Substance of the Stones, to the inner parts of the Abdomen, by the means of
certain small, scarce visible Glandules, dispersed among the small Vessels of
the Testicles, specifically dissolves the saltish Particles of it, and
separates it from the Redundancy of the Sulphurous Liquor, with which salt
Particles, and some few Sulphury, in its long and winding passage through the
small Vessels of the Stones, by a specific Faculty of the Stones themselves it
is concocted into Seed, which flows from the Parastates through the Vasa
Deferentia into the Seminary Vesicles, where it is condensed into a frothy
Liquor, and is reserved till the time of Evacuation. Now because this salt
Liquor has the greatest share in the Composition of the Seed, and that its
fruitfulness and balsamic Power chiefly proceeds from thence, the Ancients
feigned that Venus sprang out of the Sea, and gave the Appellation of salacity
to Lust.

XIII. Now that the salter Particles The Proof.
of the Blood separated by a certain Effervescency, necessarily, and in great
quantity concur in the Composition of the Seed, and far exceed the sulphury
Particles, various Arguments assure us.

First, Because in fat Bodies, where fat and sulphurous Humors predominate,
there is little Seed generated, and hence they have little proclivity to
Venery. 2. Because in drier Bodies, where salt Humors predominate, much Seed
is generated, which make 'em more able for the Sports of Venus. 3. Because the
subacid Seed exhales a kind of smell, which must necessarily proceed from a
dissolved Salt. 4. Because the increasing of that in quantity excites an
itching Titillation, and provoke to Lasciviousness. 5. Because the Fertility of
most things proceeds from Salt, either melted or dissolved by heat, and thence
it is no wonder that the foecundity of Human Seed chiefly depends upon it. The
first is apparent from many Experiments. Woodashes, especially of Burnt-oak,
strewn over the Fields, renders 'em much more fertile, and that Fertility is
more lasting than the spreading of Cow Dung over the same Fields, which only
causes a Fertility quick and of short d^rance: Because they contain a greater
quantity of Salt, which being melted by the Rain, and attenuated by the heat of
the Sun, augments that Fertility of Grass and Herbs. Grounds dung'd with the
Dung either of Men, or Pigeons, or Poultry, enfertilize those Lands ten times
more than either Cow; or Horse dung; because the other contains ten times a
greater quantity of balsamic Salt. Rainwater impregnated with much volatile
Salt, attenuated by the heat of the Sun, and with the watery Vapors exhaled
and thickened into clouds, causes the Herbs and Plants to flourish and grow to a
greater Perfection, than if watered with other Water. Hence Aristotle writes in
his Hist. Animal. l. 8. c. 19. that Reeds which grow in Lakes and Ditches,
never thrive so well as when great store of Rain falls. In like manner Fish in
their Ponds thrive much better when it rains. The Dew impregnated with a
Volatile and Balsamic Salt, produces several sorts of Worms and Insects upon
the Trees. In Vinegar exposed to the Sun, and long kept, we find many times
little Worms to breed; concerning which thing, Bartholine gives us a remarkable
Observation, Hist. Anat. cent. 4. hist. 13. who admires it indeed, but seems
not to understand the Reason. Which is plain, because the whole Acidity of the
Vinegar proceeds from the Salt being exactly melted and dissolved; which
appears from the Spirit of Salt, which is most acid, and for that common Salt
being boiled with Vinegar, renders it much more acid. Now the thinnest
Particles of this melted Salt, attenuated and volatiliz'd by the heat of the
Sun, agitate the Particles of the Vinegar with particular Motions, and so
joining with some after one, with others after another manner, beget a kind of
Fertility which breeds Worms, enlivened by the Beams of the Sun.
And thus I think we have sufficiently proved that there is a very great
balsamic power in Salt, and that the foecundity of all things living proceeds
from and out of Salt. So that it need not seem a wonder, that more salt
Particles should be requisite to compose the Matter of Seed than sulphury
Particles. But I have told you that they are plentifully separated from the
Blood by a certain way of Fermentation, caused by the Animal Spirits flowing to
the Stones; which Animal Spirit consists of salt, sharp Particles.

XIV. Now if the Animal Spirits When the Seed is well made.
flow through the Nerves in sufficient quantity, and strong enough, to the
Stones, and there be concocted into a spiritous Liquor, together with the said
spiritous Salt part of the Arterious Blood, or be duly prepared and changed in
the long windings and turnings, the Seed becomes well concocted, spirituous,
and fruitful; which thickning in the Seminary Vessels, in Copulation is ejected
white. But if that Spirit flow weak, and in small quantity to the Stones, the
Seed then generated becomes crude, watery, and not so white* the Spirits being
dissipated, as it happens, through immoderate Copulation; and the Spermatic
Parts become weak, frigid, and moist; through which ill temper of the Parts,
the narrow ends of the little Nerves that lose themselves in the Stones, grow
limber, and fall, so that very few Animal Spirits can penetrate to the Stones;
and such as pass through are stifled by the extreme coldness and moisture of
the Stones: and thence it happens that there is no convenient Fermentation in
the Blood flowing through the Spermatic Arteries, but the greatest part of it
is converted into crude, waterish, and sharp Juice, which being carried to the
Seminary Vesicles, and there gathered together, easily burst forth into the
Urethra, especially in Venereal Dreams.

XV. And for the same Reason the viscous Seminal Matter, that uses to settle in
the Prostates, is also crude and watery, and by its extraordinary Moisture
relaxing the Pores, toward the Urethra in Men, toward the Uterine Vagina in
Women, flows forth without being felt, and unvoluntarily, The reason of the
Gonorrhea Simplex.
which causes the Simple Gonorrhea. Which Seminal Matter, if it be infected
with any impure Venereal Malignity, and sharp Corruption, presently happens a
Virulent Gonorrhea, which is attended many times by Corrosion and Exulceration.
Now this Efflux of Seminal Matter, or Simple Gonorrhea, many times molests the
Patient for a long time, even whole years together, with little debilitating
the strength; because that spiritous Liquor coming from the Nerves, is mixed in
a small quantity, with such Seed, and very few or no Animal Spirits waste
themselves in its Evacuation; which at other times in libidinous Copulation
flow to the obscene Parts in great quantity, and are dissipated to the great
wasting of a man's strength: whereas there is no labor in the spontaneous and
unfelt Emission of the Seed. Thus Bartholine reports that he saw at Padua, a
Person that had been troubled with this Efflux of his Seed for above thirty
years, without any prejudice to his health; and another at Bergamo infested
with the same Distemper for ten years, in other respects healthful, but only
that he was very much emaciated.

XVI. If any Person wonder how How the Matters composing the Seed flow together.
such a spiritous Animal Vapor should flow so copiously through such narrow
and hardly conspicuous little Nerves, let him consider that the Arteries also,
by that time they come to the Stones, are almost invisible, and yet they carry
a great deal of Blood. Moreover, let him know that those copious Vapors are
not carried thither so copiously, by reason of the extreme thinness of the
little Nerves, only that they descend by degrees to the Stones: And hence after
a stout Copulation, and much Emission of Seed, there is requisite some space of
time before a sufficient recruit can come for the generation of new Seed.

XVII. But some will say, Those An Obj^ion answered.
little Nerves seem only to terminate in the Tunicle next wrapped about the
Stones, which for that reason is endu'd with a quick Sense, but never reach to
the innermost Substance of the Stones, which for that reason is insensible, as
is apparent from several Distempers, which is a sign that those Spirits cannot
flow to the inner Substance. I answer, That as there are no Nerves, so neither
are any Blood-bearing Vessels to be seen in the Stones of healthy People;
however, it does not follow from thence, that there are no such Vessels in
those Parts, for that they are there, and in whom, and when conspicuous, we
have declared Cap. 22. So without doubt there are some slender Nerves in those
Parts, though not to be perceived by reason of their white Color and extreme
Exility. Which Exility, and the small quanity of Spirits that pass through 'em,
may be the reason that the inner Substance of the Stones is so dull of feeling:
Besides, that the inner Substance of the Stones is nothing membranous, for
there is also an acute Sense in Membranes; and because the Stones, and other
Parenchyma's of the Bowels have their proper and peculiar Substance, consisting
of Vessels interwoven one among another, the like to which there is not in the
whole Body, besides which, by reason of its structure and feeling, is of an
obtuse Sense, as the Substance of the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, etc. All
which Parts, like the Stones, have their exact Sense of feeling, lying only in
the Tunicle that enfolds 'em.

XVIII. But here another Difficulty A Difficulty.
arises, more weighty than the former, that seeing the animal Spirits are every
way disposed of by the Mind, now here, now there, at pleasure, why they are
never copiously disposed of to flow into the Testicles, and cause 'em to swell,
especially upon lustful Cogitations? I answer, those Spirits are not unequally
disposed of to any Parts, but first to those that require some short stretching
forth, to the end they may act, or act more vigorously, as the Eyes, when any
thing is to be viewed with more attention; the Womb, when the Birth is to be
expelled; the Genitals in Copulation; then and chiefly then they are disposed
of to those parts that serve for voluntary Motion, as the Muscles. But they
flow always equally with a continued Course to the Parts only sensitive, as
also to those Parts wherein they contribute any thing to Nourishment or
Fermentation, as being an Influx that has nothing common with the Will: And
that they flow sometimes in less, sometimes in greater Quantity to those Parts
which are sensitive, and so occasion a quicker or a more obtuse Sense of
Feeling, that happens not through the determination of the Mind, but by reason
of their greater or lesser quantity, or the largeness or narrowness of the
Passages. And thus the Animal Spirits flow to the Testicles, not by any
determined, but merely by a natural Motion.

XIX. Now in the Seed thus made Two parts of the Seed.
of the said Matter, two parts are to be considered: Some subtle, and very
spirituous, which are very few, but very effective: Which we now call the
Germen or Blossom: Others thicker, frothy and watery, which constitute the
chiefest part of the Seed, and nourish and involve the spirituous Parts.

XX. Now these spirituous and Thick and spirituous Parts mixed and clotted
together compose the Mass of the Seed.
thicker Parts being mixed and clotted together compose the Mass of the Seed,
containing in themselves a double Principle, an Efficient and a Material. Which
Material is double, the one out of which the first Threads of the Birth are
formed, which is the most spirituous Part, containing the efficient or forming
Principle; the other Alimentary, being the thicker part of the Seed melted and
dissolved.

XXI. If this efficient Principle be Where the efficient Principle is wanting,
the Seed is unfruitful.
not in the Seed, as it happens in unfruitful Seed, then when nothing can be
formed out of it, it flows away and is corrupted. But if the efficient
Principle ready to break forth into Act, be destitute of the material
Principle, by which it ought to be fomented and sustained: Then also nothing
comes of it, as when the Seed, the second or third Day after Injection, by
reason of some sudden Fright, or other Accident, flows out of the womb; and
then nothing comes of the Blossom.

But these two Principles being united together, act nothing upon one another
but are Idle, so long as the material thicker Principle be curdled together;
for this detains the spirituous efficient Principle, as it were intangl'd and
lulled asleep, and so restrains it, that it cannot put it self forth into
Action. But when the thicker material Principle is dissolved and melted in some
convenient Place by the external proper Heat of the womb, then its inbred
efficient Spirit by degrees gets rid of those Fetters, is roused up and becomes
free, and its Power breaks forth into Act, and proceeding through the Uterine
Tubes to the Ovaries, enfertilizes the Eggs which are therein ready prepared
and matur'd, and begins to act in them, and in each of them out of it self to
delineate and form that which is to be formed, while the thicker parts of the
Seed are melted and made fit; to receive and gently cherish the Eggs falling
out of the Ovaries through the Tubes into the Womb. For if the Eggs should fall
into a dry womb, they would produce no more than the Seed of a Plant cast into
dry Ground. For as nothing comes of that Seed unless sowed in a Ground
moistened with a tepid Humidity, so nothing comes of the Egg unless it fall
into a womb watered with a convenient lukewarm Moisture.

XXII. Some will say, this cannot An Objection answered.
be so, for the Eggs of Fowl do not fall into a moist womb, but into a dry
Nest, and yet a Chicken is hatched out of this Egg. I answer, That as for Birds
and other Creatures that lay Eggs, there is not the same Reason for them,
neither do they require any such Moisture of the womb, or thicker part of the
masculine Seed, but only the Fomentation of Warmth. For being to hatch Chickens
without themselves, provident Nature has provided for them, within the shells
of the Eggs, what was requisite and could not be conferred by any thing
extrinsic, that is a copious convenient Moisture, wherein the spirituous part
of the male Seed may form out of it self what is to be formed, and nourish it
also with the same, till it comes to the maturity of a Chicken. And therefore
it is that the Eggs of Fowl have a Yolk, which is denied to all the Eggs of
Creatures that bring forth living Conceptions. In which sort of Creatures it
neither is nor could be so. For they being to bring forth large Births, there
could not be Nourishment sufficient contained in little Eggs, by which the
Birth might be augmented and nourished to such a Bigness. Hence it is of
necessity that extensive Nourishment must flow into the Eggs, and come to the
Birth; and first the thicker parts of the male Seed already melted, ought
gently to receive the new formed Body and nourish it by Apposition; and then
other more copious Nourishment must be conveyed by the Mother to the womb for
the Nourishment of the large Birth.

Having thus spoken sufficiently in general Of the spirituous Part.
of the matter of the Seed, now let us a little more accurately consider the
spirituous Part.

XXIII. Hippocrates discoursing of The Opinion of Hippocrates concerning the
spirituous p^t of the Seed.
the spirituous Part, writes in several Places, that the Seed falls from all
Parts, that is to say, that something is generated in every Part, resembling
the nature of the Part; which being conveyed from each part to the Stones,
and mixed with the thicker Matter, together with that same thicker Matter
composes the Seed, containing in it self the Ideas of all and every part.

XXIV. Aristotle ascribes a celestial Of Aristotle.
Nature to this spiritual Part, like the nature of the Stars: For, says he,
there is in the Seed of all Creatures, that which renders the Seed fruitful,
and is called Heat, and yet no Fire, nor any such Quality, but a Spirit which
is contained in the Seed and frothy Body; as also Nature, that is the Soul,
which is in that Spirit, answerable in proportion to the Element of the Stars.
What is the spirituous Part.


XXV. Now that we may inquire more narrowly into the Original and Nature of
this spirituous Part of the Seed, we are first to understand, that it is a most
subtle Body produced by another Body, having a fitness by the help of external
Causes, to produce and form another Body, like to that from which it had its
own Modelling. For when this Body has gained a proper Matter wherein to
subsist, it is together with that matter deposited in a convenient place, and
freed from all Encumbrances.

XXVI. That it is a Body is apparent, It is a Body.
because it is subject to corporeal Laws, Putrefaction, Corruption, and Change,
etc. and is produced by a Body, and not from a rational Soul; from which if it
were produced, it could not be corrupted, for that being incorruptible, must
generate something incorruptible like it self. But that it is corrupted is
apparent in the Emission of fruitful Seed, from which no Conception happens;
for then nothing is generated out of it, but it perishes, and is corrupted like
other corruptible Substances.

XXVII. That it is produced out of It is produced out of a Body.
a Body is plain from hence, that it is generated and not created: As also that
it is produced out of the Substance of the Seed, dissolved by the ambient Heat
and Moisture, loosning the conjoined Mass of the mixed Body, and is nothing
else but a thin Vapor fluid and moveable, volatiliz'd by the Heat. For which
reason it would easily fly away unless it were detained, as being wrapped about
by the thicker Particles of the Seed not so apt for Volatility; and by and by
straightly enclosed by the womb and its proper Membranes, and in regard of its
salt Particles, of which for the most part it consists, it were somewhat
inclined to fixation, and so were hindered and stopped in its Flight.

XXVIII. That it has an Aptitude (...) aptitude.
from the convenient Matter of which it self consists, and wherein it inheres,
by the help of external Causes to produce and form a Body like to that from
whence it proceeded, Experience teaches us. But whence that Aptitude proceeds
is not altogether so manifest.

XXIX. That the Figures and Forms The nature of the spirituous Part.
of Bodies arise from the various Constitution, partly of the forming Cause,
partly of the Matter out of which they are compounded, is a thing confessed
among the Philosophers. In Generation therefore a just and due Constitution and
Disposition of the Matter is required, that the formal Cause may act upon it,
and form and generate something out of it. Now the foresaid Spirit rooted in
the Seed, containing in it self the forming Form, called Nature, both has and
perfects that requisite disposition of Matter; and that is the first Agent or
Principle of the forming of the Birth, and also the first and next Matter of
the Parts to be delineated. For there is a certain efficient Spirit infused
into all natural Seeds, which arising out of the thinnest and most volatile
salt and sulphury Particles of the Seed it self, concocted after a particular
manner by the Heat, and intermixed with the more fixed Particles of the Seed;
is the primary cause of Formation, and the primary and next matter of the Body
to be formed, and actuates the other Particles of the Seed, and as it were
leads the Dance of natural Motions, which being coagulated, absent, extinct or
suffocated, there can be no Generation. Now if such a Spirit be contained in
all Seeds, then certainly in the Seed of Man.

XXX. Now a small Particle of Where the Idea of all the Parts is contained.
this Spirit contains in it self the Ideas of all and singular the Parts of the
whole Body, which Parts it is able again to form out of it self, when by the
Assistance of the Uterine Heat, being somewhat loosened and freed from the
thicker Mass of the Seed, it advances toward the Ovaries, and enters the Eggs,
and in them now carried through the Tubes into the Womb, it is agitated, moved
and roused into Action. For being agitated, it acts, and acting, it cannot do
otherwise, than out of that convenient Matter of which it consists it self, and
where it is inherent, that is out of it self to form such Parts, of which it
contains in it self the Ideas, and so by degrees renders the rest of the Matter
of the Egg apt and fit, which giving way to the Growth of those Forms, may be
able also to assume their Shape. Which I shall endeavor to illustrate by a
Comparison. As Coals extinguished, Straw, Turf, Wood, and other Materials, do
not take Fire, nor flame out, unless some subtle Matter, having the form of
Fire, enter 'em, and raise the first Idea of Fire, which then makes fit the
rest of the Matter, that it may be able to assume the like form of Fire: so
there is no Creature of the same likeness raised out of the Egg, unless it
enter some Egg, which bears the Idea of that same Creature, which making of it
self the first delineation of that Creature, at the same time renders the rest
of the Matter of that same Egg fit, first to increase its Delineation, and then
assume the form of all its Parts. Now this is that same Idea-bearing Spirit
ingrafted in the Male Seed, and separated from its thicker Mass by the benefit
of the Uterine Heat, and so infused into the Eggs.

XXXI. Now the Seed receives Ideas whence and what they are?
those Ideas from all and every singular Part; for as from all Bodies infinite
subtle Beams issue forth, expressing the Figure and external Color of all
those Bodies from whence they flow, so also from every the smallest Particles
of the Body, certain most subtle little Bodies issuing from the smallest
Particles of the Body, like most spirituous Atoms, are mixed with the said
Spirit flowing from them, which then has the same Impression of the Body from
whence it flowed, and received the same small forth-flowing Body, that lighting
upon the proper Subject to which it is inherent, it may be effectual out of it
self to produce and form a Body like to that from which it received the
imprinted Shapes. For those most subtle Bodies flowing either from some Body,
or some part of a Body, cannot but have obtained a model or fashioning from it,
such as are the Shapes of the Things within the Bodies out of which they flow.
And so the seminal Spirit obtains some propriety of those Particles of the
Body, out of which it flowed, and that not only of the Figure, but of the whole
Nature.

XXXII. But these Proprieties of The Properties of the singular Particles not
separated, meet in every Particle and display themselves in the formation.
the singular Particles, are not separated in that Spirit, but fall and meet
together in every Particle of it, and then display themselves again in the
Formation; In like manner as a thousand Beams of visible things meet together
in one Mirror, and out of them distinguishes the Figures and Colors of every
particular thing. And hence it is that every Particle of this Spirit has a
power to form the whole Creature. Which Efficacy however is more powerful, when
many Particles are collected together in one Bubble. For as a few visible Beams
flowing from any thing whatever, sufficiently represent the Figure and Color
of it, and yet that Figure and that Color are more apparently, more
accurately, and rightly discovered, if many Beams concur to depaint and set it
forth, as in Concave Glasses; so also the particular Particles of this Spirit
have a power to form the whole, yet is the Fashioning more perfect, if many
Particles endu'd with the same Power be joined together, and execute their work
with united force. Now if the Particles of this Spirit be collected in the
Bubbles not of one, but of several Eggs, thence the Generation of several
Births, for the forming Spirit has sufficient Power to form the whole in every
Bubble. Which is easily observed in Birds. For the Sperm of a Cock, which is
injected into the Hen but in a very small Quantity, but full of Spirit, when it
lights into the Ovary, is dispersed through all those Eggs which are already
come to Maturity; and is the sole Cause of enfertilizing the small Particles in
each Egg, and being agitated by the external Heat, and the little quantity of
Spirit absconded therein, is the efficient Cause of the Chicken; and also the
Matter of the first Delineation.

XXXIII. Now this same Spirit How t^ss Spirit comes to the Stones?
flowing from the several Particles is mixed with the Blood, and is circulated
together with it through the whole Body, and gives it an aptness to nourish all
the Parts. For if the Blood had not something in it self like to the several
Parts, it could not nourish all the Parts, and add something alike to every
individual Particle. The Particles of this Blood which are changed into Seed,
contain also this same Form-bearing Spirit within 'em, which is therefore
involved within the Seed made in the Stones, and that in How these Parts are
generated out of the Seed, which the Parents wanted before Generation.
a considerable Quantity, and composes its more noble and primary efficient
Part, yet such as cannot subsist nor be preserved entire without the thicker
material Part.

XXXIV. Here arises a difficult Question, how those Parts are generated out of
the Seed, of which Parts the Parents were destitute long before Generation,
seeing that no Idea, no forming Power, or Architectonic Spirit can flow from
them? I answer, that this is done, because the Imagination of the Parents
supplies that Defect, who daily seeing other Infants, Boys, and grown People,
born and well shaped with all their Members, firmly imagine with themselves
that they shall beget the like. And so no less imprint the Ideas of the
defective Parts in the said Spirit, and model both it and the whole Seed no
otherwise than if the modelling had proceeded from those Parts. For how far
Imagination prevails in this particular, appears in Women with Child, who by
the force of Imagination only forming strange Ideas, frequently add to the
Birth not only the strange Figures, Colors, and Spots of the things imagined,
but the things themselves according to their whole Nature. Thus have some
Infants been born with Horns, when the Mother has been so frighted by a horned
Beast, that she conceived such a deep impression of that Horn, that has not
only disfigured the Child with the Mold or Color, but with the very Substance
of the Horn growing out. I my self in the Year 1637, knew a Woman of thirty
Years of Age in Gelderland, who kept an Ape with a long Tail, and took great
delight in it. This Woman was about a Month gone with Child, at what time the
Ape of a sudden leaping upon her Shoulders, struck her over the Face with his
Tail: whence the woman conceived such an Idea of the Ape's Tail, and cherished
it so strongly in her Imagination, that at length she brought forth a Child
with a Tail at the end of that Portion of the Back called the Coccyx, thinly
hair'd and of the same Color with the Tail of the Ape, which the Surgeons
having cut off at the Request of the Parents, the part gangrened to the loss of
the Child's Life. Experience also teaches us, that if a woman with Child
continually and strongly think of the maimed part of any Man, from which she
took a sudden Fright, she brings a maimed Infant into the World, though both she
and her Husband had their Limbs perfect and quite the contrary: if she
continually think of a perfect and sound Child, she will bring forth a Child
perfect in its Limbs, though perhaps either she or her Husband might want a Limb.
In like manner, a Man may more easily imprint into the seminal Spirits the
Ideas of Parts defective, than the Woman through her Imagination can deface,
alter, or deprave those parts: And as this is certain of a woman by Experience,
the same is still more certain of a Man. Neither is it to be questioned but
that if the Parents think continually and much upon those defective Parts, nor
by other Imaginations imprint in the seminal Spirit the Ideas of those
defective Parts, they shall beget Children maimed in those parts. This is
apparent from hence in the first part, that if the Parents were born maimed in
any part, when they have not been able afterward to imagine any Ideas of the
entireness of that part, as being that which they never knew perfect in
themselves, frequently the Children are maimed in that part. But if they were
maimed in any Member long after they were born, then easily and strongly
imagining the Idea of that part of which they knew the soundness and the use
before, they may supply that defect in the Seed and its Spirit.

XXXV. But how the said Idea's How Idea's imagined are imprinted in the Seed.
are imprinted in the Seed by the Imagination of the Parent is not so easily
explained. However thus it seems to happen. The Image of the thing often and
seriously thought upon, is exactly delineated in the Brain; and that Picture
and its bringing into Shape being imprinted in the Animal Spirits, and by them
communicated also to the arterious Blood, together with these, that are to be
the matter of the Seed, is carried to the Stones, and in the making of the Seed
supplies therein the defect of those Ideas, which could not flow from the parts
of which the Parent was destitute, and so the Seed with its enlivening Spirit,
furnished with all the necessary Idea's of the several parts of the whole Body,
acquires such an Aptitude that all the parts may be formed out of it, even
those Parts of which the Parent is destitute. That this is thus done in the
Seed, is no such Wonder, seeing that after the same manner sometimes the Idea's
of various things, are imprinted in the Birth already formed through the strong
Imagination of the Mother: Because that the Idea's of things imagined and
exactly depainted in the Brain, being imprinted in the Animal Spirits, by the
determination of the Spirits made by the Mind, or Will, together with the
Arterious Blood flow to the womb, of which, and of the Birth therein contained
the great bellied Woman often thinks; thence they are carried through the
umbilical Vein to the Birth it self, which being very tender, by reason of the
extraordinary softness of its Body, easily receives the Idea strongly imprinted
into it by the Imagination of the Mother, (as an Image seen is imprinted into
the soft Brain, to be shortly offered again to the Memory) which is very small
at the Beginning, but increases more and more as the Child grows in the womb;
as Letters or Pictures slightly engraven with a Penknife upon the Rinds of a
Cucumber or Melon, grow by degrees with the Fruit. And thus also the Images of
visible things, at a great Distance are depainted in the Tunicle of the Eye, by
the help of the Intermediate Air, and Sounds are conveyed through the Air to
Places remote.

XXXVI. Swammerdam proposing Another Question to be answered.
this Doubt to me in his Miracle of Nature, How it comes to pass that Parents
maimed in some Parts, beget whole Children, as if he would with one Herculean
Argument dilucidate the whole Obscurity, answers, because all the parts are
contained in the Egg. But if this be the true Cause, how comes it, that out of
that one Egg, containing all the Parts, sometimes a Child happens to be born
maimed in some parts; and that sometimes when the Parents are sound and perfect
in all their Limbs; and such, as before that, have begot, and afterward also
beget entire limbed Children. Why should the Foundation of an Arm, or a Leg,
or any other part be more wanting, in that Egg, than in the Eggs of other
women, both before and afterward conveyed to the womb, out of which entire
Childeren have been conceived? If these women's Eggs contain all the parts of
the birth in themselves, why does Swammerdam himself say, that Levi, long
before he was born, lay in the Loins of his Parents? Will he have also some
Eggs to be generated in the Loins of Men? It Is to be feared he will shortly
bring 'em, as well out of the Heads as out of the Loins of Men and the Stones
of Women.

XXXVII. Here another Doubt arises; Whether Children can pr^create.
seeing that those spirituous Irradiations equally happen from all parts of the
Body, in the Body of a Child, as well as of one grown to Maturity: Why the
Office of Generation may not equally be performed as well by a Child as by a
Person fully grown: When as the forming Spirit is equally present in both? I
answer, this falls ou^ for two Causes. 1. Because that in a Child, that Spirit
has not yet a Subject wherein to inhabit. For the Blood being very Oily, is
consumed in the Growth and nourishment of the Body, so that there is no
superfluous blood out of which the seed can be duly made. 2. Because that in a
Child there are wanting those requisite Mediums to perfect that Work; For
besides the extreme Oyliness of the Matter, and its unaptness, the spermatic
Vessels are over weak to make Seed. In Males, the Yard is too short, and the
Passages are too narrow to conveigh the Seed out of the Stones to the seminary
Vessels, and thence to the Vrethra. In Females the Vessels are two small and
straitened, and the womb too narrow to receive the Seed.

XXXVIII. From what has been Whence the likeness of Features
said, perhaps some one may raise another Question; seeing that the spirituous
^dea-bearing Irradiations are to be considered only in the Seed of a Man, how
it comes to pass that the Birth does not always resemble the Male parent in
likeness of Feature and Form, but frequently the Mother? Hippocrates of old
gave sundry Reasons for this, taken from the various Quality and Quantity of
the Seed of a Man and Woman mixed together: Whose Opinion many follow, but do
not explain it all alike. Among whom are Capivaccius, and Deusingius, whose
Opinions, because they are grounded upon no solid Foundations, we shall omit
for Brevities Sake. My Opinion is, that all this whole Matter depends upon the
Imagination of the Mother. For a bigg-bellied Woman always thinking this or
that when she is awake, and converting her Thoughts for the most part to the
Birth contained in the womb, if she be an admirer of herself, and of the
outward Shape and Form of her own Body, the Child will be like her. But if she
be a Person that is altogether taken with the Shape and Features of her
Husband, and often imprint his Image into her Imagination, the Child will be
like the Father. But that this Resemblance does not proceed from the Quality or
Quantity of the Seed of the Man and Woman, is hence apparent, for that a
bigg-bellied Woman strongly conceiving in her Imagination the external Features
of any other Man, with whom she never had any Familiarity, the Child shall be
like to him: Nay, and many times, by beholding monstrous Forms and Shapes,
imprints and stamps 'em many times upon the Births. For wonderful is the Force
of Imagination, especially in Bigg-bellied Women; of which Thomas Fienus has
written an excellent Tractate.

Thus far concerning the Man's Seed: Now particularly in a few words concerning
the Seed of women, the use and necessity of it.

XXXIX. Here presently we meet Of the woman's Seed.
a Question, at the very Threshold, whether Women have Seed or no?

Aristotle affirms that women have no Whether Women have any Seed or (...)
Seed; but that their Flowers supply the place of the Seed. For which they who
follow this same Prince of Philosophers, give these Reasons. 1. Because there
is no way through which the Seed can pass from the Stones to the Womb. 2.
Because the woman's Seed can contribute nothing to Generation; and for that it
has been found that Women have many times conceived without being sensible of
any Pleasure in Coition; and therefore without any emission of Seed. 3. Because
the same Accidents do not befall women, at that time that Seed is said to be
generated in them, as happen to Men at that age, that is to say, their Voices
do not change, their Nerves are not stronger, their Body is not dried, neither
are they more perfect in the Gifts of the Mind, etc. 4. Because by the
Testimony of Harvey, the Testicles of women in the Act of Generation do not
swell, nor vary from their wonted Constitution either before or after Coition:
Neither is there any sign or mark of their Use or Necessity either in Coition
or Generation. 5. Because that by reason of the injection of the woman's Seed
into the womb in bigg-bellied women, frequent Abortion happens after
Copulation. For that Seed must either be corrupted in the womb, and so bring
various Mischiefs, and at length Death upon the enclosed Birth; or else it must
slip out of the womb, and so the Orifice of the womb being opened, Abortion
must follow. And hence they conclude that women have no Seed, and so that their
Stones are only given for Ornament, like the Paps of Men.

XL. But this Opinion long suspected, That Women have Seed.
at length has been deservedly rejected by most men; it being sufficiently
apparent* that women have Seed from hence, that they have Stones, spermatic
Arteries, and Veins, and deferent Vessels as Tubes, and Prostates, which Parts
not being given 'em in vain, no question serve for the Generation of Seed.
Moreover in the Stones themselves the Eggs are conspicuously to be seen,
containing a transparent White, well deserving the Name of Seed, which being
matur'd, and bedewed and impregnated with the male Seed, are conveyed through
the deferent Vessels or Tubes* and so carried to the womb. Lastly, Women in
Coition emit a certain seminal Matter out of the Prostates with great Pleasure,
and after Coition suffer the same Symptoms as happen to Men, sadness,
lassitude, conturbation in their Countenances, numness, and cessation from
Desire. Thus both the First and Second Reason of the Aristotelians falls to the
Ground. For that the Seed of women included in the Eggs, is altogether
necessary for Generation is apparent from hence, that nothing is begot by the
Male Seed, unless the Spirituous Part of it, light into the Liquor resembling
the white of an Egg, as into the sole Matter proper for its use: And for that
women never conceive, that have no Eggs in their Ovaries, as in elderly women;
or at least none that are impregnated and carried out of their Ovaries to the
womb: As neither do they Conceive who never emit with Pleasure any seminal
Liquor out of their Prostates. And therefore there is no Credit to be given to
those that cry they were ravished by Force, and conceived without Pleasure.
Lastly, Because that among Brutes, Bitches, Sowes, and other female Creatures,
being spay'd become Barren, as being deprived of the Organs generating
Seed-bearing Eggs. To which we may add, that the Holy Scripture makes mention
of the Seed of the Woman, as most necessary to Generation. The Third Reason of
the Aristotelians is of no Value; For that at the time that Seed is generated,
their Voices do not change, nor their Nerves grow stronger, etc. The Reason of
that is, because the whole Temperament of their Bodies is much colder and
moister than Men's; and therefore the Seed included in their Eggs, is much more
crude and moist than the Seed of Man, nor does it diffuse such a hot and sharp
Fermentaceous Expiration through the whole Body as a Man's Seed. No less vain is
the Fourth Argument, for that the Constitution of the Stones was observed by
Harvey not to vary either before or after Copulation, that was so imagined by
Harvey, because that in a Beast killed before Copulation, he could neither
discern nor know what was the difference of the Constitution in the Copulation
itself; and in another killed after Copulation he could not find what was the
Constitution in the Coition. For if perhaps the Stones did swell in Coition,
the swelling of the Genital Parts most certainly fell through the terror of
Death, and Death ensuing, and so returned to their former lank Constitution; in
like manner as a Man's Yard though stiff with Lust, flaggs upon the least Fear or
apprehension of Death. Furthermore, neither in Coition nor after Coition does
any manifest Difference outwardly appear to the Eye, neither in the Stones of
Men or Women, only that they are drawn upward in Men, yet whether or no there
happens any pleasing Alteration in the Stones of Females in the venereal Act
when the Eggs are impregnated with the due of the Male Seed, this though Brute
Animals cannot discover in Words, yet their Gesticulation sufficiently declares
it: And therefore rational Women confess it, that they feel an extraordinary
Pleasure in their Wombs, and all the adjacent parts; among which are the
Stones, adhering to the Sides of the Womb. To these Reasons may be added one
more, taken from Maids who have been seized with the Furor Uterinus, and have
dyed of the same. In whom (being opened) the Testicles of one, or both, have
been found extraordinarily swelled beyond their natural bigness; and Authors
report that some Pounds of the seminal Matter has been taken out of the
Testicles of one who died of that Distemper. I have seen several who have had
that Disease, of which two of them dyed by the force of the Malady. I desired
them both to be opened, which was done. And in both, the Testicles were
extremely swelled. In the first, the right Testicle as bigg as twice a man's
Fist doubled, and being opened, there was near ^ Pint of seminal Matter which
ran and was squeezed out of it. In the other, the right Testicle in like manner
was tumified and is big again as the former, and as black as Soot, stinking
extremely, so that the Surgeon judged it a Gangreen. Salmon.


The Fifth Argument proves nothing; for they who at the time of Ingravidation
from the Eggs injected into the womb by Coition, are afraid of Damage to the
Birth and future Abortions, they are mistaken in that to think that in the
Copulations of bigbellied women any Seed bearing Eggs fall anew into the Cavity
of the womb, not knowing that those Passages, after Conception, remain closed
up till the Delivery: As also the Vessels appointed for the Evacuation of the
Menstruum's: And that that Pleasure, which such women are sensible of in
Copulation, does not proceed from any Egg or Seed slipping out of the Stones
into the womb, but from the Viscous Seminal Matter, which is Women's Testicles
were made for absulute Necessity.
squeezed out of the Prostates into the Uterine Uagina.

LX. From what has been said it is sufficiently demonstrable, that Women's
Stones were not given 'em only for Ornament, according to the Aristotelians,
which can be none in a part that is always hidden and never conspicuous, but
for absolute Necessity.

XLII. Now what that Necessity is, let What this Necessity is.
us inquire: And therefore that something may be produced out of Plants, there
is equally required both a Fertility of the Earth, and a fecundity of the Seed.
The Fecundity of this Seed consists in the spirituous Blossom; the fertility of
the Earth in a convenient Heat and Moisture, duly moistened and impregnated
with Salt and sulphury Particles. Unless these two concur, nothing can be
produced from the Seed of a Plant. For Example, Let the best Wheat be thrown
into a heap of Salt, Iron, Lead, or dry Sand, nothing grows from thence, though
the Seed be fruitful in it self, because it does not light into convenient
Matter, wherein the generative Principle may be dissolved and set at work. In
like manner let the same Seed be cast into Earth where there is too great a
quantity of Salt, Lime, Canker, or any such matter, endu'd with a corroding and
sharp Quality, then the Seed is corrupted and extinguished, together with its
generative Principle, and produces nothing; but if it be thrown into a fat
Earth well dung'd, then the Heat assisting the more thin Particles of the
terrene Moisture, enter the small Pores of the Seed, and are intermixed with
its Substance, which thereupon swells, and so the Germen, or generative
Principle is dissolved and falls to work, and whatever is thence formed is
nourished, augmented, and increased by the same Moisture, melted and mixed
together with the thicker Particles of the Seed* being afterward to receive
from the Earth more and more solid Nourishment when once it has taken Root.

XLIII. And thus it is in the Generation A Comparison between the Womb and the
Earth.
of Man. The Womb is the Earth, first receiving the masculine fruitful Seed:
But unless that Land be moistened with a convenient dewie Moisture, embrace and
dissolve that received masculine Seed, and send forth its more subtle
engendring Parts through the Tubes to the Eggs contained in the Stones or
Ovaries, and that the Eggs thus impregnated proceed to the Womb, that through
its cherishing Heat the generative Principle infused into 'em may fall to work;
I say unless all this be, from the masculine Seed alone, though never so
fruitful, there will be nothing generated: For nothing is generated from the
Male Seed alone, though most fruitful in its self. Now, that same Female
Albuminous Seed of the Eggs is like the fat moisture of the Earth; nay it is
the very fat prepared Moisture it self, which conveniently receiving the
spirituous part of the Male Seed and entering its Pores, dissolves it, rowses
the generative Principle latent therein, and excites it to Action. Which
proceeding into Act, presently forms out of its self, in a small Compendium,
the whole that is to be formed, that is the first Delineations of the whole
Birth, and nourishes it with that agreeable Albuminous Moisture upon which it
swims first by Irroration and Apposition, till it be brought to such a
Solidity, and that the Bowels are become so strong, that afterward they may be
able to make and prepare for themselves Nourishment carried to the Womb and
infused through the Mouth and Navel.

XLIV. Hence it is apparent why Why a Woman does not conceive every time she is
lain with.
Copulation does not follow every time that a man lies with an Empty woman:
because that if a woman, through any Distemper of the Ovaries, or their bad
Structure, or by reason of her years, or through any other cause be destitute
of Eggs, or that the albuminous Matter latent in the Eggs be badly tempered,
too sharp, too hot, too cold, or endu'd with any bad quality, and so be unfit
for the dissolution of the Procreative Male Seed; then no Conception can
happen, because the spiritous procreative Principle of the Male Seed, is for
the same Reasons stifled and corrupted. But this is not the only cause why
Conception is hindered: for it frequently also happens, that the Eggs of Women
are not come to their just Maturity, or through some Impediment of the
Passages, the generative Principle cannot come to the Eggs, nor the Eggs to the
Womb; or else the Male Seed being weak of its self, and destitute of a
generative Principle, or for that its generative Principle is corrupted and
suffocated in the Womb, before it can reach the Eggs, by reason of the bad
temper of the Womb, or else from the vicious Humors therein settled; for which
Reasons there can be no Conception.

XLV. However it be, the true, manifest, The Male Seed is that without which
there can be no Generation.
and necessary Use of the Male Seed appears from what has been already said; as
being that without which there can be no Generation of Man, no more than
Generation of Plants, without a fruitful Moisture of the Earth.

XLVI. Here a material Question Whether the Woman's Seed be the cause of
Formation.
arises; If there be such a necessity of the Female Seed, in respect of the
dissolving, cherishing, nourishing Matter, whether it have any share in the
forming the Birth?

Hitherto it has been the common Opinion, That it has a share as well of the
forming Cause, as of being the nourishing Matter; and that it is mixed with the
Man's Seed, and that one Mass is made of those two Seeds mixed together, and
that out of that Mass being fermented in the Womb, the spirituous procreative
Principle is drawn forth, by which, and out of which, the Members of the Birth
are delineated and formed. Which Opinion Sennertus very speciously both
propounds and defends; and of which Ludovicus Mercatus is no less a strenuous
Patron, who thinks with one Herculean Argument to remove the whole Doubt, and
to prove the forming Power of the Female Seed. Whatever assimilates, (says he)
suffering with Victory, of necessity acts: but the Son is sometimes made like
the Mother; therefore the Mother acts in the Generation of the Son.

XLVII. But though this whole Argument It follows not that the Woman's Seed
affords any Power to form the Birth.
should be granted, it does not follow that the Woman's Seed affords any power
to the forming of the Birth. For there is a great deal of difference between
the Mother acting, and the Seed of the Mother acting. For the Mother acts upon
the Man's, and her own Seed, while she warms, cherishes, and embraces both in
her Womb, and so rowses that same procreative Principle into Action. But this
renders it fit for the Nutritive Matter. But neither She nor her Seed
contribute any thing to the forming of the Parts, but as Mediums, by which the
latent Power in Male Seed is set at work. But if the Woman's Seed should act in
forming and delineating the Birth, then it ought to contain in it self an
active Principle of forming the Parts, which might be provoked from power to
act out of that alone, by the cherishing of the Uterine Heat; but it has not,
nor is any such thing drawn forth out of it, as we have proved before, and is
manifest in Wind-Eggs. The likeness of the Son to the Mother proves nothing, in
regard the Cause of it does not proceed from any act of the Seed; but is
imprinted from another Cause, for the most part upon the Birth it self while it
is forming, and oftentimes after it is formed and furnished with all its
Members, and sometimes some Weeks or Months after it is formed: For that
innumerable Examples of Big-belly'd Women teach us that the various strong
Imaginations of the Mother, and unusual motions and determinations of the
Spirits proceeding from thence, do wonderfully change the Birth already formed,
and imprint this or that figure upon it like soft Wax: while some affrighted by
some terrible sight, others looking upon Pictures, either with delight or
abhorrency, others earnestly longing for Cherries, or other Fruits, have
imprinted strange Forms and Moles upon the Birth, and that not long before
Delivery; which active power nevertheless neither proceeds from the Seed of the
Woman, nor can be any way attributed to her, the Action being done long after
the forming of the Birth.

XLVIII. Besides the said Argument Three other more weighty Arguments.
of Mercatus, there are three more ponderous produced by other Persons: 1.
Because a Mule is generated between a Mare and an Ass. 2. Because that between
a Man and a Beast, no Man but an irrational Creature is generated. 3. Because a
white Woman many times Conceives by an Ethiopian, and produces a white Infant.
Which things seem not to be done but by the forming power of the Female Seed,
as it concurs with the forming power of the Male Seed.

XLIX. Before I dissolve these Difficulties, The Male Seed does not proceed
into Act unless there be a fit ferment mixed with it.
I judge it reasonable to consider, that the Male Seed does not proceed into
act; neither is there any thing produced out of it like to that from whence it
proceeded, unless there be a convenient Ferment and Nourishment mixed with it;
and if there be any Defect or Error, or Corruption in either, or in both, then
either nothing, or something Vicious, is produced out of it, which Nature
perfects however as far as it can. In like manner as we see among Plants, that
the Seed of Barley and Wheat thrown into barren Ground degenerates into Darnel,
and other unprofitable Herbs, having no resemblance to the former, by reason of
the Defect of convenient Ferment and Nourishment.

L. This being premised, I come to The Answer to the former Arguments. To the
first Argument.
the Objections, and answer to the first, that it does not prove that the
female Seed concurs with the Masculine as the efficient Cause of Formation: But
that in the said Case the active Principle of Generation is neither duly
produced out of the Masculine Sex, nor conveniently proceeds into Action, by
reason of the Impediments that occur, because that the Seed of the Ass is
neither in the Egg conveniently enough dissolved and provoked into Act by the
Seed of the Mare, proportionably to the Nature of that Creature; neither is
there Nourishment sufficiently convenient afforded to it in the first
Formation. Hence the Workwoman Nature, who never is idle, when she cannot form
and perfect an Ass, begets a Creature next approaching to the Nature of the
Ass, that is to say a Mule, which in respect of the Asses forming Seed is by
Nature an Ass, but in respect of the first Nutriment afforded in great Quantity
by the Mare, and participating of the Nature of the Mare, causes a bulk of Body
bigger than that of the Ass, and in some measure resembling that of the Mare.

LI. To the Second I say, That the Answer to the second Argument.
same Defect happens to the Seed of the Man in the Womb and Eggs of the female
Brute, and hence Nature instead of a human Birth, generates out of it an
irrational Monster. In like manner as in the Eggs and Wombs of women
themselves, by reason of the same defect of convenient Ferment of the woman's
Seed, or some Corruption of that or the first Nourishment, instead of a Man,
sometimes out of the fruitful male Seed Moles are generated, sometimes Brute
Beasts, like Frogs, half Dogs, Dormice, Lizzards, and such like Monsters, of
which there are several Examples to be found among Writers of Physical
Observations, and among some Historians. Which Monsters however are not
generated by the female Seed, as containing in it self any forming Power, but
through the Defect of the female Seed, which being in a bad Condition causes
that impediment, by which the forming Power of the male Seed is so disturbed
and obstructed, that it cannot act aright.

LII. To the Third I say, That a Answer to the third Argument.
white Woman may bring forth a white Infant, though got with Child by a Negro.
Not through any forming Power in her Seed, but through her strong Imagination
and Fancy of a white Child; and through the same strength of Imagination a
Negro Woman may bring forth a white Infant. Certainly the Imagination of women
conceiving and with Child, works wonders, not only as to the forming of the
Birth, but also after the Formation: And yet nothing of this can be ascribed to
the actuating Power of the woman's Seed.

LIII. Some there were who thought, Another (...).
that in the Mare before mentioned, and in other brute Animals, the Imagination
strongly operates in the forming the Birth: Which others as strenuously deny;
And because brute Animals are void of Reason, therefore they will not allow 'em
any Imagination, but if any thing unusual were begotten in the womb, they think
it happened from the forming Power of the female Seed.

LIVE. To these Arguments I answer, An Answer there^o.
That though Brutes may be said to be void of Reason, Understanding, and Memory,
yet they have something proportionable to it, as is manifest from their Actions
(the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: The Be when she brings
home her Honey, knows her own Apartment from a hundred that are like it; and a
Dog understands the Commands of his Master, and does them.) And that there is
something analogous to Imagination in Beasts Conceiving and bigg with Young, is
apparent from the Story of Jacob Genesis 30.
. And I my self, with several others, saw a remarkable Example of this thing.
In the Year 1626. there came by chance a Dromedary to Montfort, which the owner
carried about to be shown. The Creature was very large, round and cleft Hoofs,
very thick Knees, and swelled to the bigness of a Man's Head. This Dromedary by
chance, and out of the way, met a Mare which had been covered about two or
three days before by a Stonehorse; which took such a Fright at the sudden
meeting this Creature, that presently starting back she threw the Country Man
that rid her; and when her time was out she foal'd a Colt, of which all the
right Thigh before was like the Thigh of a Dromedary, with a large round Hoof
and cleft, which Colt afterward grew to be a strong Horse, which we saw
afterward for many years working both in the Plough and the Cart. Certainly no
Man in his Wits will say that this Error in Shaping proceeded from any
efficient forming Power in the Seed of the Mare; but rather from the strength
of Imagination.

LV. Thomas Consentinus fancied The Opinion of Consentinus and Deusingius
confuted.
a quite contrary Opinion touching this Matter, for he writes, that as well the
first Matter from whence, as the efficient Cause by which the Birth is formed,
lies wholly in the female Seed: But that the Man's Seed is neither the matter of
the Seed to be formed, neither contains the forming Power in it self; nor
contributes any thing to Generation, but only a certain insensible Substance,
which only kneads and moves the Matter brought by the Woman. With him
Deusingius agrees Lib. de Genesi Microcosmi, where he most plainly teaches,
that the Birth is solely formed out of the female Seed, and that it is not only
the Matter out of which it is delineated, but that there is also in it a
vegetable Soul that forms the Birth. But that it cannot be produced into Act,
but by the assistance of the male Seed, as a kind of Ferment that dissolves its
Substance, and so setting the latent Soul at Liberty, and provoking it to act.
But this new Opinion is far remote from Truth while it attributes to the
imperfect Seed of Women, questioned by some whether it deserve the Name of
Seed, the whole power of forming, and the sole matter for the Form. For the
Seed of a Tree, Wheat, Beans, or Pease, which is like the Seed of the Man,
being cast into its Womb the Earth, does not dissolve the Seed or Juice of the
Earth by its assisting Heat, and produce its like out of it; but is dissolved
by it, and so the spirituous part of it being set at Liberty, and proceeding to
Action forms out of it self the first Lineaments to be formed, and nourishes
and enlarges 'em when they are formed, with the more thick Particles of it self
(which seem to supply the place of the woman's Seed) and then with the agreeable
and convenient Juice of the Earth. The thing is apparent in a Pea or a Bean,
which being laid in a warm and moist Place, do not themselves ferment the moist
Air, that any thing should be generated out of it, but are dissolved by the
Air, and so the spirituous part being set at Liberty, and falling to work, in
themselves, and out of themselves, form the thing that is to be formed, and
cast forth the first Bud. So it is in the male Seed both of Men and Beasts,
which being cast into the womb, and entering the Eggs with its fructifying part,
does not within them produce any aptness in the woman's Seed to form any thing
out of it self, but its generative Principle being dissolved by the female Seed
contained in the Eggs, containing the forming Power, is collected in a small
Bubble, wherein being set at liberty, it forms out of it self what is to be
formed; and then the woman's Seed included in the Egg, which first supplied the
place of fermentaceous Juice, presently after serves for the first nourishment
of the thing formed. Moreover what Deusingius talks of the Seed of a Cock
injected into the Ovarie of a Hen, that makes nothing against us: For that the
smallest quantity of the Seed of a Cock is sufficient, for the first Lineaments
of the Chicken to be formed out of it. For if a human Birth, at the first
laying its Foundations does not exceed the bigness of a Pismire, how much
smaller and less, must the first Rudiments of a Chicken be, and how small a
Portion of Seed will its first Delineation require? Nor is it true what
Deusingius adds, that the Cock at one treading infertilizes the whole Ovary,
and all the Eggs contained in it, nay that the very smallest Egg, some scarce
so big as a Pea, are thereby infertiliz'd, though the Cock never tread Hen more.
For the Seed of the Cock neither enters nor infertilizes other Eggs, than those
that are come to a just Maturity. The rest that are small, and not ripe, are no
more impregnated by the Seed of the Cock than a Girl of five or six Years can
be impregnated by the Seed of a Man: For those crude and unripe Eggs are as yet
not fit to admit and receive the Seed of the Cock, and therefore daily treading
is required, to the end that those Eggs which every day grow ripe, may be
impregnated by the Seed of the Cock. And hence it is that those Hens that are
seldom trod, lay many wind Eggs that come to nothing. And therefore it is that
they who desire many Chickens, choose out the Eggs of such Hens as were most
frequently trod by a brisk Cock. The same Consideration may extend it self to
women's Eggs, which so long as they are unripe, will not admit the generative
Principle of the male Seed, which is the reason that many young Women of cold
Constitutions, do not conceive in several Months after they are married,
because their Eggs are unripe and unfit to receive the generative part of man's
Seed, which afterward they do when they come to full Maturity.

LVI. Swammerdam also seems to The Opinion of Swammerdam refuted.
ascribe both the Matter and the forming Spirit to the Seed of the woman.
Fecundation or Conception, says he, is nothing else, but a Communication of
more perfect Motion. So that the Egg, which was nourished and laid in the
Ovary, after Conception, the Ovary being left, may live and be nourished after
a more perfect manner, that it may be thought to look after and maintain it
self. And in another place he says, all the Parts are in the Egg. And assuming
to himself the Opinion of Consentinus and Deusingius, he asserts that the Seed
of man contributes nothing to Fecundity, and that neither the Matter out of
which the first Delineation is made, nor that forming Spirit is in it. But if
he bring not stronger Reasons than that of may be thought; certainly his
Argument will be too weak to confirm his Opinion, or refute mine already
proposed concerning the Seed of Man. And indeed how mistrustful he is of his
own Opinion, he shows ye in these Words of his, Fecundation cannot be
demonstrated but by Reasoning, and very difficultly by Experience.

LVII. These and the like Considerations Whether the Seed of women be a Matter
necessary for Generation.
are the Reasons that the aforesaid Opinion of the forming Power of woman's Seed
has been disliked by many famous Men, who therefore judged that the woman's Seed
concurred in Generation as a matter necessary to receive the procreative Part
of the female Seed to cherish and give it Liberty, and set it at work; and to
nourish the Embryo first delineated, but contributes no Matter to the forming
of the Lineaments, nor can claim any thing of efficient Cause in forming the
Birth. Which latter was the Opinion of Aristotle, stiffly afterward defended
by Caesar of Cremona, as also by Scaliger, in these words. As there can be but
one form of one thing, so the Principle containing that Form can be but one.
Therefore the Seed of Man is but one. For being simple and indivisible in its
Form, it cannot be composed of two, which it would be if it should proceed from
the Male and the Female. Subtle. Exercit. 268. Several other Arguments he adds
in the same place, by which he does not only deny all forming Power in the
female Seed, but refuses to acknowledge the Seed it self; nor will he seem to
allow it any ministerial Function. Scaliger's Arguments are very weighty; so
that I easily agree with him, that the form and act of Formation proceeds only
from the Seed of the Man, and that the woman's Seed contributes no forming
effective Cause to the shaping and delineation of the Birth. Yet I cannot with
Scaliger wholly renounce the woman's Seed; for I have both asserted and proved
it to be very necessary for Generation. And being necessary, yet not having a
forming Power, it cannot otherwise be necessary but only in respect of that
Matter, without which the Power of the man's Seed cannot be wakened and rowsed
into Act. Now that it is not endu'd with a forming Power, appears from hence,
that a woman cannot conceive of herself without the help of male Copulation.
Though it may be very probable that in her nocturnal Pollutions, which happen to
women as well as men, besides the seminal Matter breaking forth out of the
Prostates into the Vagina, many times the Eggs slip out and evacuate through
the Tubes into the Womb. Which nevertheless, if the Seed included in the Eggs
contained two Principles of Generation, Active and Passive, seeing she has both
Place, Time, and Nourishment convenient within her own Body, could not choose
but conceive of herself. Besides, Nature has so provided, that there shall be
only one Agent to produce a natural Effect, by the Testimony of Aristotle; but
if the Seed of the woman participated of the formal and efficient Cause, then
there would be two active Principles, the Seed of the woman, and the Seed of
the man, which is repugnant to the Order of Nature. Again, if both Sexes
contributed an active Power, the Male would produce either the same with the
Woman, or another quite contrary: If the same, then one would superabound; if
different, then Twins would always be begot, or Hermaphrodites, which rarely
happens. Lastly, our Opinion is confirmed by the Natural Instinct of Mankind;
for the Children are not denominated from the Mother, but generally from the
Father, as from him, who being their Efficient Principle, contributed to their
being formed.

LVIII. Hence it is apparent that The Seed of the Woman contains in it self no
forming power.
the Seed of the Woman does not contain in it self any forming Power in
reference to the Birth, nor is any Efficient Cause thereof; nor as the first
matter, contributes to the first matter of the Birth that is to be formed: but
that it is only necessary as a matter gently receiving the generative Principle
of the Male Seed, dissolving and fomenting it, and setting at liberty the
forming spirit inherent in the generative Principle; and disposing it to act,
and to form all the first Lineaments of the Body out of it self, and nourishing
the Embryo, when reduced into shape.

LIX. Hippocrates does not seem The Opinion of Hippocrates.
to favor this Opinion of ours, who writes thus, Lib. 1. de Genitur. In Man
there is both the Male and Female Seed; and so likewise it is in Woman; but the
Male Seed is the stronger: and Generation must of necessity be accomplished by
the stronger. In which words Hippocrates seems to intimate, that Women's seed
partakes no less of the Efficient Cause than the Man's. I answer, That in
Generation, the strength of the Seeds consists partly in the Efficient Cause,
partly in the Material preparing for Formation. And both Causes being taken
separately, may be called eitheir strong or weak, or to use Hippocrates's
phrase, either Virile or Female. When the Efficient Cause of Formation, which
is in the Male Seed, is strong or virile, and the material, cherishing, and
nourishing Cause, which is the Female Seed, is likewise strong or virile, then
of both together comes a Male Child. If either Cause be weak, yet one stronger
than the other, then from the Cause that prevails proceeds a Boy or a Girl. So
that it cannot be concluded from the words of Hippocrates himself, that he
allowed the Female Seed an Efficient Power; but that he has placed that same
strength of which he speaks, no less in the Material preparing Cause than in
the Efficient, and that by strength in the Male Seed he understood a strong and
robust efficient Power of Forming; in the Woman's Seed, an excellent temper of
preparing and nourishing Matter, and an aptitude to set at liberty the
efficient principle latent in the Virile Seed.

LX. Veslingius fancied quite another The Opinion of Veslingius.
Opinion of the Woman's Seed; for he acknowledges therein a double substance;
one Corporeal, requisite for the forming of the Birth, and another more watery,
which loosens the parts of the Womb, cherishes and preserves the Birth, and
which he says, flows continually into the Womb after Conception.

The Portion, says he, of Spermatic Moisture, which slows from the Stones to
the bottom of the Womb, is of a more noble use after Conception. For upon this
swims the rude little Body of the Embryo, at the beginning of its conformation;
and so not only hinders the more intense heat of the Womb from making any
irregular dissolution of any thing, but gently sustains the Birth it self in
the strong shogs of the Mothers Body, and secures the Umbilical Vessels, at
that time as thin as a hair, from danger of a Rupture.

Veslingius has done well to consider two parts in the Seed of the Woman: but
in that he was greatly deceived according to the ancient Opinion, that the Man
and the Woman's Seed were mixed together in the Womb, and so thought the Birth
to be formed out of that Mixture; and that he also believed, that the Milky
Juice, which in Big-bellied Women flows to the Womb for the nourishment of the
Child, to be the more watery part of the Woman's Seed. Concerning which Juice,
see Chap. 31.

LXI. At this day, according to the Harvey's Opinion.
Opinion of Harvey, many people assert, that the Women's Seed, after Conception,
together with the Man's Seed, flows out again from the Womb, as being
altogether of no use. Yet though the vanity of that Opinion be apparent from what
has been said, we shall examine it however more at large in the next Chapter.

After this Explanation made, both of the Man's and Woman's Seed, two things
remain to be inquired into in general concerning the Seed. First, At what Age
the Seed is generated; and Secondly, Why Eunuchs and gelt Animals become fatter
and more languid?

LXII. As to the first, The Seed is At what Age the Seed is generated.
not generated till the habit of the Body becomes dryer and stronger, and when
the Body is come to its full growth. And hence it is, that because the Body
attains that strength and firmness between the fourteenth and twentieth year,
that then the Seed begins to be generated, and acquires every day so much the
greater perfection, by how much the Body grows stronger, and needs less growth.
Now the reason why Seed is not generated at younger years, and in Childhood, is
vulgarly imputed to the growth of the Body, upon which the superfluous part of
the Blood, of which the Seed is hereafter to be made, is then consumed. But
this Reason is far fetched, and only a sign of the Cause why Seed is not
generated. First therefore we are to enquire, why at younger years the Body
most increases in bulk, and grows so fast, that by the knowledge of this we may
come to know why the Seed is not generated at that Age.

LXIII. The growth of the Body proceeds The growth of the Body, whence.
from hence, because all the Parts abound with a moist, sulphurous, oily Juice,
and for that reason are very flexible and apt to extend; so that the Animal
Spirits flowing into them, the Blood poured into the Arteries for Nourishment
sake, do not so sharply ferment, and therefore cannot make a sufficient
separation of the salt Particles from the sulphury. Partly because their force
is debilitated by the copious Moisture, and oiliness of the sulphury parts.
partly because the Brain it self, being as yet very much over moist, does not
at that time breed such sharp Humors, as to make a smart Effervescency, which
afterward come to be generated in greater quantity when all the parts come to
be drier. For this Reason also the Spermatic Vessels, where the chief strength
of Semnification lies, are not then so very much dried, but by reason of the
copious more moist and oily Particles of the Nourishment, continually poured in
upon them, they are extended, and grow in length and thickness: and that so
much the more swiftly, by how much more moist and oily Nourishment feeds them,
as it happens in Infancy and Childhood. But their strength and solidity is then
more increased when they become dryer and grow less. I speak of moderate and
convenient dryness, not of a total consumption of moisture. Now the reason why
they become more dry is, because the overmuch oily Moisture is by degrees
consumed by the increasing heat, and by that means the overmuch moisture and
lankness of the Spermatic Parts is abated, and they become stronger, in regard
a greater quantity of the salt Particles separated from the Blood, is mingled
with them, and is more firmly united and assimilated to them.

LXIV. The same cause that promotes Why Children do not generate Seed.
and cherishes the growth of the Body, hinders the Generation of Seed in
Children. Hence it is that the Blood is more moist and oily; and the Animal
Spirits themselves less sharp, and fewer in quantity, flow to the Stones, so
that there is only enough for the growth of the Parts, but not for the
Generation of Seed. But afterward, through the increase of heat that oily
superfluous substance being somewhat wasted, then the Brain being dryer begets
sharper Animal Spirits, which being mixed with the Arterious Blood, carried
through the Nerves to the Stones, more easily separate from it the salter
Particles more fit for the Generation of Seed, with which being condensed and
mixed into a thin Liquor by the proper quality of the Stones proceeding from
their peculiar structure and temper, they are concocted into Seed, which
becomes so much the more perfect, by how much the copious Moisture is
predominant therein, which in perfect Seed ought to be but moderate.

LXV. And hence it is also apparent (...) (...) (...) (...)
wherefore in old Age, very little, or watery, or no Seed at all is made in the
Stones: Because that by reason of their abated heat, over much moisture again
prevails at that Age through the whole Body; though not so oily as in Childhood,
but crude and more watery, whence the Brain becomes moister, and begets fewer
or less eager Spirits, and the Blood becomes colder and moister. Moreover, the
Parts themselves concocting the Seed, become more languid and over moist, and
consequently unapt, as well in respect of the Matter, as their own proper
debility, to make Seed: I except some sort of old men, vigorous in their old
Age, who at fourscore and fourscore and ten have begot Children, as Platerus
relates concerning his own Father.

LXVI. As to the latter Question, Why gelded Animals grow fat.
why Eunuchs and gelded Animals become more languid and less vigorous, the
Reason is, because that through the cutting out of the Stones, there follows an
extraordinary change of the whole Temper of the Body; in regard that lustful
seminal Breathing ceases, which is diffused over all the Parts of the Body
(which is apparent from the peculiar Smell and Rankness of Taste in the Flesh of
Beasts ungelt) and by means of which the Blood and other Humors are more
warmly heated, and the Spirits rendered more smart and vigorous. This
remarkable Alteration of Temperament is apparent in Eunuchs from hence, that
the Hair grown before Castration never falls off, and the Hair not grown
before, either upon the Lips or other parts, never comes: Quite contrary to
what befalls those that are not geit.

LXVII. The same is manifestly observed An Observation in gelt Deer.
in Deer who shed their large Beams every Year, and then new ones come the next
Year in their places; but being gelt presently after they have shed their
Horns, their Antlers never grow again, but they become very fat. Now this
change of Temper, caused by the defect of lustful and masculine seminal inward
Breathings thorough the whole Body, tends toward Cold, whence it happens that
the Blood becomes more oily and less fervent, and the animal Spirits are
generated less sharp and vigorous, and less dispersed, and that part of the
Blood, which otherwise ought to be consumed in Seed and seminal Spirits,
remains solely in the Body; fills the Vessels, and more plentifully nourishes
every part; and that plenty and oyliness of the Blood moistens and plumps up
the Body to a more extraordinary Corpulency. For the fermenting Quality of the
animal Spirits in such an abounding Quantity of sanguineous Juice, though less
fervent, being now more languid and remiss, becomes less able to separate the
sulphury and oily Particles of the Blood from the salt ones, which for that
reason remaining mixed together in greater quantity, and joined together for
the nourishment of the Parts, moisten them less, and render them fatter, but
more languid, and not so strong. For that Interposition hinders the more dry
and salter Particles of the Blood from being firmly united to the spermatic
Vessels.

LXVIII. To this we may add, In gelt Persons or Beasts, the Spirits become less
sharp and subtle, and so less fit for animal Actions.
that in those that are gelt, by reason of that extraordinary Redundancy of
oily Blood, the Brain it self is overmuch moistened, whence the Spirits become
less sharp, subtle and vigorous, and consequently less sharp and fit for animal
Actions. Which make Eunuchs more dull, less courageous, languid, and
effeminate, and slower in all the Exercises both of Body and Mind.

LXIX. From the same Redundancy Why fat People less fit for Venery.
in the Blood of oily Particles, dulling the Acrimony of the animal Spirits, it
happens, that they who are naturally fat and gross, generate less Seed and
slower, are less fit for the Sports of Venus, and are soon tired. Whereas on
the other side strong lean People are prone to Venery, and hold out longer.
Because they have more Seed, and more quickly replenished, besides that their
animal Spirits are sharper and more copious; and their fermenting Power is not
so soon abated by the over much Plenty of Oily Moisture. But some will say, why
are not Children fat for the same Reason? Because the redundant moist and
dew-like Blood is consumed in the growth and increase of the Body.

LXX. From what has been said Why in a Plethory the Body becomes unweildy,
weak, slothful, drowsy, sleepy, etc.
it appears, wherefore in a Plethory the Body becomes unwieldy, slothful, and
weak, and all the animal Actions, both the principal, and others grow drowsy,
and the Persons themselves are sleepy and heavy Headed, etc. because that by
reason of the extraordinary Redundancy of the oily Particles in the Blood, the
animal Spirits are generated fewer in Quantity, less sharp and active.

Now what that fermenting Power of the animal Spirits, so often mentioned, is,
see l. 3. c. 11.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Conception, and the forming of the Embryo.
I. WHen the fruitful Seed of Conception.
both Sexes is received into a Womb well disposed, and is detained enclosed
therein, it is called Conception.

II. This Conception is made in the Where it is made.
Cavity of the Womb it self, and not in any Pores of the inner Membranes; in
regard that no Quantity of injected Seed can be contained in the Pores, neither
is the prolific Principle, being separated from the thicker Mass of the Seed,
included in the Pores, but is carried through the Tubes to the Ovary; with
which the Eggs being impregnated, pass the same way to the Womb, where they are
detained and cherished. But as for those, who following Harvey, assert that the
Seed being injected into the Womb, soon after flows out again, the prolific
Principle only remaining within, and tell us that the Conception is perfected
not in the Cavity of the Womb, but in the Pores of the internal Membranes,
which Regius also affirms: how far they are mistaken shall appear by that which
follows.

III. Now it is necessary, that the The Orifice of the Womb must be closed
after Conception.
Seed being received and detained, that the Orifice of the Womb should be
closed, and so continue; at least for the first Months, to the end that Spirit,
wherein the fruitfulness of the Seed continues, should not be dissipated and
lost, before it slide through the Tubes to the Ovaries; which would easily
happen, were not the Orifice well closed; that the Eggs also being impregnated
with the said Spirit, and so carried from the Ovaries to the Womb, should not
slip forth, nor be corrupted by the entrance of the Air. This Closure of the
Womb, as Galen affirms, and we have seen, is so strait and exact that it will
not admit the top Whether the Seed of both Sexes concurs.
of a Probe.

IV. Now I speak of the Seed of both Sexes, neither will I be so rash, as with
Aristotle, or with Harvey, to question the Woman's Seed, or to believe that
Conception cannot be made without it, having proved the necessity of it in the
former Chapter; for though it be not the efficient Cause of Formation, yet is it
such a material Cause, as ought necessarily to concur in the Eggs with the
prolific Principle of the male Seed to its Dissolution, and the Expedition of
its Operation; and it also constitutes the Matter, together with the more
watery dissolved Parts of the masculine Seed, by which the most slender, the
most tender and smallest Threads of the Members of the Embryo being by this
time formed, may first be cherished, and then receive its Nourishment from it,
as likewise its Growth; as also for the forming of the Membrane it self, the
Amnion, and the Chorion; in like manner as in a Hens Egg we see the Shell, and
the inner thin Membrane formed out of the Seed of the Hen, before her being
trod by the Cock; as is apparent in Wind Eggs. Which Shell however, together
with the foresaid thin Membrane in the Eggs of Hens and other Birds, neither
grow nor are enlarged after the Eggs are laid, because they have acquired their
just Capaciousness and Magnitude before the Eggs were laid; as being to be
hatched without the Body of the Birds, quite otherwise than in other Creatures
that bring forth live Conceptions, in which, as the Embryo grows, those
Membranes must of necessity increase. And hence because the woman's Seed alone
is not sufficient to supply that daily Growth in the Womb: First the more
watery Parts of the male Seed residing in the Womb, and the Blood and other
Humors conveyed through the Vasa Sanguifera, join themselves to its
assistance.

V. Here we think fit to explode Aristotle's Opinion about the menstruous Blood
exploded.
the Opinion of those who with Aristotle say that the menstruous Blood concurs
in like manner with the Seed to the first forming of the Parts. For all the
Parts are delineated out of the Seed alone, and that by and out of the most
subtle and most spirituous part of it: Neither does the menstruous Blood, nor
any other Blood contribute any thing more than Nourishment, which causes the
Growth of the Parts.

VI. After Conception the Orifice of The dete^sion of the Seed.
the Womb is not only closed, but the whole Womb* contracts it self about the
Seed, to the end it may the better detain and embrace it. Thus Galen reports
that the Women have often told him, that after Conception they have felt a
certain motion in the Privities, that did as it were pull and contract them
together.

VII. The Seed being detained in The Colliquation of the Seed.
the Womb, is cherished, altered, and melted by the dewie heat of the Womb; and
so its thicker and more fixed Particles, being dissolved by a more firm
cleaving and binding together, the more spirituous and active parts which lay
imprisoned in those thicker Particles being set at liberty, presently pass
through the Uterine Tubes to the Ovaries, to the end they may enter the Eggs
that are come to maturity, and impregnate them, wherein they meet in a small
Bubble, and like a transparent and crystalline Liquor appear in the Egg carried
to the Womb.

VIII. Now in this small Bubble only In the small Bubble only is the forming of
the Embryo.
is the forming of the whole Embryo perfected. For in that same thin and
spirituous part of the Seed the Architectonic Faculty lies, which by the
cherishing of the Uterine heat, together with its subject in which it is fixed,
that is to say, that same thin and spirituous Liquor of the Seed, being set at
liberty breaks forth into Action. For it cannot be free, but it must act: nor
can it be set at liberty, unless by an External Cause; that is, by the heat of
the Womb, the whole Mass of the Masculine Seed being ejected in Copulation, be
dissolved and melted, and by that means the spirituous or prolific Part being
separated from it, be carried through the Tubes to the Ovaries, and then shut
up in the Eggs, return again with them to the Womb. For as nothing can produce
it self, so neither can any form produce it self out of Matter. But breaking
forth into Act out of its slender enclosure, it begins the delineation of the
whole Embryo, and in a short time compleats it. For presently the thin
Particles of the Bubble are gently agitated, and moved one among another, and
coagulated here and there into various forms and shapes, and innumerable
passages are hollowed out through them, and so all the Parts of the Body are
formed: because that same spirituous Matter of the Bubble being separated from
the thicker Mass, contains in it self Idea's of all the Parts, and hence
acquires an aptitude to receive the forms of all the Parts, and shape the
Figures in it self. Now because there is but a very small quantity of that
spirituous part included in the Bubble, and still the least and most subtle
part of that is expended upon the Delineation of the Embryo, therefore the
Birth at the beginning is scarcely so big as an Emmet. Delineation performed
solely by the Seed.


IX. Hence it is apparent, because the Liquor contained in that Bubble is the
most subtle part of the Masculine Seed, that the first delineaments of all the
Parts are formed out of the Seed alone, that is, out of the most thin and
subtle part of it, and then is afterward increased, and more embodied, first
by the thicker Particles both of the Man and Woman's Seed melted and diffused,
and then by the milkie watery Juice flowing through the Navel. Aristotle's
Error in affirming that all the parts are formed not out of the Seed, but out
of the Blood.


X. From what has been said, it is manifest how much Aristotle swerved from the
Truth, while he affirms that all the Parts are formed, not out of the Seed, but
out of the Blood: nay, while he attributes to the Male Seed no share, either as
to the Formation or the Matter; but only affirms that the menstruous Blood by
motion, generates both form and parts. The Seed, says he, is no part of the
Embryo, as the Carpenter contributes nothing to the matter of the Wood; neither
is there any part of the Carpenters Art in what is framed, but form and species
proceeds from that by motion in the matter. In which Error Harvey also fell,
while he endeavored to prove that the Blood exists before all the other
Members; and hence all the first threads of all the parts are delineated out of
the Blood; which he would seem to confirm more strenuously Exercit. 56. It
seems a Paradox, says he) that the Blood should be made and imbued with vital
Spirit, before the Blood-making or moving Organs are in being. Thus Exercit.
16. he says, that the Blood is first in being, and that Pulsation comes
afterward. But we answer to Harvey, That though the little Heart, which
sanguifies, cannot be well discerned at first, or clearly be distinguished from
other parts; yet of necessity it must be formed, together with the rest of the
parts, before the Blood, and being formed presently beats; though the slender
Pulse cannot be discerned by us at the beginning. For all the Parts delineated
out of the pellucid, spirituous, seminal Liquor enclosed in the Bubble; and so
by reason of their color, and their extreme smallness are hardly to be
distinguished by the sight. For otherwise, that there is a heart, and that it
exists before the Blood, the Effect manifestly declares. For seeing there is no
Blood contained in the Bubble before delineation, nor can flow into it from any
other part; therefore that which is observed in it at the beginning of the
delineation, when any small Threads begin to appear, must of necessity be
generated within it; now then if no other part generate blood but the heart,
nor any blood can be generated spontaneously, and by it self, of necessity when
any signs of blood begin to appear in the Liquefaction of the Bubble, which are
easily visible, because of their ruddy color, we must of necessity conclude a
praeexistency of the Efficient Cause of blood, which is the heart, though it
cannot be so easily discerned or known to be what it is, by reason of its
transparency and exility. So likewise if the blood be moved through the
Vessels, since it cannot be done without pulsation of the heart, most certain
it is that the heart beats, though the pulsation be not to be discerned. For the
reason why neither the little heart, nor its pulsation, cannot be discerned, is
not because there are no such things, but because they are so extremely small,
as not to be discernable to our eyes. Moreover, the thing is manifest in an Egg
put under a Hen; for the colliquation with the Bubble that first appears to the
Eye, is before the blood: and since it includes in its Bubble the forming power
that makes the Chicken, and for that the blood can never penetrate the inner
parts of the Egg, it is an Argument that the Members of the Chicken delineated,
are delineated out of the Bubble of that Colliquation, and not out of the
blood. And thus a Plant is not generated out of the green Juice, with which it
is afterward nourished, but out of the spirituous prolisic Principle latent in
the Seed. But when the Plant is generated, then it goes on with its work in
preparing the Juice which it makes for its Nourishment. To this we may add,
That it appears by inspection into a Hen Egg, that a small leaping print and
the blood are seen together.

XI. Whence it is apparent that there There can be no blood before the Organ
that makes the blood is formed.
can be no Blood, before the Organ that makes the Blood, that is the heart;
which if the delineaments of the whole Body were formed out of the Blood, ought
to be formed with the rest after the Blood, which is false, as we find by the
testimony of our own eyes, and which the Reasons before alleged confirm. And
therefore the first Threads of the Infant are delineated out of the Seed alone,
and not out of the blood; neither does the Architectonic Spirit bring forth
into Action, out of the Blood, but out of the prolific Principle, and the
sanguific Bowel the heart being formed, presently that begets the blood, and
puts it into motion. Deusingius discoursing of this matter, thus breaks out;
What Captain, (says he) or what Intelligence directs the blood through the
vagous and floating matter of Conception? What assisting Intelligence (when
first it is destitute of understanding) shall design for it the seat for the
forming the Bowels? Where is the heart to be formed? where the Reins to be
placed? where the Brains or the Spleen? lest the Brains should choose their
seat in the Abdomen, and the Intestines theirs in the Scull? What Cause shall
move it to a Circulation afterward, unless it were moved by the beating
Vesicle of the heart? What Providence shall so restrain its wandering at first
without any Receptacles, and upon the building of the several Conduitpipes,
shall direct its course into each of them.

XII. Now it is not any sort, but a It is a peculiar and appropriated (...)
that is requisite for the Embryo.
particular and appropriated Nourishment that is requisite for the small Body
of the Embryo, already delineated in the Bubble, by which, without the visible
concoction of the Bowels, it may be cherished and enlarged. Now this
Nourishment could neither be Blood nor Chylus, as wanting a greater preparation
and concoction before they can nourish; and therefore for that purpose the
provident Creator has included Female Seed in the Woman's Egg, like a certain
white of a Hen Egg, as being a most mild Humor, most apt for the first
cherishing and moistning Nourishment of the swimming Embryo, nearest
approaching to the nature of the tender parts already delineated, nor having
need of much concoction, but only a slight preparation, and a gentle
colliquation and attenuation, through the mild heat of the Womb. Thus also
Galen writes, That the Embryo is first nourished by the Female Seed, as being
that which is more familiar to its nature than the blood; since every thing
that is nourished must be nourished by its like. As we find that Chickens are
first nourished in the Eggs with the inner white, which is the Seed of the
Birds. But in regard that in the little Egg, which in women falls out of the
Ovarie through the Tubes into the Womb, there cannot be much female Seed
contained, therefore there is added to it a watery Juice, being the remainder
of the Man's Seed already melted and attenuated, after the prolific Principle
being separated from it, and driven to the Ovaries, which the Egg falling down
into the Womb, gentlely receives and embraces, and penetrating the Pores of its
little Stems, and by that means entering the inner parts, and mingling it self
with the albumineous female Juice, increases in quantity the Colliquation where
the Embryo swims, and also strongly distends and amplifies the little Skins of
the Egg, that there may be a larger Seat for the Embryo, and more Nourishment,
next approaching the Nature of its Principles. But whether that seminal Liquor,
which flows from the Prostates of women in Copulation, be mixed with the
residue of the man's Seed in the Womb, or presently flow forth after the Act, I
cannot hitherto certainly find out. Besides the prolific Principle before
enclosed in the Egg goes to work much more strongly and vigorously, when the
thicker dissolved part of the man's Seed has entered thorough its Tunicles into
the inner parts of it; and by mixture of it self has conveniently dissolved the
albumineous female Seed, to make it more fit to roll the Spirit of the
prolific Principle into Act. The same appears also in Plants, in whose Seed the
prolif^c Principle being included and entangled, never proceeds into Act, till
they have sucked in the Juice of the Earth through their Husks and Shells,
which dissolves the inner Substance that resembles the woman's Seed, and so sets
the prolific Principle at Liberty to fall to work: And so the first Cherishing
and Nourishment of the Embryo, is like that Substance, out of which it is
formed, or at least formed out of the like. Which is observed also by
Aristotle, who says, The Matter is the same that constitutes and enlarges the
Creature. For whatever is added to the delineated Parts while they grow, ought
to be like that Substance, out of which they were framed. In which Particular
Harvey also agrees.

XIII. Nor let any body wonder, How the residue of the man's Seed enters the
Bubble.
that the remainder of the masculine Seed dissolved and attenuated, should
penetrate and enter the inner Parts of the Egg, through the Pores of the little
Skins of the woman's Egg (which Skins are very tender and porous at first, but
composing the Chorion and Amnion so close and firm, that they will suffer the
Penetration of no Humor.) For this Penetration may as well happen in a woman's
Egg, as in the Seeds of Plants, that through the P^res of their hard Shells
easily imbibe the Moisture of the Earth, by which the Rind is then very much
dilated, which causes the Seeds to swell, and with that imbibed Moisture of the
^arth mixed with the thicker dissolved Particles of the Seed, the delineated
Kernel so soon as shaped is nourished; which being brought to that bigness as
to want more Nourishment, that cast forth Roots like Navils, to draw out of the
Earth a stronger Nourishment through them. And thus it is a in human Embryo,
and the dissolved remainder of the man's Seed mixed therewith. But this
Nourishment being almost spent, the Womb begins to enlarge it self, for the
Passage, thorough it, of the Nourishment to the Embryo, as through a Root.

XIV. This foresaid Matter, nourishes A twosold (...) of (...) (...).
the Parts two ways. First by a close Apposition; as the tender delineated
Parts are every way moistened and increased by it. Secondly, By the
Assimilation of the Aliments concocted in their proper Bowels. For that the
newly formed Bowels of the Embryo, at first cannot undertake Concoctions, nor
prepare or make Nourishment, which is the reason that the thin Nourishment is
afforded by Apposition o^t of the seminal Matter prepared before. But soon
after the Heart makes Blood of the same Matter, for the more plentiful
intrinsic Nourishment of the Parts, and then to the Nourishment by Application,
is added another Nourishment by Reception.

Both these ways at the Beginning Harvey acknowledges, Exercit. 9. For, says
he, in all Nutrition and gro^ing there is equally necessary a near Application
of the Parts, and Concocti^n and Distribution of the applied Nourishment,
neither is the one to be accounted less true Nourishment than the other, seeing
that it happens by the Access. Apposition, Agglutination, and Transmutation of
new Nourishment. Neither are Pease or Beans said less to be nourished with the
Humor of the Earth, which they suck in through their Tunicles, like Spu^ges,
then if they should admit the same Nourishment thoro^gh the Orifices of little
Veins, etc.

But at length that seminal Liquor being spent, and the Bowels being by this
time well grown and corrob^rated, and the milkie Juice flowing copiously into
the Amnion, the Nourishment by Application ceases by degrees, and Nourishment
by inward Reception, that is, by the Blood takes place. Because that milkie
Liquor is not so agreeable to the parts of the Birth, as the first seminal
Liquor, and therefore requires a more perfect Concoction and Alteration into
Blood before it can nourish.

XV. But the Blood being bred in The Blood bred in the Heart cleaves to the
small Fibers of the Parts: First of the Heart, then of the Liver, Lungs,
Kidneys, Stomach, Muscles, etc.
the Heart, and imparted to the whole Body, cleaves to the small Threads of the
Parts, first of the Heart, then of the Liver, Lungs, Kidneys, Stomach, and
Muscles, etc. For there are various thicker Particles in the Blood, thin, salt,
sulphury, mixed, of which some cleave to and are more convenient for these, and
are united to them as they are more proper and agreeable to their Nature;
according to which variety of Nature they undergo several Alterations, before
they can be Assimilated. And the more the Blood grows to these delineated
Threads, so much the more the fleshy Masses of the Bowels increase, and the
rest of the Parts also by degrees, are more and more completed, and grow
stronger and stronger, though some later, some sooner, according as Nature has
use for 'em.

XVI. Whence it is that the Heart The Heart acts, sanguifies, and beats first
of all.
manifestly acts, sanguifies, and beats first of all; because the perfection
and action of it, is of all others the first and most chiefly necessary: And
still the Bra^n appears like a thicker sort of puddle Water, when all the rest
of the Parts are upon their growth: And though afterward it contribute somewhat
beneficial to Nourishment, yet in the beginning, when all the slender
Delineaments, are but just formed, contain a kind of fermentaceous Quality in
themselves, and neither require nor can endure a strong Fermentation, there is
no need of its Assistance. Beside the brain also many other Parts do but very
slightly appear, till some time after the first Foundations are laid, and some
Parts not till after the birth of the Infant, as the Teeth, though they were all
delineated at the beginning. For as Nature, the Parts being already delineated,
presently acts by their assistance as her ^eed requires, so does she perfect
the Organs not by growth, but as the necessity of Use requires their
Perfection. And as we may collect what parts are formed by their Action, though
they cannot be discerned by the Eye, so we may collect that those Parts are of
special Use which are first finished, among which are the Heart.

XVII. And thus it is apparent, How the Embryo is nourished.
that the Embryo is generated out of the prolific Principle contained in the
Bubble, that it is afterward nourished, first by the Seed of the woman, and
the melted remainder of the man's, afterward with that seminal Nourishment and
Blood, and lastly with Blood alone.

XVIII. This Opinion of ours is Whether the Seed (...) ou^ (...) after (...).
contrary to theirs, who alledg that man is produced and formed out of the
specific Principle alone, that is, out of the spirituous and efficacious part
of the Seed, but that the whole Mass of the Seed beside, is altogether
unprofitable, and therefore flows out again after Conception. True it is, that
the first Lineaments or Threads of the whole Body are formed out of the Egg
alone, infused into the woman's Egg and collected in the Bubble; but it is as
great a mistake, that after the separation of the prolific Principle, and the
real Conception, that the rest of the Seed flows out as unprofitable, as being
repugnant, 1. to Reason. 2. To the Authorities of the best Physicians. 3. To
Experience.

1. Reason. Because that when the Seed is received into the Womb, and once
Conception happens, the Orifice of the Womb is so exactly closed, that nothing
can flow out again. 2. Authorities. For Hippocrates expressly declares, That if
a Woman after Copulation does not conceive, the Seed of both Sexes flows out
again: But if she conceive, the Seed never fl^ws out again. For that being once
cordially embraced, the Womb is closed up, the Orifice being contracted by
reason of its Moisture, and as well the woman's as the man's Seed are mixed
together. So that if a woman has had Children, and observes when the Seed first
began to stay in her Body, she shall know the day she conceived.

The same Hippocrates in his Treatise de Natura Pu^ri, has these words. If the
Geniture of both Parents stays in the woman's Womb, then first, because the
woman is seldom at rest, it is mingled, condensed and thickens with heat. The
words of Galen are, If the Seed remains in the Matrix, the woman will conceive.
And in another place, I have read all the Physicians that have writ of this
Matter, which I find to affirm the same thing, that if a woman will conceive,
of necessity the man's Seed must remain in her Body. In like manner Macro^ius.
The Seed, says he, that after Injection does not come forth again in seven
Hours, may be pronounced to stay in order to Conception. Which most of the
Ancients, both Greeks, and Arabians, in all their Writings assert, as having
learned it from manifold Observation. Among the Moderns, Fernelius, Ludovicus
Mercatus, and several others, maintain the same Doctrine.

3. Experience. For Galen writes that he has often been told by Persons
experienced in those Affairs, that Mares, Bitches, Asses, Cows, Goats, and
Sheep, manifestly retain the Seed in their Wombs; as also, that he himself has
frequently made trial of it, and always observed in all Creatures that retained
their Seed after Conception, and became impregnated, that the Seed was still
found in the Womb upon Dissection. Which if Galen found to be always true in
brute Animals, why not in Women? But use confirms the same, for women certainly
know themselves to be with child, if they observe their Privities to continue
dry after Copulation, and that none of the Seed comes away from them. Ask a
hundred women one after another, and they will unanimously confess that to be a
certain sign of their Conceiving, and being with Child; and they should
certainly know by that sign when they conceived, but that after Copulation in
the Night they fall asleep; or after Copulation in the day time, taken up with
other business, they never take exact Notice whether the Seed comes from them
or no. Which not being diligently observed by 'em, they seldom know certainly
when they conceived, and begin their Reckoning from the time they missed their
Flowers, and so are frequently mistaken in their Account.
XIX. But neither the foresaid Reason, Harvey's Opinion that the Seed flows out
again.
nor the Authorities of the most famous Physicians, nor the Acknowledgments of
the Women themselves, could prevail so far, but that Harvey will still
maintain, that the Seed contributes nothing to the Growth and forming of the
Parts, and for that reason asserts, that the Seed either does not enter the
Womb, or being entered, flows out again, without Prejudice to Conception. Into
which Error he has also drawn Regius, and several other Philosophers. The
Reasons that confirm him in his Opinion, he takes from Ocular Testimony, as
having dissected several Do^s, Hinds, and many other brute Creatures, yet never
found any Seed in their wombs, though he believes several of those Creatures to
have been with young. In Bitches, Conies, and several other Animals, says he,
I have made trial, that there is nothing to be found in the womb for several
days after Coition, that I am convinced that the Birth does not proceed from
the Seed, either of Male or Female injected into the womb in Coition, nor from
the menstruous Blood, as the Matter, according to Aristotle, neither that there
is any Conception presently after Coition; and that therefore it cannot be
true, that in a prolific Coition there is any Matter prepared in the womb,
which the Virtue of the male Seed coagulates like Rennet, for there is nothing
at all to be seen therein for several days. And in another Place, Exercit. 17.
In the Cavity of the womb, says he, I never, could find any Seed of the Male,
nor any thing else that rendered toward Conception: And yet the Males every day
copulated with the Females, and I dissected several of those Females, and this
I have always found to be true by the Experience of many Years. Now when after
frequent Trials, I still met with nothing in the Cavity of the Womb, I began at
first to dou^t, whether the Seed of the Man could by any manner of way, either
by injection or attraction, enter the Place of Conception. And at length often
repeated Inspection confirmed me in the Opinion, that nothing of Seed ever
reached those Places.

And from hence at last he concludes that the man's Seed neither contained in it
self the active Power of Forming, nor was the matter out of which the thing was
to be formed; nor that it entered the Womb, or was therein detained: And that
he might describe the Principle and Subject of Conception, he flies to Quality
without Matter, to Species without Subject, and an idle Conception of the Womb
without the Brain. For, says he, because there is nothing sensible to be found
in the Womb after Conception, and yet there is a necessity that there should be
something to infertilize, and that cannot be Corporeal, it remains that we have
Recourse to mere Conception, and Conception of Species without Matter, that no
man may question but that the same thing happens here, which happens in the
Brain.

And a little after, As we from the Conception of a form or Idea in the Brain,
produce another like it in our Actions. So the Idea or Species of the Parent
being in the Womb, by the assistance of the forming Faculty begets a Birth
resembling it, while he imprints upon his Work a Species which he has in
himself immortal.

And so he concludes that Conception is produced in the Womb by the receiving
of Species's without, and that the Womb it self, while it stirs up the forming
Faculty according to that Idea conceived in it self, is the principal Cause of
Formation, whereas the whole Formation is accomplished in the Egg, both in and
out of the prolifick Principle of the Seed; and the womb affords nothing but a
convenient place and cherishing receptacle for the Seed.

XX. Now though Deusingius contradicts Deusingius his Opinion.
Harvey, yet he seems to be in a great quandary, and shunning Charybdis for
fear of falling into Scylla, proposes the Question quite otherwise than Harvey,
but confirms his Opinion with no more solidity at all. For he writes that the
Seed of the Male, being injected into the Privities of the Woman, and as it
were by infection, changes as well the accidental as substantial temper of the
womb and whole body, and confers such a disposition upon the body and the womb,
by which it is wrought to the top of maturity, and impregnated, as Fruits are
ripened by the Summers heat: So that though afterward the whole mass of the Male
Seed flow forth of the womb after Coition, or though the spirituous portion also
exhale into nothing, yet the spirituous substance of the Woman's body receives
such an impression from the said temper, as the spirituous portion of the Man's
Seed first made by virtue of its own proper nature. In which words the learned
Man seems to ascribe to the Seed of Man in conception no other effect, than
that it changes the disposition of the Woman and her womb, and contributes to
it an aptitude to form and find materials, but that the Seed of the Man after
coition comes away again, as altogether useless: As if that change of temper,
and preparation to maturity, were to be made in coition, so suddenly, and as
it were at a jump, by the only injection of the Male Seed; and that the Woman,
not long before ripe for Man of her self, through the increase of her own
proper heat, and of blood and spirits, did not become fit for the generation of
eggs and conception, and that conception did not in a short time happen after
coition, but only upon a great and preceding preparation, and a long alteration
of the Woman's whole body, caused by the frequent injection of the Man's Seed.
Besides, the Comparison is ill, that the Seed of the Man should mature the
Woman, as the Sun ripens the Fruit; because a Woman is not matur'd by the Man's
Seed, but by her own inward heat, and so produces such Fruit, that is, her own
Seed included in the Egg, to cherish and ferment the prolific Principle
separated from the Man's Seed, and infused into the Egg, and to set it at
liberty; as also for the generating of the Tunicles and Membranes that enfold
the Birth, and for the most proper and convenient Nourishment of the new-form'd
Birth.

XXI. So that Harvey's Inspections Harvey deluded both himself and Deusingius.
into the Conceptions of brute Animals, not only deluded himself but
Deusingius, Regius, and several other learned Men, who suffered themselves to
be led astray before they had thoroughly examined the matter. I acknowledge my
self to be an admirer of Harvey's Experiments, and his extraordinary Ingenuity
and Industry in the Dissection of Beasts, and give him great Credit; and I
believe that in most Beasts dissected after Coition, he found no Seed in the
Womb: Now it does not follow from thence, what he would infer, That the Seed in
Coition does not enter the Womb, and that it comes away again presently after
Coition, and yet Conception happens, and therefore that the Seed is useless in
Conception. For that those Inspections of Harvey do not certainly prove that
the Seed was not detained in the Womb, when Conception was over, or at the time
of conceiving: For though he never could find any Seed in the wombs of those
Creatures, which he dissected, yet that concludes nothing of certainty, nor
proves that those Beasts were impregnated, or that there would have been a
Conception from former Coitions, had they been permitted longer life. And
certainly there are many Arguments that destroy both his Reasons and the
Arguments drawn from his Experiments.

XXII.

1. The Seed injected might Harvey's Experiments examined; first, that the Seed
might fall out, and so no conception.
come away again after Coition, either of its own accord, as happens in Women
that do not conceive; or shogg'd out, and so there might be no Conception. For
he himself writes, that Does and Hinds do copulate every day for a whole Month
together, and therefore they many times copulate in vain: after which vain
Coition the Seed flows again out of the Womb: For generally those Creatures
conceive upon the last Copulation, especially those that bring forth but one at
a time, because that after Conception they admit the Male no more. Now if
Harvey in his Dissections did not light upon one of those Does which had not
yet admitted the least conceiving Copulation, or at least had not as yet
conceived, 'twas no wonder he found no Seed in their Wombs, as being shaken out
after Coition. Thus I remember about ten years ago, in the Company of several
others, I saw a Mare, that as soon as the Horse had covered her, cast out the
Seed again; but the Horse continuing to cover her for three or four days
together, at length the last time she retained her Seed, and would not admit
the Horse to cover her any more: So that if the Mare had been opened the first
or second day, there would have been no Seed found in her womb: But if she had
been dissected after the last Coition, by which she conceived, without doubt
there would have been found Seed in her womb. And so would Harvey have found,
had he light upon Does that had conceived. For though in such a vast Herd of Deer
several perhaps might have conceived, it does not follow that he dissected
those that were impregnated; although he might have accidentally fallen upon the
one, as well as the other. 2. While those Creatures, after a long chase, are
wearied, frightened, and at length killed, it is not to be wondered at, that though
they should have conceived two or three days before, if the Seed scarce yet
melted should fall out of the womb, the Orifice being opened, in that vast
conturbation of Spirits, both before and after they are taken. For daily
Experience tells us, that many Women upon terrible Frights, have not only cast
forth the Seed conceived, but even the Birth it self already formed. 3. If
Bitches, Conies, and other Creatures urine and dung while they are killing, for
fear of death; nay, if the fear of punishment only work the same effects upon
some, no wonder that the Females of those Creatures, a few days or hours after
Coition, should shed their conceived Seed out of their wombs, while they are
killing, and so that no Seed should be found in their wombs. 4. The Seed
included in the womb, to the end that something may be produced out of it,
undergoes a great alteration in the womb; nor does it altogether retain that
form of substance which it had when it was first injected; and so perhaps
Harvey did not believe it to be Seed, either being already melted, or else
imagining it was not there, because so little.
XXIII. From what has been said, That Harvey's Experiments prove not what he
labors to maintain.
it appears that Harvey's Experiments cannot prove those things which he
labors to maintain by them. And therefore it is not for any to suffer himself
easily to be persuaded, that the Seed is of no use in Conception, but that it
flows out again from the womb, either before or after Conception. And therefore
I think there is more credit to be given to Galen in this particular, who being
informed, as well by his own, as the Experiments of others, found the thing to
be otherwise. Moreover, I do not believe we ought to deny our credit to
rational Women themselves, who by speaking satisfy us, that in Women that
conceive, the Seed does not flow forth out of the womb; of which dumb and
irrational Creatures are not able to give any account. Lastly, I cannot think
there is any credit to be given to the Speculations taken from the sole
inspection into brute Beasts, there being little of certainty in 'em, as being
explained and wrested, rather according to the preconceived Opinion of the
Inspecter, than according to Truth.

More than all this, Harvey himself writes, that about the eighteenth, or at
most the twentieth day of November, he has seen, sometimes in the right, and
sometimes in the left Horn of a Does womb, a transparent colliquated matter,
and crystalline, contained within its own proper Tunicle, and in the middle
bloody Fibers, and a jumping point. Which Matter, since it was not rained down
from Heaven, I would sain know what else it could be, but the Seed of the
Female enclosed in the Egg, together with the jumping point, and increased by
the mass of the dissolved Masculine Seed, encompassed with the Chorion and
Amnion? Now that he did not find the same Matter in many others, no question
the Reason was, because he seldom lighted upon those Creatures that had
conceived.

XXIV. And therefore there is no The Seed, after Conception, flows not out of
the womb.
doubt to be made, but that the Seed after Conception, neither flows again out
of the womb, neither is it, according to Aristotle, rarefied into Spirit, and
dissipated, or that it vanishes any other way, but that it is detained within
the womb, and thus with that, together with that other Seed contained in the
Woman's Egg, the Birth is first of all both cherished and nourished.

XXV. In the mean time I would The F^tus is formed of the Seed, and nourished
by the same.
not have any man think that I propound things absurd, while I affirm that the
Birth is delineated and formed out of the Seed, and in the beginning by the
same Seed is also nourished; and so one and the same Seed serves for two
several uses. For in the Seed there are two distinct parts; some spirituous,
out of which the Birth is delineated and formed; others thicker and less
spirituous, from whence is taken the next Matter requisite for the first
nourishment of the formed parts, their increase and greater perfection; yet the
Birth can neither be formed out of those, nor ^ish'd by them: For the same
thing does not form and nourish, but diverse parts of the same thing. The same
thing happens in the Seed of Man, and all Creatures producing living
Conceptions, as in the Seed of a Plant, wherein Theophrastes acknowledges two
parts, one spirituous, upon which the prolific or procreating power depends;
the other thicker, that nourishes the spirituous part, by virtue of which the
Seed of the Plant springs forth, and casts out some leaves, though not set in the
Earth, as containing in it self the Nourishment first required.

But now let us return to the Bubble from whence the first Nourishment of the
Embryo led us astray.

XXVI. That the first and sole foundation The Birth is formed in the Bubble.
of the Birth is wrought in this Bubble, out of the Crystalline humor
contained therein, and surrounded with a peculiar invisible Pellicle,
Hippocrates has observed, by that time the Seed has been six days old: for he
writes that he has seen the Internal Pellicle or little Skin, (that is the
Bubble) whose innermost Liquor was transparent, out of the middle of which
somewhat thin shot it self forth, which he thought to be the Navel.

XXVII. As to the time of Formation, The time of Formation.
there is some dispute about it among Physicians. Hippocrates tells us, that
the Seed being received into the womb, ought to have some appearances upon the
seventh day, and that if the Abortion thrown out within that time, be put into
water, and diligently viewed, all the first foundations of all the parts may be
manifestly discerned therein. Others affirm this Formation of the parts not to
be accomplished so soon as seven days, but after a longer time. Strato the
Peripatetic, and Diocles Caristius, by the report of Macrobius, in his Comment
upon Scipio's Dream, asserted that the human figure was formed within five
weeks, or about the thirty fifth day, to the Bigness of a Be, yet not so, but
that all the Members, and all the designed Lineaments of the whole Body
appeared in that Epitome. Aristotle averrs, that the little body of the Birth
settles as it were in a little Membrane upon the fortieth day* which being
broken, the Birth it self appears about the bigness of a large Emmet, with all
the Members distinct, and all other things, Genitals and all. Which Opinion of
Aristotle may be easily reconciled with that of Hippocrates: For he computes
from the time that the Seed was injected into the womb to the whole, and
manifest by visible formation of the Birth. Which time he asserts to be in all
forty days. Hippocrates begins his Computation from the time that the Birth
begins to be formed into Members; that is to say, after the Seed being first
melted in the womb, and the prolific Principle being separated from it, and
fallen down to the Egg through the Tubes, and there collected in the Bubble,
(all which is done within the first days,) at length it begins to be dispersed
for the delineation of the Parts. Moreover, Aristotle describes the perfect and
visible; Hippocrates the rude and scarce visible Formation of all the Parts:
these requiring more, the other fewer days. Fernelius, agreeing with Aristotle,
writes that he has seen a perfect Birth within the fortieth day; but does not
tell us how big it was. Others more modern, say, they have observed it as big
and as long as the little finger, within that time, toward the end of the third
Month, about a handful long, and toward the fifth about a foot long; which
however does not seem to be very probable, when I have seen the contrary with
my own eyes. But without question those Modern Authors were deceived i^ this,
that they did not understand the exact beginning of the Conception, as is
apparent from the following Histories of Abortive Births.

XXVIII. Harvey writes, that in a First History.
Female Conception as big as an Hen Egg, he found the Birth as long as a good
big Bean, with a pretty big Head, which the Brain out-grew, like a kind of
Comb; and that the Brain was like curdl'd Milk. Instead of a Scull there was a
Membrane somewhat resembling Leather; and the Face appeared shaped like a Dogs,
without any Nose to be seen.

XXIX. Some years since I had an The Second History.
opportunity to see an Abortion of a few weeks, upon which I made these
Observations. The bigness of the Abortion, together with the Membrane, was
about the quantity of an Hen-egg. The Chorion loose, wrinkled, and somewhat
rough and hairy without side, sprinkled with many very small Veins, all which
met together at the top of it, to which there stuck a small, fleshie, long,
shapeless, and bloody Mass, from whence the said Veins seemed to derive
themselves. Furthermore, the same Chorion was easily separated from the Amnion,
and that with a very slight handling, except in that part where the said little
piece of flesh stuck. But within the Amnion a certain watery Dissolution,
somewhat viscous, and plentiful enough. In the middle of which there swam a
small Embryo every way free, and no where sticking to the Amnion. The Trunk of
this Body was hardly so big as the half of a small Pea slit in two. At the top
of which the Head was fastened to a most slender Neck, about as big as a silk
Thread. The Head was very big in comparison of the Trunk, equalling the fourth
part of the whole Trunk; wherein black Eyes were very conspicuous; the Nose did
not swell out, but in the place of it there appeared a certain white Line.
Nothing of the Ears was to be seen, as neither the Shape nor opening of the
Mouth, only a small overthwart Line offered it self to view in the same place.
Instead of a Scull, a thin Membrane gi^t the Brain, which showed like the
diminutive white of an Egg. The Trunk did not seem distinguished into two
Bellies, but seemed to consist all of one Belly, and in the inner part of it
certain small Bowels, covered with a thin transparent small Membrane, showed
themselves, but so confusedly, that they could not be distinguished one from
the other. A little below the middle of the Trunk a slender whitish small
Branch issued forth, which was the Navel, but so short, that the length of it
hardly exceeded half the breadth of a slender Straw. Moreover, there appeared
above, certain obscure delineations of the Arms; below, of the Thighs and Legs,
in which the Fingers and Toes were only distinguished by small little Lines.
This Woman, when she miscarried, thought her self to have been gone seven or
eight weeks of her time.

XXX. Two years after that, another The Third.
Woman miscarried: the Abortion was about the bigness of a small Hen-egg.
Without a fleshie Particle stuck fast to the Membranes; out of which fleshie
Particle, the Vessels of the Chorion derived themselves, as I have observed in
the preceding Abortion. But this was a little bigger, as being about the
bigness of half a Nutmeg. The Chorion being opened, no Liquor flowed forth; for
there was nothing contained between the two Membranes, nor could the Allantois
or Urinary Tunicle be seen among 'em. Nevertheless the Chorion did not stick to
the Amnion, but only was as it were placed upon it, and was easily separated
from it, with little handling, unless where the little piece of flesh was
joined to it on the outer side, for there the Amnion was fastened to the
Chorion. Within the Amnion the Dissolution was found to be moderate as to
quantity, in the middle o^ (...) I found a small Embryo, with a large Head in
comparison of the whole, because that all the rest of the little Body seemed to
be three or four times bigger than the Head, which was no bigger than a small
Pea, and joined with a small neck about the thickness of three silk Threads
twisted together. In the hinder part of this lay the Brain, like a white Comb,
and the whole Head was surrounded with a whole Skin, under which was the soft
Brain stirred up like the white of an Egg. In the part before little black Eyes
were apparently conspicuous, but no Ears appeared. A white little Line marked
out the Place for the Nose and Mouth. The rest of the Body showed it self
rudely delineated into a Trunk and small Arteries; but was much more soft than
in the foregoing Abortment, like a thicker sort of Slime, that would not endure
the least touch without suffering an Injury. Perchance this extraordinary
softness proceeded from some Corruption, and because the Embryo had been dead
for some time; for the Lady had been ill three or four weeks before she
miscarried, not knowing she was with Child.

XXXI. In the Year 1663. in December, The fourth.
the same Lady again Miscarried, after her Husband thought she had been six
weeks gone. The Abortment was about the bigness of a small Hen-egg. The fleshie
Particle outwardly cleaving to the Membranes was much bigger than in the
foregoing Abortments, extending it self half way the Chorion. Within the
Membranes there was a sufficient quantity of dissolved Juice. Upon the
dissolution swam the slender Embryo, about the bigness of a great Emet, where
the Head, manifestly to be distinguished, appeared fastened to the small Trunk,
with two diminutive black little points, designing the place of the Eyes: The
Trunk was somewhat bowed like the Keel of a Boat, wherein some Bowels seemed to
appear, but so confusedly as not to be distinguished: and for Arteries, there
were none visible. Besides this little Embryo, a little crystal Bubble still
swam upon the same dissolved Juice, (such as I found in the foregoing
Abortments together with the Embryo,) about the bigness of a small Filbird, of
a most transparent color, wherein I could not perceive any delineations of the
Embryo: perhaps out of this the Female Birth might be afterward delineated;
which they say is later brought to perfection than the Male, and so the
production of Twins might happen.

XXXII. Now if the Embryo in the The vanity of some men who pretend to show
dried Abortments, since scarce any thing can be discerned before the fortieth
day.
eighth or ninth week be no bigger than a Pea or a Tare, and about the fortieth
day be no bigger than a large Emet, certainly their demonstrations are to be
accounted very ridiculous, who showing some diminutive dried Abortments to be
seen, endeavored to persuade their Spectators that one is the Conception of
six or eight days, the other of thirteen days or a fortnight; when as they are
much bigger than those by me seen and described; and that it is altogether very
probable, that scarce any thing of the formed Embryo can be discerned by the
Eye before the fortieth day. Besides that, it is manifest from the first formed
Embryo, that the whole mass of the Male and Female Seed cannot be wasted in
forming so small a Body, when out of the least drop of it such a small Body may
be formed as big as a large Emet: Therefore the rest of the mass, which flows
not out of the womb, nor is wasted in forming the parts, cheris^es and
nourishes those parts soon after, and contributes to their growth. But because
that residue of the Seed is soon consumed presently, therefore a plentiful
milkie Juice supplies its room, which then begins to flow into the Amnion, and
that plentifully when the Umbilical Vessels are grown to their due bulk.

XXXIII. From what has been said, The Birth not formed of the whole mass of
Seed.
it is apparently manifest, that the Birth is formed, not of the whole mass of
the Seed, but only of the most spirituous and thinnest part thereof, collected
first like a transparent Crystal into a diminutive Bubble, as has been already
said before.

And now what others have observed, and I my self have seen in reference to
this Bubble, let us now in few words take notice.

XXXIV. Riolanus Animad verse. First Observation concerning the Bubbl^ of
Riolanus.
in Laurent. tit. de formato Foetu, sets down this Observation in reference to
the Crystalline Bubble. Lately, says he, there was brought me the production of
one Month, like a small Hens egg, so wrapped about with its Membranes; of which
the outermost was, as it were, like small flocks, and very fibrous, the
beginning and foundation of the Placenta. This Membrane being slit, three
little baggs were conspicuous within, contiguous one to another like little
Clusters of Grapes. Within those Vessels was contained a transparent water: and
in one of the Bladders which was the middlemost, was to be seen a little Body
like an Emet, and a fine slender Thread produced from it. That little Body
resembled a Birth without form, and not to be distinguished, as far as could be
discerned by the Eye, most nicely beholding that Miracle of Nature: But the
ruddy Thread marked out the Navel.

XXXV. This Passage does not a The discourse concerning the Bubble illustrates
the Proposition.
little illustrate our understanding of the Bubble. But I except against one
Error therein, arising from a preconceived Opinion, that the Embryo was
forthwith nourished by the Navel: And I believe that Riolanus was very much out
as to that same Thread, which he alleges to be the Navel. For as it is
apparent from our second preceding Relation, if in that Embryo seen by my self,
newly broken forth from the Bubble, and narrowly inspected by my own Eyes, to
which I give more credit than to the sayings of others; and then more perfectly
formed, the Navel scarcely swelled out to the breadth of half a small Straw,
nor any farther cast forth any Thread, how much less could the Navel*thread be
any farther extended from this same rude, undistinguishable, and scarcely begun
Birth. Furthermore, at the beginning the parts are increased swifter or slower,
according to the more or less necessity of their use. And in regard that at the
beginning there is as yet no necessity of their Use, in regard the Birth does
not as yet want Umbilical Blood, hence it comes to pass, that at the beginning
it is extended to a conspicuous length, but afterward by degrees grows out of
the Birth; as we shall make appear Cap. 32.

XXXVI. The same Riolanus adds The second Observation of Riolanus.
another Observation of the same Nature, out of Carpus's Commentaries upon
Mundinus, wherein Carpus observes three little Bubbles touching each other. So
also Platerus, Quaest. Med. Quaest. 1. writes, that in an Abortion about the
bigness of a Filbird, he found three little Bubbles within a thin Amnion, and
believes them to be the Foundations of the three principal Parts, the Heart,
Brain, and Liver. For my part I never saw so small an Abortion, about the
bigness of a Filbird, nor ever read of any one besides Platerus that ever saw
such another. Besides, the Citations lately produced out of Hippocrates,
Aristotle, and Riolanus teach us, that the Opinion of Platerus cannot be true,
from whence it is apparent that the Birth is wholly delineated, formed, and to
be found in one Bubble only: In the other two Riolanus found a transparent
Water* Carpus believes that Embryo's would have also been found in those
Bubbles full of transparent Water, had they stayed longer in the womb, but
Female ones, which are later formed. Which, according to the Experiments of
Hippocrates and Aristotle, in some measure seems probable. At least, this is
most certain, that in and out of the transparent Liquor of one Bubble, the
Birth is delineated and formed. And therefore I am persuaded that three
Bubbles, as those learned Persons saw 'em, are very rarely to be seen, but that
generally there is but one in the Conception, unless when a Woman conceives
Twins, or three Children at a time; to which there must be added a fourth
Bubble in Women that conceive more, like the Scotch-women, who frequently
conceive four at a time.

XXXVII. Now I am the more confirmed The third Observation.
in this Opinion, by an Abortion that was brought to me at the same time that I
was writing and inquiring into these things, by a noted Midwife, in which I
found not Three, but only one Bubble surrounded with a thin Cobweb-like
Membrane. This lay hid between a plentiful Seminal Colliquation, which was
watery, somewhat thick and viscous, wrapped about with two Membranes, the Chorion
and the Amnion, and swam at the top of it, free, and no where joining to the
Amnion. But to those external Membranes, in one very little part, there stuck
without side, a certain small, fleshie, soft, formless, and bloody Mass, about
the bigness of the twelfth part of the Abortion, which being somewhat
endammaged in the outermost part of it, seemed to have been torn from the Womb.
The Bubble contained a transparent Water, clear as Crystal; wherein I could
observe neither any blood, nor any thing else, unless it were some very small
little Lines, hardly discernable, which were without doubt the outside
Lineaments of the Embryo. The Woman that thus miscarried, knew not that she had
conceived, but being struck with a sudden and more than ordinary dread, cast
that Matter out of her womb without any pain, and little straining.

XXXVIII. About the same time I The fourth Observation.
saw another very young Conception upon the Miscarriage of a Minister's Wife,
wherein I found in like manner one only Bubble very transparent and
Crystalline, about the bigness of a Filbird, wherein there appeared no little
Lines, either bloody, white, or of any other Color. To the exterior Membrane
of that wrapped about the Colliquation, there stuck also very close, as in the
former, a little fleshie and bloody Particle, endammaged without side, and as
it were torn from the womb. From this most tender little Mass, I apparently
observed certain Blood-bearing little Vessels to derive themselves and to
spread themselves very numerously thorough the Chorion. But in the inner part
of the Amnion, besides the seminal watery Colliquation, upon which the Bubble
swam, I could not observe any thing bloody, nor any small Vessels in the
Substance of it. These two Membranes were easily to be separated one from the
other, neither was there any Liquor contained between 'em.

XXXIX. The Magnitude of these The Colliquated Matter and Bubble proceeds both
from the man and woman's Seed.
two Abortions, the foregoing and this, was about the bigness of a Hen-Egg, and
their Membranes contained more of the Colliquation than half an Eggshell would
hold; which in regard it could not altogether with the Bubble proceed from the
man's Seed, of necessity the woman's Seed must be mixed with it, though the Bubble
without all Question sprang solely out of the man's Seed.

XL. Taught by these two Experiments, In one Birth, but one only Bubble.
I am apt to believe, that there is but only one Bubble in the Conception
generally, and seldom any more, unless when more Births are to be formed. But
though hitherto I never saw any more, yet I am loath to contradict the Experience
of Riolanus, Carpus, and Platerus, or to doubt of the Truth of it: And perhaps
it may be my Chance to see more at another time.

XLI. In the Formation of the In what Order the Parts are formed.
Birth, the more curious Question yet remains; which Parts of the Body are
formed in the first place, which in the second, which in the third, and which
in the last Place. Aristot. l. de Invent. Writes that the Heart of Creatures
endued with Blood is the first generated, which he observed in Eggs, after the
Hen had sat three Days and as many Nights, as he asserts l. 6. de hist.
Animal. Ent is of Aristotle's Opinion, believing the Heart first to be formed,
and to be the efficient Cause of the forming the rest of the Parts. The Seed,
says he, emitted in Copulation into the Womb by the Male, constitutes only the
Heart in Conception; for no part of the Creature consists of Seed besides the
Heart. And in another place, he says, That the Heart moves not only after the
Birth is formed, but also from the Beginning, and is the efficient, not the
material Cause of the Formation. With Ent seems Regius to agree, l. 4. Philos.
Nature. Others believe the Brain, others the Liver, others that they are all
three formed together; and afterward the Guts, the Spleen, and Lungs. And this
is the Opinion of Galen, l. 4. de Usu Partium, which many follow. The Humor,
says he, that smears the inner Surface of the Womb, is turned into a Membrane,
wherein the forming Spirit being every way enclosed, puts forth its natural
Motions, procreating three Points, answering to the three principal Parts,
which being swelled and distended by the Violence of the Heat, form their
Bellies, the Heart, the Breast, the Brain, the Head, the Liver, the Abdomen.
Then the other Parts are delineated and formed together, and then by degrees
flows the thin Blood to their Nourishment. Others with Bauhinus, believe the
umbilical Vessels to be first produced, as being chiefly and first of all
necessary in respect of Nourishment. Others affirm the Bones to be first
formed, as being the Basis and necessary Foundation of the whole Body. And thus
one judges one way, another another way, of a thing so obscure. But who, I
would fain know surveyed Nature at her work, that he should be able to know all
these things so exactly? If the Embryo in forty days be no bigger than an
Emmet, how small must it be upon the thirtieth Day? within which time
nevertheless all the Delineations are perfect, though not discernable to our
Eyes. Who in that small Body shall determine which Part is formed first, which
in the second, and which in the last Place? These are Mysteries which the
sublime Creator thought fit to conceal from our Understanding: so that if we
make any farther Inquiry into 'em, Galen will reprehend us. If thou inqutrest,
says he, over nicely how these things are made, thou will be convinced that
thou understand'st neither thy own Weakness, nor the Omnipotency of the
Workmaster.

XLII. In the mean time, if it be All the Parts formed together.
lawful in a Matter so obscure to make any Conjectures, I believe that all the
solid Parts are delineated and formed together, because they do not mutually
depend one upon another, but are all the immediate Works of Nature. Moreover
one cannot be, or act without the other: A Body cannot be without a more solid
Foundation, which is afterward to be Bony. The Heart cannot act without Veins
and Arteries, nor the Brain without Nerves, nor the Stomach without Guts, etc.
For there is no reason why one Part should be formed before another. In the
foresaid Bubble the Matter is contained which is proper for the Generation of
all the Parts, which wants no farther Preparation; and the Architectonic Spirit
may equally delineate and form at the same time all the Parts out of the same
matter. And wherefore should it form the Heart, as Ent would have it, sooner
than the other Parts? To prepare Matter for the Generation of the rest? That Is
done already. Certainly it cannot be said that the Heart generates and forms
other Parts, when it only prepares Matter for the Nourishment and Growth of the
whole, from which not their Generation proceeds, but their greater Perfection
being generated to perform their several Offices. For if the Heart at the
beginning should generate other Parts, why does it not produce new Parts after
the Birth of the Infant, when it is stronger, and operates more powerfully?
That it prepares Nourishment for all the Parts after the Child is born, is
confessed by all, why should it not do the same at the beginning? Shall it have
any other Action assigned it at this, than at another time. But you will say
the Heart is first of all conspicuous, the rest of the Bowels and all the other
Parts appear later, and therefore is first formed. Now who can discern in an
Embryo, at the beginning, no bigger than an Emmet, what Parts are already
formed with the beating Heart? Which though it be the defect of our Sight, yet
Reason sufficiently teaches us, that all the Parts are delineated together,
since the Harmony of all together is so great and so necessary, that they
cannot subsist or act one without another. And indeed it seems but probable
that the forming Spirits contained in the Bubble, and beginning the Formation
of all the Parts more vigorously perform their Work, and more speedily
strengthen and perfect all Parts already delineated, after they are at more
Liberty from the thicker Colliquation, as being assisted by the Heat of the
Heart, excited and kindled by a particular Fermentation: But certain it is,
that before that Assistance they began the Formation of all and singular the
Parts: Of which, though such and such first appear, in the forming whereof most
Spirits were employed, and of which there is the greatest Necessity for their
Use, however this does not exclude the Delineation of the rest of the Parts,
which our Sight cannot discern.

XLIII. Here if any one will object An Objection here answered.
that perhaps the spermatick Parts are delineated together, but that the bloody
Parts are afterward of necessity to be produced. I answer, that when we speak
of the Formation of the Parts, we speak of the first Delineations, or Out-lines
of all the Parts, and all those we say are formed out of the Seed alone; into
which the bloody Nutriment is afterward infused, by which they acquire a
greater Bulk and Bigness. Yet in the mean time there is no bloody part in the
whole Body, which is not intermixed with spermatic Threads: and so no part can
truly be said to be formed out of the Blood, and to subsist without a spermatic
Foundation. This was the ancient Opinion of Hippocrates. All the Members, says
he, are discerned and augmented together, not one before or after another: only
those that are naturally bigger, are seen before the other, though they were not
formed before. And in another place, There is not in my Opinion, any beginning
of the Body; but all the Parts seem equally to be both beginning and end
together. For the Circle being drawn, there is no end to be found.

Now what Parts are first visible, how the order of Formation proceeds
gradually, as far as the Eye can discern, is elegantly described by Harvey,
Tract. de generat. Animal. whom the Reader may do well to consult, together
with Antony Everard in his Lib. de Ortu Animal.

XLIV. But now seeing the formed Whether the Brain in the Embryo makes animal
Spirits and performs animal Actions.
Parts came once to associate to themselves, and assimilate the Nourishment
brought 'em, and so begin to grow by Nutrition; seeing the Heart also begins
its natural Action of Sanguification from its smallest Point or Beginning: Some
more curiously inquire; whether the Brain, which is very soft in the Embryo,
makes animal Spirits, and by their Assistance performs animal Actions. I
answer, That as the Actions of many parts are idle at first, as of the Lungs,
Eyes, Ears, Teeth, and Stones, etc. Of which there is no absolute Necessity at
the Beginning; so the Actions of the Brain, Liver, and Spleen being more
necessary, begin at the Beginning, but so weakly, by reason of the Infirmity of
the Organs, that they cannot be discerned. But by degrees the more perfect they
grow, the more perceptible they are. And hence it is probable that the Brain at
the beginning may begin to make animal Spirits, but very few and very weak,
because there is less need of 'em at the beginning: But the stronger the Brain
grows, and the more need of Spirits there is, the stronger and more vigorous
Spirits it makes. As is apparent by that time a woman has gone half her time,
when the Child begins to stir, which Motion cannot be performed without those
more plentiful Spirits. And from that time the Brain is so corroborated, that
at length it begets more plentiful and vigorous Spirits fit to perform the
chiefest animal Actions. Which principal Actions however are idle in the Birth
enclosed in the Womb, where there is no occasion or necessity of Imagination,
Thought, or Memory: But the Infant being born; the Brain increasing in
Strength, begets more vigorous and efficacious Spirits. Therefore Children as
they are weaker of Body, so are they weaker in their Intellectuals: Because the
Faculties of the Soul do not well perform their Offices till the Organs are
perfect; only the Feeling and moving Faculties begin to act from the time of
the Child's quickening. For from that time the Motion of the Infant is peceived
by the Mother, and the Birth sympathizes with the Mothers Pains. Which Cardanus
proves by pouring cold water upon the Belly of the Mother, for thereby the
Infant will beforc'd to move in the womb, and by that means he tries whether
women with Child are quick or no.

XLV. I shall here add one thing Whether the Child in the Womb sleeps and wakes?
more, which is controverted among the Philosophers whether the Infant wakes
and sleeps in the Womb? Avicen utterly denies any such thing. However Women
with Child will tell ye, that they manifestly feel the Motion of the Child when
it is awake, and the resting of it when it sleeps. But we are to say that Sleep
is the Rest of the Senses for the repairing and renewing the animal Spirits
wasted by watching, occasioned by the Contraction of the Pores and Passages of
the Brain. On the contrary that Wakefulness is a convenient opening of the
Pores of the Brain, and flowing in of the animal Spirits through them into the
Organs of the Senses, sufficient for the performance of their Actions. But
neither of these can be said to belong to the birth included in the womb. For
First; the Spirits are not wasted, but only few, and those weak are made, and
therefore the Rest, which is in the Infant unborn, cannot be called Sleep,
because it proceeds not from the Causes of Sleep, that is to say, the wast of
the Spirits, and the Contraction of the Pores of the brain, nor has it the end
of Sleep, which is the Restoration of decayed and wasted Spirits. Secondly, The
Motion of the Infant cannot be said to be waking, because it wants the true
Causes of waking, which is the opening of the Pores of the brain, and an Influx
of Spirits into the Organs of Sense, sufficient to perform the Actions of the
Senses. The first cannot be, by reason of the extreme Moisture and Softness of
the brain: Nor the latter, by reason there is not as yet generated a sufficient
Quantity of Spirits. Moreover the Motion and Feeling of the Infant does not
presuppose a necessity of waking: For that men grown up, and matur'd by age,
when fast asleep many times tumble and toss in their Sleep, and sometimes walk
and talk, and being pricked feel and contract their injured Members, and yet
never wake. Therefore we must conclude that the Infant in the womb cannot be
truly said to sleep or wake, but only sometimes to rest and sometimes to be
moved.

XLVI. Here perhaps by way of a Another (...). What is the Architectonic Virtue?
Corollary some one may ask me, what is that same Architectonic Virtue latent
in the prolific Seed which performs the Formation of the Parts? In the
foregoing Chapter we have discoursed at large concerning the enlivening Spirit
implanted in the Prolific Seed, as it is the Subject of the first forming
Spirit; but because no Spirit of it self and by its own Power, seems able to
perfect Generation, unless it have in its self some effective Principle, by
virtue whereof it produces that Effect; hence the Question arises what that is
that affords that active Force to the Spirit, and power to form a living body,
and endues the Matter with all manner of Perfection, and produces Order,
Figure, Growth, Number, Situation, and those other things which are observed in
living bodies? Which is a thing hitherto unknown, and has held the Minds of all
Philosophers in deep Suspense. Of whom the greatest part have rather chosen
tacitly to admire the Supreme Operator and his work, than to unfold him, and so
affirm with Lactantius, That Man contributes nothing to his Birth but the
Matter, which is the Seed, but that all the rest is the handy work of God, the
Conception, the forming of the Body, the inspiration of the Soul, and the
conservation of the Parts. In which sense, says Harvey, most truly and piously
does he believe, who deduces the Generations of all things from the same
Eternal and Omnipotent Deity; upon whose pleasure depends the Universality of
the things themselves. But others, who believe that the Bounds of Nature are
not so slightly to be skipped over, nor think that in the Inquiries after the
Principles of Generation, there is such a necessity to have recourse to the
first Architect and Governor of the whole Universe, but that the first forming
and efficient Cause created by God, with the Things themselves, and infused and
planted within 'em, is to be sought out of the Things themselves, more
arrogantly have presumed to give us a clearer Explication of the Matter by
Philosophical Reason, yet differing in their Opinions, which are various and
manifold.

XLVII. For Galen calls this Architectonic What the Architectonic Power i^?
various Opinions about it.
Power, sometimes by the name of Nature; sometimes Natural Heat, sometimes the
Inbred Temperament, sometimes the Spirit, which he affirms to be a Substance of
it self moveable, and always moveable. Aristotle distinguishing between the
Heat or Spirit of the Seed and Nature; asserts the Artichectonic Power to be
that Nature which is in the Spirit of the Seed; and therefore distinct from the
Spirit it self, which is inherent in the Spirit as in its Subject, and acts
upon the Spirit as its Matter. This Nature in the Spirit of the Seed was also
acknowledged by Hippocrates; saying, That it is learned, though it has not learnt
rightly to act. Not that it is Rational, but because, as Galen explains it, it
acts of it self all that is necessary to be acted, without any direction. Hence
Deusingius defines it to be a certain immaterial Substance arising out of the
Matter so determined to the Matter by the Supreme God, that it can neither be,
nor subsist, nor operate without it.

This same Architectonic Virtue, others, with Avicen, call the Intelligence;
others, with Averrhoes and Scotus, a Celestial Force, or a Divine Efficacy.
Jacob Scheggius calls it (...), o^ (...), active or forming Reason; and says
that by the word Reason, or (...); he understands a Substantial Form, which is
not to be apprehended by Sense, but by the Understanding and Reason. And so
while he seems to speak something, he says nothing at all.

XLVIII. The Platonics call it a The opinion of the Platonists
General Soul diffused through the whole World, which according to the
diversity of Materials and Seeds, produces various Generations; as a Plant from
the Seed of a Plant, a Man from the Seed of a Man, a Horse from that of a
Horse, a Fish from that of a Plotinus makes a distinction between the
Architectonic Virtue and the Platonic Soul of the World.
Fish, etc. But Plotin, the great Platonist, distinguishes this same
Architectonic Virtue from the Platonic Soul of the World, as produced from that
by which it is produced: and therefore he calls it Nature flowing from the Soul
of the World; which he says is the Essential Act of it, and the Life depending
upon it. Themistius says; that the forming Power is the Soul enclosed in the
Seed, potentially enlivened. Deusingius, in his Original of the Soul, calls it
Nature in the Seed; that is, as he explains himself, a Soul potentially
subsisting in the Seed, being in it self the Beginning and Cause of Motion: But
in a Body already formed, he calls it the Soul actually subsisting. And so
without any necessity at all, distinguishes one and the same thing into two,
and gives it two distinct names, as it either rests or acts, and according to
the diversity of the Subject to be formed, or else already formed. Just as if a
man distinguishing between a Painter lazily sleeping, or painting awake, should
call the one, Nature latent in his Spirit, as one that could paint if he were
awake; and the other a real Painter, as one actually painting: as if the
Painter that slept were not as much a Painter, as he that actually painted.
Whereas, as it appears by the Effects, that which is able to form a Body at
first out of the Seed, and that which actually forms, were not one and the same
thing: and so by a certain continuation the form of the thing formed remains.
This Opinion of his Deusingius seems to have drawn from the Institutes of the
Platonists; who distinguish between the Soul, and Being a Soul, that is,
between the Substance of the Soul, which is said to be in the Seed, and the
Appellation of Nature, and the Soul which acts at this pr^sent, and is the form
of the formed Body. Fernelius calls the Plastic Power a Spirit; but he does not
mean such a common Spirit, which the Physicians say is raised by the
preparations of the Bowels out of the Humors; but some other Spirit of far
sublimer Excellency: For, says he, this Spirit is an Ethereal Body, the Seat
and Bond of Heat and the Faculties, and the first Instrument of the Duty to be
performed. And Lib. 2. de Abdit. c. 10. he believes it to be something that
flows down from Heaven: For, says he, the Heaven without any Seed produces
many, both Creatures and Plants, but the Seed generates nothing without the
Heaven. The Seed only prepares aptly and conveniently Materials for the
begetting of Things; the Heaven sends into the Matter prepared Form, and
consummate Perfection, and raises Life in all Things. A little after he adds,
One Form of Heaven within its Power comprehends all the Forms that ever were or
can be of all Creatures, Plants, Stones, and Metals, and impregnated with those
innumerable Forms, casts as in a Mold, and generates all things out of it self.

XLIX. Others believe the Plastic Opinions concerning this Plastic Virtue.
Virtue to be a certain Power flowing into the Seed from the Soul of the
Mother. Others call it a Vegetative Soul; and make no distinction between this
and Nature; but say that Fertile Seed of necessity must be enlivened. This Soul
of the Seed Julius Scaliger and Ludovicus Mercatus stiffly defend. And
Sennertus following their footsteps, Institut. Med. lib. 1. cap. 10. has these
words: They seem all to me to be in an Error, who deny the Soul, which is the
Cause of Formation, to be in the Seed: For if you grant the forming power to be
in the Seed, you must allow the Soul to be likewise in it. For in regard the
Powers are not separable from the Soul, of which they are the Powers, it is
impossible that the Powers proper to any thing should be in a Subject, wherein
the Form is not from whence the Power slows. And since we come to the knowledge
of the latent Essence by the Operations, what is the reason we do not attribute
a Soul to the Seed, that sufficiently manifests it self therein by its
Operations. But they are two: the enlivening of the Seed and the Conception;
and the forming of all the parts that are necessary for the Actions of Life.
For every Soul, as is manifest in the Seed of Plants, is preserved while the
Soul is in it, and remains prolific for some time; and while it is sound and
uncorrupted, in a proper place, and with convenient Nourishment, operates as
living, and exercises its operations upon the matter at hand; which is not only
to be seen in some Creatures by the Action it self, but in the regenerating of
some parts, especially in Plants. For the same Operations are observed in the
Seed, and in Plants sound in all their parts, which show the same Agent in
both. For it is altogether the same Operation whereby the Soul latent in the
Seed forms the Body of the Plant out of the Matter attracted, and afterward
every year restores the fallen Leaves and gathered Flowers, and thrusts out new
Branches and new Roots; and therefore it is a sign and Argument of the same
Faculty, and of the same Soul. And this not only in Plants, but also in the
Seeds of perfect Creatures, must of necessity be allowed to be done: For as the
Flesh is not made out of Blood, unless the Flesh it self enlivened change the
Blood into Flesh, much less shall a Creature be made of Seed, if the Seed want
a Soul. And a little after he adds; For the Body of Creatures being the most
excellent and perfect, it follows that what is not enlivened cannot be the
principal Cause of the enlivened Body, but that the Body enlivened is produced
by a Body enlivened as the principal Cause. And certainly these Arguments of
Sennertus are of great weight to prove that there is a Vegetative Soul in all
generated Bodies: which is also stiffly maintained by Deusingius, De Gener.
Foet. in Utero, part. 2. sect. 1.

L. But because a Doubt may here Whence the Seed has its Soul.
arise, from whence the Seed has this Soul, it will not be amiss to add
something for the clearer illustration and confirmation of the said Opinion. We
must know then that* all and singular the parts of a living animated Body,
ought to participate of that Soul, and to live by it; and hence that which is
separated to the perfection of the Seed out of the several parts, ought also to
participate of the same Soul, which is also to intermix with the Mass of the
Seed. And because out of all and every part, something of most spirituous
parts, like Atoms, is allowed to the making and perfection of the Seed; hence
it comes to pass, that the Epitome of the whole animated Body endu'd with the
like Soul, is contained in the Seed: and that Soul, the Seed being deposited in
a convenient place, is separated from the thicker parts of the Seed, by the
Heat, with that same Matter of the Seed wherein it inheres, that is to say, the
most spirituous part divided from all and every the other parts, and roused
into Action, and so throughout forms a resemblance to that form which is
separated together with that same subtle part of the Seed; unless prevented
and hindered in its Operation, or that it be extinguished and suffocated by any
defect of the Heat or circumfus'd Matter.

LI. But it may be objected, That An objection, that the forms of animated
Being are indivisible, answered.
the Forms of animated Beings are indivisible, and hence that no parts of the
Soul can be separated from the single parts, but that those parts meeting
together in the Seed, constitute the whole and entire Soul: To which I answer;
That the Forms of animated Beings are not of themselves divisible; however they
may be divided according to the division of the Matter, so that the Matter be
such, wherein the Soul can commodiously lie hid, and out of which it may be
raised again to its duty, by the natural Heat tempered to a convenient degree.
This is apparent to the Eye in a Willow, wherein any Bough being torn off from
the Tree, the Soul is divided according to the division of the Matter, and as
it remains in the Tree it self, so likewise in the Bough; as appears by its
Operation. For that Bough being planted in a moist Ground, the present Soul
acts in it forthwith, and produces Leaves, Roots, and Boughs, and the Mother
Tree it self shows no less the presence of the Soul in it self by the same
Operations. So likewise in Creatures, that same spirituous Essence which is
separated from all the several living parts to be carried to the Seed,
participates of the same Soul of the parts out of which it is separated, as
being able to afford a convenient Domicil for the Soul, (seeing that where such
a Domicil cannot be afforded, the living Soul fails) and so being mixed with
the Seed, it causes the Seed to be potentially animated, if the substance of
the Seed be rightly tempered; which Soul, potentially lying hid therein, the
Seed being deposited in a convenient place, being afterward freed from the
Fetters of the thicker Substance wherein it is enclosed, is raised into Action;
and acting forms out of the Subject wherein it inheres, like parts to those out
of which the Separation was made, as being of the same Species with the Soul
out of which it was separated.

LII. And therefore when it is said How Aristotle and his Followers are to be
understood.
by Aristotle, and other Philosophers, That the Soul lies hid potentially only
in the Seed; this is not to be understood, as if the Essence of the Soul were
not present, but in reference to its being entangled in the other thicker
Matter of the Seed, so that it cannot act till disintangled from it, the Seed
being deposited in some convenient place, by the Heat which dissolves the said
Matter; but so separated, it acts forthwith: and out of its spirituous Subject
separated from the parts of the Creature, delineates and forms what is to be
formed, and increases it with the next adjacent Nutriment. For the Seed being
of the number of Efficients, and seeing every Agent acts, not as it is
potentially but actually such, it must not be denied but that the Soul is
actually in the Seed, though by reason of the Impediments its Action does not
presently appear.

LIII. But here it may be questioned, Whether that Soul which forms the Birth,
be in the Man's Seed only, or in the Woman's also.
Whether that Soul which forms the Birth be only in the Man's Seed, or as well
in the Woman's? I say that it is only in the Man's Seed: for if part of the Soul
should proceed from the Man, part from the Woman, then the Soul would prove a
compound thing, whereas it is merely simple. Or if it should be derived all
from the Male, and all from the Woman, then there would be two Principles of
Formation, of which one would be superfluous. For there would be no necessity
that the acting Principle of the Male should be joined with the acting
Principle of the Female; for that the latter having an acting Principle in it
self, and a place convenient, as the womb, convenient nourishment, and all
other things convenient, would not want any other efficient Principle of the
Male, but might conceive in it self, and form the Birth out of its animated
Seed with the Coition of the Male. And in Creatures that lay Eggs, a Chicken
might be hatched out of Wind-eggs without the Cock's treading. Neither of which
were ever heard of.

LIVE. Aemilius Parisanus, though he The Opinion of Parisanus.
understood not this Mystery exactly, yet seems to have observed something
obscurely, and therefore he constitutes a twofold Seed; he had better have
said, twofold parts of the Seed: one generated in the Genital Parts, which he
denies to be animated; the other not generated in the Genital Parts, but
divided from the whole, which he allows to be animated.

LV. Others, who will not allow in ^hether (...) Soul be Rational.
Mankind any other Soul particularly than the Rational, assert that That alone
perfects the Lineaments of all the Parts out of the Seminal Matter conveniently
offered, and is the Architect of its own Habitation; and stiffly uphold their
Opinion with several Arguments, and so tacitly endeavor to maintain that the
Rational Soul is See also Bartholinus's Anatomic Controversies upon the same
Subject. The Soul not ex traduce.
ex traduce, or by Propagation, no otherwise than as the Body is propagated.
Concerning which may be read that most acute Tractate of the Generation of
Living Creatures, written by Sennertus.

LVI. But these Principles most Philosophers, and all Divines oppose with great
heat, and affirm the Rational Soul not to be propagated, but to be created and
infused. To whose Opinion we readily submit; because the Soul is not of that
nature that it can produce any thing of it self; it has nothing to do in the
Formation of the Body, nor with any Natural Actions, it is not to be divided
into parts, nor corruptible as the rest of the Body, but immutable, and
separable from the Body which it inspires. Besides that, it is not created like
the Bodies of Creatures, which were commanded to be produced out of Earth and
Water, according to their kind, wherein the Vegetative Soul of every one is
included: but after the whole Body of Man was formed alive out of the Earth,
God is said to have breathed into him the Breath of Life, and then he became a
living Creature. Whence it is manifestly apparent, that the Rational Soul of
Man, inspired by God, was not formed out of Earth, Water, or any other
corruptible Matter, like his corruptible Body, which was formed out of Clay,
before the breathing of his Soul into him: But that it proceeded incorruptible
and simple from the immediate Operation of God, without any parts, by the
separation of which it could be dissolved and dye, as the Body for the same
Reason perishes with its vegetable Soul; and subsists of it self when its
Temporal Habitation is fallen. For which Reason Man is not only said to live
Naturally, like other Creatures, but after the Image of God, which sort of
living is not ascribed to any other Creatures.

LVII. But these latter, though they That the Soul is not Rational.
seem to discourse rightly and truly of the Creation and Infusion of the
Rational Soul, yet if they do not likewise admit a Vegetative Soul in Man, they
are under a gross mistake, nor do they unfold the first Efficient Principle,
concerning the Explanation of which the Question is here, and not of the
Original of the Rational Soul. Against those therefore that will not admit a
Vegetative Soul in Man, I bring these two powerful Arguments.

First, Seeing that the Rational Soul is not propagated by Generation, but
Created, of necessity it must be infused, and that either into a living or a
dead Body. Not into a dead Body, for that Soul cannot inhabit a dead Body, nor
enliven it, for its life is different from the life of the Body; which perishes
while the Soul departs out of the Body, and lives to perpetuity: Therefore it
is infused into a living Body: What then raised Life in the Body before the
Infusion of the Rational Soul? It will be said perhaps, That at the same time
that the Parts are to be delineated, the Rational Soul is infused, and that it
is which introduces Life* and is Life it self. I answer, Not when they are to
be delineated, but after all the Parts are completely delineated and formed,
then the Rational Soul is infused, according to the Testimony of the Scripture
it self: where it is said that God first formed Man out of the Dust of the
Earth; (observe the word Man, therefore a living Creature, or a Creature endued
with a Vegetative Soul;) and then inspired into him the Breath of Life, and he
became a living Creature; as much as to say, that then was inspired into him
his perpetual living and Immortal Soul. Therefore* as then, so also afterward
the Rational Soul does not form and enliven the Body, but is infused into the
Body formed and living: I say living, for that which forms the Body, of
necessity enlivens it, and lives it self: For such a wonderful Structure cannot
be formed by a dead thing; nor by Heat alone, which only serves to attenuate
and melt the Substance of the Seed, and rowse and set at liberty the forming
Spirit, lying hid and entangled within it, and excite it to action, not able of
it self to form the Parts of the Body, nor to adjust the order and shape of all
its Parts. And therefore it is not the Rational Soul, but this same enlivening
Spirit (which Galen calls Nature, we the Vegetative Soul) raised out of the
Seed it self wherein it is potentially, is that which out of it self, and the
Subject wherein it abides, and out of which it proceeded, forms and enlivens
the Body, and all its agreeing Parts; into which being formed and living, the
Rational Soul is afterward infused, and united to it, to determine and temper
the Motions of the Corporeal Soul, till the Body, proving at length unfit to
entertain it any longer, it departs out of it; not being the occasion of Death,
of it self, but chased and expelled from its Habitatation by the death of the
Body: So no way guilty of the death of the Body by its recess, as by its access
it contributed nothing to its life. This is apparent from hence, for that the
Immortal Soul cannot give Mortal Life, of which it is destitute it self, to a
Body corruptible and separable from it. For whatever gives a living Form to a
Body, that also gives a Life and Form like to it self, as is apparent in all
Brutes and Plants: Therefore if the Rational Soul were to give a Form to the
Body, it would of necessity give an Immortal Form like its own, such a one as
is not in the Body.

LVIII. Moreover, it is hardly to The Rational Soul not present when the parts
were first delineated.
be believed, that when the Parts came first to be delineated, that the
Rational Soul should be present at that beginning a^ the first Agent; and more
improbable to be believed, that when the Embryo first delineated is cast out of
the womb by* Abortion, no bigger than an Emmet or a small Pea, from a Body
hardly discernable, a Rational Soul should be cast forth at the same time, that
should be liable to give an account of Good and Evil Actions at the last This
savours too much of Calvin's Doctrine, for the usual Doctrines of Original Sin
are made the great foundation of that horrible Proposition concerning
Reprobation, the consequences of which reproach God with Injustice, they charge
God foolishly, and deny his Goodness and his Wisdom in many Instances. For (as
a learned Divine of the Church of England says) 1. If God decrees us to be born
sinners, Then he makes us to be sinners; and then where is his Goodness? 2. If
God damns any for that, he damns us for what we could not help, and for what
himself did; and then where is his Justice? 3. If God sentence us to that
damnation, which he cannot in justice inflict; where is his Wisdom? 4. If God
for the sin of Adam, brings upon us a necessity of sinning; where is our
Liberty, and why is a Law imposed against sin? 5. If God does cast Infants into
Hell for the sin of others, and yet did not condemn devils but for their own
sin; where is his Love to Mankind? 6. If God cause the damnation of so many
millions of persons, who are no sinners on their own stock, and yet swears,
that he desires not the death of a sinner; where then is his Mercy, and where
his Truth? 7. If God has given us a Nature by derivation which is wholly
corrupted; then how can it be that all which God made is Good? where then is
his Providence and Power, and where the Glory of the Creation? But since God is
all Goodness, and Justice, and Wisdom, and Love, and that he governs all things
and all men wisely and holily, and that he gives us a wise Law; and binds that
Law on us by Promises and Threatenings; I think there is reason to assert these
things to the Glory of the Divine Majesty. Thus far that excellent Person.
Salmon.
Day, or else to perish with it.

Nor is it for us to judge of heavenly Matters above the reach of our
Understandings, especially of the time of the Infusion of this Rational Soul:
Though they seem to determine something probable concerning it, who judging
rightly according to Truth, that the Rational Soul is created by God (...), or
immediately, assert with St. Austin, That the Soul is infused by Creation, and
created by Infusion: that is, that it was not first framed in Heaven to be sent
into the formed Body; but that it is united to the Body at the moment of
Creation, and created at the very moment of Infusion. But whether that Creation
and Association happens at the beginning of the forming of the Body, or whether
in the first, second, third, or fourth Month, or in any other Month after the
Birth began to be formed; or at what time the Body may be fit to receive the
Soul; that is not our business so accurately to enquire into; for that the Body
must be fit to receive the Soul, and that if the Body undergo any material
Change of its Temperament and Confirmation, presently the Soul takes its
flight, as Galen acknowledges. But our Apprehension is not sufficiently
perspicacious for us punctually to understand that precise time, which is only
known to God the Creator of the Soul: and therefore says Willis, When all
things were rightly disposed for its reception, it was created immediately of
God, and poured into the Body: And therefore it is only for Philosophers to
inquire into the Original of that same perishing Life in the body of Man, which
is the Habitacle of the Rational Soul in this Vale of Misery for a Time; which
Life, upon good grounds, we affirm to be far different from the Life of a
Rational Soul, nor can arise from it.

The second Argument which I produce, is this; The Rational Soul is infused
either into the Seed, or into the Birth when formed. The first is not true, for
then upon any effusion of fertile Seed, not followed by Conception, a Soul
would be lost; and so all Divines would commit a heinous sin of public
Soul-murder, in suffering young lusty Men to marry Women above Fifty, knowing
there can be no Production from such unequal Matches. To which, if it be
answered, That the Seed of the Man never proves fertile but when mixed with the
Seed of the Woman. I answer, That the efficient Power is all in the Man's Seed,
and that the Woman's Seed is only material, and the next Alimentary Principle.
If therefore that efficient Power first forming the Birth, were the Rational
Soul it self, it ought to be solely in the Man's Seed; and in that case the
Divines and Lawgivers could not exempt themselves from Soulmurder; from which
however all Men readily excuse 'em, even those that hold the Soul to be
propagated. If the latter be true, let the opposing Party tell us, what was the
first Moving or efficient Cause in the Seed, which began to move and enliven
the Seed before the Infusion of the Rational Soul. Of necessity it must be
something else besides the Rational Soul, and therefore the Vegetative Soul.
But Philosophers teach us, that in every living Compound there can be but one
Soul, and that in Man comprehends the Vegetative within it self; and that the
latter is only an Accident, and tempering of the Substance, that is to say, the
innate Heat, and such a disposition of the Heart, Brains, and other Bowels, as
also of the Spirits themselves, as is in a condition to act: and therefore
there cannot be two distinct Souls in Man; one Vegetative, the other Rational.
But though Aristotle of old, and many Philosophers now teach the same Doctrine,
it is not to be thence inferred that the Doctrine is true: they are Men, and
may Err. The foregoing Reasons sufficiently demonstrate the thing to be
otherwise, and abundantly inform us, That the Life of the Body would be
perpetual, if the Rational Soul were once to enliven it: For wherefore should
it be less able to do it in the end, than at the beginning, when it can suffer
no diminution of its Faculties? and if at the beginning it disposes the Matter
for Life, why should it not proceed and do it without end? Moreover, seeing
that a Vegetative Soul is admitted among Brutes as the only Mistress and
Enlivener of the Organical Body, wherefore may not such a Soul be admitted in
the Body of Man, which is no less corruptible than the Body of the Beast? To
this we may add, That the diversity of Actions, the necessity of two Souls in
Man, is apparent: For the Flesh covets against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh. And this Intestine War every Man has Experience of in
himself: For the Corporeal Soul abiding in the Body, inclines a Man to Sensual
Pleasures; the Rational, which is of a higher Original, dehorts us to abstain
from mischievous Lust, and invites us to Holiness, and raises our thoughts from
things perishable and Earthy, to things Divine and Incorruptible. This Civil
War Medea felt in her self, whence she cried out,

-- Video meliora, proboque, Deteriora sequor -- The better things I see and do
approve;
The worse I follow after, seek, and love.
LIX. Lastly, The Corporeal Soul, The Corporeal Soul makes Conclusions, and
acts after its own manner, but far inferior to the Rational Soul.
though it not only apprehend Things in their simple Capacity, but laying several
Things together, makes Conclusions after its own manner, as appears from the
Actions of Dogs, Apes, Elephants, etc. yet are its Actions far inferior to
those of the Rational Soul. For this not only beholds the Idea's conceived by
the Fancy of that Corporeal Soul, but also judges whether they are true or
false, good or ill, disordered, or in order: and often stops the fury of the
Corporeal Soul, unsteadfastly roving through various Phantasms, and recalling
it from these or those Conceptions, directs it to others, and at its own
pleasure bounds it within certain Limits, lest it should stray from the Truth,
and by that means governs and moderates its Actions.

LX. For the better illustration of The Matter illustrated from Holy Scripture.
this Mystery, there will some farther light appear in that which follows; though
indeed the whole Cloud is dissolved by the Sovereign Judge, which is the Holy
Scripture, which declares that there is a Vegetable Soul both in Men, as well
as in Beasts. Of Brutes, it is manifest in these words; Let the Earth produce
every living Creature according to its kind, Cattle, and Reptiles, and every
Beast of the Field according to its kind. And the same is to be deduced from
Genesis 9. v. 10, 12, 15, 16. Levit. 24. c. 18. and Job 12. v. 10. in all which
places the Scripture speaks of a Living Soul produced out of the Earth or
Corporeal Matter, and joined to the Living Body, therefore corruptible, and
liable to perish upon the dissolution of the mixed Body. And this fort of Soul
in Men the sacred Scripture not only acknowledges, but distinguishes from the
Immortal Rational Soul, calling he one simply, a Living Soul; the other the
Spirit given by God. The first is apparent from several Texts of Scripture;
Genesis 2 v. 7. Exodus 21. v. 23. Levit. 24. v. 18. Deuteronomy. 19. v. 21. ^ Reg. 19. v.
4. where Elias desired the death of his Soul. And in the Gospel of St. John c.
10. v. 11. The good Shepherd lays down his Life for his Sheep. Which certainly
cannot be understood of the Immortal Rational Soul, which never dies; but of
that Soul which gives life, as well to Brutes as Men; and at the beginning
formed the Organic Body, and being it self Corporeal, is produced out of
Corporeal Matter, and perishes again together with the Body which it formed;
and upon the perishing of which, the Rational Soul infused from above,
immediately takes its flight, as not having any habitation in the body of Man
longer than Life endures. This Immortal Rational Soul, the holy Text, to
distinguish it from the Vegetative Soul, which is corruptible like the Matter
from whence it proceeds, calls for the most part a Spirit, and sometimes only
the Soul. Thus David, Psalm 15. v. 10. Thou will not leave my Soul in the
Grave. And Psalm 30. v. 10. Into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Thus Eccles.
14. v. 17. The Spirit returns to God that gave it. Thus Stephen, Acts 7. v. 60.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. And Matthew. 27. v. 50. And when he had cried with
a loud voice he yielded up the Ghost; repeated by St. John, c. 19. v. 13. All
which latter Texts cannot be understood but only of the Immortal Soul.

LXI. But because it is apparent An Answer to such as object that there cannot
be two Souls in Man.
from what has been said, That there are two Souls in Man; what shall we answer
to those that object, and say, there cannot be two Souls in Man, because
several Forms cannot actuate the same Matter? We say that there is but one Soul
that immediately actuates the same Matter, and gives Form to the Species, that
is the Vegetative Soul; but that the Rational Soul, which is of a sublimer
Original, only dwells in the Body, but never formed it at the beginning. So
that there are not two, but only one Form that actuates the Matter. Which is
manifest from hence; for that when the Body formed perishes, the forming Form
perishes likewise with it; but the Rational Soul neither perishes, nor is
corrupted with it. Therefore this neither is, nor was the forming Form, but
something else infused into the Body already formed, and subsisting of it self,
which by virtue of the forming Form abides in the Body; and when that fails,
presently forsakes the Body, and subsists entirely of it self, without being
united to it.

LXII. But here another Question The sensitive Soul, what?
arises; Whether, if a Vegetative Soul be to be allowed, which indifferently
enlivens Plants and Animals, there be not also a third peculiar sensitive Soul
to be allowed, that feels as well in Man as in Beasts, and performs Operations
different from those of the Vegetative Soul? To which I answer; That the
Vegetative Soul is the same that feels in those Creatures, which have those
Mediums and apt Organs necessarily required for feeling; as Brains, Eyes, Ears,
etc. but where those Organs are wanting, as in Plants, they are not said to be
sensible, but only to live as Vegetables.

We must therefore yield, according to Sacred Scripture, and for the Reasons
already alleged, that there is in Man a Vital, Vegetable Mortal Soul, distinct
from the rational immortal Soul; and that that is the Soul which is the chief
Actress in the Formation of the Birth, the same also which many call the
Architectonic Power, or the Plastic Efficacy.

LXIII. And thus I think I have The Architectonic or Vegetative Soul subsists
in a Man with the Rational Soul.
sufficiently demonstrated that the Architectonic Power is the Vegetative Soul
it self, and that it may subsist in a living Man conveniently, together with
the Rational Soul. And now one would think there were no more to be said as to
this Particular; but because we have already made an Excursion somewhat too far
beyond the Limits of our Port, before we return back, let us spread our Sails,
and steer a little farther into the Ocean, that we may show a safer Course to
others that sail in this Turbulent Sea, and are in continual danger of
Shipwreck among the Shelves and Rocks of Error and Mistake.

The first Doubt that occurs in the History of the Vegetative Soul, is, where
to assign it a Seat in the Body of Man, and other perfect Creatures; which has
occasioned great Disputes among Philosophers.

LXIV. That it abides in all Parts of The Seat of the Vegetable Soul, where?
the Living Body, scarce any one will deny, as being apparent from its actions
in all parts of the Body. So that the Peripatetics asserting it to be equally
diffused into all parts alike, say that it is in All, and All in every Part.
That is to say, that one and the same Numerical Vegetable Soul extended through
the whole Body enlivens the whole. But because it is divisible with the Matter
wherein it abides; therefore that which abides in the Parts that are torn from
the whole, not only constitutes a part of the Soul which enlivens the whole,
but constitutes the whole Soul in that part so torn off; which either dies with
the part torn off, for want of Nourishment, as when any animal Part is cut off,
for then all that whole Soul which enlivened that part fails and fades away for
want of Nourishment: Or else, having convenient Nourishment operates in the
dismembered Part, and performs the Act of Enlivening. Which is apparent in many
Plants; as for Example, of a Willow Bough, which being torn from the Tree, and
again planted in the Earth, will grow as well as the Tree from which it was
pulled; and therefore every bough enjoys the whole Soul, as the Mother-Tree
retains the whole Soul, and so both the one and other grow and increase alike,
not by virtue of any part of the Soul, but of the whole Soul, as is apparent by
the Action: For that Vivification and Nutrition is performed in all the boughs,
which cannot be performed by a part of the Soul, but by all the Soul. And so
the foresaid Maxim of the Peripatetics may be rightly expounded, which
nevertheless has hitherto, by many Philosophers, been too hastily rejected as
false and impossible.

LXV. Among those that have not Whether in some parts more than in others?
rightly apprehended, the learned Willis, seems to have been one, who in his 4.
Chap. de anim. Brutor. thus writes. The Corporeal Soul, says he, in more
perfect Brutes, and common to Man, is extended to the whole Organical Body, and
vivifies, actuates, and irradiates both its several Parts and Humors, so that
it seems to subsist in both of them actually, and to have as it were its
imperial Seats. But the immediate Subjects of the Soul are the vital Liquor or
the Blood, circulated by a perpetual Circulation of the Heart, Arteries, and
Veins, and the animal Liquor or nervous Juice flowing gently within the Brain
and its Appendixes. The Soul inhabits and graces with its Presence both these
Provinces; but as it cannot be wholly together in both at once, it actuates
them both as it were divided and by its Parts. For as one Part living within
its Blood, is of a certain fiery Nature, being enkindled like a Flame. So the
other being diffused through the animal Liquor, seems as it were Light, or the
Rays of Light slowing from that Flame. And a little after,

There are therefore Corporeal Souls according to its two chief Functions in
the Organical body; viz. the Vital and the Animal; two distinct Parts, that is
to say, the Flamy and the Lucid.

LXVI. From this Text of Willis Willis not congruous in this matter to Reason.
it appears, that the most famous Person conceived a new Opinion of the Soul,
but less congruous to Reason. For First, He alleges that the Soul, besides the
Parts of the Body enlivens likewise the Humors and Spirits, wherein he very
much deviates from the Truth. For that the Humors and Spirits do not live, but
they would live were they enlivened by a Soul. Secondly, Seeing that Life
cannot be ascribed to the fluid Nourishments continually passing away, nor
joined to the whole in Continuity, but only to the real Parts of the Body:
Willis seems tacitly to take it for a thing not to be questioned, that the
Blood and animal Spirits are the true Parts of an animated Body, no less than
the solid Parts adhering to the whole in Continuity, which that it is not true,
we have demonstrated in the first Chapter of this Book. Thirdly, He asserts
that the Blood and animal Spirits are the immediate Subjects of the Soul, the
contrary to which is apparent, for that the immediate Subjects of the Soul are
the Parts themselves of the Body, among which neither the Blood, nor Spirits,
nor any other of the Humors are to be numbered. Fourthly, Contrary to Reason
he constitutes two Parts of the Body, one Fiery or Flammeous, another Lucid,
and ascribes to each particular Seats, to the one the Blood, to the other the
animal Liquor; for thus the Soul that had no Feet before, will have two Feet in
this our Age, and with one Foot shall tread upon the Blood, with the other upon
the animal Liquor. Yet lest the Soul, having broken one Leg by Accident should
chance to fall, provident Dr. Willis has provided her a third Leg. But besides
these two Members, says he, of the Soul, fitted to the individual Body, a
certain other Portion of it, taken from both, and as it were the Epitome of the
whole Soul, is placed apart, for the Conservation of its Species. This as it
were an Appendix of the vital Flame, growing up in the Blood, is for the most
part Lucid or Light, and consists of animal Spirits, which being collected into
a certain little Bundle, and having got an appropriate Humor, are hidden up
among the spermatic bodies. And thus the Soul that formerly knew neither how to
walk or stand, now shall stand more firmly supported with three Legs. And yet
with all her three Legs she will halt, not without danger of falling, and
therefore if any one could furnish her with a fourth Leg, then she would not
only stand more stoutly, but proceed equally in all her Actions, without
halting, like a strong fourfooted Horse. But setting the Jest aside, it is
apparent from what has been said, that the learned Willis did not rightly
understand the Maxim of the Peripatetics, and for that Reason miserably mangled
and divided the Soul, indivisible so far as it abides in the whole, into
several Parts at his own Pleasure, whereas it is the same and of the same
Nature in all the Parts. If any one should here object, That the Seed is also
potentially animated, and that from thence it is manifest, that the Humors may
live and be animated as well as the Parts of the Body, which we have so
strenuously denied; I answer that the Seed is no nutritive Humor like the
Blood, and animal Liquor, nor is any longer a part of the individual Body,
John, or Peter, from whence it is separated, but a specific Juice, containing
in it self a Compendium of the whole Man, and the Ideas of all the Parts, and
therefore the Soul may lie hid therein, as in all the Parts of the whole Body,
till at length separated from its Entanglements by Heat, it declares its being
present by its enlivening Actions: Which enlivening Actions never proceed, nor
can proceed, from any nutritive Humors, or redundant after Nourishment.

LXVII. But seeing the Philosophers What the Vegetative Soul is?
of our Age leave no Stone of Enquiry unturned, nor are ever at rest, till they
have found out something in their most obscure Searches, whereby to persuade
themselves and others that they are within reach of the Truth. I would have
them now explain to us what this vegetable Soul is, which is the first
efficient and Protoplastic Principle in the Formation of the Birth: For
otherwise, if we were to acquiesce in the Name alone, the efficient Principle
might be affirmed to be rather a Chimera than an efficient Principle. If
perhaps any one shall say with Aristotle, That the Soul is the beginning of
Motion. Or, That it is the first Act of a natural body potentially having Life.
Or with Ferneli^s, That it is the Perfection of an Organic body, and whatever
shall give Life to that body, and introduce vital Actions. Or with Sennertus,
That it is an Act and substantial Form, by which such a body is animated. Or
with some of our modern Philosophers, That it is the first matter of
Fermentation and Formation, and that Life is nothing else but Fermentation;
These are all mere Words and mere Chimeras. For by such words the Essence of
the Soul is no way unfolded: Nor does it appear, what that beginning of Motion,
or what that first Act is; nor what that Perfection, or substantial Form, or
first matter of Fermentation is. In Man alone we know the rational Soul, its
Divinity, and its Immortality only by Revelation, and Faith, and by its
wonderful and divine Operations. But no Man unfolds that substantial Form, that
first Act, that first Matter of Fermentation, by which all animate Beings
obtain Life, and are thence said to live, nor what that first Act, that Form or
Matter is; but all Men acquiesce in the Name alone of a Vegetable Soul.

LXVIII. This same Soul I call the This Soul is the vivific Spirit produced out
of Corporeal Matter.
vivific Spirit produced out of Corporeal Matter, surpassing all other Spirits
produced out of Matter. Now although this Definition of mine be sufficient to
denote the Substance it self of the Soul, or rather the Subject wherein it
abides, nevertheless it will not satisfy many who desire a farther Explication
of the Nature of this Spirit, which however it is better to contemplate in
Thought, than to express in Words. For how, or with what Knowledge instructed,
it forms and joins the Parts of the Body to be formed, so fitly, and with so
much decency of Order and Shape, he only knows who alone, and first of all
created all things at the Beginning. What it is that rowses it, and frees it
from the Encumbrances wherewith it is surrounded, and brings it upon the Stage
of Action, has been already sufficiently explained; that is to say, the Heat
acting in convenient place and time upon the Seed; for that without such a Heat
it cannot be dissolved or wakened out of the thicker Matter. The Opinion of
Regius.


LXIX. Regius thinks he has found out a way to unfold this Gordian Riddle more
clearly and after another manner promising to explain this obscure Mystery of
Nature, as do many others, by manifest Reasons. He writes that the Formation of
the Birth is perfected by the heat as well of the Womb as of the Seeds, by
which their Particles are agitated in the Womb; and being agitated by reason of
their Shapes and Magnitudes which they have acquired in the seminary Passages
tempered and shaped after a certain manner, of necessity become in the Womb a
perfect prolific Principle of the Creature to be formed, furnished with
Alimentary Juice, and clothed with little Membranes, in some Measure
resembling the Seeds of Plants. Then he adds that this Explication of the
Formation of the Birth is so manifest, that there is no farther Necessity of
framing in the Womb or Seed any Idea, Fantasy, or Principle of a Soul or any
other Faculty, to be the Author of Formation. But the most learned Gentleman,
who at first sight promises something of a Delphian Oracle, in these words does
but explain the lesser Obscurity by the greater Obscurity, and swelling with an
extraordinary Self-Conceit, he is pleased with his own Invention, as to believe
that never any Man ever did or ever will invent any thing more subtly and
ingeniously; when as there is nothing in it but Vanity and Ostentation. For
what others call the Soul of the Seed, the vegetative Soul, the Plastic Power,
the Architectonic Virtue, etc. that he calls certain Shapes and Magnitudes of
the Particles of the Seeds, more difficult to be apprehended than plastic
Power, or vegetative Soul. And although perhaps some Persons may believe that the
Artificial Formation of other things without Life may in some Measure be
conceived by his mechanic Explication annexed, yet does it not from thence
appear, how the Parts of our living Body are generated out of the diversity of
the Shapes and Magnitudes of the Particles of the Seed; what should occasion
the Heart to be formed in the middle of the Breast, and not in the Abdomen or
Head, why there should be in that particularly eleven Valves and no more;
wherefore not two Hearts in one Birth; how the Parts receive Life from the
Principle of the Birth, and what introduces Motion and Actions, etc. All which,
with an innumerable number of other things, he that will refer to the Shapes
and Magnitudes of the Particles of the Seed, ought first to tell us what they
are, and how they are mixed. Who does not this, proposes his Shapes and Figures
as mere Imaginary Chimeras, and clears up no Obscurity, but wraps us up in more
Darkness, and while he pretends to tell us something of Novelty and better,
says nothing at all, but intangles an obscure thing in newer but obscurer Terms.

LXX. Lately Tho. Willis has set Willis's Opinion.
forth the Substance and Nature of this Soul quite otherwise, de an. Brut. c.
2. Where after he has asserted the Soul of Brutes, which we call Vegetative to
be Corporeal, and extended through the whole Body, and divisible together with
the Matter wherein it abides, at length concludes, that the Soul lying hid in
the Blood or Vital Liquor, is either a certain Fire or Flame.

But that we have affirmed the Soul of a brute, says he, to be not only
Corporeal and extended, but that it is of a certain fiery Nature, and its Act
or Substance is either a Flame or a breath, near to, or a Kin to Flame, besides
the large Testimonies of Authors both Ancient and Modern, Reasons and Arguments
almost demonstrative, have also induced me to it. As to what appertains to the
Suffrages of others, that I may not seem to insist upon the Authority of a
single Gassendus, who has maintained this Hypothesis, I shall here cite many
both ancient Philosophers and Physicians. For not to mention Democritus,
Epicurus, La^rtius, Lucretius, and their Followers, Hippocrates, Plato,
Pythagoras; Aristotle, Galen, with many others, though disagreeing about other
things; Yet in this Opinion, That the Soul was either a Fire, or something
Analogical to it, they all shook Hands; to whom, among the Moderns, Fernelius,
Heurnius, Cartesius, Hogeland, and others also have joined themselves; and
lately Honoratus Faber has delivered in express Words, That the Soul of the
brute is Corporeal, and its Substance Fire.

LXXI. But while the famous Thomas Willis Refated.
Willis, with all those most ingenious Philosophers and Physicians, asserts the
Soul to be Fire, he names indeed a Body of the greatest Activity, but such a
one as consumes and destroys all things in which and upon which it acts:
whereas the Soul by its Presence does not destroy those Bodies in which it is
and acts, but preserves 'em in their soundnss, excites the Members to their
Functions, and defends 'em from Corruption, till those Bodies, wherein it
abides, are destroyed by some other Cause, together with the Soul it self.
Moreover, among all those famous men, not one could ever teach, what it is that
forces or instructs that Fire in the Generation of the Creature to adapt and
join all and singular the parts in such an exact and admirable order together,
and in every one to perform such various and determined Operations; as the
making the Chylus in the Stomach, Blood in the Heart, Animal Spirits in the
Brain, Sight in the Eye, Hearing in the Ear, Taste in the Tongue: why through
its extraordinary activity and rapid Motion, it does not hinder the Formation
of the Organs, and rather destroy 'em being formed, then form 'em it self, and
produce variety of Actions out of each.

LXXII. Moreover, the foresaid Willis his Explanation of this Soul.
Thomas Willis, pretending to explain the Soul yet more perspicuously, defines
it a little after to be a Heap of contiguous Particles existing in a swift
Motion. And then to show the nature and original of those Particles, he thus
proceeds, Cap. 4. In Mechanical things, Fire, Air, and Light are chiefly
energetical, which human Industry is always wont to use, for the more
stupendous and no less necessary Works. In like manner we may believe, that
the supreme Work-master, to wit, the Great Creator, in the beginning did make
the greatly active, and most subtle Souls of living Creatures out of their
Particles, as the most active, to which he also gave a greater, and as it were
a supernatural Virtue and Efficacy from the most excellent Structure of the
Organs, most exquisitely labored beyond the Workmanship of any other Machine.

LXXIII. But suppose the Substance The Authors Animadversions.
of the Organ, wherein the Soul most nearly resides to be made out of such
Principles, and so the Organ of the Soul to be well composed, what is this to
our Enquiry? The true Existence of the Soul consists not in the Substance of
the Organ, but in its own Substance, and appears by its Act or Operation. As
the sight consists not in an Eye well composed of good Substance, but in the
Act of Seeing, and perception of the visible Rays; which Act of Sight the Soul
accomplishes by means of the Organ of Sight well formed. But now I would fain
know what that is which gives life to that heap of Particles, constituting the
substance of the Soul, and by its Presence forms and enlivens the other Parts,
and excites 'em to so many various, wonderful, and distinct Operations? when it
is said that the Soul is a heap of most subtle Particles, or a Fire, then only
by an impropriety of Speech, the Thing containing is designed for the Thing
contained, that is, some most subtle Subject wherein the Soul most nearly
resides. For that properly it is something else besides Fire, is apparent from
the contrariety of the Actions: For the Fire destroys, the Soul preserves: the
Fire destroys Bodies formed; the Soul both forms and produces things not
formed. The Fire is sensible of nothing; the Soul by means of the sensitive
Organs, sees, hears, and tastes, etc. Hence the most learned Willis, though a most
stout Asserter of his own Opinion, at length is forced to distinguish the Soul
from its Corporeal Subject: For, says he, as soon as any Matter is disposed to
receive Life, by the Laws of the Creation, the Soul, which is the fo^m of the
thing, and the Body, which is said to be the Matter, began to be formed under a
certain Species, according to the Character imprinted in 'em.

LXXIV. Therefore the Form, that The form of the Soul is different from the
Matter it inhabits.
is the Soul, is something different from that same Matter, which is the next
Subject or Habitaculum of the Soul. In like manner, speaking of the Principles
of the Soul, As to the first beginnings of the Corporeal Soul, says he, this,
as a Shellfish, forms and ^its its Shell to it self, exists somewhat a little
sooner, and so more noble than the Organical Body: Because a certain portion of
Animal Spirits, or most subtle Animals, or a little Soul not yet inkindled,
lies hid in the Seminal Humor, which having gotten a proper fire place, and at
length being kindled from the Soul of the Parent acting or leaning to it, as a
flame from a flame, begins to shine forth and unfold it self, a little before
the first Groundwork of the Body is laid. This orders the Web of the
Conception, and agitates the applied Matter, etc.

LXXV. Now I would have Dr. Willis his little diminutive Soul.
Thomas Willis explain what he means by that Little Diminutive Soul not yet
enkindled. For a heap of Animal Spirits, or any Atoms whatever, can be nothing
but the nearest Matter wherein it abides: For such a Subject does not live,
unless there be in it some living thing to enliven that heap. For such a
Subject, in Generation, neither knows how, or was ever taught to form,
delineate, compose, and enlarge all the Parts in such exact order. Which what
it is we know not, only we find it by its effects. Hence Willis himself
acknowledges, that the Soul cannot be perceived by our Senses, but only we
understand it by its effects and operations. From which words of his it
appears, that whatever Dr. Willis said before of Fire, and a heap of Animal
Spirits and Atoms, they are only mere and most uncertain Conjectures, which
denote not the Soul it self, but only either its next Subject, wherein it
abides, or by a Similitude of thinnest Body of swiftest Action, the manner, in
some measure, of their Actions. For to assert that the Soul is a Heap of most
subtle Atoms, or a Fire, is the same as to assert, that the Sight is Fire,
because that by the means of the most subtle moveable Fire, its Action is
accomplished, nor can be accomplished without it. Whereas it is not that same
Medium into which the visible Rays are imprinted as the Subject, and with it
conveyed to the Eyes, but the perception of those Rays that make the sight.
As therefore that Percipient is something else quite different from the Air, by
means of which the visible Rays are conveyed to the visible Organs. So the Soul
is somewhat else, which is different from the Fire, or any other heap of Atoms,
by means of which it subsists and operates in the Body.

LXXVI. From whence it is apparent Willis his Absurdity.
how absurd that is, which Dr. Willis adds, Cap. 2. The Existency of the
Corporeal Soul depends altogether upon its Act or Life. The word depends is
ill; he should have rather said, becomes known. For by the Act it self, or
Life, we only discover, that such a Soul is present and acts, to enliven the
Body wherein it abides. For Example; when I write any thing, by that Act it is
known that the hand of a writer performs that Act: However, the Hand that
writes is quite different from the Act, which is the writing; and does not
altogether depend upon that Act; only by that Act the presence of the Agent is
made known. Wherefore it is not well added by Dr. Willis, The Essence of this
begins altogether from Life, as it were from the firing of a subtle Matter. I
say he asserts this erroneously, for that the Soul does not begin from Life,
which nevertheless lies as it were imprisoned in the Seed, till with its
spirituous Subject, wherein it resides, it remains wrapped up in the thicker
Particles of the Seed; from whence being set at liberty in a convenient place
by the Heat, it begins to act and perform its duty, and enliven, form, nourish,
and increase the Body where it resides; and thus by these actions we discover,
that such an enlivening Soul is in the Body. The Affections or Passions of the
Soul.


LXXVII. Of the Affections or Passions of this Soul many things might be
written, which however we purposely omit, lest our Digression should be too
tedious. In the mean while we recommend to the Readers what the learned Willis
propounds upon this Subject in his Hist. de Anim. Brut. from Cap. 8. to Cap.
16. where he writes so elegantly and splendidly concerning the Passions, that
he does not only show the sharpness of his Wit, but carries away the Laurel
from all others that have wrote before him.

LXXVIII. We shall only add one Whether the Soul be nourished.
Question more, Seeing that the Vegetative Soul is Corporeal, whether it be
nourished by those Nourishments which are brought for the support of the Body
wherein it abides? It was an ancient saying of Hippocrates, That the Soul
always grows till death. Hence some have concluded that the Soul wastes like all
the other parts of the Body, and is repaired from time to time by the
Nourishment, together with those Parts wherein it resides. But seeing the
Nature of the Substance of that Soul is unknown to us, and for that reason in
the mean time reaches us, that it abides in some Subject which is the nearest,
as in some subtle Spirit, and by that means enlivens the Body, we think that
same saying of Hippocrates is rather to be understood of that same nearest
subject of the Soul, without which most certainly it cannot subsist, than of
the Soul it self; concerning whose substance, what, and of what Nature it is,
and whether it want Nourishment, we can determine nothing certainly. When the
flame of a Lamp is cherished and continued, we do not nourish it with a flame
like to it self, but something that nourishes the Subject to which it adheres,
as Oil with Oil; which Subject failing at length, the flame fails, which
however is somewhat distinct from it subject, for Oil is not flame or fire;
neither is Fire Oil. But it is a diminutive Fire latent in the Oil, which being
kindled by another flame, issues forth out of it by degrees, but cannot subsist
without it, and so there is a necessity of recruiting, not the flame of the
Lamp with another flame, but the subject of it, that is the Oil, to the end it
may be continued. In like manner it is not the Soul, but its nearest Subject,
which is to be nourished, and so by the nourishment of that the Soul is
continued. But that Dr. Willis believes the contrary is apparent from these
words of his: As the thicker Particles of the Nutritive Juice repair the losses
of the Corporeal Bulk, so the more subtle Particles of it repair the waste of
this same Soul. And thus he believes, that not only the near Subject, but the
Soul it self to be nourished: which is left to every Man's liberty to think
what he pleases.

LXXIX. In the mean while there What this Life or Soul is, the Philosophers
ignorant.
are such eager Contentions about the Original, Seat, Subject, Essence,
Substance, and the whole History of the Soul, the most acute Philosophers,
could never yet find out and tell us what this same Life or Soul is, concerning
which so much has been discoursed and written, and which is the prime Actress
in the Generation of all Creatures, and forms the whole that is to be formed.
Here therefore it is that we are all at a loss; here we find how ignorant we
are; here we perceive how vainly we waste our time, in prying into those
Mysteries which the most Sublime Creator would not have us understand: Here we
observe the Arrogance of many, who in the unfolding such Secrets of Nature,
with a haughty Ostentation endeavor to show their Knowledge and their
Learning, when they utter nothing but mere empty words. Certainly it behooves us
in Mysteries of this Nature tacitly to acquiesce, and patiently to be contented
with our Ignorance, and rather to admire the Power of the Almighty, than to be
too scrutinous into forbidden Mysteries, mindful of those Verses of Lucretius:

Multa sacro tegit involucro Natura: neque ullis
Fas est scire quidem mortalibus omnia: multa
Admirare modo, necnon venerare: neque illa
Inquires quae sunt, arcanis proxima: namque
In manibus quae sunt, vix nos ea scire putandum est.
Usque adeo procul a nobis praesentia very.
The Sense of which is this:

Nature, much under Vails seems to conceal,
Nor was it fit, she all things should reveal.
It is not just, proud, foolish Man should know
All things she does within the Orbs below.
Nor is it fit Man should be made so wise:
Lest knowing all, he should her Skill despise.
Some of her Works as wonderful she made;
And some, the worship of the Gods invade.
Things near, if hid, we may not search into:
The more remote, less lawful are to know.
Those things with which we daily do converse,
Their very Names we scarcely may rehearse.
So far off still, Truths presence seems to stand,
We scarce the Name, much less the Thing command.
CHAP. XXX. Containing the History of the Birth contained in the Womb. And
first of the Placenta or Uterine Liver, and the Cavities called Acetables.
HAving thus finished the History of the Seed and Conception, together with
that of the Formation of the Birth; now let us proceed to the History of the
Birth when formed, and contained in the Womb.

I. Upon opening the Womb of a The Uterine Liver.
Big-bellied Woman, there presently appears a fleshie Substance, which
Fallopius from some resemblance which it has to a Cheescake, calls the Uterine
Cheescake, or Placenta; others from its resemblance in use, color, and
substance, call it the Uterine Liver.

II. This Liver is a Bowel after its The Definition.
own manner fleshie, soft, consisting of innumerable Fibers and small little
Vessels, and Blood between, condensed in dead People, by means whereof the
Birth adheres to the Womb, but more especially to the bottom of it.

III. At first the Seed of the Man Its Original.
being injected into the Womb (if Conception happen) is every way enclosed by
the whole Circumference of the Womb, and is found contiguous to it. Then by the
nourishing heat of the Womb it is melted and dissolved, and so the prolific
spirituous part being separated out of it, it retires forthwith through the
Uterine Tubes toward the Ovaries, there to imprint upon the ripe Egg the Seal
of Fertility. This Egg in the Ovary is surrounded with two little Pellicles, of
which the one is thicker and stronger; the other thinner and weaker, as in
Birds an outermost hard shell, and an inner thin Membrane grows in the Egg out
of the Seed of the Hen. To the outermost of these Membranes, at the very first
beginning certain downy Lineaments formed out of the Female Seed are seen to
adhere: to which also, at the very same first beginning, a certain ruddy soft
substance joins it self, which seems to arise from the substance it self of the
womb, in the same place where the Egg slips through the Tube into the Womb, by
means whereof it adheres by and by to the Womb, and is furnished by the Womb
with some Blood-conveighing Vessels, which it imparts to the Chorion, as being
those Vessels which are discerned in the Chorion, before any Formation of the
Birth, nor can be derived thence from any other part. These downy beginnings of
the Placenta, or Uterine Liver, increase by little and little through the
affusion of that same Blood to this very Bowel, whose substance at the end of
the third Month is notably conspicuous. Within the inner Membrane is included
the whole Colliquation of the Seed, together with the Crystalline Bubble,
wherein the Birth is formed out of the prolific Principle infused into it;
which being formed swims upon the Colliquation, free and adhering no where to
any Membranes, and for some time is nourished with that alone.

IV. Afterward, when the increasing When the Umbilical Vessels begin to grow.
Embryo begins to want a more plentiful Nourishment, the Extremities of the
Umbilical Vessels grow out more and more, and are extended toward this Liver
(which from that time begins to be more manifestly conspicuous, to the end they
may draw a firmer Alimentary Juice from thence, and carry it to the Birth, as
the Plants by means, of their Roots suck nutritive Juice from the Earth. But
how these Vessels cross the Membranes, and come to this Liver, see Chap. 32.

V. Harvey, in an Abortion cast Harvey's Observations of the beginning of the
Placenta in (...) Abortive.
forth about the bigness of a Hen-egg, observed withal in the outward and upper
part of the Chorion, as it were a thin Slime, or a certain Down, denoting the
first Rudiments of the growing Placenta; and in the inner part of the same
several Roots and Branches of the Umbilical Vessels, but never the Chorion
sticking to the womb. But the reason why he never saw the Chorion slicking to
the womb, perhaps might be, either because the Matter to be poured forth out of
the womb for the increase of the Placenta, was not yet increased to a
sufficient quantity; or because the fleshic Particle, which we have seen
sticking to the Chorion, in the Expulsion of that Conception, was not torn from
the womb, but from the Chorion; and so the Chorion coming forth together with
it, was not by Harvey seen to stick to the womb. But those Roots of the Vessels
which Harvey took for the Umbilical Productions, seem not to have been the
little Branches of the Umbilical Vessels, in regard the Navel could not be
grown out to that length in that time, nor reach so far, but were rather little
Vessels extending themselves from that same fleshie substance sticking above to
the Chorion, with which the Umbilical Vessels are wont to intermix themselves.
See the Abortions in the preceding Chapter.

VI. By what has been said, it is Whether coagulated Blood?
sufficiently apparent, that the beginning of the Placenta, or Uterine Liver,
is not generated out of the impurer part of the menstruous Blood flowing from
the womb, the more pure part in the mean season passing to the Birth through
the Umbilical Vein, (as many have erroneonsly asserted:) seeing that the first
threads of it are delineated out of the Woman's Seed as well as the Chorion and
Amnion; to which afterward the nourishment is brought, not from the more
impure, but from good Blood pouring in. And therefore they were grossly
mistaken, who judged it not to be any Bowel, but only a heap of menstruous
Blood collected and coagulated without the Vessels, and preserved in that place
for the nourishment of the Birth, whereas both in respect of its beginning, its
fibrous substance, and its use, it appears no less to be a Bowel than the other
Liver seated in the right Hypochondrion. Besides that, the upholders of this
Opinion do not consider, that the Blood cannot subsist without Corruption nine
Months together out of the Vessels in the womb, or any other hot and moist
place; and daily Experience teaches us, what terrible Mischiefs follow upon the
Extravasation of the Blood though it be good, if it stay in the place but a few
Months.

VII. Fabricius ab Aquapendente Aquapendeat's Opinion.
calls this Liver a Fleshie Substance, and a Fleshie Mole; not that it is
simply flesh, but a Bowel that has a peculiar and proper fibrous Contexture,
and a flesh convenient for it self, whose first threads are delineated out of
the Woman's Seed; and afterward a peculiar fleshie Substance thickened out of
the Vital Blood, which first flows from the Mother more plentifully thither
through the Uterine Vessels, and afterward is forced thither from the Heart of
the Birth through the Umbilical Arteries. For when the Umbilical Vessels are
come to the Uterine Liver, a certain spirituous Nectar, or Vital Spirit, flows
out together with Arterious Blood from the heart of the Birth, which as it
increases, nourishes, enlivens, and excites to action all the Parts of the
Birth, and its Membranes, the spirituous Blood of the Mother assisting and
affording the greatest part of the Matter, so does it enlarge and nourish this
Placenta or Uterine Liver.

VIII. This Liver in a single Conception The number of Placenta's.
is always single; and in the Conception of Twins, both Births have one common
Liver containing the Navels of both; but sometimes each Birth has a distinct
and proper Uterine Liver. However, Wharton believes that both Twins have a
peculiar Placenta, but so contiguous; that they seem to be but one. But that
the Opinion of Wharton expressed by the word always, is not generally true,
Experience teaches us; by which it appears, that sometimes the contrary
happens. And therefore we are certainly to conclude, That in the Conception of
Twins there is sometimes one Liver, sometimes two. But for what reason, and in
what cases there happens sometimes one, and sometimes two, is a Mystery
hitherto unreveal'd, and unknown to all Practisers; which nevertheless we shall
endeavor to unfold in the next Chapter, when we come to discourse of the State
of the Membranes in Twins.

IX. The Substance of it is peculiar Its Substance.
to it self, soft, loose, brittle, thin, furrowed with several furrows, and as
it were here and there slightly divided; yet in the mean time altogether
fibrous, being a Contexture of innumerable Threads and diminutive Fibers, and
infinite little Branches of diminutive Vessels, and swelling with coagulated
Blood poured in, not much unlike the looser Parenchyma of the Liver, though less
firm, and easily dissolved and mangled by a slight attrition. And such a sort
of Substance, as well at other times, as particularly in December 1665. we
showed to several Doctors of Physic and Students, in a Woman that died after
she had been six Months gone. And lately in the Placenta's of two live Women,
from whom we extracted the Births when they could not be delivered of
themselves: which Placenta's, after the Extraction of the Birth, were separated
whole from the Womb, and drawn forth together with the Membranes.

X. It is of a dark ruddy Color, Its Color.
not unlike the Color of the Spleen; somewhat more ruddy, seldom paler.

XI. The Shape of the whole Uterine Shape and bigness.
Liver is for the most part Circular, sometimes Long, or Quadrangular, seldom
Triangular; but unequal in its Circumference. But the bigness and thickness
various, according to the Condition of the Body and the Birth, and the Time of
the Woman's going. For in Abortions of thirty and forty Days it hardly appears
about the Roots of the Navel, hardly then extended thither. But after that the
spirituous Blood flowing thither in greater Quantity, it grows and enlarges
every day, till at length it comes to its Perfection, about a Foot in Breadth,
or so much as may be extended between the two Thumbs and fore-Fingers extended
in Compass: About two or three Fingers thick in the Middle, but thinner in the
Extremities. Nicolaus Hoboken, an accurate Inspector into these Placenta's,
writes that he never saw any one thicker than a Thumbs breadth, or very little
more. Nevertheless we are to observe that there is some variety in the breadth
and thickness, being found sometimes to be thicker, and sometimes thinner in
all Secundines.

XII. In the hollow Part next the The Superficies.
Birth, the Superficies of it is equal and concave like a small Platter. Upon
the gibbous Side unequal with several Excrescencies, with which it fastens it
self to the inside of the Womb, no other Substance interceeding, the fungous or
spungy parts here and there slightly swelling out at the time of Impregnation,
and rests upon it with its open Pores. And the Womb also, at that time more
spungy, opening its Pores and the Extremities of its Arteries, joins
immediately to the Placenta, yet without any mutual Anastomoses of the Veins or
Arteries either of the one or the other (concerning which several Anatomists
have written several Fancies contrary to Truth, merely upon the Score of
Conjecture) and so it transfuses the Alimentary Blood and milky Juice into this
Placenta, which after Delivery, the said Placenta being torn away and
separated, for many days together flows from those Openings or little Holes.

XIII. In the Middle, or about the The Ingress of the Navel.
Middle, and sometimes toward one or the other Side a diminutive little
umbilical Gut is sasten'd to it, with its Vessels included, by means whereof
there is a necessary Communication between the Placenta, and the Birth; of
which more c. 32.

XIV. A Vein, and two umbilical Its Vessels.
Arteries are inserted into it, which are intermixed with Roots in the
Substance of it, with a wonderful Folding, and are thought to join together
with some Anastomoses. But the Ramisications of the Arteries are generally more
numerous, more serpentine and knotty, but less and more ruddy: The
Ramifications of the Vein less in number, but larger and thicker, less
contorted, and of a darker Color. However the bigger part of the Roots is not
joined by Anastomoses; but the Arteries pour forth the Blood which is brought
from the Heart of the Birth into the Parenchyma of the Placenta; which together
with a good part of the Blood flowing through the small Vessels of the Womb,
being altered by the Uterine Liver, and endu'd with a slight fermentaceous
Quality, the gaping Roots of the Vein assume and convey to the Birth.

XV. It has been the common Opinion, Whether any Anastomoses between the
Vessels of the Womb and Cheesecake.
according to the Sentence of Galen, That the diminutive Branches of these
small Arteries and Veins are not only joined together by Anastomoses between
themselves, but also with the Extremities of the Vessels of the Womb; and
hence, after Delivery, by their being broken off from the falling Uterine
Liver, there happens a great Flux of Blood. But we observe in Brutes, That
certain Vessels attracting Nourishment out of the little Placenta's of the
Chorion, are manifestly extended into the Pores of the little pieces of Flesh
swelling out from the Womb, but that no Anastomoses descend from the Womb or
its Protuberances into the Placentulae of the Chorion, nor that there are any
Placentulae between the Vessels of these Placentulae and the Womb. Which it is
probable to be no less true in human Conception, and that no blood-bearing
Vessels run out from the Womb into the Placenta, but less that they join
together by Anastomoses with the Umbilicals; seeing that the blood descends
like Dew, only by degrees from the Ends of the Uterine Arteries, gaping at the
time of the woman's being ingravidated, where it is prepared for the Nourishment
of the Birth, as we shall show hereafter.

XVI. Wharton seems to assert, Wharton's Opinion.
that several Vasa Sanguifera are extended from the Womb it self no less than
from the Navel of the Birth, into the Placenta, however that they are
intermixed with 'em. For he says that the Placenta is divided into two Halves,
easily separable one from the other. Of which two Halves, the one manifestly
looks toward the parts of the Womb, and the other toward the parts of the
Embryo. And that all the Uterine Vessels, distributed toward the Placenta,
terminate in that same half which looks toward the womb, and there are consumed
into little hairy Strings, and do not at all pass thorough the other half. Also
that the umbilical Vessels which run forward toward that half of the Placenta
which is fixed to the Chorion, are all exhausted into small Hair in the same
half; neither do they pass into the opposite Medietie contiguous to the womb.
But this most famous Person presupposes a Division of the Placenta, never to be
found, and never demonstrable; and thence erroneously concludes, that the
diminutive Vessels running from one place to another, reach no farther than the
one half; whereas there are no Vasa Sanguifera that descend from the womb to
the Placenta, and for that it is most certain that the umbilical Vessels
penetrate through the whole. But as for those diminutive Vessels that are
derived from the little piece of Flesh affixed to the Chorion at the beginning
of the Conception, they are distributed through the whole Chorion, before the
Formation of the Birth, and seem to have none or very little Communication with
the Placenta: Concerning which, it is very much to be doubted whether they
proceed from any Continuation of the Vessels of the womb. To which Obscurity
the most accurate Inspection of the famous Nicolaus Hoboken, have given us a
very great Light, who never could observe any Productions of the blood-bearing
Vessels from the womb into the Placenta, whenas he has inquired into, and laid
open, with great Study and Industry above other men, all the Mysteries of the
Placenta and the whole Secundine; published in a Treatise, de Secundin Human.
adorned with Cuts delineated with his own Hand, and exposed to the View and
Judgment of all Men.

XVII. The same Wharton believes, Whether any Veins and Arteries in the (...)?
that there are also lymphatic Vessels intermixed with the Veins and Arteries
in the uterine Liver, and that then enters together with them the Navel of the
Birth. But he adds, that thorough those the milkie Juice poured forth from the
Womb toward the Placenta, is conveyed to the Birth. But we have proved it
already that there are no such conspicuous Vessels extended from the Womb to
the Birth; and that if Wharton by accident saw any little whitish Vessels
carried from the Placenta to the Womb, through the umbilical diminutive Gut,
it is very probable he might be deceived and mistake the milkie Vessels for
Lymphatics; as differing very little either in shape or thinness. Unless we
should say, that the lymphatic Vessels do not only and always carry the
Lymphatic Juice, but the Chylus also in various places, where the Chylus is
offered, and so that the same thing may likewise happen in the Placenta, as it
often happens in that large pectoral Vessel, called the Thoracick Chyliductus.
In the mean time Hoboken, a most accurate observer of these things never could
find any lymphatic Vessels in the Liver, neither did they ever occur to me,
though I have diligently sought after them.

XVIII. Some there are who assert, Whether any Nerves in the Cheescake?
that there are also certain small diminutive Nerves, and that there is a
certain nutritive Juice conveyed through those for the benefit of the Birth.
But I would fain know of those People, whence those Nerves have their Original,
from the Father or the Mother, or from the Birth? The first cannot be, by what
we have said already, in regard there are no Vessels that extend themselves out
of the Placenta into the Womb. And that the latter cannot be true, is apparent
from hence, because it is contrary to Reason and all Belief, that any Nerves
should be extended so far from the most soft Substance of the brain of the
birth, and that they should run from the body of the Womb it self, through the
whole length of the Navel to the Placenta: Besides that in the Delivery, by the
breaking of those Nerves the birth it self would be greatly endangered. Lastly,
Because there are no nutritious Juices carried through the Nerves, neither can
be carried through 'em, as we shall show more at large l. 8. c. 1.

We have said a little before, that the Vessels and Pores of the Womb, do gape
a little toward the Placenta, and empty their Juices into it like a kind of
Dew. This many strenuously deny in Women: And yet at the same time they grant
that the Vessels of the Womb are opened into the Uterine Caruncles of Beasts,
and pour forth their alimentary Juice into their little Caverns, which is again
sucked up out of them by the little branches of the umbilical Vessels, and out
of those Cotyledons is carried to the Womb, as we find true by ocular
Testimony. But it is not worth while to use many words in refuting the Opinion
of these Men, as contradicting not only the Sight it self, but one another,
seeing that they allow alimentary Juice to the Placenta's or Cotyledons of
Beasts, and yet deny them to the Placenta's in Women; whereas there is the same
use and necessity of the same part in both, and for that it is apparent by what
has been already said that the alimentary Juice is no less in the Cotyledons of
Women than of Beasts.

XIX. The Place where the Placenta The Place of Adhesion.
sticks to the Womb cannot be certainly assigned; for sometimes it is joined
and firmly adheres to it in the right side* sometimes in the left, and
sometimes at the hinder part of the bottom of the Womb; and where it is
fastened within to the Chorion, there it admits the Entrance of the umbilical
Vessels. But when it begins to increase, in the first Months it sticks as
closely to it, as the unripe Fruit to the Tree. But the bigger the Birth grows,
and the nearer to Delivery, so it still parts the more easily from the Womb,
and at length, when the Fruit is quite ripe, after the Expulsion of the birth,
falls off from the Womb.

XX. By the general Vogue of the The Opinions of the Ancients.
Ancients it is said to adhere to the Womb by Acetables, concerning which
Acetables however there is a very great dispute.

1. Some think 'em to be the Protuberancies Opinion.
of the Vessels of the womb, like to Hemorrhoids or Warts, with which the
Embryo is nourished. But this is derided by Erotian in his Onomasticon. 2.
Others with Diocles assert'em to be certain Mamillary Processes, swelling out
from the body of the womb into its Cavity, during the time of Ingravidation,
for the Nourishment of the Birth: which is also exploded by Soranus Ephesius.
3. Others with Protagoras, backed as they say, by Hippocrates and Galen, affirm
that the Acetables are the Orifices of the Vessels swelling with overplus of
blood, dispersed through the inner Tunicle of the Womb? And thus Van Horn
asserts 'em to be a certain arterious larger sort of little Pipes gaping into
the Cavity of the Womb. Which Opinion was started long before by Spigelius, but
rejected by Nicolas Massa. 4. Formerly they held that the Kernelly Pieces of
Flesh, resembling the Leaves of the Herb Wall-Penny-Wort, were placed between
the Chorion and the Womb, adjoined to the Orifices of the Vessels, and took
them for the Cotyledons. 5. Riolanus writes that the Placenta is fastened to
the sides of the Womb by an innumerable number of Fibrous Productions, and
gives the Name of Cotyledons to these Fibers: And besides these affirms that
there are no other apparent Cotyledons in Women. 6 Fallopius, Arantius, and
many other quick-sighted Anatomists, deny that there are any Acetables or
Cotyledons in a woman's Womb; with whom also Harvey agrees: who describes the
Cotyledons in beasts, but deny women to have any, or that they have any thing
like 'em. On the other side Silvius stoutly maintains that there are Acetables
in women, and affirms that they are to be seen in a woman near her Time, or but
newly delivered. With whom Carolus Gemma, and Laurentius agree, Galen indeed
asserts that women have Cotyledons, but he confirms it only by the Authority of
other Anatomists; and says they are the Orifices of the Vessels of the Womb; or
rather the closing together of the Vessels of the womb and the birth by
Anastomosis: Which Opinion we have already refuted.
In such a Dissension of learned Men, though it be hard to assert any thing of
certainty, yet the Truth is to be inquired into, in regard it seems a thing not
to be doubted, but that women have Acetables, in regard that Hippocrates, who
neither could deceive nor be deceived, as Macrobius testifies, makes mention of
'em; which he would not do to no purpose nor by mistake. First then let us
consider what these Cotyledons are, and next, whether they are in women with
Child?

XXI. Certain Parts appearing in The Name derived.
the Womb of a woman with Child, are called by the Greeks (...), and that from
a two fold Resemblance. First from the Likeness which they have to the Herb
Cotyledon, which the Latins call Venus-Navel, in English Wall-Pennywort, an
Herb, whose Leaves are somewhat thick, smooth, full of Juice, round, unequal in
Compass, and a little hollow in the middle. Secondly, From the likeness which
they have to the Cavity of the Hip-bone, which is called (...), and contains
the head of the Thigh Bone. From which Resemblance, they are also called by the
Latins Acceptabuld, because they receive something into their hollowness; but
more frequently Acetabula, because they are like to little Sawcers, wherein
they use to bring Vinegar to the Table.

XXII. From this Derivation of the What the Cotyledons are.
Name it manifestly appears, That Hippocrates and the rest of the Ancients, by
Cotyledons never meant any Protuberancies of the Vessels, or any other fleshie
or mamillary Excrescencies, or fibrous Ligaments, but some certain things that
were hollow, or else their Cavities themselves: And therefore they were all
under a gross mistake that took those Protuberancies for Cotyledons.

XXIII. We are now to enquire in In what Creatures to be seen.
what Creatures they are to be found? I answer; That they are to be found as
well in Women, as in any other Creatures that produce living Births, only
different in figure and shape. For in Women, if we do but accurately consider
the Matter, there are not many, but one Cotyledon, and sometimes two in Women
that have conceived Twins. For indeed the whole Uterine Placenta, which is
unequal toward the Womb, hollow toward the Chorion, is all together, somewhat
thick, full of Juice, round, unequal in the circumference, exactly resembling
the Herb Wall-Pennimort, or else the figure of a little Sawcer. Of this Woman's
Cotyledon, Hippocrates makes mention Sect. 5. Aph. 45. Those Women, who being
moderately corpulent, miscarry at the end of two or three Months, without any
manifest occasion, their Cotyledons are full of slime, and therefore by reason
of their ponderosity, are not able to contain the Birth, but are broken. For if
great store of flegmatic slimy Humors lie heavy upon the Placenta, being
softened and becoming lank in the gibbous part of it, where it sticks to the
inner spunginess of the womb, of necessity it must be unloosned, together with
the Birth, which by its means, sticks also to the Womb. Now Hippocrates speaks
of Cotyledons in the Plural Number, not that he would have one Woman, that has
conceived but one Birth, have more Cotyledons or Placentae; but because he is
discoursing in the Plural Number of Women in general, who though singly, they
have but one, yet many together have several Cotyledons. This, if many famous
Anatomists had more attentively considered, and among the rest our most
quick-sighted Harvey, they had not so unwarily denied Cotyledons in Women, nor
rejected so easily the Authority of Hippocrates in that particular. And
therefore, according to the first Resemblance, Cotyledons are in Women.

XXIV. But according to the latter Cotyledons in Brutes.
Resemblance, they are to be found in most Beasts that bring forth living
Productions, who during their Impregnation, have several little pieces of
flesh, somewhat thick and hard, spungy and prominent, rising from the Womb in
time of Impregnation toward the inner Cavity, and sticking close to it, and
like a Honycomb, hollowed into several little conspicuous Cells, containing a
certain Alimentary Juice, as is to be seen in Ews, Cows, and several other
Creatures. And some there were that took these little fleshinesses of the womb*
others those little diminutive holes before mentioned for real Cotyledons: when
as neither the one nor the other have any resemblance with the Cavity of the
Hip-bone. But those single fleshinesses of the Womb are encompassed by another
thin ruddy soft piece of flesh adhering to the Chorion, and furnished with the
innumerable small Extremities of the Umbilical Vessels, entering the little
diminutive holes of the protuberant Caruncles of the Womb, and hollow toward
the little fleshiness of the womb: Which thin hollow fleshinesses adhering to
the Chorion, and embracing the thick protuberant fleshinesses of the womb, are
the true Cotyledons, having a hollowness like the Cavity of the Hip-bone: and
as the one comprehends the head of the Thigh Bone, so these in like manner
comprehend the protuberant fleshinesses of the womb: and hence they are called
Loculamenta, or Pigeon-holes, that is, distinct Places, each one of which
receives a Caruncle of the womb. But these fleshinesses of the Chorion in those
Beasts that have 'em, supply the place of the Placenta, and receive the Juices
received by the Caruncles of the womb, and conveigh them through the Umbilical
Vessels to the Birth. For that every one of the thin Extremities of the
Umbilical Vessels adhering to them, are inserted into the several diminutive
holes of the Caruncles of the womb, filled with a certain nutritive slimy
Juice, as a Honycomb is filled with Honey, wherewith several Beasts seem to be
nourished in the womb. Which little Vessels, when they are drawn forth out of
the diminutive holes of the Caruncles of the womb, the said slimy Juice is to
be seen sticking to their Roots, and is extended out of the holes, like small
white Threads. Nevertheless it is very probable, that that same Juice being
condensed by the Cold in dead Animals becomes so thick, as the Lymphatic Juice
is congealed into a Gelly, but that in living and warm Creatures it is not so
thick or viscous, but thin and fluid, to the end it may the more easily glide
through the most narrow Vessels into the Cavity of the Amnion, and so reach to
the Birth. But we must observe by the way, that those little fleshinesses of
the Chorion at the beginning of the Impregnation, are difficultly to be
separated from the Caruncles of the womb: but the Embryo increasing, as it were
come to maturity, are dissolved and loosened by degrees, and at length fall off
of themselves, and in the delivery are expelled, together with the Birth; and
the Protuberancies swelling from the womb, decrease again by degrees, and
contract themselves.

XXV. The use of the Uterine Liver The use of the Placenta in Women.
in a Woman is, partly to support the milkie Umbilical Vessels, which attract
the milkie watery Juice out of the Pores or diminutive holes of the womb:
partly after a peculiar manner to concoct and prepare the Blood, flowing as
well from the Mother, through the Uterine Arteries; partly from the Birth,
through the Umbilicals, to render it more serviceable for the nourishment of
the Birth. This was Harvey's meaning, where he says, Moreover the Placenta
concocts the nutritive Juice coming from the Mother for the nourishment of the
Birth. But what alteration or concoction the Blood undergoes in Human
concoction, that has hitherto not been so clearly understood, neither has any
one written concerning it. For our part, we think it very probable, that the
Uterine Liver dissolves the thicker and salt Particles of the Blood, and
intermixes it with the sulphury, and so makes the necessary bloody ferment for
the Blood of the Embryo, without which the Blood in the heart of it cannot be
well dilated, and performs that function alone, which in Men born the Liver and
Spleen perform together. For as in Man born, the Arterial Blood is forced
through the Splenetic Artery into the Spleen, and therein concocted, after a
particular manner, is conveyed through the Splenetic Branch and the Vena
Porta to the Liver, to the end it may be mixed with the venal Blood coming from
the Mesaraic Veins, there to be concocted again after a new Manner, and to
acquire the perfection of a Fermentaceous Liquor, and that obtained immediately
imbibes the venal Blood flowing from all parts, as also the Chylus gliding
through the Subclavial Vein, with it is fermentaceous quality, so that coming to
the Heart, it may be there dilated and turned into Spirituous Blood; In like
manner, in the Birth, the Blood is forced out of the Iliac Arteries through the
Umbilical Veins into the Placenta, to the end it may be mingled with the Blood
flowing from the Womb, be digested and acquire some slight kind of
Fermentaceous power: and so it is carried through the Umbilical Vein, to the
Liver of the Embryo, and flowing through that into the Vena Cava, is there
mixed with the Blood and the Chylus, (generated out of the Liquor of the Amnion
sucked in at the Mouth of the Birth) flowing from the Vena Cava: and so all
that mixture being prepared and imbibed with a slight Fermentaceous Quality,
passes gradatim to the Heart, and is therein dilated and made Spirituous.
Probable therefore it is, that as in the Embryo, the Lungs are quiet, so that
the Liver and Spleen do not as yet officiate, as in a Man born, which is
manifest, 1. From the bulk of the Liver, too bigg for the Body of the Embryo;
2. From the Color of the Embryo, too bright, and perfectly ruddy, which in Men
born, when it officiates, is black and blue.

XXVI. Those Bowels therefore, not The Placenta supplies the Office of some
other Bowels.
being able as yet sufficiently to dissolve, and prepare them to a
fermentaceous height, in the Birth, by reason of their weak and tender
Constitution, provident Nature therefore has substituted in their place for the
time a Uterine Liver, which supplies the Office of both from the time that the
Blood begins to flow from the Birth, through the Umbilical Arteries into the
Uterine Liver, till the Delivery. For as in the Birth it is requisite the Blood
should be less sharp, and consequently ought to be concocted not in both, but
in one Ventricle of the Heart; so likewise the Fermentaceous Liquor that is to
be mixed with it, ought to be less acrimonious, and by the same consequence
ought not to be prepared and concocted in the Liver and Spleen as in Man born,
but only in the Uterine Placenta, to the end it may be more mild and temperate
when it enters the Birth.

XXVII. Now there are four Reasons to Why the Placenta sticks to the Womb.
be given, wherefore the Placenta sticks to the Womb. 1. That thereby the Birth
may be more firmly contained in the womb. 2. That the watery milkie juices
descending from the Womb of the Mother, may be conveniently conveyed through
the proper Milkiy Umbilical Vessels, passing through the Uterine Liver into the
Umbilical Diminutive Gutt, and thence into the concavity of the Amnion. 3. That
the Placenta it self may not be nourished only by the Blood of the Birth,
flowing through the Umbilical Arteries, which is very small at the Beginning,
but also and that chiefly with the Mothers Blood, and so may grow the faster,
and be made fit for the performance of its duty; there being a necessity for
some dissolution at the beginning, of the Salt or Tartarous Particles in the
Blood, by means of a certain slight formentaceous Liquor, to promote more
swiftly the Increase of the solid parts. Vid. l. 2. c. 12. 4. To the end there
may be a more copious Contribution of the Mothers Blood, flowing out of the
little Vessels of the Womb, into the Uterin Liver, that that same larger
quantity of Blood may be mixed in the Placenta with the lesser Quantity of
Arterious Blood, flowing thither from the Iliac Arteries of the Birth, through
the Umbilical Arteries: and being there concocted may be endued with a slight
fermentaceous Quality, and so falling into the Heart, may be presently dilated
and altered into spirituous Blood. For as in Man born, to the end the Blood may
be made right and good, twenty or more parts of the venal Blood are mixed in
the Vena Cava, with one part of the Chylus flowing through the Thoracic Ductus
Chyliferus, before they come together to the Heart: So ought it to be done in
the Birth: Which not having so much Blood of it self to mix with a convenient
portion of the Chylus, necessarily for the supply of that defect, there is
required a portion of the Mothers Blood, which together with the Arterious
Blood of the Embryo, flowing thither from the Iliac Arteries, being
conveniently prepared, is communicated continually to the Birth, through the
Umbilical Vein.

XXVIII. Here it may be objected, An Objection.
that that same Blood will flow either into the Umbilical Vessels, or into the
substance of the Uterine Liver. That the first is not true, is apparent from
hence, that there is no Communion by Anastomoses between the Vessels of the
Womb, and the Umbilicals. If the latter should be true, then the Extravasated
Blood would grow corrupt, which would occasion Inflammations, Apostemes and
other Mischiefs; therefore, etc. Now the former being granted I answer to the
latter, That the Concoctions of the other Bowels, and many other parts,
instructs us, that it cannot be true by any means: For the Chylus being poured
forth into the Glandules of the Breasts is not there corrupted, but concocted
into Milk: the venal Blood poured forth into the substance of the Liver,
acquires a Fermentaceous Quality without any corruption, and is carried to the
Vena Cava; the Blood also poured forth into the Kidneys, despoyl'd of a good
part of its Serum, without any corruption, is conveyed to the Vena Cava: So
also the Blood which flows into the Uterine Liver, is not therein corrupted,
but is concocted after a peculiar manner, and undergoes some necessary
Alteration, which having suffered, it enters the Roots of the Umbilical Vein.

XXIX. Beyond all Controversy therefore The Blood flows from the Womb into the
Uterine Liver.
it is, that the Blood flows from the Womb into the Uterine Liver. Which we
find by the flux of Blood that happens for many days in time of Travail by the
tearing away of the Uterine Liver from those opened extremities of the Vessels
of the Womb, which before gaped into it.

XXX. But besides the Blood, there A Watery Milky juice flows from the Womb to
the Amnion.
is a watery, Viscous, Milkie Liquor which flows from the Womb to the
hollowness of the Amnion, which is seen to flow forth at the time of Delivery
and presently afterward. So Andrew Laurentius relates, Anat. l. 1. quest. 10.
that he had seen several Women in Travail emit a great quantity of milk from
the womb. Schenkius also reports out of Bauhinus, that Capellus, the Physician,
saw a Woman who discharged half a Cup full of milk out of her womb and bladder.
And hence Deusingius concludes, that the milkie Juice flows from the womb into
the Uterine Liver, that is into the milkie Umbilical Vessels passing through
that Liver. Which Opinion is confirmed by this, for that often in Women in
travail about the end of the Flux, the Secundines grow whitish, and become as
it were of a milkie color; which presently ceases through the sucking of the
Breasts. But whether that milkie Juice flows from the womb into the substance
it self of the Placenta, is much questioned by some. Others say, that partly
through the ruddy and bloody color of the Parenchyma of the Placenta; partly,
for that never in the whole Placenta that milky Humor, or any thing like it,
was to be found by any Anatomists, the contrary is to be asserted. In this
Obscurity the more accurate Dissection of Brutes gives us some light, by which
we find a certain whitish viscous Humor settled in their Uterine Caruncles,
into which the Roots of the milky Umbilical Vessels, adhering to the little
Vessels of the Chorion, are inserted, and receive that Juice, and convey it to
the Birth. So it seems also probable, that some such like milky Juice, in
Women, flows through some peculiar milky Vessels to the womb into some proper
Caruncles riveted into the inner porous substance of the womb it self: and that
the milky Umbilical Vessels passing through the Placenta, are inserted into
'em, which receive that Liquor, and carry it to the Amnion. For as in Brutes
certain spungy Excrescencies grow out from the womb receiving that Juice, so
likewise it is probable that in a Woman's womb, there are certain little spungy
Caverns for the same use, though not conspicuous as in Brutes. For if there be a
milky Liquor to be found in the Uterine Caruncles of Brutes, which in dead
Creatures becomes thick and viscous through the Cold, and thence sufficiently
to be seen, without doubt also, within the porous substance of a Woman's womb,
there must be some little Caverns by which that milky Juice flowing from the
womb is particularly collected and received. And as from the Veins of the womb,
and the Arteries gaping toward the Placenta, the blood is poured into the
bloody parts of the Uterine Liver, and carried from them through the Umbilical
Vein to the Liver of the Birth, so it is likely that the milky Juice is carried
from the little milk-bearing Cells of the womb into the Umbilical milky
Vessels. But because those Uterine Cells of the milky Juice have not hitherto
been observed by any Person, this is no proof that they are not there; for the
Lymphatic Vessels themselves, the milky Mesenteries and Pectoral Vessels lay
concealed for many Ages; and yet it cannot be said but that they were there. So
likewise at this day the Production of the Urinary Passage in the Birth without
the Navel, and the milky Vessels running toward the Breasts, are not
conspicuous, though it be most certain that the Urine of the Birth flows through
that passage into the Allantoides, seated between the Chorion and the Amnion;
through this, the milky Chylus is carried to the breasts. Moreover, Anatomists
have seldom an opportunity in a breeding Woman to observe the substance or
constitution of the womb, or of narrowly surveying the Uterine Placenta when
whole; or if any such opportunity were offered, no body has hitherto thought of
looking after those milky Uterine Cells: And besides the Passage of the milky
Vessels through the Placenta, being broken by reason of the softness of the
substance, and the flowing forth of the blood, cannot be seen. To which we may
add, that in Women, for some time dead, those milky Cells of the Womb, and
milk-bearing Vessels of the Womb are impossible to be discerned, as they might
be discovered in the bodies of such as come to a sudden end, and presently
opened. We must conclude therefore, that as in Brutes the Maternal milky Juice
is collected in the little Cells of the Caruncles of the Womb; so also in Women
that Juice is received by certain little Caverns of the womb, fixed into its
inner substance, which is porous in certain places while the Woman is breeding,
though they do not swell out in that manner, nor are so manifest as in Brutes.
For if there were no such things as those little milky Cells, to what use
should those milky Vessels be, as well those of the Mother extended to the
womb, as the Umbilical Vessels of the birth? Which nevertheless that they are
both there, I do not think is at all to be questioned: For that there are
Uterine milky Vessels, has been found by the more quicksighted Anatomist
sometimes since; as we shall show more at large in the next Chapter. So
likewise that there are Umbilical milk-bearing Vessels, is apparent from hence,
that there is a milky Juice contained in the little Gut, flowing from thence to
the hollowness of the Amnion, which when the whitish Color sufficiently
declares that it is not carried through the Vasa Sanguifera, of necessity it
must come thither through the milky Vessels extended from the Navel of the
birth toward the womb. But because this Juice is not so white as the milk of
the breasts, but of a more watery Color, Wharton therefore will have it to be
called rather Gelly, and that, because it is somewhat clammy and clear, and
being cold congeals like Gelly, and that not only in the Amnion, but in the
little Gut; for it is found in both.

But Gualter Needham will oppose both what has been said, and what is to be
said in the next Chapter, who labors altogether to persuade us, that this same
milkie or chylous Juice is carried not through any milkie Vessels, but through
the Arteries, together with the blood toward the Womb; and there again being
separated pure from the blood, is emptied into the hollowness of the Amnion. As
if there were any understanding or provident separating faculty in the
Arteries, by whose instinct they knew how to carry that milky Juice forced into
'em by the heart, together with the blood, afterward, in the time of
Childbearing, and at no other time, pure and unmixed, without any other blood,
directly to the womb, and perhaps to the breasts, but no where else: and there
to separate it with so much prudence from the blood, and send it from the ends
of the Arteries toward the hollowness of the Amnion, to the end this thicker
and more slimy Juice should flow from those ends, but the arterious blood which
is much thinner and fluid, out of a particular favor, should be detained in
its own Vessels. Most stupendous Miracle of Nature! But perhaps it may be
objected, Choler in the Liver, Serum, Matter, Tartar in the Kidneys, in
spontaneous and procured Loosnesses, as vicious Humors are separated from the
blood, and ejected forth, what wonder then that the same should happen to the
Chylus, as to the womb? I answer, that those separations of the said Humors
from the blood in the Liver, Kidneys, and other parts, are made by the force of
the Bowels framed to that end; of which, the whole constitution of the
Substance and the Pores is such; as likewise the peculiar fermentation
proceeding from thence, that those Bowels being sound and well, of necessity
must make those separations, and cannot act otherwise: in like manner as the
peculiar fermentaceous Juice generated in the Duodenum by the power of the
Liver and Sweetbread, separates the whitish Chylus from the Alimentary Mass
concocted in the Stomach. But if the Chylus were to be separated from the
arterious blood near the womb, it must be done without the help of any Bowel,
or without any peculiar fermentaceous Juice generated in any Bowel particular
ordained for that use; for no such Bowel is there at any time to be found. Add
to this, that not any such separation whatever could bring it to pass, that
that same milky Juice should be determined to certain particular parts, as the
womb and breasts, and that at particular times, of breeding and giving suck,
and at no other time. For the heart is the one and only general thruster forth
of the arterious blood, and that continually, without any distinction of parts
or times, but to all parts and at all times. Lastly, this is also to be
considered, that those said Chylous and milky Humors before that separation
from the blood; really and actually ought to have been in the arterious blood,
and to have been mixed with it: whereas on the contrary, never any true Chylus
either actually or potentially is contained in the blood that passes through
the heart, nor there dilated* and so thrust forward into the Arteries, as we
shall show L. 2. c. 12.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Membranes enfolding the Birth; and the humors therein
contained.
I. NExt the Uterine Liver follow two Membranes enfolding the Birth, and as it
were enclosing it in an Egg, Chorion, and Amnios, which because being both
joined together, they are expelled out of the womb together with the Placenta,
presently after the birth of the Child; are by the Latins called Secundae or
Secundine, Secundines.
Seconds or Secundines; by the Greeks (...) and (...), as being things that
come forth in the second place.

II. The Chorion is an Exterior The Chorion.
Membrane encompassing the whole Birth, thick and interwoven with several small
diminutive Fibers, like Threads, smooth within, and somewhat rough without;
here and there sprinkled with a little Fat, and where it sticks to the bottom
of the Womb by the help of the Placenta, furnished with several Vessels
proceeding from the first Caruncle described C. 29. As also from the Uterine
Liver, and Umbilical Vessels: Of which those are to be seen in great number in
the Chorion before the Formation of the Birth; but these, after the Navel is
grown out to its full length from the Birth, enter the Membrane, and are
intermixed with the former, and so being strengthened with this Membrane as
with a Coverlet, pass forward to the Uterine Liver annexed to the Chorion.

III. Nicholaus Hoboken, besides The Urinary Membrane.
the Chorion, describes another Membrane, thin and transparent, not having any
visible Branches of Vessels, very like the Amnios sticking to the Chorion, and
easily separated from it with the Nails, without the help of a Penknife; but
sticking very close about the Region of the Placenta sticking to the Chorion.
This third Membrane between the Chorion and the Amnios, Needham was the first
that found out, and called it very fitly the Urinary Membrane, rationally
affirming it to supply the place of the Alantoides in Brutes, and that between
that and the Chorion, the Urine of the Birth was collected and kept till
Delivery. And thus by this Invention of the most famous Needham, and the
Confirmation of the same by Hoboken's Inspections into the Secundines, all
those Doubts are most splendidly removed concerning the Alantois of Women, and
the Place where the Urine of the Embryo is contained, and preserved till
delivery. I my self, by Needham's Directions, have sought for and found it; and
so laid aside all those Doubts which have puzl'd me before concerning the
Alantois in Women. This Membrane, when others also saw, they took it for the
inner part of the Chorion, and so asserted the Chorion to consist of a double
Membrane, to which Opinion many other Anatomists gave their Consent.

IV. The Amnios is the inner Membrane, Amnios.
next enfolding the Birth and sostly enclosing it, hence called by the Names of
Amiculum and Indusium, the Cloak, or Shirt, gently resting upon the Chorion,
yet no where joined to it, but only in one very small place in the upper Part
at the Caruncle described C. 29.

This is very thin and single, soft, smooth, and transparent, distant from the
Birth with a loose Space, furnished with little Vessels hardly Visible, issuing
from the foresaid Caruncle, and the umbilical Vessels. This Membrane
Aquapendens thought to be double; who perhaps lighting upon the urinary
Membrane before mentioned, thought it to be a part of the Amnion. Now these
small Vessels by reason of their extraordinary Exility, are very rarely to be
discerned by the Eye, and therefore Hoboken, and some others thought it had no
Vessels; but erroneously, when Life, Nourishment, and Growth, teach us that it
cannot want Vessels; seeing that in the Spiders web-like, and glassy Tunicle of
the Eye, there are no Vessels conspicuous; and yet they are no less nourished
with Blood than other Parts, and those Vessels are sufficiently conspicuous in
the Net-like Tunicle wrapped about the vitreous Humor. Needham writes that
these little Vessels are manifestly to be discerned in a new ejected and warm
Amnion, but vanish as soon as it comes to be cold. Wharton moreover allows the
Amnios Lymphatic Vessels, which in regard they are at no time to be seen, nor
any way useful therein, whether they be there or no, I very much doubt.

V. Sometimes at the time of Delivery The Caul on the Head.
it happens that a torn-off Part of this Amnios will stick to the head of this
Birth, and that the Child is born with it, as if he had a Caul or Cap upon his
Head, for which reason such Births are called Galeati, or with Caps or Cauls on
them. From this Cap the Midwifes make great Observations upon the future Good
or Ill Fortune of the Infant, according to the Diversity of the Color, and
diligently preserve it, as a Fee belonging to themselves, by that means to
scare and terrify the Parents of the Infant with their Fictions and Stories,
and procure the more Money for it from the Parents, whom they ridiculously make
believe that if the Infant did not eat that Cap in Powder, or else carry it
about him all his Life time in a Box, he should prove unfortunate or else
Epileptic; or be continually haunted with Spirits and Hobgoblins: but if he did
eat or carry it about him, that then he should be happy and fortunate.

VI. But we are to observe, that The Con^tion of the Membranes in Twins.
when a Woman has conceived Twins, they are for the most part wrapped about with
one Chorion; but that each Embryo has a distinct Amnion, and that there is
contained in each Amnion, a distinct milkie Humor, as we find in Chessnuts and
Almonds, the outward Shells of which, though they include two Kernels, yet each
Kernel has its proper Tunicle whereby they are separated one from another. Now
if it happen that the Amnions of Twins are broken by any blow, fall, bruise, or
through any other means; or else were not sufficiently distinguished at the
beginning, then the Embryo's in those Parts where they touch one another grow
together, and a Monster comes to be brought forth. But many times it also
happens, that the distinct Embryo's are ensolded in distinct Cho^ons.

VII. The reason of this was formerly The reason thereof, and of monstrous
Births.
altogether unknown; but since the discovery of Women's Ovaries and Eggs, it is
easily explained. For as we often see in Hen Eggs two Yolks, with their
distinct Whites, separated by a very thin Membrane, included in one hard Shell,
and from such Eggs impregnated by the Cock and set under the Hen, rarely two
and well formed Chickens hatched, but frequently one monstrous Chicken, with
four Wings and Feet, and two Heads; for that the Membranes being broken, the
two Chickens being hatched together grow into one. So it may happen in the Eggs
of women, that two Eggs may be included in one harder Shell, which constitutes
the Chorion: And then if the Membranes of the Amnios are strong enough, the
Twins remain separated one from the other, and Navels issuing from each, are
inserted both together into one Placenta adhering to the Chorion, and at length
brought to Maturity, come forth apart in the Delivery, and when the latter is
come forth, there follows but one Secundine, which contained 'em both in the
womb: Neither can there be two Placentae, because but one Placenta can be
fastened to one Chorion. But if the Membranes of the Amnios were very weak and
broken, then the Twins immediately resting one upon another, grew together by
reason of the extreme Softness of the bodies, and so being joined together come
forth monstrous in the birth. But if it happen that two distinct mature Eggs
impregnated with the male Seed, slip out of the woman's Ovaries through the
Fallopian Tubes into the Womb, then each Embryo comes to be included in
distinct Membranes, Chorion, and Amnion; and each also, (of necessity to
receive the Navel of each Embryo) have a distinct Placenta adhering to its
proper Amnion (as in Brutes that bring forth several at a time, every Embryo
has a distinct and peculiar Placentula) and come forth apart at the time of
Delivery, their proper Secundines following each; unless by chance the
Placentae stick more closely to the Womb; and then at length being both
together loosened, both the Secundines follow after the Delivery of the Twins:
And sometimes we have seen one Twin follow the other not till the next; or two
days afterward. As in Twins, so it is when a woman has Conceived three or four
Children at a time, which Births are here very rare, but frequent in Scotland.
From what has been said also arises the Solution of that Doubt concerning the
number of Placentae in Twins, when one, and when two or more are necessary:
That is, one, when Twins are comprehended in one Chorion; two, when each are
included in their proper Chorions: Which two nevertheless lie so close many
times to one another, that they seem to be but one at first sight. For the
umbilical Vessels of each Twin, passing thorough their proper Chorion and
Amnion, ought to be presently inserted into the Placenta growing in the
exterior part of that Chorion; to the end that by its means the Embryo may
stick to the Womb. But they must not be inserted into the Placenta growing to
the Chorion of another Birth, as being that which those Vessels do not
immediately enter, nor so much as tend toward it.

VIII. These two Membranes, the The Original of these Membranes.
Chorion and the Amnios, are vulgarly thought to be Productions of the
Membranes of the Abdomen of the Birth. For that the umbilical Vessels
proceeding from the Abdomen of the Birth, are included within two Membranes,
constituting the little Gut: Of which the innermost, which is the thinner, is
thought to be produced from the Peritoneum; the outermost, which is the
thicker, from the Carnous Membrane These Membranes being dilated to the end of
the Navel, and expanded about the Birth, out of the innermost the Amnion is
said to be formed, out of the Exterior the Chorion: And this is the Opinion of
Harvey. Hippocrates also seems to intimate the same thing, where he says, out
of the Navel extended are formed two Membranes. Who also saw in the Conception
of a singing Wench, a Membrane produced from the Navel which contained the
Conception. If any one object, that these Membranes are generated before the
parts of the Birth are delineated. I answer, that the Threads of the first
Delineation, though they are not visible to the Eye, are yet in Being. For in a
Hen-Egg we observe a little ruddy dancing Point (which is thought to be the
Heart) which cannot beat unless it receive something thorough the Veins, and
force it through the Arteries; and yet though neither the one or the other are
visible, yet Reason teaches us, that they are in Being. In like manner in a
human Birth, though all the first Lineaments are not to be seen, yet they are
there, and the Navel may be produced out of them, together with the Membranes
enfolding the Birth. If any one shall say that in a Hen-Egg there are Membranes
before the Navel is delineated, nay before the Egg is set under the Hen: I
answer, that in an Egg, before the Delineation of the Parts, all things
requisite ought to be in readiness; which cannot be contributed by the Hen
toward their Delineation; as in Creatures that bring forth live Conceptions
they are prepared by degrees together with the Delineation. For these receive
from the Womb of the Dam more Nourishment over and above to supply their
Growth; from which Nourishment also these Membranes delineated out of the
Female Seed receive their Growth.

These Opinions of Harvey pleased me also formerly, but after I saw, in the
Abortions described C. 29* these Membranes already formed, nay very large and
strong, before the Formation of the Birth begun, while the procreative Matter
is collected in the Crystaline Bubble; no Threads at all being as yet extended
from the Bubble; and also in the beginning of the Embryo already formed, a
Foundation hardly conspicuous to bud forth out of the belly, nor any the least
Delineaments of the Vessels extended from it through the Colliquation or
dissolved Matter, toward the Membranes; but the Embryo altogether free, nor
joined to any part swimming upon the Colliquation; and both Membranes already
sufficiently strong, and wrapped about the whole dissolved Matter, and furnished
with conspicuous Vessels, I thought my self obliged to recede from that
Opinion, and not without reason; in regard it was impossible that such strong
Membranes, so conspicuous and so large, should be generated out of any
invisible String (of which Harvey speaks) which never any Person could so much
as dream to be formed out of the Bubble at first collected together.

IX. Therefore these Membranes do Their true Original.
not arise from their Beginning; but are generated in the Women's Ovaries
themselves out of the female Seed* as we have said c. 24. and are encompassed
with Eggs. Which Eggs being afterward discharged into the Womb, their outward
Membranes swell, and the Chorion grows thicker (like Leather steeped in Water)
and being very much dilated, constitute these two Membranes, the Chorion and
the Amnion. And as the outward Shell of a Hen or other Birds Egg, before it be
laid, sticks with a little Branch to the Ovary; so also in a woman these
Membranes by means of a Caruncle sticking to the Chorion, adhere not to the
Ovary but to the Womb it self at the very beginning; as appears in the
Abortions described c. 29. and perhaps in that very part where the Egg descends
out of the Tube into the Womb; and embrace the whole dissolved Matter together
with the Crystalline Bubble collected therein; and so within their Walls,
through the benign Cherishing of the Uterine Heat, the Architectonic Spirit
latent in the Bubble, is set at Liberty, and roused into Action. As for those
slender small Vasa Sanguisera, which from the beginning are seen dispersed
through the Chorion (as we have observed in the forecited Abortions) I have
observed them to be produced not from the Birth then not as yet formed, or from
the Crystalline Bubble, furnished as yet with no blood or blood-bearing
Vessels; but from that fleshy, spungy, and plainly rubicund Particle, which at
the upper part stuck to the Chorion, and seemed to be endamag'd withoutside,
and as it were torn from the Womb (so that it might appear that the Chorion
stuck to the Womb by means of it) which seemed to receive those little Vessels
from the Vessels of the Womb by Continuation, and so send them to the Chorion.

X. Besides the foresaid Membranes, Alantoides.
there is in Brutes that bring forth living Conceptions, a third Membrane found
in form of a Bagg, very thin, and furnished with no visible Vessels. This by
Galen and the ancient Physicians is called (...), from (...), a kind of
Pudding, like the Gut wherein Puddings use to be made. For according to Suidas,
(...); is taken for (...) a Gut. Hence the Latins call it the Farciminal, or
Pudding Membrane, and sometimes the Intestinal or Gut Membrane; though it does
not in all Creatures retain the shape of a Pudding or Gut, but in many
resembles a broad Swath.

XI. It is a most thin Membrane, What it is.
smooth, hollow, soft, and yet thick, without any Vessels conspicuous to the
Eye, by no means enfolding the whole Birth, extended to the utmost extremity
from one Horn of the Womb to the other, waxing slender at the extreme Parts
that enter the Horns of the Womb, till it end in a Point.

XII. It rises with a narrow Beginning, I^s Origi^al.
where the Urachus or Passage of the Urine, continuous to it, opens into its
Hollowness, and presently dilates it self.

XIII. It is seated between the Chorion Situation.
and the Amnion, from which it may be easily separated.

XIV. Its Use is to collect the Urine Its use.
of the Embryo, flowing out of the Bladder through the Urachus, and to preserve
it till the time of Delivery. From which use of it, Needham calls it in all
Creatures which have a Placenta, the Urinary Membrane.

XV. Its Bigness and Figure varies Its Shape and Bigness.
according to the Difference of Creatures. For in some it resembles a Gut in
shape and bigness, in others a broad Swath, and is much larger, as in a Cow,
much more in a Mare, in which Creature it is every way fastened to the Chorion,
and enfolds the whole Birth together with the Amnion. But as for its bigness
and shape in Sows, Coneys, Dogs, and some other Creatures, Gualter Needham
exactly describes upon View. l. de format. Foet. And in the same place adds the
whole discourse concerning it, and the manner of finding it out in Brutes.

XVI. Now seeing that Urine abounds Whether any Allantois in Women?
in the Conceptions of all Creatures that bring forth living Births, while they
remain in the Womb, and that there is a necessity for the same to be discharged
out of the Womb, and reserved somewhere till the time of Delivery, the Question
is whether this Membrane Alantois, be in all Creatures, especially in Women?
Aquapendens says, that Women, Cats, and Bitches are destitute of this Membrane,
as also are all other Creatures that have Teeth in both Jaws: And that the
Urine of their Conceptions is collected in no peculiar Vessel, but flows out of
the Urachus between the Chorion and the Amnion, and is there reserved till the
time of Delivery. But our modern more quicksighted Anatomists have found it now
in many of those Creatures who were denied it before. Yet do these very much
question whether it be in Women. Harvey who overlooked it in Brutes, denies any
such thing in Women. On the other side, Highmore not only allows it to Brutes,
but admits it in Women; and assigns it in them the same Use, which it is
vulgarly said to have in Brutes: That is, to receive the Urine of the Embryo
through the Urachus, and reserve it till the time of Delivery: And agreeing
with Vesalius, says it is easy to be found, if in a biggbellied Woman the
Dissection should be begun from the Placenta, otherwise by reason of its
extreme Slenderness it is easy to be broken. But here Needham well observes,
that Vesalius at the time that he wrote, had never dissected any woman with
Child (as he confesses himself in the same place) and therefore made a Judgment
of women by what he observed in dogs: And described a human Embryo wrapped in
the Secundines of a Whelp. But afterward, when he had dissected a woman with
Child, he changed his Opinion, and numbered but two Membranes in a woman, that
is to say the Amnion and Alantois, reaching the Chorion not under the name of a
Membrane, but of the whole Conception. In this Obscurity, the Quicksighted
Needham gave us great Light, who describes not any Farciminal or Puddinglike
Membrane, such as the Alantois in many beasts, but a bagg quite of another
Fashion, wherein the Urine of the Conception is collected and reserved till the
time of Delivery. The Secundines, says he, being received by the Midwife, let
'em be laid in their proper Posture, as well as may be. Then taking a small
Packthread, follow it as far as the Amnion. This is fastened to the Packthread
a little below the Placenta, the rest hangs free. If the Amnion be fresh, you
shall find the little Veins of it; otherwise they vanished, the Blood being run
out, and the Membrane cold. This being left about the Packthread, go to the
next Membrane, which if you prick withoutside about the Placenta, or tear the
extreme Edges with your Fingers, you shall find to be easily divided into two;
of which the outermost is porous and spungy, and full of little Veins; the
innermost very slippery, and extremely transparent, but void of Veins and
Arteries. That I take for the Chorion, this for the Urinary Tunicle. It cannot
be called a folding or facing of the former, because of the dissimilitude of
the Substance; but whether we look upon the Situation, Figure, or Substance of
it, it is the same with the Urinary Membrane of all Placenta breeding Animals.
But it is not shaped like the Alantois, neither is there any Membrane of that
Figure in a Woman. From which words it is apparent that there is no such
Alantois allowed to women as in beasts. But this also appears over and above,
that Needham rightly and truly asserted the inner thi^ Membrane next adhering
to the Chorion, to supply the place of the Alantois in women, and that the
Urine flowed out of the bladder of the birth through the Urachus, between that
and the Chorion, where it is reserved till the time of Delivery. And this
Invention of Gualter Needham's, Nicolas Hoboken found out, confirmed, and
described, in most Secundines, lib* de Secund. Human.

XVII. Within the Amnion, besides A milkie Liquor within the Amnion.
the Embryo, is contained certain milkie Liquor in great Quantity, very like to
watery Milk, somewhat oily, which Harvey calls the Colliquamentum, or
dissolved Matter, in which the Embryo swims, and which sticks to it, when first
born, all over the Body, and is usually washed off by the Midwife with warm
Water, or Wine and Butter.

XVIII. But here I think it necessary The Filth sticking to the Birth.
to distinguish between that Liquor wherein the Embryo at its first Delineation
swims, and that wherein it swims afterward. For the first is the seminal
Residue of the Man's and Woman's Seed, and is well and truly called the dissolved
Matter. But the latter is that, which when the former is consumed, and the
Navel being now brought to the Uterine Liver, flows through the Umbilical
Vessels, and is a Juice merely milkie, but watery, not to be called by the Name
of Colliquamentum.

Here by the way, we may take notice of the Error of Fabricius, and some
others, who thought that same unctuous Uncleanness sticking to the body of the
Child new born, to be an Excrement of the third Concoction, made in the whole
habit. As also of that Mistake of Claudius de la Courvee, who lib. de nutrit.
foet, writes that it is nothing else than an Excrement, falling from the Brain
through the Mouth and Nostrils. But it was nothing but the Ignorance of the
Nature and Use of the milkie Liquor contained in the Amnion that produced these
Errors.

XIX. Concerning the Liquor in the What the Liquor in the Amnion (...).
Amnion, there are two different Opinions of the Physicians: While some think
it to be the Urine, others the Sweat of the Conception. But neither of the two
have hit the Mark.

XX. That it is not Urine, appears (...) i^ b^ (...).
by this, for that this Liquor is found in the Birth new formed, in great
abundance, whereas so small an Embryo never discharges any Urine. Nay, for that
it is found in the Amnios before the birth is formed; whereas there can nothing
of Urine flow from the Crystalline Bubble.

XXI. That it is not sweat, is hence W^ S^.
apparent, that before the Birth is formed and perfected, or else from the
beginning of the Formation of the Birth, it is impossible that Sweat so
unctuous, and thick, and in so great abundance should flow from so small an
Embryo, which exceeds in quantity, ten times or more, the little Body of the
Embryo.

Moreover, if this Liquor were an Excrement, whether Urine or Sweat, or any
thing else, it would increase as the Birth grows. But ocular Inspection teaches
us the contrary. For in Sheep it so manifestly abates by degrees, as the Birth
enlarges, that a little before the Lamb is yean'd, there is hardly any
remaining; though it abounded at the beginning. Lastly, Sweat and Urine are
acrimonious Excrements, wherein if the tender Embryo, covered with an
extraordinary thin and soft Skin, should swim for nine or ten Months together,
it would be much injured by that Acrimony. As we find the Skin of new born
I^fants to be many times very much corroded by the Sharpness of the Urine: though
their Skin be much harder and firmer than the Skin of the Birth in the Womb.

XXII. Riolanus, Anthropog. l. Whether any Steam.
6. c. 7. acknowledges this Liquor to be the Sweat of the Birth; but c. 8. he
says it is the Steam of the arterious Blood fuming from the Heart, and so
turned into that Water that surrounds the Birth. Which if it were true, that
Liquor ought to be at the beginning, whereas there is none or very little blood
as yet, neither can be any or very little, but is more and more increased as
the birth enlarges: Whereas on the contrary it abounds very much at the
beginning, and from that time forward abates by degrees: And how little is to
be found in Sheep after yeaning, has been said already.

XXIII. Therefore this Liquor contained It is an Alimentary Humor.
in the Amnios, is no Excrement, but an Alimentary Humor, and nourishes with
its Matter, out of which at the Beginning is taken the Nourishment of all and
singular the Parts of the Embryo: And hence follows their Increase. For it is
the next Nourishment wherewith the Birth is nourished at first. For therein it
is found to swim, before the Uterine Liver manifestly appears, from which at
length being enlarged, the Umbilical blood-bearing Vessels manifestly suck
forth blood; with which alone, if the birth were to be nourished, it would for
some time at the beginning want all manner of Nourishment, neither would there
be any Alimentary Matter to supply the first Growth of the Parts. But hence
also it appears to be a nutritious Humor, and to be taken in at the Mouth by
the Birth, for that in Color, Taste, and Consistency it differs little or
nothing from that Liquor which is found in the Stomach of the Birth.

XXIV. In the first forming of the What sort of Liquor it is.
Birth this Liquor is nothing else but the Seed of the Woman (like the white of
an Egg) enclosed in the Egg, mixed with the Residue of the Man's Seed being
dissolved. Afterward when the umbilical Vessels are grown to their just
length, and entered the Uterine Liver, then is the milkie Juice carried thither
through the milkie Umbilical Vessels from the milkbearing Cells of the Womb,
whose whitish Color, sweetish Taste, and likeness of Substance little differ
from the Chylous Liquor, somewhat mixed with the Lympha, and which is found in
the Pectoral Chylifer Channel, and its Receptacle. Whence it is altogether
probable, that it is the purer part of the Chylus, somewhat watery by its
Mixture with the Lympha, carried from the Mother to the Hollowness of the
Amnios, through the Passages mentioned in the foregoing Chapter; nay it is
pleasing to the Taste, like watery Milk; for which we do not take so much the
Judgment of our own Taste, but Harvey's Proof from this, that almost all brute
Creatures that bring forth living Conceptions, lick it up from their young ones
newly brought forth, and swallow it; whereas they never touch the Excrements of
the Birth.

Wharton writes, that it is a Liquor Whether it proceed from (...) (...)
poured forth from the Nerves within the Amnion; perchance, because that being
deceived by the white Color, he took the milky Vessels to be Nerves.

Needham thinks that it is a milky Liquor carried thither through the ^eries,
somewhat mixed with the Nervous Liquor: which Opinion we resute, l. 2. c. 12.

XXV. Nicolas Hoboken also Hoboken's Opinion.
asserts this Liquor to be carried thorough the Arteries, though after another
manner. For though up and down in other places of his book de secund. Human. he
writes that he could not observe any blood-bearing Vessels in the Amnios: Yet
in his Treatise de secund. Vitul. he writes that the Arteries possess in a
plentiful number the Tunicle of the Amnios, and that in that place there is a
great Correspondence between them and very many small Glandules, not only in
great number besieging the outer parts of the little String, but the inner
parts of the Amnios: So far forth as by means of those little Glandules, the
Arterious blood carried thither, is affected and prepared, that the said Liquor
may be thence conveyed to the Hollow of the Amnios. But he does not add what
Alteration it undergoes, nor does he any way prove that Correspondence which he
supposes by Conjecture. Moreover in many parts, by means of the Glandules the
Lympha is separated from the blood, as Choler in the Liver, the splenetic Juice
in the Spleen, etc. But it was never heard that any Juice which is not in that
blood* could be separated from it, or that the Arterious Blood could be changed
into milkie Juice.

XXVI. Here we meet with one Difficulty, A Difficulty concerning the milkie
Uterine Vessels and the Umbilicals.
that is to say, that the milkie Vessels, as well those that come from the
Mother to the Womb, as those that run from the Birth to the Womb, are never to
be seen, But no Man will make a wonder of this, who sees how easily all
blood-bearing Vessels, even the Chyle-bearing Pectoral Channel, which is
somewhat bigger, ly hid when empty; and sometimes the Lymphatic Vessels being
emptied disappear, so that they neither be discerned or found any more. He also
that has observed how invisible those Passages are through which sometimes in
the Dropsy the serous Humors of the Abdomen, and in the flowing of the Whites,
that vast Sink of the Vicious Humors is emptyed through the Womb, from the
Liver, Mesentery, and other Vessels of the Abdomen. So also these milkie
Uterine and Umbilical Channels, without Question, are very small, and in dead
women evacuated, and thence they have hitherto so long layn hid, that they have
escaped the Sight of the Anatomists. Of which nevertheless there have not long
since been some Discoveries made, which some Persons not dreaming of the milkie
Vessels, have taken for Lymphatics, others for diminutive Nerves.

XXVII. Charleton reports that Vanhorn observed 2 milkie Branches descend
toward the great Artery, etc.
Vanhorn, a famous Anatomist of Leyden, in an Epistle to Thomas Bartholin,
wrote that he observed two milkie Branches descending toward the Separation of
the great Artery, extended to the Seat of the Womb near the Crurals. Something
also to this purpose has Anthony Everard observed in Coneys: For he writes that
in a Coney with young, he observed some milk-bearing Channels, arising from the
descending Trunk that run along together with the Spermatic Vessels to the
parts serving for Generation. Deusingius gives a clear ocular Description of
these Vessels; de hum. Corp. Fab. p. 7. c. 3. For, says he, that there are
milkie Vessels also belong to the Womb, conveighing Alimentary Juice to the
Birth, we have not only in another place, by most solid Arguments demonstrated;
but observed by ocular Inspection in Bitches Whelps innumerable diminutive
milkie Branches running through the broad Ligaments of the Womb, to the Horns
themselves, and the whole Body of the Womb. Moreover we observed in the Year
1655. a little milkie Branch entering together with the Umbilical Vessels
through the Navel of the Whelps contained in the Womb. And as in other
Creatures so there is no Question to be made but there is in Women. But though we
have not hitherto seen these milkie Conveighances to the womb, however it
suffices for the Demonstration of the Truth, that they have been discovered by
more quick-sighted Anatomists; and that also it may be demonstrated by most
certain Arguments, that of necessity they must be there, though they are seldom
conspicuous. 1. Because there is a great Similitude in Color, Taste, and
Substance between the Liquors of the Chyle-bearing Pectoral Channel and the
Amnios. 2. Because in breeding Women, a certain Chylous Milkie Liquor flows in
great abundance from the womb. As has been observed and seen by Andrew
Laurentius, Zacutus, Lusitanus and others. 3. For that colored Liquors being
swallowed down, come presently to the womb, which cannot penetrate thither so
suddenly through any other than the milkie Vessels concealed and devious from
the rest. Thus writes John Heurnius, that upon the giving of Saffron in Broths,
a Woman brought forth a Child stained with a Saffron Color. Also Henry ab
Heers reports, That a Woman having swallowed Saffron, within half a quarter of
an Hour brought forth a Child stained with a yellow Color. Which Color could
not possibly reach so soon to the womb and the birth, unless together with the
Chylus, it were carried thither, through certain milkie Vessels devious from
the rest. For if the Saffron were first to be concocted in the Heart, and then
to be carried thither with the Blood, it would lose its Color. Or grant it
still to be retained, yet it would require the Interval of some Hours before it
could come to the womb. Concerning this Matter see some other things said c.
18. whereby the remarkable Experiment tried by Herdotius in a Bitch with Puppy,
this same devious Passage of the milky Juice to the womb is made very apparent,
and there illustrated with other Observations.

XXVIII. Here we are to take notice Curveus hi^ mistake.
of the mistake of Curveus, who writes, that at the beginning there is a Humor
in great abundance collected between the Chorion and the Amnios, and that that
being filtered through the Membrane of the Amnion, penetrates to the inner
hollowness of the Amnion; and that this inner Juice differs not from the other,
but only in its thinness caused by the same filtration. Whereas the Humor,
which is found without the Amnion, is not contained simply in the Chorion, but
between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane; neither is there any at the
beginning in that part to be filtered, whereas from the very beginning the
moisture moderately abounds in the Amnion; and whereas the inner Juice is not
thinner, but much more thick and viscous than that which afterward increases
between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane. Moreover, the milky Juice of this
Amnion, being boiled, grows to the consistence of a Gelly, but the other
without the Amnion thickens without any boiling. The first is apparent by the
Experiment of Rolfinch, Lib. 6. Dissert. Anat. c. 32. Where, says he, We boiled
the Humors wherein the Birth swims with a gentle heat, when the thinner
Particles being consumed, that which remained at the bottom was clammy like
Glue. The Humors upon the Tongue taste somewhat sweetish, so that this
glutinous Substance is grateful to the taste; neither is there any thing of
luxivious or salt in it. But it does not only grow thick and viscous by
boiling, but also the Cold congeals it to a moderate thickness and viscosity,
by which I have seen this Juice thickened in the Umbilical Intestine to the
thickness of a perfect Gelly, and in the Amnion to the consistency of the white
of an Egg.

XXIX. Now though it may seem to be The passage of the Juice.
a thing unquestionable that this milky Juice is carried through some milky
Vessels from the Mother to the Womb, and from that through the milky Vessels of
the Placenta, within the hollowness of the Amnion, yet from what part of the
Mother, and from whence these milky Vessels proceed toward the womb, has been
hitherto discovered by no body that I know of. Some by uncertain Conjectures
believe that they are extended thither from the Thoracic Chylebearing Chanel,
others from the Chylebearing Bag, others from the Sweetbread. Of which, if any
clear demonstration could be made out, the Question would be at an end. Ent
most courageously endeavors to dispel this Cloud of Darkness, Apol. Digress.
5. where he writes, That this Liquor is derived from no inner milky Vessels,
but that it flows from the Woman's breasts to the womb, and that the birth is
nourished with the Mothers milk, no less within than without the womb: and for
this reason he believes the Teats of brute Beasts to stand so near the womb; to
the end the milk may flow from them more easily to the womb. But as for the
passage which way, he takes no great care: For he writes that the Milk descends
from the breasts through the Mamillary Veins, and from thence into the
Epigastrics, joined to them by Anastomosis, and through those flows down to the
womb. But that he may not seem to contradict Circulation altogether, he says,
That it may happen without any prejudice, that there may be a Flux contrary to
the usual Circulation through some Veins, if there be a new Attractor. He adds,
That it is for this reason that the Milk is generated in the breast so long
before delivery; that is so soon as the Woman quickens. So that if the Milk did
not flow to the birth, the Woman would be very much prejudiced, and the Blood
being detained for three or four Months together would be corrupted. Lastly, he
a^nexes the Authority of Hippocrates, who says, Aph. 5. 37. If the breasts of a
Woman with child suddenly fall and grow lank, she miscarries. For, says Ent,
when the Milk fails in the breast, there can be no nourishment afforded to the
birth in the womb, which for that reason dies, and is thrown out by Abortion.

XXX. But though these things are Ent's Opinion confuted.
speciously propounded by Ent, yet there are many things that subvert the
learned Gentleman's Argument.

1. Because that milky Liquor abounds within the Amnion, before any thing of
Milk be generated in the breasts. 2. Because it is impossible that the blood
should be carried upward, and the milky Juice downward at the same time through
the Mammillary and Epigastric Veins. 3. Because that between the Mammillary and
Epigastric Veins there are no such Anastomoses as he proposes. 4. For that the
milky Liquor of the Breasts passing through those blood-conveighing passages,
would lose its white color by its mixture with the blood, and so it would not
be found to be white, but red in the Amnion. 5. For that the feeble heart of a
small Embryo could never be able to draw this milky Juice from the Mothers
breasts: besides that, there is no such distant attraction in the body of Man,
and whether there be any such at a nearer distance, is much to be questioned.
6. For that the Milk, from the one half of the Woman's time, till the time of
Delivery, never remains in the breast, but entering the Mammillary Veins,
together with their blood, is carried in the order of Circulation to the Vena
Cava, as the Chylus reaches thither through the Subclavial Vein, which is the
reason it is neither corrupted, nor does the Woman any prejudice at all. 7. As
to Hippocrates his affirming the lankness of the breast to be a sign of
Abortion; for this in a Woman shows that either the Chylus is defective, or
that it is all carried to the heart, and none to the womb or breasts. Hence
Hippocrates concludes, That if formerly the Chylus flowed in great abundance to
the breasts, they dry up of a sudden, as appears by the lankness of the
breasts, much more will that fail which is carried in a lesser quantity to the
womb, for the nourishment of the tender birth, and that through much narrower
Vessels, and so of necessity the birth must dye for want of nourishment, and be
cast forth by Abortion.
XXXI. From all which it is apparent, That this milky Juice does not come from
the Breasts.
that milky Juice, let it come from what parts it will to the Womb, it does not
come from the Breasts; and that their Opinion i^ most probable who believe it
flows from the Chyle-bag, the Pectoral Passage, and other Internal
Chyle-bearing Vessels, though there has been as yet no clear Demonstration of
those Passages.

XXXII. Veslingius either not observing, The Opinion of Veslingius touching the
use of this Juice.
or ignorant of the nourishment of the Birth at the Mouth, ascribes to this
milky Liquor of the Amnion a use of small Importance. For he says that it only
preserves the tender Vessels of the Embryo swimming upon it, in the violent
Motions of the Mother; and when the time of Delivery approaches, that it
softens and loosens the Maternal places by its Efflux, to render the passage of
the Infant more easy: Moreover, he thinks it to be the more watery part of the
Woman's Seed, as we have said before Cap. 28.

XXXIII. The Amnios, Urinary The Amnios, Urinary Membrane and Chorion stick
close one to another.
Membrane and Chorion, at the Caruncle in Abortions described Cap. 29. sticks
close one to another (where they transmit the Umbilical Vessels toward the
Uterine Liver) but every where else they lie loosely only at the beginning of
the Conception; and when at length the Umbilical Vessels have passed those
Membranes, then through the flowing in of the Urine of the birth through the
Urachus, the Urinary Membrane begins to recede from the Chorion (which till
that time seemed to be the inner part of the Chorion; and between that and the
Chorion the urinary serous Humor begins daily to increase, as the birth grows;
so that near the time of Delivery it is there to be found in great quantity.

XXXIV. This Urinary Liquor Riolanus The Opi^ion of Riolanus.
denies to be there, and affirms that there is no Liquor to be found without
side the Amnios. And so Veslingius seems never to have distinctly observed it;
for he says that no Humor can be collected together between the Membranes of
the birth, by reason of their sticking so close together. But Ocular inspection
teache^ us that there is no such close Connection, but only a loose Conjunction
or Imposion one upon another. The whole mistake seems to have proceeded from
hence, That it was not known that the Urinary Membrane containing the Urinary
Liquor, lay hid between the Chorion and the Amnion, and drew back, and was
extended from the Chorion upon the flowing in of the Urine of the birth. Whence
many questioned whether any Liquor could be contained in that place: which
Cloud is now dispelled by Needham's late Discovery of the Urinary Membrane.

XXXV. We have many times seen The urin^ceous Humor sep^rated from the Liquor
of the Amnios in Brutes, where it is collected i^ the Alantois.
the said Urinaceous Humor contained between the Chorion and the Urinaceous
Membrane, manisestly separated from the Liquor of the Amnios in such Brutes
where it is collected in the Alantois: and in Bitches, the demonstration of the
separation is easy to be made. For if you take a Puppy by the head, as yet
wrapped up in its Membranes, you shall see these Humors by the means of the
Membranes of the Alantois and Amnion separated one from another, and the serous
and turbulent Hamour enclosed in the Alantois, and so to remain between the
Chorion and the Amnion, but that the other milky Juice is contained within the
Amnion. Then open the Chorion with the Alantois, presently the outermost milky
Juice flows forth, but the other milky Juice remains in the Amnion. And thus we
must conclude that the serous Urinary Humor in Human Conceptions is collected
and reserved between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane, but that the other
milky Juice is enclosed within the Amnion. And that we lately demonstrated in a
Woman that had almost gone out her time, suddenly choked with a Catarrh;
finding the watery Urinary Liquor to a great quantity enclosed between the
Chorion and the thin Urinary Membrane, which we then thought to be the
Alantois; the other milky Juice residing within the Amnion; though there was not
so great a quantity of it. This was the first body where I thought I had seen
any shadow of an Alantois, but afterward, by the preceding demonstration of
Needham, I perceived there was no Alantois in Women, like the Alantois in
Beasts; but that the Urinary Membrane supplied its place.

XXXVI. Now what this serous What the Serous Humor is?
Humor is, contained between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane, till our
very times, both Physicians and Anatomists, have been in great doubt: And this
in certainty begat 2 Opinions. According to the first, many believed that it
was not some Excrement, but a kind of Humor like Butter-milk, less nourishing
than that contained in the Amnion; and that the purer part of it served for the
nourishment of the birth, and was carried to it through the little Fibers of
the Umbilical Vessels extended thither according to Harvey's Observation: but
that the more unprofitable part was reserved for the preservation of the birth
till the Delivery; by its softness to defend the birth from External Injuries,
and to moisten and make slippery the privy parts in time of Travail. According
to the other Opinion, others thought that this Humor was the Urine of the
Child, discharged through the Urachus, and received by degrees between the
Chorion and the Urinary Membrane, there to be reserved till the time of
Delivery, to moisten the Female parts, and render them slippery, for the more
easy passage of the birth. For the latter of these Opinions we give our voice;
because it is altogether necessary, that all the parts of the birth being
formed, the Kidneys should perform their duty, and separate the superfluous
copious Serum from the blood. For the nutriment of the birth, that is the blood
and the milky Juice, is very serous, that being the more liquid and fluid, they
may pass with more ease to the birth, and be the better digested by the
new-form'd Bowels. But it was requisite that superfluous Serum should be
separated from the profitable Juice, to forward the growth of the parts, which
would otherwise be altogether serous, and render the birth distended with an
Anasarca. Now the Kidneys separate that serous Excrement, out of which it
slides through the Ureters into the Bladder, wherein it is to be found in great
quantity in Embryo's of five or six Months growth, wherein all things appear
more clearly to the Eye. But it flows not out of the Bladder through its
Orifice, because at that time the overstraitned Sphincter does not transmit the
Urine: For such was the Supreme Creators pleasure, lest the Urine flowing out
of the Genitals, should be mingled with the milky Juice which the birth takes
in at the Mouth, and defile, corrupt, and render it unfit for Nourishment. And
therefore another passage was provided for it thorough the Urachus, rising from
the bottom of the Bladder toward the Navel. Which though in Men born it be
consolidated in the shape of a Ligament, like the Umbilical Vein growing out of
the liver of the birth; yet while the birth is included in the womb, it is
always penetrable, and sufficiently conspicuous as far as the Navel; and
conveys and pours forth the Urine out of the Bladder between the Chorion and
the Urinary Membrane, there to be reserved till the time of Delivery.

XXXVII. They that do not agree The mistake of Deusingius.
with us in this Opinion, are wont to say, That this serous Humor is found
very plentiful between the Membranes at the beginning of the Formation of the
Birth. Even Deusingius himself following the Opinion of Harvey, writes* That
then it exceeds in quantity a hundred times any other Humor contained in the
Amnion, and therefore it cannot be Urine; but that of necessity it is a Humor
very requisite for the nourishment and security of the birth, though not so good
as that other which is contained in the Amnion. But these are mere Figments
altogether contrary to Experience. For in the beginning of the Formation of the
birth, this Humor appears not at all, but about the fourth Month a very little
is to be seen; and from that time forward, as the Birth and the Reins increase,
and the Kidneys do their Office, so much the more it augments. But herein
appears their mistake, that while they labor to defend their Opinion with
great heat, they do not distinguish between the Serous Humor excluded out of
the Amnion, and the milky Juice abiding within the Amnion; and by means of the
Urinous Membrane, and the Tunicle of the Amnion it self, separated from the
Serum it self. Moreover, they do not take notice that the milky Juice is that
which from the beginning of the birth is most plentiful, neither unpleasing to
the taste or smell; and is so consumed for the most part in many Brutes, that
there is nothing hardly remaining at the time of the birth. Whereas on the
other side, the other Serous Humor is not to be seen at the beginning of the
Formation; but afterward appears in a small quantity, and so augments by
degrees. Neither has it any thing of a whitish color, but gains both color,
taste and smell, as it increases, and at length, at the time of Delivery, comes
away in great quantity, and with a strong smell. Wherein if the birth had
immediately swam in the womb, the tender little body had suffered no small
prejudice without side, by reason of its Acrimony; nor less within side, for
that being continually swallowed in at the Mouth down the Stomach, it must
needs have extremely afflicted the Embryo.

XXXVIII. The less attentive consideration The mistake of Riolanus.
of this Matter deceived Riolanus also, who did not observe that there were two
and two plainly distinct Humors, of different Natures, contained between the
Membranes, but took 'em both together for one and the same Humor, which he
thought resided within the Amnion. Which mistake of his is apparent by what has
been said already.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Navel-string, its Use, and the Nourishment of the Birth.
I. THE Membranes enfolding The Name.
the Birth being opened, the Navel comes to be seen, so called from Umbo,
signifying the Boss of a Shield, because it is in the middle of the Belly, or
the Center of the lower Belly; by the Greeks called (...), and by Aristotle
(...), the root of the Belly. Some, with Galen, have asserted it to be the
Center of the whole Body, which Vesalius places better in the joining together
of the Share-bones.

II. The Navel-string is a membranous The Na^el, what it is?
winding and unequal Chanel rising from the mediety of the Abdomen of the Birth
toward the Uterine Liver, conspicuously long, and when the Birth is fully
mature three spans, rarely half an Ell in length; and about a fingers breadth
in thickness. Which longitude and laxity was requisite at first, to the end the
Birth now become stronger in the womb, should not break the Navel with its
tumbling and kicking; but come more easily into the World without breaking it,
and the remaining Secundines sticking to it, be more easily drawn forth.

III. It turns back for the most part Its Situ^tion.
above the Breast, and produces it self toward the left from the hinder part of
the Head to the Forehead, and hence proceeding to the Uterine Liver, is joined
to it by the Vessels contained in it, and the Membranes. Sometimes it proceeds
forward toward the right side, hence it winds about the Neck, and so descends
to the Placenta. Sometimes I have observed it turned back above the Breast,
toward the hinder Parts and Back, never coming at all to the Neck; for Nature
wonderfully varies in its situation. Even very lately I found it above the
Breast and Head, and evolv'd about the left Foot. Rarely as Skenkius observed
in a difficult Labor of his own Wife, that the Navel should wind about the
Neck of the Birth, with two or three Circumvolutions. More rare what Hoboken
observes of a Birth, whose Navel was wound four times about the Neck, the Head
being next the Placenta; which Birth having broken the Membranes, came forth
with the Secundine altogether.

IV. The Navel-string consists of Its Vessels.
Vessels, and a little Pipe containing Vessels, called the Diminutive Gut.

The Umbilical Vessels, which proceed from the Birth, are usually reckoned to
be four; one Vein, two Arteries, and the Urachus. But to these the milky
Vessels are necessarily to be added, through which the milky Liquor is conveyed
from the little Caverns of the womb into the hollow of the Amnion.

V. A Vein larger than the Arteries The Umbilical Vein.
rises from the Liver of the Birth, out of the Cleft of which it goes forth to
the foundation of the Vena Cava, of which it is a Sprig; and thence passing the
Navel, it runs through the Navel-string to the Placenta, into which it is
ingrafted with many roots. Harvey deduces its first Original from the Heart,
but erroneously; for it comes not to the Heart, but by the means of the Vena
Cava. And so its Original is rather to be derived from the Vena Cava, and the
Original of the Vena Cava from the Heart.

VI. It has been hitherto the vulgar The Use.
Opinion, that the Blood flowing from the Placenta, is poured forth into the
Liver of the Birth, and there farther concocted to the highest perfection of
Blood. On the other side, Harvey writes, That there is no use of the Liver in
the Embryo, and that therefore this Vein passes entirely through the Liver
directly to the Vena Cava; and so that the Umbilical Blood suffers no
alteration neither in the Liver, but flows directly through that into the Vena
Cava, and thence to the Heart, there to be dilated into a more spirituous
Blood. Riolanus asserts quite another thing, That the Umbilical Vein is twofold
in the Liver, and equally communicates as well to the Porta, as the Cava, and
that he learned it by manifold Experience. Dominic de Marchettis testifies
also, That he once saw the same thing: And Frederic Ruysch, That he discovered
and showed it in the Liver of a Calf newly calv'd. And so they believe that
some part of the Umbilical Blood is emptied into the Liver, and the other half
poured forth into the Vena Cava. At first sight Reason seems to persuade us to
give great credit to Harvey. For that the Ferment, which in Men born, by reason
of the harder Nourishments that are to be dissolved, ought to be more sour and
sharp, is made in the Liver and Spleen: But in the Birth, where in respect of
the softer Nourishment it ought to be more mild, it is made in the Uterine
Placenta, so that there is little or no use of the Liver and Spleen; nor of the
Lungs; but that those Vessels chiefly grow, and are reserved for future uses:
and hence it may seem probable that the Blood passes directly through the Liver
to the Vena Cava, without any remarkable alteration, and thence directly to the
Heart. This Glisson seems more strongly to confirm, who describes a certain
veiny Chanel in the Liver, which easily admits an indifferent Probe; open in
Children new born, and Embryo's; in Men grown always shut; which tends directly
to the Vena Cava, and is given to that end that it should bring the Stream of
Blood flowing through the Umbilical Vein into the Vena Cava. Which last cannot
be true, seeing that all the Spermatic parts, of which one of the principal is
the Liver, are delineated together; and that this Liver is first conspicuous
among the rest of the Bowels, afterward the Heart, long before the Umbilical
Vein, and in a short time grows to a remarkable and conspicuous bigness. But
though the aforesaid Reasons seem very plausible for Harvey and Glisson's
Opinion; yet that Riolanus and Ruysch were much more in the right, I could
easily prove by my own Observation. For that I might understand this matter
more certainly, I resolved to try an Experiment upon a Still*born Infant: To
that purpose having opened the Abdomen with the Breast, I blew through a Straw
thrust into the Umbilical Vein, and observed that presently I blew the Heart
and the Lungs, yet so that the Liver also received somewhat of the breath;
without doubt through the lateral little Branch taken notice of by Riolanus and
Ruysch, and inserted into the Liver or Vena Porta; which though in the first
Months it be so slender, that it is hardly discernable, nevertheless it is most
likely that afterward this little Vessel increases with the rest of the Parts,
and contributes more Blood to the Liver, toward its swifter growth, the better
to prepare and fit it for its future Office; which for some time it begins in
the womb before Delivery, as is apparent from the Gall, which is found in the
Gallbladder of a Child born perfect, but in an Abortion of six or seven
Months, and in the Excrements of Children newly born. For the Liver does not
presently after the Delilivery, as it were, skip to its office of bilious
Fermentation, but is used to it by degrees in the womb.

VII. The Umbilical Vein therefore Its Valves.
conveys the Blood prepared in the Placenta to the Birth; the return of which
into the Placenta is prevented by several Valves looking toward the Birth, and
sustaining the violence of the Blood, endeavoring to flow back. Nevertheless
these Valves, by reason of their extraordinary slenderness, can hardly be
demonstrated; but that they are there, we have just reason to conclude, because
the Blood cannot be squeezed with the finger from the Birth toward the
Placenta, but may easily be squeezed toward the Birth. Nicholas Hoboken writes,
That he could find no genuine Valves in the Umbilical Vein, but that he
observed several winding inequalities; and near the Placenta saw a Caruncle, or
rather a little membranous separating fold, so situated according to the length
and depth of the Vein, as to terminate the veiny spreading forth of the
Branches, and seemed to supply the place of a little Valve; which he calls
Analogous to the Valve.

VIII. Here we are to take notice of The Error of Cour^eus.
the mistake of John Claudius de la Curvee, who believed there was nothing
conveyed to the Birth through the Umbilical Vein from the Uterine Placenta, but
that quite the contrary, the Blood flowed from the Birth to the Placenta;
because this Vein grows from the Birth first, and proceeds to the Placenta,
therefore, says he, the Blood must first flow into the Placenta, and so be
carried toward its own End inserted into the Placenta. But not only the
foresaid Valves plainly demonstrate Curveus's Error, but also the trial made by
a Ligature, of which in due place. Besides, his Reason drawn from the Original
of the Umbilical Vein, is of no moment; for the beginning of the Production
does not argue the beginning of the Use; but its aptitude for any farther use.
Thus the Vena Cava, according to Harvey, is produced from the Heart,
nevertheless the Blood does not flow from the Heart, into the hollow Vena Cava,
but out of the Vena Cava into the Heart: Thus the Roots of Plants grow downward
into the Earth; nevertheless the Nourishment is conveyed from them out of the
Earth to the Plants, and not out of the Plants into the Earth.

IX. The Umbilical Vein does not The Umbilical Vein in Brutes.
seem to be ordered after the same manner in Brutes as in Men. For Fabricius
observes in a Bitch and a Cat, beside the Vein already mentioned, two other
Umbilical Veins that pass away to the Mesenteric Veins, and open themselves
into them. One near the Stomach, the other near the thick Guts. But Highmore
writes that he has found in Cows an Umbilical Vein always double. Perhaps also
there may be some difference in other Creatures, which we leave for others to
enquire.

X. The Umbilical Arteries, being The Umbilical Arteries.
two, derive their Original from the Internal Iliac Branches of the great
Artery, at the beginning of the spreading of the Branches; from which being
stretched forth upward toward the sides of the Bladder, and having got the Vein
in their Company, they enter the Navel-string, and pass through it with a much
more winding and looser Chanel than the Vein, and so these three Vessels,
sometimes in order lightly twisted, sometimes opposed one to another only like
a Triangle, pass thorough the milky Gelly contained in the Navel-string, pass
to the Uterine Liver, into which they are ingraffed with innumerable Roots, and
form therein a most wonderful Texture, and Netlike Fold, which Bartholine
seeing, says that those Vessels close one among another in the Placenta, with a
wonderful Anastomosis; which nevertheless is not very probable, neither can any
body demonstrate the truth of it. Neither Carpus nor Fabricius make any mention
of any Anastomosis; but only they observe about a Spans distance from the
Birth, a more confused contexture of these three Vessels, and a ruder
Contorsion. I my self formerly more accurately intent in the examination of the
Navel, found and showed sometimes a certain slight, sometimes no Contorsion at
all, but that these Vessels, as it were, placed in a Triangle, and almost at an
equal distance, disjoined one from another, passed directly through the Gelly
of the Pipe of the Navel-string, as has been said.

XI. Harvey writes, that these Arteries These Arteries hard to be found in the
Embryo for the first Months: yet formed and grow together.
are hardly to be found in the Embryo for the first Months, but that the
Umbilical Vein is conspicuous long before these; and hence he believes that
these Arteries are formed later, and sometimes after the Vein. But it is more
probable that these three Vessels are formed and grow together, seeing that the
Parenchyma of the Uterine Placenta cannot be sufficiently enlivened without
these Arteries, and roused into action; and also that there could be no use of
the Umbilical Vein, unless the Vital Blood were carried first through the
Arteries to the Placenta. But the reason why they are later conspicuous, is
this, because they are much less and slenderer; for which reason, in most other
parts, the small Arteries are not so discernable as the Veins: but that the
largeness of the said Arteries is not always alike, but narrower near the
little Nodes of the Pipe of the Navel-string, so that they seem to knit
themselves into little knots, is the Observation of Hoboken.

XII. Through these Arteries Blood The Use.
and Vital Spirit is conveyed, not from the Mother to the Birth, (as many with
Galen believed,) but from the Birth, by the pressing forward of the Heart to
the Uterine Liver, for the further Colliquation, after a more specific manner,
of the Blood flowing from the Uterine Vessels, and to the end it may be
concocted with it, that so Matter may be prepared and better fitted for the
Nourishment of the Birth, which being carried through the Umbilical Vein to the
Bowels of the Birth, may be more conveniently dilated in the heart of the
Embryo, and acquire new perfection of Blood.

XIII. Ocular Inspection clearly demonstrates The motion of the Blood through
the Navel.
this motion of the Blood. For if the Navel of a living Embryo (as may be
experimented in Beasts) be tied in the middle, the Pipe of the Navel-string
being opened, presently the Arteries between the Embryo and the Liver, are seen
to swell, and to be deprived of all motion; whereas on the other side the Vein
swells between the Ligature and the Placenta, and flags toward the Birth: which
shows that the Arterious Blood is forced from the Birth to the Placenta, and
the Venal Blood from the Placenta to the Birth. Or the same thing may be tried
after another manner without a Ligature, if you squeez the Blood with your
fingers through the Vein from the Placenta toward the Birth, for so it easily
moves; but it cannot be forced the contrary way by reason of the resistance of
the Valves: but the Blood is with great difficulty forced through the Arteries
to the Birth, whereas it flows readily, and of its own accord, to the Placenta.

XIV. Many there are that write No Anastomoses.
several things of the Anastomoses of the Arteries with the Veins, and of the
Veins with the Arteries, quite repugnant to Ocular Inspection, seeing that no
such Anastomoses can be found in the Placenta. Which Hoboken has accurately
taken notice of, who by the injection of Liquor has perfectly examined this
matter.

XV. Now what is to be thought of No Union of the Umbilical Veins with the
Arteries.
the union of the Umbilical Veins and Arteries with the Womb, let us briefly
enquire. Ga'en and Aristotle teach us, That the Orifices of the Umbilical
Vessels are united with the Ends or Orifices of the Vessels of the Wombs. So
that the Roots of the Umbilical Vein draw Blood from the Veins of the Womb, and
the Arteries Spirit from the Arteries. To which Opinion Aquapendens, Sennertus,
and several other famous Men, have submitted their consent: Others, confirmed
by Ocular Inspection, deny this union of the Vessels, with whom we also agree.
For there are several Arguments to show that there are no Union or Anastomoses
of the Umbilical Vessels and the Womb.

1. Because such a Union of the Vessels would bind the Birth so strongly to the
Womb, as not to be dissolved in time of Travail. Or if by the violent
strainings of the Woman in Labor, it should be violently torn away, there
would happen so many and such pernicious Wounds by the rending of the several
united Vessels, that the Effusion of Blood would soon be the death of the Woman
in Travail. 2. Because the Blood may descend by degrees into the Placenta
through the gaping Vessels of the Womb, to be prepared therein for the growth
and nourishment of the Child. But never any Anatomist hitherto could observe
any farther productions of the Vessels of the Womb, either toward or into the
Placenta, so that whatever has been written concerning this matter, has been
written by Conjecture. 3. Because that such a Union of the Vessels of the Womb
and the Umbilicals being granted, there could be no use of the Uterine
Placenta: for the Blood flowing through that continuity, nothing of it could
either come into the Substance of the Placenta it self, or be elaborated
therein. 4. Because the Umbilical Veins do not proceed to the Womb, but spread
their Roots only through the Uterine Liver, and from thence, and not from the
Womb, immediately assume the Alimentary Blood which is to be carried to the
Womb; as Plants by means of their Roots suck up their Alimentary Juice out of
the Earth. 5. Because the Arteries draw nothing from the Womb or its Arteries,
but convey Vital Blood from the Birth to the Placenta, and end there in little
Branches. 6. Because in the beating of the Umbilical Arteries, the measure is
altogether different from the Pulse of the Mother. 7. Because it has sometimes
happened, that the Mother being dead, the Birth has sometimes supervived in the
Womb; which could never be, if the Birth should receive its Vital Blood from
the Arteries of the Mother. For the Mothers Pulse failing, the Birth must dye
either sooner, or at the same time.
XVI. Hence the mistake of Vesalius The Umbilical Vessels do not rise from the
Uterines.
and Columbus is apparent, who following Galen, thought that the Umbilical
Vessels were not only joined together with the Uterine Vessels, but also by
continuation were derived from them, and extended from the Womb to the Birth.
Which Error is easily evinced by this, not to repeat what has been already
said, That in the Abortive Embryo seen and described by us, the beginning of
the Navel-string did not arise from the Womb, but from the Birth. Besides that,
in Chickens the beginning of the Umbilical Vessels, manifestly arises from the
Chicken it self, which being separated into several Branches, are extended from
the Chicken to the Yolk of the Egg. In like manner as in Vegetables the Roots
are not extended out of the Earth into the Plants, but out of the Plants into
the nourishing Earth: which is more apparent in Onions, which being hung up
without the Earth, send forth Roots from themselves.

XVII. From the foresaid Opinion Whether formed before the Heart.
proceeded another as absurd, That the Umbilical Veins and Arteries were
generated and formed before the rest of the Bowels, as Bauhinus endeavors to
persuade by diverse Reasons, as if the Bowels could not be formed without blood
conveyed from the Womb. Whereas among the more acute Philosophers it is
undoubtedly concluded that they are formed of the Prolific part of the Seed,
and that after their Formation already finished, the Nourishment of the said
Vessels proceeds to the farther part from those Bowels, and hence they first
grow to a greater length, and are extended to the Placenta.

XVIII. But here some one will make How these Vessels p^ through the Membranes.
a Query, How those Vessels, when they have grown out to that length, from the
Belly of the Birth, as to reach the Membranes, can penetrate through the
Chorion and Amnion to the Uterine Liver. I answer; It Is done after the same
manner as the Roots of Plants and Trees penetrate into the hard Earth, and
sometimes enter Walls and Stones, which Water cannot penetrate. For so the
sharp and slender ends of the Umbilical Vessels, insinuate themselves by
degrees into the Pores of the Membranes, and pass through 'em, though the Humors
contained within the Membranes cannot pass thorough. But afterward, when those
Vessels adhering to the Pores grow out more in length, the said Pores are also
more and more dilated, to which the Vessels are already united and indissolubly
joined.

XIX. Riolanus makes mention, out Dorsal Roots.
of Avicen and Varolius, before the Generation of the Veins and Umbilical
Arteries, of two Capillary Vessels, which he calls the Dorsal Roots of the
Birth; which are from each horn of the Womb, inserted into the upper and hinder
part of the coagulated Seed, through which necessary Blood is supplied to the
Formation of the Parts, in the mean while that the Umbilical Vessels are
strengthened; and which afterward vanish when the Foundations of the Parts are
laid. But that these are mere Figments is apparent from hence; because the
Birth is neither formed nor generated out of the coagulated, but melted and
dissolved Seed, and out of the subtle part of that, which is called the
Flower. Besides, these Dorsal Roots would be to no purpose, when the Parts
ought to be delineated out of the Prolific Flower only of the Male Seed, which
is apparent from the Egg, wherein though there be no Blood contained, nor can be
supplied from any other place, yet the Parts are formed, and being formed
generate Blood out of the obvious Alimentary Matter, wherewith all the
delineated Parts are nourished, increase and come to perfection. We should now
speak of the milky Umbilical Vessels, but that we have so largely discoursed of
'em already, Cap. 30. However, this I add, or rather repeat, that Gualter
Needham seems to acknowledge no milky Vessels in this place, for he assigns
another way to this milky Liquor: For that being concocted in the Stomach of
the Mother, and mixed with the Blood, and circulated with it through the
Sanguiferous Vessels, it is in that manner carried to the Womb, and there mixed
with the Blood of the Birth, and then that part of the Maternal Blood, that
wants not any farther Concoction and Fermentation, is converted into the Blood
of the Birth, but that the rest of the nutricious milky Juice, that wants a
farther Concoction, is separated from it, and laid up in the Amnion, as matter
of future Nourishment, to be carried through the Mouth into the Ventricle of
the Stomach, and there to be digested. Which Opinion we have refuted more at
large Cap. 30.

XX. The fourth Umbilical Vessel The Urachus, or Urinary Vessel.
manifestly conspicuous, is the Urachus or Urinary Vessel, a thin, membranous
round little Body, having a little hollow passage quite through it, rising from
the bottom of the Bladder to the Navel, in the midst between the Vein and the
Arteries.

XXI. This in most Brute Animals It is pervious in large brute Animals.
of the larger size, being manifestly pervious, and by the Observation of
Hoboken, furnished with no Valves, is carried to the Urinary Membrane above
described (for in lesser Animals the Passage of it is hardly discernable)
between which and the Chorion, the Urine of the Birth is emptied into it, there
to be reserved till the Time of Delivery. Hieronymus Fabricius writes, that
this Vessel in most brute Animals, where it rises out of the bladder, is but
only one Passage or Chanel; but where it farther extends it self without the
Abdomen toward the Alantois, it is divided into many small Fibers, which is the
Reason that the Urine flows into the Pipe of the Navel-string, but does not
easily flow back into the Urachus, though you endeavor to force it back. So
likewise Needham observes, That in the Bladder of larger Beasts there is a
Liquor found like to that which is contained in the Alantois, and that if a
Pipe be adapted to the Bladder, the Wind will be blown into the Alantois.

XXII. But in Man the Extension How it is observed in Mankind.
of the Urachus is observed no farther than the Navel only, beyond which no
farther progress of it was ever demonstrated by any Anatomists. And hence it
has been concluded by most, That the Urachus is only extended to the Navel, and
serves for the Ligament of the bottom of the Bladder, and that it is not
pervious quite thorough. Which Arantius asserts in downright terms: In my
Opinion, says he, that which seems in the Human Bladder to bear the form of a
Chanel or Urachus, is no other than a Ligament of the Bladder, which being
somewhat broader at the bottom, lessens by degrees, like an Awl: So that when
it comes to the Navel, it vanishes quite away, having no Cavity all the while;
but only as I conjecture, appointed to bind the Bladder to the Peritonaeum, and
to sustain it, lest when distended with Urine, it should compress the neck of
it at the subjected Parts. So Pareus writes that he could find no passage of
the Urachus in Man by all the Art he could use. Thus also Needham reports that
he could not find the least footstep of an Urachus in the Navel-string of a
Man; much less any Cavity of it. But Reason teaches us that the Use of this
Ligament is the less necessary, seeing that the Bladder is so closely joined to
the Region of the Share, that it needs no other Ligament, and therefore that
this part is designed for some more noble Use, of which Avicen, and Fabricius
ab Aquapendente better perceived, who say that the Urachus does not terminate
in the Navel, but pass through it, and go out of it, and proceeds farther
together with the Umbilical Vein and Artery, and that is to the Membranes
enfolding the Birth, and that in Brutes it opens into the Alantois, and conveys
the Urine out of the bladder of the Birth, and by consequence in Man it opens
between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane.

XXIII. But the Reason why it is Why it is not conspicuous without the Abdomen.
not conspicuous without the Abdomen is this, for that perhaps either no Body
was sufficiently diligent in the farther search of its Progress: Or else that
because of the extreme thinness and transparency of its Substance it is not
visible; which is the reason also that the Chyliferous and Lymphatic Vessels,
when they are emptyed are hardly to be seen by any body, and therefore by the
most skilful Anatomists hitherto overlooked, whereas when they are full they
are at this day easy to be found. Add to this that in Human Bodies when dead,
so thin and slender a Vessel, thorough which the serous Humor only passes,
which never stays in it, may easily grow lank and flagg, and so by reason of
its Transparency be hardly discernable from its neighboring Parts.

XXIV. Lately, when I was more Observation.
diligently examining the Navel of an Abortive Birth, of about seven Months gone
or more, I observed a Vein and two umbilical Arteries not twisted one within
another, but that a certain thick whitish Gelly, moderately condensed, was
contained in the Pipe of the Navel String, carried thither, no question,
through the milkie Umbilical Vessels, passing the Placenta out of the milkie
Caverns of the Womb; and that the said Vessels as it were placed in a Triangle,
passed directly through the Placenta, and was as it were supported by the Gelly
it self. I saw no other Vessels conspicuous in the said Pipe of the
Navelstring; but when I cut the Navel-string athwart, I observed in the middle
of that Triangle, a little drop of Serous Liquor spurt out, and the String
being a little more hardly squeezed from the Birth outward, six or seven little
drops followed: And these, as I persuaded my self, came out of the Urachus
invisibly crossing the white Gelly, together with the other Vessels.

XXV. Now that the Urine flows The Urine flows from the Birth through the
Urachus.
from the Birth through the Urachus, the Examples of many grown to ripe Years
sufficiently inform us, the Passage of whose Urine being stopped through the
ordinary Channel, it evacuated through the Navel, being as it were unlocked
again. Of which there are very remarkable Stories to be found in Fernelius,
Laurentius, Cabrolius, Hildan, Highmore, and many others. If this happens in
People that are of ripe Years, whose Urachus is dried up into a Ligament, how
much rather may it be ascertained that the same thing happens in the Birth, in
which this Vessel is more open, nor any way dried up. Moreover in an Embryo
miscarried in the fifth, sixth, or seventh Month, the Bladder is always found
swelling, and almost full of Urine, out of which, if the Urine were not emptied
the next following Month through the Urachus, the Bladder would of necessity
burst in a short time. For every day more or less of the Serum is separated in
the Kidneys from the Blood, and conveyed to the Bladder, and as the Birth
increases, so much the more Serum is separated of necessity.

XXVI. They who have not well Bartholin in an Error.
considered these things, have subscribed to an ancient Opinion, which they
endeavored to defend with many Reasons. Among the rest Bartholinus writes,
that in the Dissection of a very young Birth he could not find the Urachus to
be pervious, nor could he thrust in a Probe, which was a sufficient
Demonstration that the Urachus was not pervious. But whoever has observed the
Narrowness of the Urachus in Men, will never wonder that a common Probe cannot
be thrust into such a straight Vessel: And so much the rather, because at its
exit out of the Bladder, it passes among the Membranes with a winding Channel.
So that if any one could thrust in a sharper and smaller Probe, yet it would
never pass directly along, but break out at the Sides of the thin Vessel.
Besides Bartholin, Harvey also asserts that he never saw the Urachus pierced or
containing any Urine in it. So likewise Anthony Everard observes that neither
in Coneys, Dogs, or Hares, he ever saw the Urachus pierced, but always solid
and impassable, and doing the Office of a suspensory Ligament. Upon which
Regius relying, believes also the Urachus not to be perforable. But these
Mistakes are all refuted by what has been said before. The Opinion of Courveus.


XXVII. Claudius Courveus observing that of Necessity part of the Serum must be
separated from the Blood which is made in the Embryo, and that it does not flow
through the Genitals into the milkie Juice contained in the Amnion, with which
the Birth is nourished, and believing with the rest that the Urachus was not
perforable, he endeavors to prove that the Embryo, all the time that it is
enclosed in the Womb, discharges no Urine out of the Bladder, but that the
Bladder collects all the Urine, and is able to contain it till the Delivery.
But how much Courveus was mistaken, this one thing informs us that in
Miscarriages of four or five Months, the Bladder is then found swollen with
Serum, and always very full; which if it be so full in these first Months, in
which by reason of the smallness and tenderness of the bowels there is less
blood made, and consequently less Serum separated, what shall become of that
Serum which is separated in the last Months when the bowels are stronger, and
the Serum is separated in greater Quantity? Shall it be stuffed into the bladder
filled in the first Months? Surely the bladder must of necessity burst, before
the Birth be come to be six Months in being. Beside the Infant being born, very
often makes water, which is a Sign that the Serum flows in great abundance to
the bladder, and hence also that of necessity it was evacuated out of the
bladder through the Urachus while it was detained in the womb, by reason of the
Passage of the Genitals not being then open. This also is demonstrated by the
Effusion of the Serous Filth preceding the Birth, which is nothing else but
this same Urine collected between the Chorion and the Urinous Membrane, which
flows out upon the breaking of those Membranes by the kicking of the Birth.

XXVIII. Alexander Maurocordatus The Opinion of Maurocordatus.
proposes quite another way for the Evacuation of the Serum, which abounds in
the Birth. For he writes that it is not transmitted through the Urachus, which
he asserts to be hitherto so falsely called, but through the Continuation of the
Umbilical Vessels and the Womb, to be evacuated thorough proper Places. But
this Figment is grounded upon a salse Hypothesis, that is, the Continuation of
the Umbilical Veins and Arteries, and the womb; which we have refuted a little
before. Moreover if there be no use, as he presupposes, of the Urachus, through
what Passages, I would fain know, shall the Urine come from the Bladder of the
Birth to the Veins of the Mother? Shall it return out of the bladder through
the Arteries to the Reins; and from thence shall it return through the Emulgent
Veins, to the Vena Cava, and Liver, and so with a contrary Stream through the
umbilical Vein fly back to the Mother?

XXIX. For the Security of the The Pipe of the Navelstring.
Umbilical Veins there is a Covering wrapped about 'em, which is called the
little Gut, or the little Rope, or Pipe of the Navel-String; and many times the
whole Production of the Navel-String together with its Vessels, is understood
by the Words Intestinulum, or Funiculus. This is a Membranous hollow round
part, of an indifferent thickness, consisting of a double Tunicle (of which the
innermost is thought to proceed from the Peritoneum, the outermost from the
fleshy Pannicle) as well comprehending as clothing the umbilical Vessels (In
which Vessels, by reason of the blood contained, there are several Spots
conspicuous without side of the Tunicle, from the Vein broader and darker, from
the Arteries red or black and blue) with which it is twisted like a Rope: Though
this Contorsion be in some greater, in others lesser; and sometimes we have
seen the whole Navel-String contorted or twisted, the Vessels ascending
directly thorough the Gelly contained in its Hollowness. In the hollowness of
this Part there is a certain whitish Humor drawn from the little Caverns of
the Womb through some little milky Vessels, and poured forth into this Cavity
between the Umbilical Vessels, and is found diffused round about 'em, and ready
to descend from thence farther into the Amnion.

XXX. It is thought to enjoy some Some few Nerves.
very few Nerves like the Chorion and Amnios, for it is not altogether void of
Feeling.

XXXI. It has in several Places Knots like little Bladders full of a whitish
Juice.
little Knots, like little Bladders full of whitish Juice, which Riolanus
thinks to be generated from a Portion of the fleshy Covering, in that part
thicker for the stronger binding together of the Umbilical Vessels, by which
means Nature took care, lest the Blood should flow to the Birth with too great
Violence, and overwhelm the tender Body. But Wharton more judiciously observes,
that those little Knots, are little Teats, through which the milkie Juice
flowing into the Hollow of the Navel-String, distills into the Concavity of the
Amnion. Others believe 'em to be Dilatations or Burstings of the Arteries, but
contrary to all Reason, when Dilatations of the Arteries are caused by some
certain Violence, but these little Knots are generated of themselves; seeing
also that in that part there can hardly be so much Violence offered to the
Arteries, by which they should be dilated into Burstings. Moreover seeing those
Dilatations, called Aneurismata, are Diseases of depraved Conformation,
therefore they would not be in the Navel-String of all Births; whereas those
Knots are in all Births, in some more, in some less, and are not preternatural
Tumors, nor so loose as those Dilatations. Add to this, that they do not, like
these, vanish or flagg, upon the Effusion of the Blood, nor are they like them,
sometimes greater, sometimes less, but always of an equal bigness; and by the
conspicuous Spots, are equally distinguished from the Membrane of the
Navel-String, whereas those Dilatations are not to be discerned from the rest
of the Skin by any variety of the Color. Some, but without any Ground, think
those Knots to be raised by the Contorsion of the Umbilical Arteries. And
Nicolas Hoboken, believes that these Knots may be observed not only in the
Covering, but also in the Vessels included therein. And hence he asserts three
sorts of Knots, some in the String, others in the Umbilical Vein, and others of
the Arteries themselves. The Knots of the Rope or Tunicle, he takes to be the
Protuberances of the Membrane it self, caused by the Twistings of the Veins and
Arteries. That the Knots of the Arteries are round or orbicular, but the Knots
of the Vein, sideways only. And he calls the Inequalities of the Largeness of
the blood-bearing Vessels Knots. But commonly when we talk of the Nodes of the
Funi^le, we mean only those which are conspicuous without in the Intestine, and
presently obvious to the Sight.

XXXII. From the Plenty of these Predictions from thence.
Knots, the superstitious Midwives are wont to foretell what number of Children
the married Couple shall have; and if there be very few Knots, then forsooth
they pronounce Barrenness for the future. By their Distance one from another
they judge of the Intervals between Child and Child, and by the variety of the
Color, of the Difference of the Sex, and foretell many things as to the
Prosperity or ill Fortune of the Infant. Which is not only familiar among our
modern Midwifes, but seems to have been formerly practiced by Physicians
themselves; for that Eucharius, Rhodion, and Avicen, make mention of these kind
of Knots.

XXXIII. The Navel, when the Infant The cutting of the Navel-string.
is born, is tied with a strong Thread near the Abdomen, and about two or three
Fingers breadths from the Ligature is cut off and so left, till what remains
beyond the Ligature, being dried up or putrified, falls off of it self, and the
Exit out of the Abdomen be closed up with a strong Skin drawn over it. From
that time forward those Umbilical Vessels within the Abdomen of the Infant,
degenerate into Ligaments, tying those Parts from whence they proceed to the
Navel.

XXXIV. But as to the cutting of When cut to be left of a just Length.
the Navel-string aforesaid, Aristotle warns us that there is great Care to be
taken, which consists in leaving a just Length. For the Navel-string being
drawn too far out, and so tied exactly near the Skin, and then cut off, many
believe to be the cause in a Male Child of shortning the Yard; and in a Female,
of difficult Labors when she comes to bring forth. But if too long a part of
the Navel String be left, that the Caul will easily afterward slip down into
it, and so cause the Umbilical Burstenness. The Truth of the latter we have
found by Experience; but as to the former, we cannot affirm any thing of
Certainty.

XXXV. Now seeing that the use of The Nourishment of the Birth in the Womb.
the Navel is to conveigh the Arterious Blood through the Arteries from the
Birth to the Uterine Liver, and the same after Preparation, together with the
Maternal Blood flowing thither, again to carry through the Vein to the Birth.

XXXVI. Hence it was a thing First Digression.
decreed among Philosophers and Physicians* that the Birth in the Womb was not
nourished by any other Nourishment than the Blood brought through the Navel.
Which Opinion seems to be confirmed by the Authority of Hippocrates, who seems
to be of the same Opinion. Others altogether reject this ancient Opinion, and
inform, that the Birth in the Womb is not nourished by the Navel, but through
the Mouth; and confirm their Opinion also by the Authority of Hippocrates who
l. de princip. and de not. puer. plainly writes, that the Birth in the Womb is
nourished through the Mouth; And these believe that the Uterine Liver only
prepares after a Specific manner, that same Blood which forced thither through
the Umbilical Arteries from the Birth it self, and so remits it through the
Vein to the Birth, but that no Blood comes to the Navel Vein through the Womb.

XXXVII. But to decide this Question The Birth is nourished by the Mouth and
Navel.
so long controverted, my Judgment is, that these two Opinions are to be joined
together, and that we are to assert, that the Birth is nourished partly by
Apposition, and by the Mouth, partly by the Navel.

XXXVIII. At the beginning before Nourish^nt by Apposition.
the perfect Formation of the Umbilical Vessels and the Uterine Liver, the
parts delineated are increased and augmented first by Apposition out of the
remaining Seminal Matter, now dissolved into a Colliquamen, upon which the
little Embryo swims; in the same manner as Plants, when they first begin to
germinate from the Seed, take their nourishment and growth from the remaining
part of the Seed; as we see in Onions hung up in the Air, which send forth
their Leaves upward, and cast forth their Roots downward; and the same thing we
find to be done in Pease and Beans, germinating without the Earth in a moist
Air: For this matter is already prepared for the nourishment of the Birth,
neither has it need of any farther concoction, as being most natural to the
tender parts already delineated, Thus first of all the Birth is nourished by
the Apposition alone of the Seminal Dissolution, after that, partly by
Apposition, and partly by some part of the Seminal Dissolution taken in at the
Mouth, and first changed into Blood in and from the Heart.

XXXIX. But afterward, the Bowels Nutrition by the Mouth and Navel.
being somewhat corroborated, and the Seminal Dissolution being for the most
part consumed, and the Uterine Liver being come to greater perfection, the
Navel with it* Vessels being extended to it, and thence the milkie Juice now
largely flowing into the Amnion, the Birth is nourished by the Mouth and Navel.

The three ways of the nourishment of the Birth, are proved by most solid
Reasons.

XL. Nutrition by Apposition which The proof of Nou^ishment by Apposition.
is the first of all, appears from the swift Increase of the parts, whereas as
yet the Bowels are so tender and weak, that they cannot contribute so much
Blood to so swift a Nourishment.

XLI. Nourishment at the Mouth Proof of Nourishment at the Mouth.
is proved by six Reasons.

1. Because the Stomach of the Birth is never empty; but full of a Milkie
whitish Liquor, and a Juice like to it is always contained in the Mouth of it;
as is to be seen in Brutes. The same thing happens also in a Chicken while it
sticks in the Egg, in the Mouth and Craw of which there is a certain matter
like coagulated Milk; that is, from the white of the Egg taken in at the Mouth.
2. Because there are Excrements contained in the Gutts, which the Infant born
evacuates at the Fundament. Which without doubt are the remainders of some
nourishment taken in at the Mouth; whereas such Excrements could not abound in
the Guts from Blood alone; which some nevertheless have maintained contrary to
reason, who are refuted by Riolanus. 3. Because the Stomach presently after
delivery, could not so soon go about its Office of Concoction, had it not bin
at all accustomed to it in the Womb. 4. Because the Birth could not undergo so
great a change without a manifest prejudice, as that having bin nourished in
the Womb for so many months with Umbilical Blood alone, so soon as born, it
should immediately, and as it were at a jump, be nourished by Milk taken in at
the Mouth, and swallowed down into the Stomach. 5. Because an Infant is no
sooner born, but it understands to suck the Nipples, which it could never do,
had it not bin accustomed in the Womb to take in something at the Mouth, either
by sucking or chewing. 6. For that not a few newborn Infants puke up a Milkie
nourishment, before they have sucked the nipple, or taken in any thing at the
Mouth forth of the Womb; which could not be in their Stomachs, unless they had
taken it in at the Mouth of the Womb. A manifest Observation.
Example of this I saw in my youngest Daughter Ioane, who an hour after she was
born, puk'd up a great quantity of white Milk, to the Admiration of all the
Women that were present; in regard the Infant had not then either sucked the
Nipple, or taken in any thing at the Mouth.
XLII. Harvey de gener. proves An Argument from sucking.
this Nourishment by a strong Argument taken from sucking. The Birth, says he,
so soon as, nay before, it is born, sucks, as if it had done it for sometime in
the Womb. Having tried it as yet sticking in the Birth before it could either
cry or breath, it has taken hold of, and sucked the finger put to the Mouth of
it.

XLIII. This Nourishment is also Confirmed by Hippocrates.
confirmed by the Authority of Hippocrates. lib. de Carn. where he shows it to
be done, by Arguments drawn from the Dung, which Infants evacuate as soon as
born, and the first taking of the Nipple.

XLIV. If any one should ask with With what matter it was nourished at Mouth.
what sort of Nourishment it was nourished at the Mouth: We have said enough
already as to that point; that is to say, first of all with the dissolved
Seminal Liquor, afterward with the milkie Juice contained in the Cavity of the
Amnion. This milkie Juice Harvey found in the Stomach of an Abortion: And Olaus
Rudbeck has this Observation concerning this matter. Having dissected, says
he, all the Kittens of one Cat, we found in the Mouth, Stomach and Gullets of
every one a Mucilage and Viscousness like to that which was within the Body and
the Amnion.

XLV. Now this same Juice is by Taken in by degrees and swallo^ed, not forced.
degrees taken in at the Mouth by the Infant and swallowed, not forced into it;
for by that means such a quantity would flow into the Mouth of it, that the
Stomach would in a short time be distended, and prejudice the Infant. Not that
there is any reason to fear with Hennigius Arniseus, lest the Birth should be
choked by the copious Liquor wherein it swims, should it open its Mouth; for
in regard that it does not breath in the Womb, it draws nothing within the
Lungs; and if it should breath, it would be as soon stifled, with the Mouth
shut as open.

XLVI. Here Nicholas Hoboken A Question.
puts the Question, whether the Birth takes in that first Nourishment, by
sucking or only by swallowing, without any foregoing or joint Act of sucking.
But this is a doubt of no such great Moment to require a laborious Solution.
For when any liquid thing is taken in at the Mouth to be swallowed, after the
common manner of speaking, it is said to be taken in by sucking or supping,
whereas many times it is done neither way, only it is poured into the Mouth,
and so swallowed. And so there is no question, but that the Alimentary Liquor
slips into the Mouth of the Birth; In the mean time it is likewise as probable,
that the time of delivery approaching, the same thing is done as it were by
sipping, and so swallowing; whence it comes to pass, that the Birth being
accustomed to that kind of sipping, as soon as it is born, striving to sip,
easily learns the way, and manner of sucking. Which was Harvey's Opinion, de
genesis Animal. If the Embryo, says he, swimming in the said Liquor, opens its
Mouth, of necessity the water must enter its Iaws, and if it move other Muscles
(which is known by its motion in the Womb, which may be felt without by the
hand) what if we should think it to be the same use of the Organs of the Iaws
to sup up that Liquor? But that he may the better describe the same manner or
Action of supping, and that it does not touch the Liquor, by drawing it toward
the inner parts of the Mouth, he adds the manner how the newborn Infant begins
the Action of sucking. Neither, says he, does the Infant suck, by compressing
the Nipple with its Lips, as we by supping, but as if he would swallow it, he
draws it all into his Chaps, and by the help of his Tongue and Palate, as it
were by chewing, fetches out the Milk. For while he endeavors as it were to
chew, he sucks in the same manner as he did in the Womb. And this is that
manner of sucking which Hippocrates means, when he writes, that the Birth sucks
in the Womb.

Riolanus unwarily denies, that the whitish Liquour contained in the Stomach of
the Birth, is the Chylous Juice, but says, it is an Excrement of the third
Concoction of the Stomach: or a phlegm that falls from the Head; neither of
which it can be said to be. And therefore Claudius de la Courve, well refutes
him in these words, Lib. de Nutrit. Foet. If in the third Month, as he
observes, this Nourishment whatever it be, be generated in a certain Quantity,
in how great abundance shall it be generated in the sixth, seventh, and ninth
Month? But how much, if that Mucous humor contained in the Stomach be the
Excrement of all the Bellies? So much, as neither the Stomach of the Child, nor
the Intestines would be able to contain.

XLVII. The Nutrition of the Birth by the Umbilical Blood, these three
Arguments chiefly prove.

1. The Insertions of the Umbilical The proof of Nutrition by the Umbilical
Blood.
Vessels into the Placenta annexed to the Womb; into which out of the Body of
the Womb, the Maternal Blood flows through the opened Orifices of the Vessels;
and is therein prepared, and so conveyed through the Vein to the Birth. 2.
The great quantity of Blood ascending through the Umbilical Vein to the Birth;
within a living Animal, by tying the Navel string with a thread, and pricking
the Vein between the Ligature and the Placenta, is presently seen: Whereas but
very little can be forced through the small Umbilical Arteries, from the Birth
toward the Placenta, for that four times as much is drawn out of the Placenta
through the Vein, as is carried through the Umbilical Arteries. 3. Necessity:
For the Birth increasing wants much Nourishment; but its tender and weak Bowels
can concoct and prepare but Little; hence it requires some purer and already
concocted Nourishment, by which it may be speedily nourished, and by its
admixture the Nourishment taken in at the Mouth, may be changed into Blood.
Moreover in an Embryo the Chylus taken in at the Mouth, ought not to come alone
to the Heart, but mixed with the Venal Blood, as in Men born it is carried to
the Subclavial Veins, and in them and the Vena Cava is mixed with the Venal
Blood, endued with a fermentaceous Quality, and so comes to the Heart.
XLVIII. This Nutrition seems to be It is carried in the same manner in a
Chicken.
carried on in the same manner in a Chicken, whose bill adheres to the White;
but its Navel string or its Vessels enter principally the Yolk; which is
instead of the Mothers Blood prepared in the Uterine Liver.

But the more the Pullet increases, so much the more the inner white abates,
truly supplying the place of the Female Seed, which the Chicken consumes by
little and little with its bill lying in it. Now that being for the most part
consumed, the outward white is also consumed, supplying the place of the Milkie
Liquor. And then also the Yolk is manifestly wasted, as being that into which
the Umbilical Vessels are inserted; the Vein of which is a Branch of the Porta.
Which is an apparent sign, that the chicken at the beginning tender, and
requiring less Nourishment, is nourished at first with the inner White only by
apposition, then by the Mouth. Afterward when it wants more copious
Nourishment, then it is also nourished with the Exterior White at the Mouth,
and also with the Juice of the Yolk by the Navel. And the like procedure and
order of Nourishment, happens in Human Birth; which before the sufficient
perfection of the Uterine Liver, and Umbilical Vessels, and while the parts are
yet very tender, is nourished with the Seminal Colliquamen, remaining after the
Delineation of its parts; afterward wanting a more copious quantity of
Nourishment, the Uterine Liver now increasing, the Umbilical Vessels being
perfected, and the Milkie Vessels extended to the pipe of the Navel-string, and
the Amnion, it is Nourished with the milkie Juice at the Mouth, and with Blood
by the Navel, and so at that time enjoys a double nourishment, out of which
being mixed together, perfect Blood is made in the Heart. For at the first the
Seminal Dissolution sufficiently nourishes the Embryo, as being most analogous
to it, and nearest to its Original, and already prepared, and wanting little
Concoction. But afterward, when the Dissolution being consumed, the Birth
comes to be nourished with the milkie Juice, which is less Analogous to it, and
therefore has need of some Concoction in the Stomach and Heart, then of
necessity, some other former Juice must be mixed with that Juice in the Body of
the Birth, endued with a certain fermentaceous Quality, which when it cannot be
performed by the overweak Liver of the Birth it self, of necessity it must be
drawn through the Navel from the Uterine Liver. This Nourishment proceeds in
like manner in Plants. For Examples sake, throw a Branch of a Willow into a
Pond, first it is nourished with only Viscous water, in the mean time besides
Leaves it casts forth Roots from it self to a certain length, so that at last
they reach the Earth, and insinuate themselves into it; and so from thence
receive a firmer Alimentary Nourishment, which causes the Willow to shoot out
in bulk. Thus also the Embryo is for some time nourished with a Seminal
Colliquamen, and a more serous milkie Juice taken in at the Mouth, in the mean
time the Roots of the Umbilical Vessels from its Navel-string, put themselves
forth till at length they extend themselves into the Placenta, as it were into
the Earth, and so from thence receive a firmer Alimentary Juice, prepared
therein, and conveigh it to the Birth, for its swifter and larger Growth.

These things thus said enjoin Silence to Riolanus, who concludes that the
Birth is Nourished only by the Navel. But, says he, the Birth being every way
surrounded with Waters, if it should take its Nourishment in at the Mouth, it
could not be but that it must swallow its own Urine again together with its
Nourishment. These more modern Authors have observed, that neither the Mouth
nor Nostrils are open in an Embryo four Months gone. For which reason we
acknowledge no other way of Nourishing the Birth, but by the Umbilical Vein,
that conveighs Blood to the Liver.

XLIX. But Riolanus together with Riolanus deceived.
the Ancients was deceived in that, because he minded not the Difference of
Substance and Place; between the milkie Juice enclosed in the Amnion, and the
Urine without the Amnion, contained between the Urinary Membrane, and the
Chorion. As also for that without any farther Inquisition, he admitted a false
Proposition, grounded only upon the Opinion and Relation of others, as most
true, that the Month of the Birth continued shut till the four Months end.

What has been said, may suffice to convince Claudius Courveus also, who by
many reasons endeavors to maintain, that the Birth is by no means Nourished
with the Umbilical Blood, but only with the Liquor of the Amnion, whose vain
labor in the Proof, any one may see that reads his Book.

L. But before we leave the History Whether Tapping i^ a Dropsy, may not more
safely be done in the Navel it self.
of the Navel-string, there is one thing to be inquired into that concerns
Physical Practice, that is to say, seeing that Ascitic Dropsies are frequently
cured (according to the Directions of Hippocrates and other Ancient Physicians,
and the consent of Experience) by tapping which is usually done a little below
the Navel, somewhat toward the Right or left side, the Question is, whether
that tapping may not be more safely begun in the Navel it self, to the end the
Serum included within it may flow out. Andrew Laurentius, with whom Bauhinus
consents, maintains the affirmative with so much heat, that he prefers the
opening of the Navel far before the other way of Tapping, and affirms that the
included Serum may be easily evacuated through the Umbilical Veins. This
Opinion of his he confirms with four Stories of Ascitic Patients, of which
three were perfectly cured by the breaking of the Navel of its own accord, the
fourth by the Artificial opening of it. Then he adds not only the manner of the
Operation, but also diverse reasons to uphold it; of which the first is this,
Where Nature tends, there we must follow her, but many times she attempts that
Evacuation of her own accord through the Navel, therefore, etc. But Laurentius
mistakes in speaking so generally of this Section of the Navel, as if it were
convenient in every Ascitis: For we are indeed to follow where Nature tends; if
she seeks passages that are Natural: But seeing that in an Ascitis, Nature
seldom tends to the Navel, which swells in very few that are troubled with that
distemper, therefore that Operation is not convenient generally in all, but
only in some few. For in others whose Navel does not swell of its own accord,
that Section would be not only unprofitable, but also prejudicial, since it
would be dangerous to cut the Consolidated Navel, where Nature intends no
Evacation of the serous Humors that way, whence painful Convulsions must be
expected, and a Gangrene greatly to be feared, especially in a Body Ascitic and
full of ill Humors. Moreover if the Navel did not swell before of it self,
being opened by Art, there will nothing of the Serum flow out that way from the
Cavity of the Belly; because Nature does not tend that way, and therefore such
a section would be unprofitably, dangerously, and unadvisedly undertaken;
Lastly Laurentius judges erroneously that the Serum which flows out of a
swollen Navel being opened, flows out of the Umbilical Vessels; Seeing that the
Serum contained in the Cavity of the Abdomen, cannot enter the Piss-bladder by
any Passages, and to ascend through that and the Urachus to the Navel; nor can
it enter the Heart, and so be forced through the Iliac and Umbilical Arteries:
nor can it enter the Liver it self, and be conveyed thither from thence
through the Umbilical Vein, by reason of several little Valves that stop the
ascent of all manner of liquor from the Liver toward the Navel: Nor can it
enter the Milky Umbilical Vessels, altogether dried up, soon after the Birth.
Therefore that Evacuation cannot be made through any Umbilical Vessels, but
from the Cavity it self of the Abdomen; out of which, in some Ascitics, the
Serum collected in great Quantity, through the pressure of the Muscles of the
Abdomen, sometimes insinuates it self into the Navel, taking the same way
through which the Umbilical Vessels pass thither, by which means the Skin being
loosned in the Navel, there happens a watery humor, which being opened, the
watery Serum flows out, yet not without danger to the Patient, seeing that as
Hippocrates witnesses, such a sudden Evacuation is very dangerous, and it is a
hard matter for the Physicians to stop it in such a Case. Laurentius orders the
Navel to be tied, or else to clap a Silver pipe to the hole of the Section; by
which means the rapid Colors of the Serum may be stopped, and let out at the
pleasure of the Surgeon. But this advice savours of unskilful Theory; Seeing
that not only Reason but Experience teach us, how difficult a thing it is to
tie the Navel, when grown flatted upon the flowing out of the Serum; or to
thrust in a Silver Pipe, and keep it there; for if it be done with a Swath
brought about the Loins, it puts the Patient to more pain; if by a Ligature
about the Pipe, then the part tied will suddenly dye and corrupt, and the
Ligature will be unloosed.

CHAP. XXXIII. In what parts the Birth in the Womb differs from a Man grown.
I. THis Difference consists in the In what the difference consists.
diversity of Biggness, Figure, Situation, Number, Use, Color, Cavity,
Hardness, Motion, Excrements and Strength of the Parts.

This Variety is conspicuous either in the whole Body, or in the Ventricles, or
in the Joints.

II. For the whole Body is considerable. Variety in the whole.


1. The small Bulk of all the Parts, 2. The ruddy Color of the whole, 3. The
softness of the Bones,
of which many are as yet Cartilaginous and Flexible, so much the more, by how
much the Birth is distant from Maturity.

III. In the Head there is a great Variety Difference in the Head.
of Difference.

1. The Head, in proportion to the rest of the Body, is large, and the Figure
of the Face nothing so well ordered. 2. The Bones of the Scull are softer, and
the top of the Head is not covered with a Bone, but are spread over with a
Membrane. 3. The Bone of the Forehead is divided, as also of the lower Jaw, and
the Wedge-fashioned Bone, is quadripartite. 4. The Bone of the Hinder part of
the Head is divided into three, four, or five Bones. 5. The Brain is softer and
more sluid, and the softness of the Nerves is extraordinary. 6. The little
Bones of the Hearing, are extremely hard and large. 7. The Teeth lie hid within
their Little Holes.
IV. In the Breast there is no less difference Difference in the Breast.
to be observed.

1. The Breasts swell out, and a serous kind of Milk flows from the Breasts of
Newborn Infants, as well Male as Female, sometimes of its own accord, and
sometimes being squeezed though very gently. But no little Glandules appear
conspicuous, only there is to be seen some sign of a little Teat. 2. The
Vertebres want the Spiny Processes, and are formed out of three distinct little
Bones, the mutual Concourse* of which forms a hole, which admits the descending
Spinal Marrow. 3. The Heart is more conspicuous in biggness, and furnished with
larger little Ears. 4. There are two Unions of the Bigger Vessels, not
conspicuous in grown People, viz. an Oval Hole through which there is a passage
open out of the Vena cava into the Pulmonary Vein, fortified with a Valve by a
part of this Vein, and a Channel extended from the Pulmonary Artery into the
Aorta. 5. The Glandule under the Channelbone adhering to the Vessels, appears
of an extraordinary Bigness, and as it were with a threefold Little Glandule.
6. The Lungs are ruddy, thick and bloody, and heavier than usually, so that
being thrown into water, they presently sink.
V. The difference in the lower Difference in the lower Belly.
Belly, consists in these things.

1. The Stomach is more contracted; though not empty, but full of a Milky
Liquor. 2. The Umbilical Vessels go forth of the Abdomen. 3. The Cawle, hardly
conspicuous looks like a Spiders Webb. 4. The Intestines equal or exceed the
length of the little Body seven times. 5. In the Thin Guts are contained
phlegmatic and yellow Excrements; in the Thick Guts, hard and blackish; and
sometimes Greenish. 6. The huge Bulk of the Liver not only fills the right
Hypochondrium, but extends it self to the left side, and so covers all the
Upper part of the Ventricle. 7. The Spleen is very small. 8. The Gall Bladder
swells with the yellow or green Choler. 9. The Sweetbread shows it self
remarkably large and white. 10. The Kidneys are vaster in Bulk, and seem to be
composed of a Cluster of many Kernels. 11. The Suppositious Kidneys are also
very large, nor do they lie night the Kidneys, as in grown People, but rest
upon the Kidneys, and encompass the upper part of them, as it were with a large
bosom. 12. The Ureters are wide, and the Bladder distended with a great
quantity of Urine. 13. In Females, the Womb is depressed, the Tubes longer, and
the Stones conspicuous for their largeness.
VI. In the Joints there are these Difference in the Joints.
differences to be observed.

1. In the tenderness and softness of the Bones. 2. Because the Little Bones of
the Wrist and the Back of the Foot are gristly, and not firmly joined.
CHAP XXXIV. Of the Situation of the Birth in the Womb.
WHen I take out a mature Birth out of a dead Mother, I cannot but admire how
so large a Body should be contained within so small a Prison, and move it self,
which being once drawn forth, no Art of Man can thrust in again. Now therefore
let us observe how the Birth is contained in the Womb.

I. The Situation of the Birth is not How the Birth is contained in the Womb.
always alike, but many times found to be various, which proceeds partly from
the Birth it self, partly from the time that the Woman has gone, and her
growing near the Time of her Delivery.

The Head is contained in the upper part of the Womb, with the Arms and Thighs
contracted together, the Knees nearest the Elbows, the Hands in some placed
upon the Knees, in some upon the Breast; in others folded together; the Feet
are turned back inward, so that they touch the Buttocks with the Soles, rarely
with the Heels. Whence it comes to pass, that the Legs of Newborn Infants are
bowed inward, and their Feet in the same manner, which fault is easily
afterward amended by swathing, by reason of the softness of the parts.
Sometimes the Birth lies toward the side, and assumes to it self an overth wart
Situation, which is easily perceived by the Woman laying her hand upon her
Belly, as also by the swelling out of the side, and the weight falling that way.

II. Sometimes, one, two, or three The Inversion of the Birth.
weeks before Delivery, the Birth turns it self with the Head downward, and
lies much more toward the Lower, preparing for its Exit; which tumble is
performed in a short time, though not without some trouble to the Mother, who
takes that alteration for a certain Sign of her approaching Labor.

III. About the time of Delivery the Change of Situation.
Birth changes its Situation several ways; while by kicking and moving it self
to and fro, it seeks to come forth. Hence I believe it is that several
excellent Anatomists, who perhaps have viewed such kinds of Births in Women at
such times Deceasing, do not agree in the Manner of the Situation of the Womb
in the Birth; while some describe the Arms, others the Thighs, or other parts
after this or that manner situated in this or that place.

IV. Fernelius asserts that there is The Opinion of Fernelius.
a different Situation of Males and Females; affirming that Males lie with
their faces toward the Abdomen or inner parts, and Females quite the contrary;
and that hence it is, that the Bodies of drowned Women swim with their Bellies
downward in the Water, and Men upon their Backs. Which Opinion Riolanns derides
as ridiculous, and without reason.

Charles Stephens reports, that Twins observe a contrary Situation; and that
one looks toward the forepart, the other toward the hinder part. But this Rule
is uncertain, as is apparent from hence; for that sometimes Twins have bin born
with their Abdomens, Breasts, or Foreheads growing together, which could never
happen if they lay back to back.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Delivery.
I. THe Birth being conceived in Digression. How long the Birth remains in the
Womb.
the Womb, abides within that dark Domicil, till it comes to Maturity; that is,
till it has acquired strength anough, so soon as it is set at Liberty, to
endure the Violence of the Air and the Alteration of Nourishment. But how long
it is, before it acquire that Maturity, and how long it is before it ought to
come into the World, is disputed among the Learned. That there is a certain
time prescribed by Nature to all other Animals is vulgarly known; so that the
Contest is only concerning Man.

Hippocrates and Aristotle seem to ascribe no certain time to the Birth of Man;
for they affirm that a Woman may bring forth from the Seventh to the Eleventh;
with whom agrees the greatest part of the Crowd of Physicians. But most
commonly Human Births are detained in the Womb nine whole Months together,
before they come to their just Maturity; which Maturity nevertheless may
sometimes happen in seven Months: So that within both those times Women may be
delivered of Sound and Mature Children. Such as are born before the seventh
Month, are not ripe, neither can they be preserved alive; because they cannot
brook the violence of the Air, nor Alteration of Nourishment: Wherefore, says
Aristotle, The Birth that comes forth sooner than the seventh Month, is no way
to be preserved alive. But because there has happened an Exception to this
General Rule of Aristotle's, I think that instead of by no means, he should
have written very seldom.

II. For that some have lived that Children born within the sixth Month.
have been born before the seventh Month, the Relations of Physicians testify.
Avicen reports, that he saw one born within the sixth Month, that lived well:
Cardan writes that the Daughter of Peter Soranus, being born in the sixth Month
grew up to Maturity. Spigelius writes, that in Zeland he knew a certain
Letter-Carrier, who by the Public Testimony of the City of Middleburgh, under
the Certificate of the Magistracy, was born in the sixth Month, so small, so
tender and weak, that he could not endure Swathing, but was wrapped up in Cotton
to defend him from the Cold. We also knew a Girl that was born within the sixth
Month, whose Head when she was born, was no bigger than a large Apple, and the
whole Body so small, that the Nurse could hardly touch it, nor could it be
Swathed according to the usual manner; which afterward grew up to a just
proportion, and is now at this time living about eighteen years of Age.

III. Montuus reports that he knew Children born in the fifth Month.
a Cupbearer to Henry King of France, who though he were born in the fifth
Month, yet lived to a florid Age. Francis Vallesius tells us of a Girl born in
the fifth Month, that he knew when she was entering into her twelfth year. In
like manner Ferdinand Mena makes mention of two that were born in the fifth
Month. But certainly this is to be understood of the end of the first Month.
And so all these Examples quoted from Men of Credit, and confirmed by their
Testimonies, sufficiently demonstrate, that sometimes a Child born before its
time, may be so cherisht and hatched up by Care and Art, as to be preserved
alive. But these are accidents that rarely happen, from whence no certain
Conclusion can be drawn. For it is a wonder, when a Birth so immature, so
tender, and so weak, happens to live any time.

IV. Hippocrates also denies that They cannot live that are born in the eighth
Month, according to Hippocrates.
they can live who are born in the eighth Month: Perhaps because he often
observed it so to fall out in Greece. For which Regius gives this Reason;
because that the Birth being a certain Critical Evacuation, it cannot be done
safely and soundly but in a Critical Month; such as is the seventh: So that if
that Crisis of the Birth happen in the eighth Month, then of necessity some
powerful preternatural Cause must intervene, so much to the prejudice of the
Infant, that it cannot live. But if only the Critical Months, the seventh,
fourteenth, etc. are only to be accounted wholesome, what shall we say to a
Birth of nine Months, which however is no Critical Month, and yet most frequent
and most wholesome? What to the Tenth Month? Certainly there is no Effervescency
of the Body of the Infant, as there is of the Humors, which boil at certain
times, and break forth Critically? And therefore since there is no solid
Effervescency in the solid parts of the Birth, neither is there here any bad or
good season of Critical Evacuations to be observed, and thence no reason that
Children born in the eighth Month, should be thought less likely to live, than
those that are born in the seventh; seeing that daily Experience teaches us,
how that Children born in the eighth Month, live as well as they that are born
in the seventh. For if they are born in the seventh Month, and can be ripe so
soon, why not in the eighth? why shall not the latter brook the Violence of the
Air, and the change of Nourishment as well as the former? rather, why not
better* seeing they are more mature. In vain do many here allege the great
toil and tumbling of the Birth in the seventh Month more than in other Months,
by which he is so weakened and tvr'd, that he cannot brook the Labor of
Expulsion in the Eighth: for these are idle Dreams refuted by the Women
themselves, who assure us that they perceive that extraordinary Motion no more
in the seventh, than in the sixth or eighth, As vainly others fly to the
numbers of Days, Hours, and Minutes, confining the Exit of the Child to certain
numbers, when the incertainty of the days of delivery frequently delude those
Numbers. Lastly, the Astrologers in vain endeavor to reconcile this matter by
the benign or malign aspects of Saturn, as if Saturn ruled always; or at least
that there were no Children born in the eighth Month, but under his Reign;
whereas such Births frequently happen under the Dominion of other Benign
Planets, which seem to be secured from Saturn's Injuries by their Clemency and
Benignity. Besides, Asto the Influences of the Stars, how unknown and merely
conjectural they are, not only the fallacious, uncertain, and contrary
Judgments of Astrologers so frequent in their Writings demonstrate, and of what
little Prevalency and Efficacy they are, experience teaches; so that whether
they have any power over things here below, is not without reason questioned by
many. And hence though many, in explaining the meaning of Hippocrates,
Concerning the Children born in the eighth Month, by him pronounced
short-lived, have labored very much, and have studied to underprop and adorn
his Sentence with many fictions and pretenses of Truth, yet not only frequent
and daily Observation, but the Authority and Experience both of the Ancients
and Moderns overturns all they have reared beyond the Limits of Greece. For
Galen says, they are in a very great Error, that will not acknowledge the
eighth Month for a due and natural time of delivery. In like manner Aristotle
asserts that Children born in the eighth Month live and grow up. Nevertheless
he adds that the words of Hippocrates may be interpreted in the best Sense. But
many dye in several places of Greece, so that very few are preserved: So that
if any one there does live, he is not thought to be born in the eighth Month,
but that the Woman has mistaken her reckoning. Pliny writes that in Egypt and
Italy, Children born in the eighth Month do live, contrary to the Opinion of
the Ancients, and that Vastilia was happily brought to bed of Caesonia,
afterward the Wife of Caius. Among our Modern Authors, Bonaventure saw three
safe that were born in the eighth Month. So it is credibly reported, that the
Learned Vincent Pinelli, together with his Sister, were born Twins in the
eighth Month, as was also Cardinal Sfondrati, and both his Sons. Cardan brings
five Examples of great Men all born in the eighth Month, who lived; and asserts
moreover, that in Egypt generally they live that are born in the eighth Month.
Which if it has befallen so many Princes, we may easily conjecture that the
same as frequently happen among the ordinary People, who seldom reckon so
exactly. Riolanus relates that in the Island Naxus the Women are usually brought
to bed in the eighth Month: and Avicen gives the same Relation of the Spanish
Women. We find the same to be true in Holland; and that it is so likewise in
France, England, Scotland, and all the Northern Countries, is very probable,
because we never hear of any complaint against the eighth Month in any of those
places.

V. Now the reason why some are The reason of the variety in the time of
Delivery.
born in the seventh, some in the eighth, and others in the ninth Month, is to
be ascribed to the difference of Regions, Seasons, Diet, Passions of the Mind,
Temperament of the Seed, Womb, and Woman her self, by means whereof the heat of
the Womb increases sometimes later, and sometimes sooner; So that sometimes
there is need of a swifter, sometimes a slower Ventilation. Paulus Zachias
seems to Paulus Zachias.
accuse. Hippocrates and Aristotle of a Mistake for appointing so many
uncertain limits for sound Delivery: and believes that there is a certain time
for the Delivery of Men as well as of Beasts; that is to say, the end of the
ninth, and beginning of the tenth, and that all other Births either on this
side, or on that side, are all preternatural, occasioned by some Morbifick
Cause, which is the reason of so many weak and distempered Children. Which if
it were true in those that are born before the nine Month Term, then certainly
the Mother or the Child would be affected with some Morbifick cause, either
before or after the Birth; whereas in Children that come in the seventh Month,
which frequently happens, any such bad affection rarely happens, but that the
Mother and the Child equally do well, as if the Birth had bin delayed till the
end of the ninth Month; nor is the Child more sickly or weaker, than those that
are born at the end of the ninth Month, which are many times as sickly and
weak, as those that are born in the seventh. Now as to those that are born
beyond that Term, it has been controverted among several, whether any such
thing happen, and whether a Woman bring forth after that time. In the mean
while, it is a Rule hitherto held certain, environed with many probable
reasons, and the Authority of great Men, that some Women may be brought to bed
in the eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth Month, and that the
Children are duly born, by reason of the weakness of the Infant, or the Mother;
the Coldness of the Womb, scarcity of Nourishment, or some such like cause,
which may occasion Nature to delay the Appointed time of Birth, as many famous
Philosophers have persuaded themselves and others: Hippocrates expressly asserts
that Children are born in the eleventh Month. Aristotle admits the eleventh and
no farther, They that lie longer than the eleventh Month, seem to lie hid; that
is, that the Mother has mistaken her Reckoning. Petrus Aponensis, otherwise
called the Conciliator, by the Report of Cardan, asserts himself to have been
born in the eleventh Month; as if he had kept his Mother's reckoning in her
Womb. Homer makes mention of one born in the twelfth Month. Pliny speaks of a
certain Woman that was brought to bed in her thirteenth Month; and Avicen of
another that was brought to bed in her fourteenth. Of which we have another
Example in Alexander Benedict; I omit other Women that went two and twenty
Months; nay some that went two, three, four whole years, of which John
Schenkius quotes Examples, I fear me too fictitious, out of several Authors.

VI. But indeed these are all idle Learned Men too much deceived by old Women's
Tales.
Stories without any grounds, and proved by no certain Experience, but taken up
from the discourses of tatling Gossips, to whom some overcredulous Learned Men
have given too much Credit, to the end they might underprop these Vanities with
some supports of probability. For as I believe it to be most certain that the
time of delivery may be for certain causes delayed some few days beyond the
Term of nine Months, so I believe it impossible that it should be put off one,
much less many Months, seeing that in whatsoever Constitution of a Woman, the
Increase of heat becomes so great in the Infant, that it requires Ventilation
by Respiration; and for that cause the Birth must seek relief without the
narrow straits of the Womb. So that it is manifest those serious maintainers of
that Opinion drew too hasty a Conclusion from the false Relations of silly
Women. For if we narrowly pry into the Matter, there lies a Snake in the
Grass; either wickedness in the Woman, or simple Error in the Reckoning.
Wickedness in the Woman; Who if she have no Children, upon the death of her
Husband, that she may enjoy her Estate, leagues her self with another Man, and
being by him got with Child, pretends to be delivered, Eleven, twelve, thirteen
Months after the death of her Husband, that so she may lay the Child to him in
his Lifetime; which is a sort of wickedness so frequent, that the Courts are
full of these Contentions: Which is the reason that these lateward Births
seldom happen but among such kind of Widows, rarely among Women that live with
their Husbands. There may be also a simple Error in the Reckoning, for that
Women generally compute their Reckoning form the first suppression of their
Flowers: though it may happen from other causes that their Flowers may cease
three or four Months before Conception. So that if a Woman begin her Reckoning
from the first Suppression, she must of necessity mistake, and through that
Mistake the Child shall be said to be born in the eleventh or twelfth Month,
that came at the appointed time of the end of the Ninth. Aristotle believes
that Error may proceed from the swelling of the Womb. Women, says he, are
ignorant of the Time of their Conception, if when the Womb was swelled before,
as it often happens, they afterward lie with their Husbands and conceive, for
they believe this to be the beginning of their Conception, because it gave such
a Signal.

VII. Through the same Error in Error in Women's Reckonings.
Reckoning, Children are said to be born in the fifth or sixth Month, which
nevertheless are not born till the Ninth. For that some Women for the first
two or three Months of their being with Child: have their Flowers upon them
still at the set times; but afterward they stop; and so they begin their
Reckoning from that Suppression wherein they greatly err, beginning their
account from thence, when they are three or four Months gone: and so a Child
shall be said to come in the sixth Month, that was duly born in the ninth, and
this Error is apparent from the just proportion of the Child, and the strength
of its parts.

VIII. When a Woman draws near What happens near the time of Delivery.
her time, the Birth turns it self, and the Head declining, plants it self
before the Privity, distending upwards the rest of the Body: Which turning
happens a week or two before the delivery. Then the Orifice of the Womb, like
a blowing Rose begins to open and dilate it self, and to prepare a passage for
the Birth that is about to come forth; moreover the Infant kicking and
sprawling to and fro, breaks the Membranes wherein it is infolded, and so the
humors included therein flow forth, which loosen the Privy parts, and render
the Passages slippery; to make the passage easy for the Birth to pass
thorough. For it rarely happens that the Child is born and comes into the
World with the Membranes whole and entire, which once I saw in an Infant that
was very weak.

IX. This sprawling is painful to The cause of Expulsion.
the Womb, and this pain communicated to the mind in the Brain, presently the
Animal Spirits are sent in great Quantity through the Nerves to the pursing
Fibers of the Womb, and the Muscles of the Abdomen, which being contracted
together, cause a strong Expulsion of the Birth.

X. The Infant comes forth with A natural Birth.
the Head foremost according to Nature, says Hippocrates. Lib. de. not. puer.

XI. Whatever other manner it offers Unnatural.
it self to come forth in, that Birth cannot be said to be Natural; and the
more hazardous it is, by how much the posture of the Child is more unusual. For
if it offers one Thigh or one Arm, it makes a stop, unless that Member be
thrust back and the Birth turned. If two Thighs be offered together, the
delivery may go forward, but with great difficulty, if the Buttocks offer
themselves first, the delivery goes not forward, unless very seldom, sometimes
the Birth comes forth doubled, but with great difficulty and great danger. If
the Sides or Belly offer themselves first, the Delivery is impossible.

How the mature and large Birth should be able to pass through the Straits of
the Bones of the Pelvis, stuffed with Muscles and other parts, Galen admires, but
dares not explain. But it is done, by reason that the Bones of the Share, the
Os Sacrum, and the Hip-Bone, their Cartilages being loosened, separate a little
one from another, as we shall show more at large. L. ^. c. 16.

XII. However it be, or at whatever Nature expels the Birth out of the Womb
through the Uterine Sheath.
time the Delivery happens, Nature expels the Birth out of the Womb through the
Uterine Sheath, or at least endeavors to do it, and that is the only passage
appointed for the Expulsion of the Birth. I say, or at least endeavors to do
it: for sometimes it happens, that that same passage being stopped, the Child
cannot be expelled by Nature, but must be drawn forth by the skill of the
Surgeon; and that through the passage already mentioned by the hand, either of
the Midwife or Surgeon, or by the Assistance of Hooks, which we have tried with
success in many Women, or else by Section made in the Womb and Abdomen, which
is called the Caesarian Delivery, concerning which Francis Rousset has written
a famous Treatise. But it is rarely seen that Nature her self attempts
Expulsion, through unwonted Passages. Of which nevertheless Bartholin relates a
most Remarkable Story, Lib. de insolit. part. viis. Of a Woman that evacuated
several little Bones of a Human Birth, first of all out of her Navel swelling
and dissected, next out of an Ulcer in her left Ilium, and this not all at
once, which increases the wonder, nor all together, but at several times, and
at several years distance; and those so many, that it was thought they were
enough now for the Bodies of Twins. To which Story he adds a long and splendid
Explanation; and moreover out of several Authors brings many other Examples of
corrupted Births, evacuated out of the Navel, Hypochondriums, Ilium's opened,
the Fundament, and other unusual Passages; for which we refer the Reader to
Bartholin himself.

XIII. In the mean time, there are Somethings admirable to be observed.
the Admirable and Stupendous works of Nature, seeing that the Birth must of
necessity slip into the Cavity of the Abdomen; through the broken, ulcerated,
or any other way torn and lacerated Womb; or else the Conception in the Tube
must have miscarryed thither, out of the Tube, being broken through the
Thinness of the Membrane of the Tube, before it could cause those Exulcerations
by its corruption in the parts of the Abdomen. But because many such Women have
been restored to their former health, this is most of all to be wondered at,
that those inward Wounds and Ulcers of the Womb and Tube, should heal again of
themselves, and that the Birth putrefying in that Place, should not withal
putrify the Guts, Bladder, Mesentery, and other Bowels of the Abdomen, and
rather hasten the Death of those unfortunate Women, than such an unwonted
Delivery.

XIV. We are now to return to the The cause of the (...) (...) of the (...).
Causes of Delivery, among which in a natural Delivery we have reckoned the
kicking and stirring of the Infant, which is assigned to three Causes, that is
to say, the narrowness of the Place, the Corruption of the Nourishment, and the
want of it.

XV. The narrowness of the Place Not the narrowness of the place.
signifies nothing to the purpose: For there are many Women, who having before
brought forth very large Births, afterward are delivered of a little one, and
then a great one again.

Now the Place was big enough for that same little one to have stayed longer,
and there was Nourishment sufficient in it for its larger growth, where there
had bin a great one before. Moreover as the Infant grows, so its Domicel the
Womb enlarges, which if any cause obstruct, the Birth dies before matur'd, and
abortion happens.

XVI. Nor can any such thing be Not the Corruption of Nourishment.
proved from the Corruption of Nourishment; seeing there is no Corruption of
it, but that it is as equally good at the end, as at the beginning. If any one
affirm the Urine of the Birth to be mixed with the Nourishment, we shall remit
him to the preceding 30, 31, 32. Chapters. Besides, the Birth could not be
rendered more vigorous, by the corruption of the Nourishment, to kick and
sprawl, but weaker and more infirm. Some there are who with Regius add over and
above, that the Nourishment becomes unpleasant to the Birth by reason of its
Corruption, and therefore refusing such ungrateful Nourishment it kicks and
spurns, and seeks to get forth. But there can be no Depravation of the
Nourishment, and therefore this Opinion presupposes some acute Judgment in the
Birth, to distinguish between the goodness and badness, pleasantness and
ungratefulness of the Nourishment. But what Judgment an Infant has, I leave to
any one to consider. For we find Children new born take Sack, Milk, Oil of
sweet Almonds, Ale, Syrups, powder of Bezoar, etc. without any Distinction, and
therefore it is not likely it should be able to distinguish the taste of
Nourishment in the Womb.

XVII. Neither can it be defect of Not defect of Nourishment.
Nourishment which causes this sprawling; which would rather occasion weakness
and immobility: for all living things languish for want of Nourishment; and
motion ceasing by degrees, at length they dye. Moreover we see many Infants new
born that are strong enough, and yet for the first two or three days, receive
little Nourishment, which if they had wanted in the Womb, they would not have
been so strong, but weak and languishing, and would have been greedy of
Nourishment when offered. And to this, that in many Women with Child that have
hardly Bread to eat, the Birth does not only sprawl, but is so weak, that its
motion can hardly be felt in the Womb: but let the Mother feed heartily, the
Birth is refreshed, and moves briskly in the Womb. Which is a certain sign that
the stronger Motion of the Infant proceeds from a sufficient supply of
Nourishment, and not from want of Nourishment, which would rather retard than
promote delivery.

XVIII. Claudius Courveus finding Whether abundance of Excrements.
these causes, did not promote delivery, has contrived another, which is,
redundancy of Excrement, which he says is sometimes so much, that the Birth
constrained by necessity of Evacuation, never leaves kicking till it get forth.
Which fiction of Courveus is contrary to Reason and Experience. The one
teaching us that there is no obstruction to hinder the Birth from Evacuating in
the Womb. And it is apparent that very little Excrement can redound, in regard
the Infant takes no solid Nourishment in the Womb. Then Experience tells us,
that a new born Infant does not piss all the first day, and for three days
together many times never evacuates by Stool, which it would do as soon as
born, were the Opinion of Courveus true.

XIX. Therefore there must be another The true cause.
cause of this strenuous kicking and ensuing Labor, which is the necessity of
Breathing and Cooling. For at first the heat of the Embryo is but small,
showing it self like a little spark, that has no need of cooling but of
Augmentation. Now this heat increasing; the Actions and Motions of the Birth
increase. At length this Heat increases to that degree, that it wants
Ventilation and cooling: which being denied the Infant begins to be more and
more disturbed by the heat, and through that disturbance vehemently to move and
kick, and by means of that motion to excite the Uterine Humors to an
Effervescency, and make way for it self into a freer Air. But that increase of
heat happens also in a small Birth, which has stayed its due time in the Womb,
as well as in a large Infant. So that the cause of Calcitration and delivery is
the same in a small as in a large Infant if ripened in the Womb.

XX. Thus in very hard winter A Similitude.
Weather, suppose a Man almost nummed and frozen to death, should be enclosed
and shut up in a narrow close Chamber every way stopped up; and there should be
a great Fire made in that Chamber. First the heat of that place would Excite
and Augment the remaining heat of the enclosed Body. Hence the enclosed Body
would begin to come to himself again, and the heat would extremely refresh and
revive him. And set at liberty his benumbed and frozen Joints, so that he might
be able to walk and eat. But afterward the heat of the Body increasing beyond
due Mediocrity, though he had the choicest and most plentiful Nourishment by
him, he would begin to be troubled and sweat. Lastly, Extremity of heat
increasing that anxiety: he begins to turn himself every way, and violently
breaks open the door for more Air, afraid of being stifled.

XXI. Thus in the Birth this same The (...) of Refreshment and Respiration is
the cause of Calcitration.
necessity of Refreshment and Respiration, is the only true and chief cause of
Calcitration and Delivery. For when the heat of the Heart is so increased, as
to generate hotter Blood to be now twice dilated in both Ventricles, of
necessity, it must be cooled by Respiration in the Lungs; which Respiration
being denied, the Infant is Suffocated, as many times it happens when it sticks
in hard Labors before it can be expelled. Now that the necessity of breathing
forces the Birth to Calcitration, is apparent from hence, for that as soon as
it is born and enjoys a free Air, it presently breaths, and oftentimes cries;
to which Respiration it is not forced by the ambient Air, but by the necessity
of Respiration, besides which there can be no other cause imagined, that can
compel the Infant to breath.

XXII. Harvey believes this necessity The Opi^on of Harvey, and two Questions.
of Respiration, is not the cause of Calcitration and delivery; for proof
whereof he puts two Questions to be resolved by the Learned. First, How the
Embryo comes to remain in the Womb after the seventh Month; whereas being
expelled at that time it presently breaths; nay cannot live an hour without
Respiration; but remaining in the Womb, it abides alive and healthy beyond the
ninth Month without the help of Respiration?

To which I answer what I have hinted before, that according to the temper of
the Woman, her Seed, her Womb, her Diet, the heat augments in some Births
sooner, in some later, which if they increase to that bigness in the seventh
Month, that refrigeration by Respiration is necessary, then the Birth breaks
its prison by Calcitration, and such a Birth, whatever Harvey thinks, cannot
abide alive and sound till the eighth or ninth Month; for the Birth that abides
so long in the Womb, is not come to that degree of heat in the seventh Month,
as to want Refrigeration.

XXIII. Harvey's other Question Harvey's other Question.
is, How it comes to pass, that a new born Child, covered with all its
Membranes, and as yet remaining in its water, shall live for some hours without
danger of Suffocation; but being stripped of its Secundines, if once it has drawn
the Air within its Lungs, cannot afterward live a Moment without it, but
presently dies?

To this Question of two Members I answer, that the first part perhaps may be
true of an immature Birth thrown forth by Abortion, by reason of its small heat
requiring little Refrigeration: but of a Mature Birth, brought forth in due
time, it cannot be true; there being so much heat in it, as must of necessity
be cooled by Respiration; and therefore such a Birth being included within the
Membranes, cannot live for some hours, as Harvey supposes, nor half an hour, no
not a quarter of an hour; And this the Country People know by experience, that
a Colt or a Mare, being once brought forth, if it remain included within its
Membranes, I will not say an hour, or half an hour, but a very little while,
half a quarter of an hour or less, is presently stifled, and therefore they
take care that some body stand by, while the Dam has brought forth, to break
the Membranes, which if no Body be present, the Dam often does with her Mouth:
And which all other Creatures that bring forth living Conceptions generally do,
else the Birth is stifled. But grant the Birth may live half an hour within the
Membranes, this makes not against us. For the external Air presently
refrigerates the Air included in the Membranes; which being so refrigerated,
the Birth for some time may enjoy the benefit of the cool Air: but not long,
for that the hot Air sent from the Lungs with the vapourous Breath would in a
short time fill the the whole Capacity of the Membranes, and so the Birth for
want of cooler Air must of necessity be stifled.

XXIV. To the latter part of Harvey' s That Birth may live a while without
Respiration.
Question I answer, that so long as no Air is admitted into the Lungs, the
Birth may yet live without Respiration, because a small quantity of Blood may
be forced out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, into the thick Lungs; and
hence the dilated Blood in the right Ventricle, is not carried to the left; but
through a Channel, by which the Pulmonary Artery is joined to the Aorta in the
Birth; it flows into the Aorta, into which for some time, as being less hot and
spirituous, it may flow without Refrigeration, because it is not therein
dilated again. But when by the Inspiring of the Air, the substance of the Lungs
becomes to be dilated, then the Compressions of the Vessels being all taken
away, the spirituous Blood in great quantity is forced from the right Ventricle
of the Heart, into all the open Vessels of the Lungs, which unless it should be
somewhat thickened by the Inspiration of the cold Air, could not flow to the
left Ventricle, there to be again dilated, but would stuff up the whole Body of
the Lungs, and so the Creature would be stifled. And this is the reason that
when the Birth has once breathed, it cannot afterward live, though never so
little a while without Respiration. And therefore that is certainly to be
exploded which Bauschius, the Writer of the German Me^icophysical Ephemerides,
cites out of Patterson Hayn, written to him by Gerges, a certain Hungarian
Shepherd. In Hungary, says he, a Woman near her time, in the year 1669. began
to fall in labor, insomuch that the Child had already thrust forth his Head
without the Womb. But the Birth having cried twice or thrice, was drawn back
into the Womb, and there remained a fortnight longer, after which the Woman was
duly brought to bed.

Now how far this idle story is from Truth, a blind Man may see. For when the
Birth has once thrust forth its Head without the Womb, unless either by the
force of the Womb; its own striving, or the hand of the Midwife, the whole Body
either come forth or be drawn out, the Orifice of the Privity so strengthens it
self about the neck of it, that it is presently killed. But by reason of the
extraordinary narrowness of the Capacity of the Womb, it can never return back
to the inner parts, especially after it has sent forth two or three Cries. This
let who will believe, and let Patterson Hayn, and Gerges the Shepherd believe
it as long as they please, who have suffered such a Fable to be imposed upon by
Tattling Gossips, and ventured so slightly to divulge it for a Truth.

XXV. Lastly it maybe objected against An Objection.
our foresaid Opinion, that it is not probable that the necessity of
Respiration forces the Birth to a stronger Calcitration, when the Birth in the
Womb breaths sufficiently, considering the Proportion of its heat. For
Vessingius, resting upon the Authority of Hippocrates, writes that the Lungs of
the Birth enclosed in the Womb, by a gentle dilation draws something of Air,
and for proof of this, he alleges the Infants being often heard to cry in the
Womb. Examples of which are produced by Albertus Magnus, Libavius, Solin,
Camerarius, Sennertus, Bartholin, and Deusingius. Also the Learned Velthusius
believes, that in this case the Air penetrates to the places where the Infant
lies, and that it is attracted by the Infant by Inspiration. Nay the Honorable
Robert Boil, in Experim. Physic. Mathem. Exercit. 41. seems to confirm this
crying by a most memorable Example. I knew a certain Lady, says he, who was
with Child some years since; at what time her friends bemoaned her Condition to
me, that she was very much terrified with the Crying of her little Infant.

XXVI. But whoever they were, All in an Error, who write of Respiration and
crying in the Womb.
they were all in an Error that wrote of the Respiration, and crying of the
Birth in the Womb. For first the Relations of these things are taken from the
vain stories of idle and unskilful Women and Men; who either conceive Whimsies
of their own; or else on set purpose persuade others into a belief of these
Vanities. Either to move the Rich to Pity (for generally the poor are they that
only hear these Noises) or else to get themselves a name among the Vulgar, by
establishing some Prophecy upon these feigned wonders. But we shall hardly read
of any person of Reputation, that ever heard this imaginary Crying. Secondly,
it is impossible there should be any breathing or crying in the Womb, without
any Air; but which way shall it come thither. For the Mouth of the Womb is so
closely shut, by the Testimony of Galen or Hippocrates, that it will not admit
the point of a Probe, nor the least Air or Water. Of which though some make a
doubt, yet we found to be true, in the year 1649. When we opened the Body of a
young Woman that was poisoned, in whose body we found the Womb swollen with a
Birth above a hands length; and the Mouth of the Womb not only most closely
contracted, but also stopped up with a glutinous, clammy, phlegmatic Humor,
that would not admit the sharp end of a Bodkin, unless it should have been
forced through the Glewy substance. The same thing we found in December 1665.
in a Woman seven Months gone that died suddenly. Moreover besides this closing
up the Mouth of the Womb, the Birth is also so exactly enclosed in its
Membranes, that no liquor contained within can distill forth, nor any external
Air penetrate withinside. Which difficulty Gualter Needham observing after he
has related a story as it was told him of a Child that was heard to cry in the
Womb of a Noble Woman, L. de format. foet, writes, that the Air cannot come
from without to the Birth, but that it may be there generated by the
fermentation of the Humors latent within; as wind is bred in the Stomach, Guts
and other parts. But this being in some measure granted, how is it possible
that the Birth going about to cry, should draw in that or any other Air, when
it swims upon the Milkie liquor of the Amnion, which would fill up the Mouth of
it? For should it breath in the Air, it would be choked, in regard the Liquor
in the Mouth would slide down into the Lungs, through the rough Artery,
together with the Air, and fill up the middle Fistulous part of the Windpipe.
Certainly it is a wonder that those Learned Men who have written concerning this
Uterine Crying, have not made this Observation upon it, that the sound which is
heard in the Belly of a Woman with Child, which they that hear perhaps take for
the crying of the Infant, proceeds only from the Wind that roars in the Guts,
compressed and straightened by the bulk and weight of the Infant: as we hear
sometimes a wonderful whistling of the wind, impetuously forcing it self
through the narrow holes of windows, such a one as once I remember I heard my
self, with several others, exactly resembling the sighs and groans of a Man in
sorrow, or in some great danger; so that all that heard it were frighted, and
talked of nothing but Spirits and Hobgoblins, that bewayl'd some terrible
Misfortune that was to befall them; whereas after half an hours search we found
the winding hole, through which the wind passing, made that lamentable noise,
which cea^d upon stopping the Hole. And thus it is no wonder if the Vapors
passing through the streights of the Compressed Guts, sometimes make a whining
noise like the crying of an Infant, as you shall hear in the lower Belly,
noises of the wind resembling perfectly the croaking of Frogs, and the Hissing
of Serpents. Therefore, says Aristotle, the Infant never cries till it be come
forth out of the Womb.

XXVII. Here perhaps an important The cause of (...) and dead Births.
doubt will arise, if it be so that the Birth promotes its delivery by vehement
kicking, occasioned by the necessity of Respiration, and so provokes nature to
Expulsion, what is the Reason, 1. That sometimes a very weak Birth, that wants
no Respiration, is forced out of the Womb in the fifth or sixth or seventh
Month, (in which seventh Month however many mature Births sufficiently strong
and lively, and wanting Respiration are born, though it may happen that many
Births unripe, very weak, and unable to brook the change of Air and
Nourishment, may be and are frequently born in that Month.) 2. That a Birth
that dies in the Womb, consequently requiring no Respiration, is cast forth by
female Labor, seeing that in neither of these cases, there is any need of
strong Calcitration to promote delivery. I answer to the first, that sometimes
a Birth may be sound in the Womb, according to the time that it abides there
after Formation, though not ripe, that is so weak as not to be able to brook
the changes of Air and Nourishment; and that of such a Birth a Woman miscarries
by Abortion, not through the necessity of Respiration, or provoked by
sprawling, but by reason of a cause far different, either the flowing in of too
much phlegm, or too violent Agitation of the Woman's Body, or through the rapid,
disorderly and violent motion of Spirits and Humors, as in the passions of
Anger or Fear, by all which cause the Placenta is loosned from the Womb, or
the Birth is killed; which then becomes heavy and troublesome to the Womb, and
provokes it to Expulsion, and to the end that trouble may be expelled,
presently the Spirits are sent in great quantity to the Contracting Fibers of
the Womb and Muscles of the Abdomen, which by drawing both the one and the
other together expel the Birth.

To the Second I say, that the Birth being dead, for some times the pains of
Travel cease, because the kicking and motion of the Birth ceases: neither does
the Woman come to be in travail again, unless her pains are moved by Medicines
that procure a strong Fermentation in the Humors: Or by the Putrefaction of
the Birth, or the Dissolution of the Placenta, or that the sharp Humors bred
by the retention of the Secundines sharply boil among themselves, or that the
weight and corruption of the dead Infant, give some particular trouble to the
Womb, and so by the means of a more copious flowing in of the Animal Spirits,
excite it to new striving, and a more violent Expulsion.

Of delivery that happens after the Death of Women with Child, or dying in
Labor, enough has been said, C. 25.

The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF ANATOMY. TREATING Of the Middle BELLY or BREAST.
CHAP. I. Of the Breast in General.
WE come now to the Middle Belly, the Chambers or Throne of the Royal Bowel,
to which the concocted and refined Nourishments are offered as junkets, to make
out of them with its princely Blast a wholesome Nectar for the whole
Miscrocosmical Commonwealth, and distribute it to all the parts through the
little Rivulets of the Arteries.

I. The Middle Belly is vulgarly The Breast.
called Thorax (...), to leap; because it contain the leaping Heart: and it is
that Concavity, which is circumscribed above with the Clavicles; before, which
is placed the Sternon or Breast Bone; behind, with the Bones of the Back; the
fore parts of which are called the Sternum and Breast; the hinder parts the
Back.

II. The structure of it is partly The strusture of it.
Bony, partly Fleshy; It ought to be partly Bony, to the end the Breast may
remain expanded; lest there should be a falling by Reason of the softness of
the Fleshy parts, and so the most noble Bowel, the Heart, together with the
Lungs, should be compressed and hindered in their Motion. It ought to be partly
Fleshy, that it may be conveniently moved in Respiration, which the Heart can
by no means want. And for the preservation of that Expansion, and the more
convenient liberty of Motion together, it was requisite that it should be
composed of several Bones; and that those should be joynted together with
Gristles, and that there should be Muscles not only between each, but that they
should be covered over with many.

III. The shape of the Breast is almost The Figure.
round, somewhat depressed before and behind, and extended to a convenient
length.

IV. The largeness of it is different The largeness of it.
according to the bulk and size of the Persons and difference of Sex, as being
of less extent in Women, especially Virgins than in Men; for that Men having a
hotter Heart and Blood, and more laboriously employed require a greater
Respiration, and dilatation of the Lungs, that the hot Blood flowing into the
Lungs, into the right Ventricle of the Heart, may be the sooner refrigerated
therein. But the narrowness of the Breast is never well liked, for when the
Lungs in Respiration have not sufficient Liberty to move in the hollow of the
Breast, they often hit more vehemently against the adjoining Ribbs, and thence,
because they are very soft parts of themselves, they become languid and feeble,
and the Vessels being broken by that same bruising one against another,
occasion spitting of Blood, and the corrupted Blood settling in the spungy
Caverns breeds an Ulcer, whose companion is generally an Ulcer with a lingering
Fever. For this reason great care is to be taken of Infants, not to swathe
their Breasts too close, which prevents the growth of the Ribbs, and the
Dilatation of the Breast. Sometimes it happens in young People, that Nature
being strong of it self, dilates the narrow hollowness of the Breast, by bowing
and removing some Ribs out of their natural Place, and causing a Gibbosity,
makes more room for the motion and Respiration of the Lungs. But to avoid that
deformity, there are some Artists that by the help of some convenient
Instruments, do by degrees compress those Gibbosities that they appear no more,
which is a Cure frequent among us. But then I have observed that those
Bunchback People being so cured, by reason of the Breasts, being reduced to its
former streightness, become Asthmatick, and in a short time spit Blood, and so
fall into an incurable Consumption. And there we advise the hunch-back'd never
to seek for Cure, Life being more desirable with the deformity, than Death with
the Cure.

V. This middle Venture consists of Its Division.
parts containing, and parts contained.

VI. The containing are either common Containing parts.
or proper. As for the Common, See l. 1. c. 3, and 4.

VII. The proper containing are the The proper.
Muscles of the Breast, described l. 5. several Bones, the Sternum, the
Shoulder-Blades, the Clavicles, all described l. 9. The Breasts, the
Diaphragma, the Pleura, or Membrane that encloses the Breasts and Entrails, the
Mediastinum, or doubling of the Membrane of the sides.

VIII. The Parts contained are the The contained parts.
Heart, with its Pericardium, the Lungs, with a Portion of the Trachea, or
rough Artery, the Greater part of the Gullet, a Portion of the Trunks of the
Aorta Artery, and the hollow Vein, the Thymus, or Glandule in the Throat, with
several other smaller Vessels.

Moreover the Neck, because it is an Appendix to this Belly, is usually
numbered among the parts of this Belly.

CHAP. II. Of the Breasts, and the Milk.
I. THe two Breasts, as well in Their place.
Men as in Women, are spread upon the middle of the Thorax, of each side one,
above the Pectoral Muscle drawing the Shoulder, and cover it, by that means
perfecting the handsome shape of the Body.

II. These by one general name the The names.
Greeks call (...), those of Women by a particular name (...): By the Latins
they are called Mammillae, and Ubera, though some will have Mammae to be proper
to Women; Mammillae to Men; and Ubera to Beasts.

III. They are but small in Men; but The bigness.
of a larger size in Women, for the Convenience of giving Suck. But among Women
likewise there is a difference in the Bigness; because that before the flowing
of the monthly Courses, and in old Women they swell out very little or
nothing. But in middle aged Women, they are lesser or bigger according as the
Women breed or give suck; or as they are such that neither breed nor give suck:
for that the one require larger Breasts than the other.

In several Parts of India, as in the Kingdom of Senega, the Women are reported
to have such large Breasts, that they reach down to their Bellies, and being
raised up, they can fling them over their Shoulders. Here at Utrecht we
formerly saw a Nurse that had such large Breasts, that she could suck her self;
and if the Child lay upon her Shoulders, she could conveniently give it the
Nipple. Monstrous were those Breasts mentioned by Bartholine in his Hist. Anat.
in these words: A Woman, says he, of note in Helsingore carried about her,
Breasts so large and ponderous, that they hung down to her Knees: and when she
sat, she rested her weighty Burden upon her Knees.

IV. Now the bigness of the Breasts A consideration of the bigness.
is chiefly to be considered by the Physician, when he comes to the choice of a
Nurse. For this reason Moschius, an Ancient Physician writes, That a Nurse with
moderate Breasts is always to be chosen, for that great Breasts do not breed
Plenty of Milk, and too small denote frigidity. But though it may be so
generally, yet experience tells us, it is no certain Rule. For we have known
many Women that had very small Breasts; yet every time they were with Child,
their Breasts swelled to a moderate Bigness, and so continued all the time they
gave suck, yielding great store of Milk; but after the Child was weaned fell
again. Others again we have seen, and those not a few, that having large
Breasts, bred a great deal of Milk; and it is the common Opinion, that great
Beasts breed more Milk than small ones. This in Cows the Country People pretend
to know by Experience, who will therefore give more for a Cow that has a large
Udder, than a small one.

V. They were formed two in number, Their number.
partly that there might be sufficient Nourishment, for a double offspring,
partly that, if one should prove defective through any distemper or any other
accident, the other might supply the want.

VI. They are seated in the middle Their Situation.
of the Breast, not in the Abdomen as in Brutes, for the Convenience of giving
Suck, that they might be ready for the Infant in the Arms of the Mother. The
Rabbis, by the Report of Buxtorf, feign other idle Reasons for their Situation
where they are; Thus Rabbi Abba, that the upper Region of the Breast was
ordained for the Breasts, that the Child might be discreet and prudent, and
suck understanding from the Heart of the Mother. Rabbi Iehuda alleges it to be
done, lest the Child should see the privities of the Mother; and R. Mathana,
that he might not suck in a nasty Place.

VII. The shape is Hemispherical, the The shape and color.
substance soft and white in Women; in Cows and other Creatures not so white,
and sometimes enclining to yellow. Riolanus notes, that the substance is ruddy
under the Armpits in Women with Child, and such as give suck, which we could
never observe.

VIII. They are composed of many Glandules.
Glandulous Bodies different in bigness, little Pipes and Channels meeting
together, joined and compacted with a good quantity of fatt spread over them,
which are also swathed about with a fleshy Membrane, and knit with Muscles
underneath. Riolan and Wharton, contrary to ocular Testimony, deny this
multitude of Glandules, and aver that the whole Breast is composed of one sole
Glandulous Body, divided into no distinct Globes; yet in the mean while they
grant that in Breasts that are not sound, little Globes may be discerned; which
certainly would not be perceived in Breasts unsound, unless they were really in
sound Breasts, which are less tumid.

IX. There is one large Glandule A large Glandule.
seated in the middle, which the rest that are lesser surround: also infinite
Folds of milky Vessels are scattered among the Glandules, by means of which the
Milky juice is not only conveyed to all the said Glandules, but also the
lesser pour forth their Milk into the great Glaudule. Moreover there are larger
and copious Pores in the Glandules themselves, in which as in so many Cells the
Milk is reserved till the time of giving Suck, unless it be so thin and so
plentiful, as to flow out of it self.

X. Over the great Glandule lies The Teat.
the Teat, which is a little, round spungy Body, clothed with a thin Skin, and
penetrable with many little Holes.

XI. In this the Milky Channels of Where the Milky Channels terminate.
the Glandules terminate; and thorough the little holes of it, as through a
little pipe the Milk is poured by sucking into the Mouth of the Infant.

XII. It is endued with an Exquisite The exquisite sense of the Teat.
sense of feeling; and the gentle handling of it is delightful, but a
Boisterous rubbing of it painful; and besides by handling and sucking it falls
and rises, like the nut of the Yard.

XIII. The color of it is red in Its Color.
Virgins, more livid in those that give suck; but in Women that are past
Childbearing it grows black.

XIV. The bigness of it is various* Its bigness.
in some as big as a Mulberry, in most no bigger than a sweet Bryar berry; in
others lesser: but more prominent at the time of giving suck, than at other
times.

XV. The Circle that surrounds it The Areola.
is called Areola, pale in Virgins, in pregnant Women brown, in old Women black.

XVI. The Breasts have five sorts of Vessels.
Vessels: 1. Nerves, from the upper Nerves.
Intercostals, which being carried to the Teat in great number, occasion its
Arteries.
quick sense of feeling. 2. Arteries for Nourishment, the innermost, from the
Subclavial Branch of the great Artery; the outermost from the Axillarie Branch.
3. Veins, to bring back Veins.
the Blood remaining after Nourishment; far bigger and more numerous than the
Arteries; and those double, running out from the exterior and interior parts of
the Breasts to the Subclavials and Axillary Branch of the Vena Cava, and
discharging themselves into it. Through these, in Nurses, sometimes a copious
quantity of Milky matter is carried from the Breasts to the Subclavial Veins,
in like manner as the Chylus through the Chylifer Pectoral Channel, and for
that reason chiefly these Veins are so large and numerous, because it is their
business to conveigh the Blood remaining after Nourishment, but also part of
the milky Liquor redundant in Women giving suck, to the Subclavial Veins, which
liquor also remaining after the Child is weaned, is not corrupted in the
Breasts, but is carried thither through these Veins. 4. Milky Vessels. 5.
Lymphatick (...), Lymphaticks.
Channels.

One of the innermost Arteries and Veins descending from the Subclavials (which
are called Mammarie) creeps on both sides toward the lower parts under the
straight Muscles of the Abdomen: which are met by as many Arteries and Veins
from the lower Belly, coming from the Epigastrics; which are said to close by
Anastomoses with the former, under the middle of the said Muscles. by means of
which, as it was formerly believed, there is a great Correspondence between the
Womb and the Breasts, as also that the Blood is carried from the Womb toward
the Breasts to be turned into Milk. But the meeting of these Vessels is merely
fictitious, for we never could find it our selves, neither could any body else
ever show us any such thing. Sometimes indeed their ends approach nearer one to
another, but they never unite. Besides that the Circulation of the Blood has
long since refuted that Opinion. See more concerning this. L. 1. c. 5. and L.
6. c. 3.

XVII. That there are Lymphatick Lymphatick Vessels.
Vessels in the Breasts, there is no reason for any one to question; but
whether so numerous as Wharton says he has observed them may be doubted.
Probable it is, because the Milky Vessels contain a very watery Milky Liquor,
that he thereby deceived took many Milky Vessels for Lymphaticks, which made
him describe a great number of those Vessels. But those Milky Vessels are
filled with a watery juice, when the Woman giving suck being a hungry, has
taken much watery Nourishment, and then the Milk that is sucked out of the
Breasts proves very watery.

XVIII. The Milky Vessels, quite The Milky Vessels*
different from the Veins and Arteries are for the most part observed to be
intermixed with the Glandules of the Breasts, springing from the whole
Circumference of the lower part, and closing together in the middle of the
Breasts; which Communion and Continuity nevertheless with the Chylifer Channels
absconding within the Trunk of the Body, could never be made manifest hitherto
by all the diligent enquiry of Anatomists. Because that in dead Bodies though
but newly hanged, these Accesses or small Channels of Communion lie hid in like
manner as the Passages of the Stones into the Parastates, and out of the
Seminary Vessels into the Urethra, and such like Passages, through which we
find that Nature orders several Translations of humors in living Bodies.
However there is no question to be made, but that in the inner parts, they pass
no less through the Membranes and Muscles to the Breasts, than through the
Arteries and Veins. And therefore they are not conspicuous, but lie hid,
because the Chylous juice abides not within 'em, no more than Urine in the
Ureters, but by the Compression of the Muscles of Respiration, and the parts
through which they pass, is presently and swiftly thrust forward and passes
through them. In like manner as the Milky Vessels of the Mesentery, the Chylus
being emptied into the Receptacle, swiftly vanish, and are no more seen, before
new Chylus causes 'em to swell again, which because it stays not long within
them, affords but a short view of them. Nor is it to be wondered at, that these
small Milky Channels, being extended toward the Breast, should escape the Eye,
when the Pectoral Chyle-bearing Channel it self, running out indifferent large
all the length of the Spine, could neither be seen nor found by the most
curious and quick-sighted Anatomists of so many Ages, which nevertheless in our
time, rather chance, than Art or Diligence discovered. Perhaps some such
accident may bring to light these Chyle-bearing Channels of the Breasts. For
that they are there, Reason, Use, and the effects sufficiently demonstrate, and
Hippocrates describes them under the name of little Veins, when he says, That
in Women after Delivery, the little Veins of the Breast become larger, to draw
the fat Chylus from the Belly, from whence the Milk is bred. However there is
no question to be made, but that they are there, though the Ocular Testimony of
some accurate Anatomists may be wanting for Proof. Yet Antonie Everard observes
to us that he remarked a manifest deduction of the Milky Vessels to the
Breasts: for says he, some of these Channels arising from the descending Trunk,
running out above the Muscles of the Abdomen, under the Fat, afforded matter
for the Milk to the Glandulous substance of the Breasts, which afterward
formed little Pipes sufficiently conspicuous, out of which the Milk is carried
into the Common Channel, and sucked through the Nipple. Thus also Pecquet at
Monpelier in the year 1654. before the most experienced Riverius, found out and
demonstrated in a Bitch that gave suck, near the third upper Rib, a Milky
Channel reaching to the Breasts, out of which a great quantity of Milk was
poured forth. Which Experiment he often proved in Bitches that gave suck by the
like Effusion, always of great store of Milk out of the Vessels being opened,
as often as he began his dissection from the outward parts near the first Ribs
of the Breast. He had also before observed this little Branch to proceed from
the forked Separations, which however was not inserted into the Subclavial
Channel, but turned away as it were by stealth toward the Armhole, between the
Muscles of the Breast. Nor was it a lesser small Branch, which Theodore
Schenkius observed running with a direct course without the Abdomen, to the
Teats in a dissected Bitch that gave suck, which being squeezed poured forth
its juice into the Nipple. Ludovicus de Bills describes in his Belgic Apology,
certain little Vessels descending from the Lymphatick Circle situated in the
Neck toward the Glandules of the Breasts, which he thinks to be Milky Vessels
but erroneously, not distinguishing between the Lymphatick and Milky. So that
contrary to reason, the ocular Testimony of the said Persons ascertains us of
the Production of Milkie Vessels to the Breasts.

As Antony Everard found out in Coneys little Pipes, extended from the
Descending Trunk to the Breasts, which in those Creatures seem to be seated in
a lower place; so in a Woman certain little Branches seem rather to be extended
from the ascending Pectoral Trunk, to the Breasts seated in the Breast it self.
This appeared in our Secretaries Wife four or five weeks gone, who happening
into our practice while I was more accurately studying this point, was
complaining that she had very little Milk in her Breasts, and that if the
Infant sucked any thing hard, she felt a pain very troublesome from her Breasts
to her Back, about the middle Region between the Shoulder-blades, but somewhat
lower; and that she had some slight sense of the same pain as far as her Loins;
but when the Child did not suck, she felt no pain at all. Without doubt these
were some Impediments, by reason of which the Milky Vessels had not free
passage to the Breasts, and hence the Child drawing in their upper part, and no
sufficient Chylus following out of the Pectoral Channel, that sucking
occasioned some pain from the Breast to the Milky Pectoral Channel: as is more
especially apparent from hence, that though this Woman were in pain upon the
drawing of the Infant, yet she felt but very little Milk in her Breasts, and so
was forced to provide another Nurse for the Infant. The same I observed in the
Wife of a Colleague of mine, who being brought to bed in September 1664.
complained that she could not endure the drawing of the Infant, by reason of
the pain she felt at that time, extending it self to her back between the
Shoulderblades, and thence to the Loins. Afterward I observed several Examples
of the same Nature. All which things make it probable that the Milky Mammarie
Channels are derived from the Milky Pectoral Channel.

XIX. From what has been said it Whether the Chylus be carried through the
Arteries to the Breasts.
is apparent how much they are in the wrong, who affirm that the Chylus is
carried with the Blood through the Arteries to the Breasts, and out of them
separated again from the Blood and changed into Milk. As Thomas Consentinus,
with whom Gualter Needham agrees, asserts, that the Milk is separated from the
Blood, which is carried through the Pectoral and Mammary Arteries: Which he
endeavors to prove, 1. By the manifold Ramifications of the Arteries, which
are observed in the Glandules of the Breasts. 2. By the Anastomoses of the
Epigastrick Vessels, with the Mammary Vessels. 3. By the extraordinary bigness
of the Mammary Arteries conspicuous in Women that give Suck. But these
Arguments are not so sinewy, as to sustain a new Opinion of so much weight; for
that much more copious Ramifications of Arteries are conspicuous in the Brain
and its Membranes, in the Lungs, and several other parts, and yet they show no
sign at all that I know, of any Milky or Chylous matter contained in the
Arterious Blood. In like manner the Anastomoses of the Epigastrick Vessels with
the Mammary, teach us nothing certain concerning this matter, which have been
said to have been found by many* but were never by any yet demonstrated. As for
the bigness of the Arteries, that does not proceed, as he supposes, from the
plenty of Milk matter, but because the Glandules swelling with Milk, somewhat
compass the ends of the Arteries, so that the Blood flowing into them, cannot
flow out again so freely and swiftly, as when a Woman does not give suck; and
therefore being detained with them in great abundance, causes 'em to appear
more turgid and swollen than at other times. But I wonder Consentine makes no
mention of the Veins, which in Women that give Suck, are much more numerous and
bigger than the Arteries. Several other Arguments of lesser note are urged by
Consentine, but because they are diffused in the following discourses here and
there, I say no more of them at present. And thus this new Opinion falls to the
Ground; That besides the Blood the Chylus also, being actually such, is carried
and circulated through the Veins and Arteries, and afterward separated again
from it.

XX. The Primary Office of the The Office.
Breast is to make Milk; the secundary Office is to cover the Breast, and
preserve it from the External Cold; and in Women to contribute toward the
Beauty of their structure.

XXI. Now the Milk is a white First digression. Milk, what.
and sweet Juice, prepared in the Breasts for the Nourishment of the Infant.

XXII. As to the matter of the The matter of Milk.
Milk, there are great disputes among the Learned. For seeing that the
spirituous Blood is carried through the Arteries, and the Chylus through the
Childbearing Vessels to the Breasts; and for that they are conspicuously full
of Veins, a Question arises, Whether the Milk be bred out of the Arterious or
Veiny Blood, or Menstruums; or out of the best or less pure Alementary Blood,
or out of the Chylus.

XXIII. Aristotle and Galen affirm Whether out of Menstruous Blood.
that the matter of Milk is the Blood that used to be evacuated at the monthly
Purgations. Which Opinion they seem to have taken from an Aphorism of
Hippocrates, If a Woman that is neither with Child, nor has brought forth have
any Milk, her Flowers are stopped. And these are followed by all the Ancient
and Modern Physicians and Philosophers, enforced with these Arguments.

1. That upon the stopping of the Flowers, the Milk breeds not only in Women
with Child, and delivered, but also in Virgins. Of which sort of Virgins
breeding Milk, Vega, Gorrheus, Schenkius, and others produce various Examples.
2. Because Women that give suck, never have their Flowers; or if they flow in
great quantity, the Milk decreases or dries up altogether. 3. Because they
whose Flowers cease through Age, never have any Milk in their Breasts.
XXIV. But from this Opinion supported Absurdities from the former Opinions.
by so many Arguments and Authorities, these five Absurdities follow,

1. That when Milk is bred, the Flowers must of necessity stop. But quite the
contrary, we have a thousand times seen Nurses and Mothers, that have had their
Flowers in great quantity at fixed times, without any decrease of their wonted
plenty of Milk, which all Phisicians in their Practice will testify as well as
my self. But the reason why the Courses stop in Women that give suck, is not,
because Milk is generated out of them, but because a great quantity of Chylus
daily flows to the Breasts, and more sparingly to the Heart of the Wo^ that
gives suck, whence it happens that there is Blood enough generated for the
nourishment of the Body; but no redundancy that requires monthly Evacuation. 2.
That then the Milk would most abound, when there is most plenty of Menstruous
Blood that stops; least, when but little. And yet in the first Month, when that
Blood most redounds in Women, and is least wasted by the Embryo, then is there
no Milk bred: But in the last Months of a Woman's time, when the grown Birth
chiefly consumes the superfluous Blood, and there is least redundancy of it,
then the Milk breeds in the Breast* Moreover in Childbed-Women when the
Menstruums flow plentifully, there is yet great store of Milk in their Breasts;
and that increasing nevertheless the Menstrua do not stop. 3. That there should
be so much Milk generated, as there is Redundancy of the said Blood. And yet
there is no Man but easily observes the inequality of that proportion of a
small quantity of Blood, that redounds every Month, and of the great quantity
of Milk drawn from a Woman every day. And then again what shall we say of
Sheep, Cows, Goats, and such like Animals, that never have any Menstruous
Blood, and yet every day yield great quantities of Milk. 4. That Milk should
only breed in Ripe Women, that either have or may have their Flowers. But
newborn Infants not only Female but Male, evince the contrary. Out of whose
Breasts we have seen Milk to flow for some days, nay, for some weeks together,
or else easily squeezed out with a slight compression of the Finger. And the
same thing Cardan observed, and Schenkius reports to have been seen by
Camerarius; and indeed any body that will, may observe it in newborn Infants.
Dry old Women also are an Argument to the contrary, whose courses generally
stop by reason of their Age, of whom nevertheless the writers of Physical
Observations, besides Aristotle, relate that several have had great store of
Milk. Boden also, Henry ab Heers, and others give several examples of the same
thing. 5. That Milk never breeds in Men, because they have no redundancy of
menstruous Blood. But yet Aristotle and Avicen testify the contrary. Who both
teach us that Men many times give a great quantity of Milk. They that have
traveled the new World, report that they have found some Countries there,
where the Men had the greatest store of Milk, and gave the Children suck. Which
Testimonies of these Experiments Vesalius, Eugubius, Alexander Benedict,
Bartholine, Stantorellus, Cardan, Gemma and several others confirm by Examples.
Nor will that distinction here avail, which Bauhinus, Spigelius, and Ludovicus
Mercatus allege, that the same Men's Milk is no true Milk, but a juice like to
Milk, and therefore to be distinguished from Milk. For it is not probable that
so many Eyewitnesses, all prudent Men, that understood what they did, could be
so deceived, as not understand when they tasted Milk. Besides that, it is bred
in the Breasts, and differs nothing at all from Women's Milk, neither in color,
smell, taste or substance, and the Children are as* well nourished with it, as
with Women's Milk, as the Histories testify.
XXV. Others to avoid all the aforesaid Whether out of Alimentary Blood.
difficulties, allege that it is not necessarily bred out of the Menstruous
Blood, but out of some redundancy of the Alimentary Blood. But these Men while
they endeavor to shun Carybdis fall into Scylla. For several Arguments
altogether destroy this Opinion.

1. It is impossible that a Woman that gives suck, should live with so much
loss of Blood: For take but from any Man for a few days together, a pint or
half a pint of Blood, it cannot be done without an extraordinary Emaciation of
the Body, destruction of the strength, and vigor of the Body, and hazard of
Life: Or if an excess happen in the flowing of Courses, it overweakens the
Party to a high degree. Now is it probable that a Woman should yield so many
pints of Milk bred out of the Blood every day, for whole Months and years
together, without any emaciation or decay of Strength or Health. If you answer
that they are sometimes so weakened, that they are forced to wean the Child. I
answer that does not happen by reason of the great quantity of Blood changed
into Milk, but because the Chylus is carried in too great quantity to the
Breasts, and there is changed into Milk, while the lesser Portion is carried to
the Heart, and passes into Blood, the consequence of which defect must
necessarily be Emaciation and weakness of the Body. 2. If the Seed which is
generated out of the Blood being evacuated in a moderate quantity, debilitates
the whole Body, shall not the Milk much more enervate the natural strength,
being daily drawn out in great quantity? But this is not done. 3. If after any
great and often iterated Evacuation of the Blood, decay of strength, Cachexy,
Dropsy, and other cold Distempers follow, shall Women that give suck, with
whom this continual Evacuation of Milk lasts for whole years together, be free
from those Dissempers, and enjoy a more sane habit of Body? 4. If every sudden
alteration be dangerous, why, when Women wean their Children, at what time
plenty of Milk fails of a sudden, and by consequence also, the evacuation of
Blood ceases, why I say do they not fall into some pernicious Plethora? Which
however never happens. You will say perhaps that some, Women eat less at that
time. I answer that they are not without an Appetite for all that, nay, and
that most Women eat as well, and as much after weaning as before. If you say,
that same superfluous Blood is evacuated at the monthly Periods, that
evacuation is too thin and rare, in respect of the whole Quantity of Blood
changed into Milk, which before was wasted every day. 5. If the Blood, that
flows into the parts in greater quantity through the Arteries, and distending
the parts, causes stronger Pulses therein, why does not that happen in the
swelling Milkbearing Vessels of Women; wherein nevertheless there is no
stronger Pulsation perceived. 6. If the Blood flowing plentifully to the
Breasts, should be extravasated therein, and tarry till changed into Milk, it
would not be changed into Milk, but into Matter, and breed an Aposteme; as
happens in Impostumations of the Breast. 7. By the Laws of nature, there is no
return from Privation to Habit. Shall the Chylus alone be excepted from this
general Rule? and lose its whiteness, and all its other qualities, so to pass
into Blood, afterward to quit again the qualities of Blood, and reassume its
former qualities of Blood? Whether the Blood now concocted for the nourishment
of the solid Part, shall lose its more perfect condition, and be changed into a
Milky substance, to be again concocted into Blood by the Birth? Nature does
nothing in vain, neither does she tread the same path backward and forward in
any of her Operations* Neither does the motion of Concoction run retrograde to
Crudity, but only advances to the greater perfection. Can a Ripe fruit grow
green again, to be ripened again? So the Blood made out of the Chylus, cannot
run retrograde into a Milky Chyle, to be concocted again into Blood. Some one
will say perhaps with Plato, That nature uses here deceit, to alienate Man from
seeding upon Blood, otherwise that Milk differs nothing from Blood, but in
Color. But what need any such Artifice to delude newborn Infants, who while
they suck, never see what color the Milk is on: Or if they did, were not able
to distinguish one from the other. Why is not the same abuse put upon Lions,
Wolves, Tigers and Leopards, to whom cruelty is natural? Neither let any Man
object that while the Seed is generated, the Blood in the same manner passes
into a substance, again to be changed. For then it is not changed into a
Chylous, or any other Cruder or worser Substance, to be again reduced into
Blood, but into a far better, out of which not only some parts must be
nourished, but the solid parts of the Birth are to be generated and formed. 8.
Seeing that the nourishment swallowed, requires several hours time to change it
into Blood, how comes it to pass that Nurses presently after they have eat and
drunk, presently after feel a copious quantity of Liquor flow to the Breasts,
before any Blood could be generated out of the said Nourishment? What is the
reason that the Milk attracts to its self immediately, and retains the faculty,
quality and odor of what the Nurse swallows, whereas no such thing can be
perceived in the Blood, nor in the parts nourished with the Blood; thus if you
give a purge to the Nurse, the Physic sooner purges the Infant than the Nurse.
Perhaps indeed by long Use and Time, and the many times ^repeated eating,
concoction and preparation of the same thing, some such alteration or quality
may be imprinted in the Blood, and the solid parts nourished by it; as in that
beautiful Damosel fed with Poison, that was offered to Alexander, whose Body by
long use and feeding upon Poisons, became so venomous, that she infected and
killed all that lay with her. Now that Milk easily imbibes the qualities of the
meat which the Nurse swallows* Walter Charleton proves admirably well; For,
says he, Beyond all others, is that Experiment for the demonstration of the
Milky Ways; For let the Nurse drink Milk but slightly tinctured with Saffron,
and within half an Hour after, more or less, the Milk that is milk'd out of her
Breasts, shall have the Smell, Taste and Color of Saffron.

He also reports an Observation out of Prosperus Marinus, concerning a Roman
Woman, out of whose Nipple the Surgeon drew a little Branch of Succory, which
she had eaten the day before, and so proves that not only the Chylus, but
thicker Substances may sometimes also pass together with the Chyle to the
Breasts. Thus Aristotle reports that sometimes swallowed hairs come to the
Breasts and Nipples, an Example of which Alsaharavius reports that he saw in a
certain Woman.

9. If a Woman go long without Meat or Drink till she be very hungry and dry,
Milk will not breed in her Breasts, though there be no want of Blood in the
Vessels. Which though Bartholine denies, from the Observation of Hogheland: Yet I
have osten seen it to be true with my own Eyes. And if at that time the Infant
suck, it shall not draw any Milk, for want of Chyle in the Milky Vessels, but
Blood from the Ends of the little Arteries and Veins, opened at that time more
then usually, by the vehement drawing of the Child, till the Woman eats and
drinks again, and new Chyle come to the Stomach. Of which we have a manifest
Example in a Lady of this Town, who in the Year 1650 gave Suck, but not being
able to eat or drink for three or four Days together, by reason that her
Husband lay dangerously ill, she not only had no Milk in her Breasts, but upon
the strong drawing of the Infant, it was found that pure Blood followed out of
her Nipples. Afterward when her Husband recovered, and that her Grief abating,
she began to eat and drink well, and good Chylus came again into her Stomach,
she had immediately plenty of Milk in her Breasts. A certain Sign that that
Milk was not generated out of the Blood; out of which however otherwise it
might have been made before, when there was Chylus; which nevertheless was at
that time sucked out of the Breasts pure and ruddy, and not changed into Milk.
XXVI. To these Arguments it may An Objection.
be perhaps Objected, That a Cow for the first days after it has Calv'd, sends
forth a Bloody Milk; which is a Sign that Milk is generated out of the Blood. I
answer, That at first, presently after the Birth, the Milky Pores of the
Breasts are not yet so dilated that Chylus sufficient may be able to flow
through them to the Dugs, and then the little Veins of the Udders are opened by
the drawing of the new Calv'd Creature, and a small quantity of Blood flowing
out of those Veins, dies the Milk of a Ruddy Color; but when the Milky Pores
are sufficiently opened and dilated, and that the Chyle flows freely to the
Dugs, there is no farther Violence done to the said Veins by drawing, and then
that Mixture of Blood ceases, and the Milk breeds in great quantity.

XXVII. There seems one Difficulty Why the Veins swell in the Breast.
more remaining, How it comes to pass, if the Milk be not made out of the
Blood, that in Creatures which give Suck, the Arteries, but especially the
Veins, are much larger and more swollen in the Breasts, than in those Creatures
that do not give Suck. But to this we have answered already in the Question,
Whether the Chylus be carried to the Breasts by the Arteries; and where the
Vessels of the Breast are enumerated?

XXVIII. Conringius, to avoid Whether made of crude Blood
these Rocks without Shipwreck, affirms the Milk to be made of the more
imperfect and crude Blood, which is not yet concocted to perfect Redness; nor
very Spirituous; or much Circulated through the Heart, by the evacuation of
which, the Natural Strength is not much injured; which, by reason of its
Serosity, easily slips to the Teats, and is quickly augmented by Drink. But
there are five Difficulties to be Objected against this.

1. That the Chylus as soon as it is dilated in the Heart, presently acquires
perfect Redness; so that the Blood which is bred therein, may be said at first
to be less Spirituous indeed, but not less red, than other Blood that has
oftener circulated through the Heart; Of which, more, c. 12. 2. That the cruder
part of the Blood, by reason it is more thick, cannot be carried so swiftly
through the Vessels, and be separated from the more refined Blood, and flow to
the Breasts alone, not being able to move it self apart, and separating it self
from the rest of the Mass. 3. That in Nurses that feed upon wholesome Diet, the
Milk is not very serous, but fat and thick; whereas otherwise by reason of its
Crudity, it would be always serous. 4. That upon suck the more spirituous and
thinner parts would more easily follow, than the crude and thicker; and hence
would arise a swift decay of the Strength. 5. That our Bodies are not truly
nourished with serous and thin Blood, as is apparent in a Flegmatic Cachexy and
Anasarca, but with fat and well concocted Nourishment, such as Milk is, as is
apparent from hence, for that Children so long as they suck, and are nourished
with Milk-Diet, are better nourished, and grow more than after they are weaned:
and for that Milk also greatly nourishes grown People, upon whom otherwise
serous and crude Nourishment brings a Cachexy, or else they are evacuated for
the most part by Urine and Sweat; nor do they contribute much to the strength
of the Body.
All which things instruct us, That no Blood, whether Menstruous, Alimentary,
or Crude, can be the Matter of Milk. And therefore this Doctrine inculcated for
so many Ages, is to be rejected, and we are to seek another Matter for its
Generation.

XXIX. This Matter, Wharton Whether out of the Arterious and Nervous Blood.
and Charleton, the better to find out and describe, divide into two Parts, one
Chylous, the other Spermatic; and this they say is much less in quantity than
the other. The one they say is transmitted to the Dugs through the Arteries of
the Breast; but that this is carried thither through the Nerves. But here they
are under a double Mistake. First, Because they do not consider that there is
no Chyle nor Chylous Humor contained in the Arteries; because the Chylus, when
it passes the Heart, there loses its own Form, and takes the Form of Blood, and
never returns to Chylus again. Secondly, Because they think that the Visible
and thick Alimentary Humors pass through the Invisible Pores of the Nerves:
which we have at large refuted, l. 1. c. 16. and l. 8. c. 1.

XXX. Hieronymus Barbatus describes Whether out of the Serum.
a quite different Matter of the Milk, while he endeavors to prove by many
Reasons, that Milk is neither made of Blood or Chylus, but only of the Serum,
as being that wherewith he thinks that all the Spermatic Parts are nourished:
for that the Serum swimming upon the Blood, by the heat of the Fire thickens
into a Jelly, whence it is apparent that it is not only changed into Milk, but
agglutinated to the Parts that are to be nourished. Which last Assertion, which
is the Foundation of the Learned Gentleman's Argument, is contrary to
Experience. For that Serum swims upon the cold Blood drawn from the Vein, being
set in the Sun, or to the Fire, will exhale to Dryness, but never turn to a
Jelly, unless it be faulty. The Lymphatic Juice, which as he thinks, differs
nothing from the Serum, thickens to a Jelly, but how much that differs from the
Serum, see l. 1. c. 13. Lastly, Though Milk be not made without Serum; yet that
the Serum is only the Menstruum in which the Milky Particles are mingled
together in Fusion, and not the Primary Matter of Milk, is so apparent from the
Substance it self of Milk, as also from the Butter and Cheese that are made of
it, and are far different from the Serum, that no man in his Wits can question
it.

XXXI. Malpighius writes, That it Whether out of Fat.
may be doubted whether the Milk in the Breasts may not be made of Fat. 1.
Because Nature heaps together a great quantity of Fat about the Glan dules of
the Breasts in Nurses and Women that give Suck; which seems not merely to be
done for Ornaments sake. 2. Because in Milk when made, there is much Butter
contained which may be separated from it. But this Opinion is levelled by the
sole Plenty of Milk, which is daily drawn from all Creatures that give Suck; as
in Women, but more especially in Cows, Sheep and Swine. For this same Plenty is
so great, that if all the Fat of the Breasts should be dissolved into Milk in
one day, it would not suffice for half the quantity that is drawn out, nor the
Breasts remain in their perfect Condition. Besides if Milk were made of the
clammy Fat of the Breasts in those that give Suck, why should not the same
thing happen in Virgins, and such as do not give Suck; whose Breasts are many
times no less fat and tumid, than of those that are Nurses? As for the Milk's
containing Butter in it, that proves nothing to the purpose, for that the
Chylus contains Butter in it, and the Blood has Oily Parts mixed with it, when
neither the one is made of any Fat in the Stomach, nor the other of any Fat in
the Heart.

XXXII. Martian, Ent, Giffart and The Chyle is the Matter of Milk.
Deusingius much more truly assert that the Chylus is the Matter of Milk: with
whom We also concur, and affirm that the Milk as well in Men and Infants, as in
Women, is made of the Chyle.

The Truth of which is confirmed by an exact Consideration of the Substance of
the Chylus and the Milk. For if the Milky Substance of the Chylus be narrowly
looked into, how very little does it differ from Milk? Between watery Milk and
Chylus there is little or no difference in Color, Taste, or Substance. Only
the Serosity of the Chylus being somewhat separated and wasted in the Glandules
of the Breasts, and there will be excellent Milk, and that so much the fatter
and thicker, by how much the less of Serosity there is in the Milk, or more
dissipated within the Glandules of the Breasts. But if that Serosity of the
Chylus be not sufficiently separated, then the pure Chylous Liquor thin and
white, and nothing different from the Chylus contained in the Chyliferous
Pectoral Channel (distills out of the Breasts, as we see in new born Infants, as
well Male as Female, in whom by reason of the looseness of the Pores and
Chylifero's Channels, the Chylus flows freely to the Breasts; and because the
tender and languid Glandu'es of the Breasts, are not sufficient for the farther
preparation of that Chylus, hence the Chylus reaching thither, flows out of its
own accord, or with a slight Compression.

XXXIII. But why and how the How the Chylus is changed into Milk.
Chylous Juice is changed into Milk in these Glandules, has not been inquired
into by any one that I know of. The Reason is this All the Glandules through
the whole Body, are designed to separate out of the Blood any Lymphatic Liquor,
Spittle in the Mouth, somewhat Bilious in the Liver, Lixivious in the Spleen,
etc. and to endue it with a certain slight, subacid Quality, and being so
endu'd, to mix it with the Blood, Chylus, and other Humors, to the end they may
separate 'em by means of a slight kind of Effervescency from other unprofitable
Humors, and somewhat coagulate and thicken 'em, to prevent the flight of the
most subtle Sulphurous Spirit, and also so to operate, that the sweet
Sulphury, Milky Spirits being somewhat more inspissated and closed together in
the fatty condensed Liquor, may be yet more sweet and white.

XXXIV. For the same Reason The Milky Juice made more perfect.
also, the Milky Juice (with which in its passage through the inner Milky
Vessels something of the Lymphatic Juice is here and there intermixed) comes to
be more perfected in the Kernels of the Breasts; that in them its sweet
Sulphury Spirits, through the mixture of a little never so slightly subacid,
may be a little more thickened or fixed, and so being more united, may become
fatter, whiter, and more fit for the nourishment of the Infant, which, that it
is so, appears from hence; for that when that Liquor of the Mammary Glandules,
which is to be mixed with the Milky Juice infused into 'em, becomes vicious
through any defect, or overacid, then also the Milk is corrupted in the
Breasts, or grows sour; nay and is sometimes coagulated to the hardness of
Cheese, and causes both Inflammation and Exulceration of the Breasts. See more
of this l. 1. c. 7.

XXXV. Here a Question may arise, Why the Milk fails in Effusions of the Blood.
if these things be true, and that the Milk is not made of the Blood, but
Chylus, how it comes to pass that in a great Flux of Blood the Milk fails? I
answer, That it does not always fail for that Reason, if the Woman eat well:
and if it do fail, the Reason is, because that Nature more intent to relieve
the greater Necessity, forces the whole Chylus, or the greatest part of it, and
converts it into Blood, to repair the strength of the whole Body, transmitting
very little or none of it to the Breasts.

To this we may add, That upon the failing of the Blood, there fails also a
requisite Influx of Animal Spirits, by means of which the Breasts are loosened,
and the Chyliferous Passages preserved open; and so the Breasts falling for
want of those Spirits, or compressed by the weight or thickness of the adjacent
parts, the passage of the Chylus into the Breasts is stopped up, which causes the
Milk to fail.

XXXVI. Neither does the forementioned Why Women that give Suck want their
Courses.
Aphorism of Hippocrates contradict this Opinion of Ours; If a Woman that is
neither with Child, nor has lain in, have Milk, her Flowers have left her. For
she has not therefore Milk, because that Superfluity of Menstruous Blood flows
to the Breasts, and is there turned into Blood; but because the Vessels being
sufficiently filled with Blood, by means of some Lustful Thought, or Libidinous
handling of the Breasts, part of the Chyle, not necessary for the begetting of
Blood, flows through the said Passages to the Breasts, and is there turned into
Blood; and so that Superfluity of Blood, that should have been evacuated by
Menstruous Evacuations, is prevented by Nature, to the exoneration of a good
part of the Chylus in the Breasts, and turning it into Milk, before it be made
Blood: as frequently it happens with Nurses, who have not their Courses for
that reason for the most part, and yet are not burdened with any redundancy of
Blood. Whereas if that Milk, in the Woman mentioned by Hippocrates, should be
made by the Menstruous Blood restagnating, then all Women when their Courses
stopped or stayed, would always have Milk in their Breasts; when it rarely
happens but among salacious and prurient Women, excited by much lascivious
Titillation and venereal Thoughts, and consequently the motion of the Animal
Spirits, which loosen the Breasts, and open the Pores of the Chyliferous
Passages, and so make free way for the Chylus to the Breasts. In like manner as
by libidinous contrectation and sucking the Chylus may be carried to the
Breasts of some Men who can never be suspected of Menstruous Evacuation, and
there be turned into Milk: and of such men giving Suck, there are various
Examples among the Physicians, of which Bartholine has collected some together,
l. e. Anat. Reformat. c. 1.

After the same manner is the Story of Mesue's Story.
Mesue's Woman to be explained, who spit Blood, when the Milk failed in her
Breast; which Blood was stopped when her Milk came again. Because the Chylus
that was wont to flow to the Breasts, flowed to the Heart, where there happened
to be too great a quantity of Blood, which for that reason burst out of the
vessels of the Head and Lungs, and was evacuated at the Mouth. But afterward,
the greatest part of the Chylus flowing to the Breasts, and the Milk returning,
then upon the ceasing of the Repletion, the spitting of Blood likewise ceased.

Here also lastly may be objected the Example of Cows, who having been foddered
all the Winter with Hay, at length coming to feed upon Grass, nevertheless
their Milk does not alter and grow fat, till two or three Weeks after, and it
contributes another somewhat ruddy color and grateful Taste to the Butter,
which would come to pass the first or second day, if the foresaid Proposition
were true, seeing that the Chylus is altered at the beginning. I answer, First,
That what is alleged is not true; for it is not three weeks time before the
alteration of the Milk, but the first, second or third day; and it is
manifestly apparent in the Color and Taste of the Butter made the fourth day,
tho it be not perfectly conspicuous at the beginning; because the preceding
Chylus was not then wholly wasted, but mixed with the latter. Besides the very
Substance of the Udder cannot be so soon disposed to give such a sudden
Alteration to the Milk: seeing that Disposition depends upon the Blood which
nourishes that Substance: hence it follows that as that Nutrition, so the great
Alteration of the Disposition proceeding from it, procures its Effect by
degrees, but not in one or two days.

XXXVIII. This Opinion of ours Whether the Animal Spirits be the Matter of Milk.
concerning the Chylous Matter of Milk, Wharton seems to prove but in part; for
he joins to it another Matter, of which never any man hitherto makes mention.
For he affirms the Milk to be made partly out of Chyle, and partly out of a
certain Juice flowing from the Nerves, which is mingled with that Chylus. But
seeing there is no such Cavity in the Nerves, through which such a manifest,
thick, fatty, whitish Juice can be thought to pass, but only invisible
Porosities, through which no such plentiful Juice, which is to be turned into
Milk, can possibly flow to the Breasts of Women that give Suck, it is apparent
that no Liquor can come from the Nerves for the Generation of Milk. Which is
manifest from hence, for that through the copious Conflux of that Animal Liquor
through the Nerves to the Breasts, there would be a great dissipation and waste
of Animal Spirits in Women that gave Suck, and an extraordinary decay of
Strength; whereas Women are more cheerful, and better in health when they give
Suck than at other times.

XXXIX. These things being thus A notable Question.
affirmed, there remains a Notable Question to be examined, that has so
deterred most Learned men, that they have rather chosen to pass it over in
silence, than to meddle with it. What it is that forces the Chylus (that was
wont to flow to the Heart) through the Chyliferous Channels to the Breasts, for
the Generation of Milk?

Deusingius believes, That the Menstruous Blood, through a certain singular
Quality contracted from the Womb, rarefies, and as it were ferments all things
in the Body, and causes a Disposition proper for the generation of Milk. This,
he says, is communicated to Infants by the nourishing heat of the Womb. But
that in Men and Virgins, it is occasioned by the frequent handling of the
Breasts, in like manner as in little Kids, whose Dugs being compressed by the
hands, there presently follows Milk.

But these plausible Reasons fall upon the Rocks by me formerly proposed, and
suffer a total Shipwreck. Nor is that any thing truer which Deusingius adds,
That the Chylus is forced toward the Breasts in Women with Child, by a
compression of the Stomach and Sweetbread made by the growing Infant. For
which why does not the same thing happen in other Tumors without the Abdomen,
and when the dead Birth sticks in the Womb, at what time there is the same
compression. Some will say perhaps, That there is not the same Lactific
Disposition infused by them into the Breast. Which is of no moment, for if the
aforesaid Compression of the Stomach were requisite to concur with such a
Disposition, then such a Compression ceasing from the Birth after Delivery, no
Chylus would come to the Breasts, and so there would be no Milk generated
therein; much less in Virgins and Men that give Milk, in whom such a
Compression by the Birth, could never happen. But these things being all
contrary to Experience, fall without refutation.

Some have recourse to the Providence of Nature; others to other invalid
Reasons: and thus this Mystery has hitherto remained in obscurity.

But for the better discovery thereof, we are first to consider, That besides
the Chylus and an apt Conformation of the Breasts, there is required toward the
Generation of Milk, a free passage of the Chylus to the Breasts, which we
easily conceive in Infants newly born by reason of the softness and the loose
Porosities of the Parts. But what should open that Passage in People grown to
maturity, which had been stopped up for many years, he that can tell this,
unlooses the Gordion Knot. Suck or handle the Breasts of a hundred Men, Virgins
and Women that do not give Suck, as long as you please, you shall not find the
Milk come to all, perhaps not to any, or only to one or two. But why not to
all? Because say you, the Breasts of the rest are not sufficiently loose or
porous. But the same Women when afterward with Child evince these reasons, in
whom there is then to be found a sufficient laxity of the Dugs.

XL. Therefore there is another cause The true Cause.
to be sought after, which I take to be a strong Imagination, and an intent and
frequent Cogitation of Milk, of the Breasts, and of their being sucked; which
works wonders in our Bodies; not simply of it self, but by virtue of the
appetitive Power, or of the Passions of the Mind, which occasion various
motions of the Spirits and Humors. Thus the Imagination and Thought of an
extraordinary Danger makes a man tremble, fall down, grow cold, and fall into a
Fit, and sometimes occasions the Hair to grow gray on a sudden. Glad Thoughts
revive and warm the Body. Obscene Thoughts occasion Blushing; and Thoughts of
Terror occasion Paleness. Venereal Thoughts diffuse Heat through the whole
Body, loosen the Genitals of Women, stiffen those of Men, and open the Seminary
Passages, otherwise invisible, in such a manner, as to occasion spontaneous
nocturnal Pollutions.

This intent Imagination and desirous Thought of giving the Infant Suck, is the
reason why the Chyliferous Passages to the Breasts are dilated and opened,
especially if some other external Causes contributing to the same purpose,
cherish and excite those strong Imaginations, as lascivious Titillation of the
Breasts, the stirring of the Child in the Womb, or sucking of the Nipples: For
according to the various Influx of the Animal Spirits, the parts are sometimes
straightened, sometimes loosened, as every body knows; and according to that
various Constriction or Dilatation, the Blood and other Humors flow more or
less into the Parts: and are sometimes the occasion of Heat, Softness, Redness;
sometimes of Constriction, Coldness and Paleness. Among these impuls'd Humors
is the Chylus, which is continually thrust forward by the Muscles of the
Abdomen, through some Lactiferous Vessels, and so through those Vessels that
tend to the Breasts, provided that a special Influx of the Animal Spirits have
loosened those Parts through which those Vessels are carried, and has rendered
those Vessels penetrable, by removing all manner of Constriction.

Now that this is the true Cause, is apparent from that man mentioned by
Santorel, who, upon the Death of his Wife, when his Poverty would not give him
leave to hire a Nurse, that he might still the Cries of the Infant, would often
lay the Child to his Breasts (no doubt with an ardent desire to give it Suck)
and so at length through that intent, continual Cogitation, and often iterated
sucking of his Teats, the Chyliferous Passages were loosned, and his Breasts
afforded Milk sufficient for the nourishment of the Infant. The like Accident
happened at Viana, where the Woman of the Bores-Head was brought to Bed not long
after the Death of her Husband, and soon after her Delivery died, very poor her
self, leaving the Infant sound and healthy; of which the Grandmother taking
Compassion, and not able to hire a Nurse, by reason of her Poverty, undertook
to bring it up by hand, in the 60th. Year of her Age; at what time putting the
crying Infant to her Breasts, and giving it her Nipples to suck, through that
force of Imagination and eager desire to suckle the Child, her Breasts began to
give Milk, and that in a few days so plentifully, that the Infant wanted little
other Diet, to the great admiration of all that saw the Infant suckled with the
Milk of an Old Woman, whose Breasts had been fallen for many years. Many such
Examples of Old Women giving Suck, Bodin relates in his Theat. Nature. And the
Truth of this Cause is no less evinced by lascivious and prurient Virgins, who
are full of Libidinous Thoughts, and therefore often handling their Breasts,
sometimes without the loss of their Virginity, come to have Milk in them; of
which sort of Milk-bearing Virgins of undoubted Honesty, I happened to see two;
Bartholin witnesses another seen by himself; and we find several Examples of
Women yielding Milk in Vega, Schenkius, Caster, Castellus, and others,
collected by Bauhinus. Neither will any man question but that such like
lascivious Thoughts of their own Breasts, and handling 'em, has also produced
Milk in the Breasts of Men. But in Women with Child, the stirring of the Birth
in the Womb excites every day more and more those Thoughts of suckling the
Infant, and hence when the Infant begins to move sensibly, then the Milk begins
to appear in the Breasts. An Observation.


XLI. I shall add a manifest Domestic Example. My own Wife in March 1656. had
in her lying in a sufficient quantity of Milk, according as she was wont to
have; but the Infant for six or seven Weeks was so weak, that it could not
suck, so that every one thought it would have died, and she not dreaming any
more of suckling it, her Milk dried up: But when afterward the Child recovered
and was able to suck, and my Wife had no Milk in her Breasts, the Child was of
necessity to be put out to Nurse: But the Nurse proving bad, my Wife, nine
Months after her Delivery, sent for the Child home; and while another Nurse
could be found, would often lay the crying Infant to her Breast, wishing her
self in a condition to suckle it. The next day the Child was sent to another
Nurse; but that Evening, through that same strong Imagination and
Thoughtfulness, her Breasts that had been dried up for above Eight Months,
began to swell and be full of Milk, so that had not the Nurse been hired, she
could have suckl'd the Child her self, which proves that strong Thoughts and
Imaginations are the first Cause that move the Chylus to the Breasts.

But some will say, if this were true, then in those Women that have no Milk in
the Flower of their Age after being brought to Bed, such ardent Desires to give
the Child Suck, would bring Milk into their Breast, but no such thing happens,
though they desire to suckle the Infant. I Answer, That all Thoughts are not so
intent and strong as to move the Affections of the Mind, without a vigorous
stirring of which, the Animal Spirits are not so impetuously moved: and hence
the Thoughts of Suckling the Infant, though they frequently occur to the Woman's
mind, yet if they do not happen with a violent and continual Intentness, the
Animal Spirits cannot be so copiously determined toward the Breasts, as to be
able to dilate and remove the Impediments of the Vessels tending thither.
Besides that many things may happen which may hinder the passage of the Chylus
to the Breasts, notwithstanding the present ardent desire and strong
imagination of suckling the Infant: as scarcity of Chylus, thickness of the
Breasts, obstruction of the Kernels by viscous Humors, by Exulceration, Fall,
Blow, or other Mischance, or a natural Streightness of the Milky Vessels
tending to the Breasts, or compression from the neighboring Parts; and then
the Effects of Thought and Imaginat on are frustrated.

XLII. Hence it appears why Childbearing Why the Milk increases the fourth day
after childbirth.
Women have such plenty of Milk the Third, Fourth or Fifth Day after Delivery:
Because that being tired with their Labor, for the first Two or Three Days,
they do not much employ their Thoughts upon any thing; and for want of
Appetite, eat little, and breed less Chylus, but the next days following, when
they eat more, and the Infant begins to cry more, then they also continually
think of giving it nourishment, and desire to satisfy the Crying of the Child,
and through this Affection, the Passages being loosened by the determined
Influx of the Animal Spirits, the Chylous Juice that was formerly carried to
the Womb, is now turned to the Breasts.

XLIII. To conclude, I shall only A Question.
add one Question worth Examination: Why upon the weaning of the Child, the
Chylous Juice is no longer carried to the Breasts, but the Milk is dried up? It
is because the Woman lays aside all thought of giving Suck, which the more
speedily she does, the sooner and the better are her Breasts dried up; for that
then the more copious Influx of the Animal Spirits to the Breasts, fails; by
which the Glandules of the Breasts, and the Chyliferous Vessels tending
thither, were dilated; and hence the Glandules then fall and are contracted,
and the said Chyliferous and Milky Vessels are compressed by the weight of the
adjacent parts; so that there can be nothing more through those conveyed to the
Breasts, and then that part of the Chylus that was wont to be conveyed thither,
in Women with Child is conveyed to the Womb, in others to the Heart, there to
be changed into Blood; which because the Body does not want in such abundance,
hence it comes to pass that Women are less hungry and thirsty than when they
gave Suck, and so they breed less Chylus, and what Blood is bred superfluous in
the mean time in Women with Child, contributes to the Birth, in others is
evacuated through the Womb.

XLIV. But some will say, Where Why the Breasts are dried up upon weaning.
remains that Milk, which upon the first weaning remains in great plenty in the
Breasts, and is not sucked out? Why is it not coagulated and corrupted, and
consequently does not breed Inflammations and Apostemes?

I answer, it is carried by degrees through the Mammary Veins, to the hollow
Vein, and so to the Heart, in like manner as the Chylus poured forth out of the
Chyliferous pectoral Channel into the subclavial Vein, flows together with the
Veinal Blood to the Heart. But whether that Milky Juice be carried to the Heart
through the Mammary Veins extraordinarily in Women giving Suck, especially such
as abound with Milk, I leave to consideration; seeing that the remarkable
Number and Bigness of the Veins, and the small Number and Bulk of the Arteries
seem to persuade the contrary.

XLV. In opposition to this Opinion What drives the Chylus to the Breasts in
Beasts.
of ours, one notable Doubt arises; How it comes to pass that in Cows, Mares,
Ews, Goats, and other Creatures the Milky Chylous Juice flows in such
abundance, and so constantly to the Udder, seeing that being deprived of
Rational Souls, they are no way capable of Imagination, Thought, Intellect,
Memory, Will, Judgment, etc. True it is our Modern Philosophers that follow
Cartesius, acknowledge no such noble Actions as these in Brutes; or if they
seem to perform some Actions like to these, they believe they neither can nor
ought to be numbered into the Rank of principal Actions, as not being performed
by a Rational Soul, but affirm 'em to proceed only from a certain kind of
Motion of the Spirits induced by the Objects, and flowing from the propriety of
the Disposition of the Parts. And thus they allege that in Brutes certain
Dispositions of the Spirits and the rest of the Parts are induced by the
Objects, from which certain kind of Motions result, in reference to which the
Pores sometimes of these, sometimes of those Parts are opened and shut through
the greater or lesser, slower or swifter, stronger or gentler Influx of the
Spirits. And in this case now proposed by us they would thus argue, viz. In a
Cow, by reason of the great Commotion of the Birth in the Womb, or the Pain of
bringing forth, the Pores are opened about and toward the Udder, and so by the
Influx of Animal Spirits the Passages before shut are dilated, so that the
Chylous milky Juice is at liberty to flow thither more freely through its
proper Vessels. Which Laxity of the milky Passages continues long after
bringing forth, because of the continued opening of the Pores wider than usual
toward the Udder, and the more Copious Influx of the Animal Spirits, and
continued by the tickling Motion about the Udder induced by the grasping of the
Calf that sucks, or the Hand of the Milkmaid.

But in regard the Object cannot of it self induce any sensitive Motion, unless
it be first known either as Good or Evil, and this Knowledge and Perception
presupposes something knowing, far different from the Object to be known (for
being taken without Knowledge and Preception, no Motion can be said to be made
by its means; as in those that are troubled with a Catalepsie, into whose
Organs both sensitive and moving, tho well formed and furnished with Blood,
Heat, and Spirits, tho the Objects fall, they cause no Motion, because they are
not perceived; and consequently there are no new Determinations of the Spirits
to various Parts, nor no alterations of Motion.) Furthermore seeing the
Property of the Disposition of the Parts, necessarily presupposes some peculiar
Disponent, which induces to that proper Disposition, and alters it according to
the nature of the Thing; and even the motion of the Spirits it self presupposes
also some first mover, perceiving and knowing the Object (for nothing knows,
moves, and disposes it self without a Cause) it sufficiently appears, that such
an Explanation neither suffices nor satisfies, especially if we consider over
and above that most brute Animals perceive and distinguish Pains, Smells, and
Tastes, covet things grateful, perceive, know, and avoid things grateful as
such, know their Friends from their Enemies, etc. Which most certainly are no
Operations of the Disposition of the Parts moved by Objects; but of something
perceiving the Objects, and so disposing the Parts to perform such and such
Actions. As in Man a Brain well formed and tempered, and full of Animal Spirits
is not the primary Cause of the principal Actions, but the Rational Soul, which
makes use of the Brain and Spirits as Instruments, and so disposes the Brain,
that sometimes these, sometimes other Pores are more or less opened and shut,
and fewer or more plentiful Spirits sometimes determined after this or that
certain manner through those open Pores; and consequently these, sometimes
others, and many times several principal Functions operate together. Or as an
Organ sufficiently furnished with Pipes, Bellows, and Wind, cannot by virtue of
any Object, or by its own proper Disposition sing any musical Songs, unless by
the Assistance of the Organist, who directing the Keys with his Fingers
determines the Wind sometimes into these, sometimes into other Pipes, and so
produces a grateful Harmony. Thus also in Brutes, besides the Objects and the
proper Disposition of the Brain and other Parts* there must be of necessity
something else over and above, which perceives the Objects, and produces such
wonderful Operations out of those Parts. It is here in vain alleged that
simple Natural Affections, as Hunger, Thirst, Joy, Sadness, want in Brutes no
other Instructor, than the Instinct of Nature: Concerning which Tho. Willis
writes many things, but little to the Dilucidation of this matter. As if that
same natural Instinct did not want an Instructor as well in Brutes as in Men:
For as Man is never a hungry, but when he perceives that troublesome
Vellication of the Stomach; who will believe that Brutes are sensible of Hunger
without that Vellication? Or if they perceive by Instinct without any other
Teacher, let us know what that Instinct is which perceives without a Teacher,
and how it operates that Perception? Which if it be not that rational Soul, of
which Brutes are deprived, what is it? We will call it for the present
something Analogous to the Rational Soul, which in Brutes operates a kind of
Understanding, Memory, Knowledge, with something of obscure Judgment after their
manner, or some such like thing. For Brutes are not moved, nor do they act like
Engines moved by Clock-work, as most of our modern Philosophers endeavored to
inculcate, Regius, and Florentius Schuyl among the rest. For Engines moved by
Clock-work neither feel Pain, nor hear, nor see, nor come when they are called,
nor fly those that threaten 'em; all which Operations are observed in Beasts:
And then says Isaiah, The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribb.
And Jeremiah, The Kite knows his Time, the Turtle, the Swallow, and the Stork,
know the Seasons of their Coming. Thus a Dog knows his Master and the Servants
from Strangers, fawns upon his Friends, barks at his Enemies, and after his
manner understands and executes the Commands of his Master. He dreams in his
Sleep, and barks in his Dream. In hunting also he seems after a manner to
argue; for coming where three ways meet, after he has examined two, and finds
the Game not gone either of them, he takes the third without farther
Examination; as if he had thus reasoned with himself, The Game must be gone
either that way, or that way, or this: But neither that way, nor that way,
therefore this way. Thus Rocarius reports a notable Story of a Dog that
belonged to a peculiar Friend of his, which happened in the Court of Cardinal
Alexander. This Friend of his went a hunting alone one time with his Dog, and
following his Game with great heat in a solitary Wood, fell at length into a
deep Pit, where he had perished inevitably but for his Dog: For the Dog having
lost his Master returned immediately home, filled all the House with his
Howling and Whining, and by running out a doors and returning again, intimated
a kind of eager desire that some body should follow him, which the Cardinal
observing, and perceiving that the Owner of the Dog was missing, ordered some
Persons to follow the Dog, and by him being led directly to the Pit, there they
found his Master and drew him out. Who taught this Dog to leave his Master to
seek for human Help, to return home, to testify his Sadness by his whining, to
urge the Servants to go along with him, to carry them to the Pit, and to show
them his Master fallen into it? Only the Object: Oh the wonderful force of
Objects that reaches Beasts to reason in this manner. A Mare knows her Enemy
the Wolf, and stoutly defends her Foal from his Seizure. Eagles being to
encounter Hearts as Rocarius testifies, first by their fluttering up and down
gather the Dust into their Feathers, then flying over the Heart, they shake the
Dust into the Eyes of the Stag, to the end that being blind he may run headlong
and fall from the Precipice. A wild outrageous Panther, by the Testimony of the
same Author, whose Young accidentally fell into a Pit, from whence she knew
that only Human Help could recover them, as it were guided by some kind of
Reason, besets a Road leading three ways expecting some Man to pass by; at
length lighting upon an unwary Traveller, she fawned upon him, and laying her
Paws upon him, gently lead him, willing as he was to go, to the Pit; out of
which, after he had taken her young ones, the cruel, yet grateful, wild Beast,
for the Kindness done her, guarded the Traveller through the midst of the
Desert, back again to his Road, and dismissed him without the least harm. The
cruel and hungry Lion in Gellius knew Androclus again that had formerly pulled
a Thorn out of his Foot, and was so far from tearing him, that by his outward
Gestures he showed him all the Kindness imaginable, walked about the City with
him, and obeyed him as his Servant, for being formerly his Surgeon. The Doves
carried out of Holland into England, and there kept Prisoners a while, flew
back, when set at Liberty, into Holland, and in two days return to their old
Dovehouse, as Monsieur Abeels, a Merchant, well known among us, can testify. A
Stork makes cruel War with another Stork for having possessed her Nest, and in
conclusion either wounds or kills her, and throws her Chickens and her Eggs out
of the Nest: And the same Bird knows by the Constitution of the Air, when it is
seasonable to fly into remote Regions, and when to return. The singular
Subtlety of Apes is discovered by their Actions. The Elephant does many things
to a Miracle, as if endu'd with Reason. I omit the wonderful Industry of Ants,
or to tell with what Art Birds build their Nests, Spiders spin their Webs, and
Bees build their Combs, and gather their Honey. All which things could never be
done without some kind of Understanding, Knowledge, Memory, and Judgment, or at
least something analogous thereto, tho they are not performed with equal
Perfection in all Creatures; for as that same analogous Reason, is in some more
Excellent and Vivacious, as the Organs are more or less fitted; so some Beasts
differ from others in acuteness of Wit, in Understanding, Memory, Docilitie,
and Stupidity. Hence our Savior himself ascribes to some Creatures a sort of
Knowledge or Understanding, where he says, Be wise as Serpents, but innocent as
Doves. Now I would fain know how simplicity of Mind or Prudence can be in such
Creatures without some kind of Understanding. Tho these Operations are more
Imperfect in Brutes than in Men: In whom also they are sometimes sufficiently
imperfect of themselves; as in Men that have been exposed in Deserts, and bred
up by wild Beasts; who being afterward taken by the Hunters, have differed
little from wild Beasts but in Shape, of which we have several Examples in
Pliny, Goulartius, Dresser, Camerarius and others, who nevertheless by
convenient Education and Exercise attain the highest Pinnacle of Perfection;
which slight Shadow only of Perfection, tho far different from rational
Perfection, most manifestly appears in Brutes, which nevertheless ought of
Necessity to have some Cause. And therefore it is apparent from the Reasons
foregoing that no Motion can be raised up in Brutes, unless Good or Bad be
perceived, and if they be in such a manner perceived, there must of necessity
be within 'em something Perceiving and Knowing. Nevertheless it does not follow
from hence (what our Adversaries infer) that if there be any Understanding and
Knowledge in Brutes, therefore they must have a Soul, and that no less immortal
than the Soul of Man. For that they have See l. 1. c. 28, 29.
a feeling and perceiving Soul must be granted, but that it is immortal like
the Soul of Man we plainly deny. For the Difference of those Souls, and the
Difference of the Original teach the contrary. Scripture therefore, Reason, and
Experience teach us that there is something to be allowed to Beasts which is
Analogous to Reason, but mortal however. Which is perspicuous from this one
thing, that some Creatures run Mad, as Apes intoxicated, Dogs and other
Creatures distempered with a Hydropholie; which Madness could not happen to
Creatures that understood better in their natural Condition, for natural
Ability and Impotency must be referred to the same Subject. And here that
Inference is of no Value, That a Madman, is not mad according to his Rational
Soul, but according to the inner Senses which the Beasts have common with him,
which operate rightly or amiss, as the Organs are well or ill disposed; and so
Brutes also run mad according to those Senses, and not according to any Soul.
This Objection does no way destroy the Existence of some kind of mortal Soul in
Brutes, in some measure Analogous to the immortal Mind, and as it were a kind
of Shadow of it; but rather it proves in Man besides the rational incorruptible
Soul, that there is yet within him another corruptible Soul, common to Brutes,
perfecting the Operations of the internal Senses, called the Vegetative and
Sensitive, which of necessity must be in Man, as we have proved l. 1. c. 29.

The learned Willis labors very much in discovering and explaining the
Percipient, and after he has largely unfolded it, how the Images of Objects are
formed and imprinted in the Brain, by the running backward and forward, Motion,
Repercussion. etc. of the Spirits, at length altogether Doubtful, says he,
However we are yet to enquire what kind of Power that is, which sees and knows
such like Images delineated there, and also according to those Impressions
there received chooses, desires, and exercises the respective Acts of other
Faculties. But that he may disingage himself out of this Perplexity, he says,
1. That there is an Innate Knowledge in Brutes, infused by the supreme Creator,
and implanted in their Principles or Natures from their first Formation, for
certain Uses necessary for the Propagation of Life, which vulgarly uses to be
called Natural Instinct. 2. That there is within 'em a certain acquired
Knowledge by the Impressions of sensible things, by Imitation, Experience, human
Teaching, and by other means learnt by degrees, and which arrives in some to a
higher, in some to a lesser degree of Perfection. In the following Paragraphs
he discourses at large concerning both these sorts of Knowledge, and thus he
believes he has sufficiently extricated himself out of his Labyrinth, when in
the mean time he never does nor can explain, what or what sort of Being, or
what thing that natural Instinct is, and whence that acquired Knowledge
proceeds, which cannot proceed but from something Knowing, which something
Knowing had he explained together with natural Instinct, all this Cloud of
Obscurity had been scattered: But now relying only upon Names and Words, he
leaves his Readers as much in the Dark as they were before.

All which things when Galen had excellently well considered, he writes, That
Brutes are not altogether void of Reason, capable of Affections: And believes
that some sort of Reason, tho to some less, to others more Liberally is to be
allowed to Brutes. Wherein Galen agrees with Aristotle: In Men, says he, there
is Wisdom, Prudence, and Art, so likewise in some Brutes there is a certain
other Nature of this Sort: And in another place, There is in some Beasts
Urbanity, Savageness, Clemency, Cruelty, Fortitude, Sloth, Confidence, Anger,
Malice, and an Image of Prudence. Thus also by the Report of Bodin, the most
learned Philosophers, Chrysippus, Porphyrius, Dion, Solin, Plutarch, and others
have confirmed a sort of Reason allowed by Nature to Beasts. With whom Hugo
Grotius assents, l. 1. de veritat. Relig. Even Beasts exercise some Actions so
orderly and well directed, that they seem to proceed from a kind of Reason
which appears chiefly in Ants and Bees: but is manifest also in other
Creatures, that fly things hurtful, and seek those things that are profitable.
This sort of brutish Reason Aristotle calls Reason by Participation, or Passive
Understanding.

Neither is this Opinion contradicted by that other Text of Scripture, Be not
like the Horse and Mule that wants Understanding. For there, by Understanding
is to be understood an acute and rational Understanding. Thus we usually say of
Men that are Blockish, Fools or Madmen, that they want Understanding; because
their Intellects are not so acute; whereas nevertheless they know and
distinguish Objects after their manner, as appears by their Actions. Moreover,
seeing that both Men and Brutes do know, these perfectly, the other less
perfectly, of necessity we must distinguish between the rational Intellect,
which belongs only to Men; and the Intellect of Brutes, far inferior and more
imperfect than the other, and which never can be brought up to the perfection
of Rationality.

XLVI. But what that Something Analogous What is that something Analogous to
the Rational Soul.
to the Rational Soul, is, no man could hitherto sufficiently unfold. Julius
Caesar thinks he has discovered a sufficient Explication, by calling it Common
Sense, which is in the midst between all the external Senses, and collects
their Multiplicity into one. Others think it to be nothing that subsists of it
self, but only an Accident and Modification of Substance, that is to say, such
a disposition of the Brain and Spirits induced by Heat, which causes Beasts to
live and feel after their manner. But after that manner the Mediums are only to
be understood by which the Act of perceiving is performed nor does it teach us
what that Medium is which perceives such Mediums in Brutes after their manner.
For example, when a Man sees, he wants Heat (for a congealed Eye does not see)
and a convenient disposition both of the Brain and Eye: but there is some other
thing which causes him to see visible things through these Mediums, that is,
the Soul. But seeing Brutes also feel and perceive things visible, audible and
tangible, of Necessity also in them, besides heat and convenient Organs, there
must be something Percipient and Analogous to Reason, by which the Act of
perceiving is performed. Now whatever that is, it manifestly appears, that it
is something singular in Brutes, which was created by the Supreme God at the
beginning, together with the World, and infused and mixed with the Matter of
the World, which in Brutes is again extracted out of Matter, and proceeds into
manifest Act: but in the mean time the most excellent of the Matter is produced
exceeding the common Condition of the mixed Matter, which so manifestly operates
those nobler Actions in Brutes, and frequently in some seems to imitate the
Actions of the Mind. And this is that which we think is to be understood by
Analogous to Reason, which we can better admire at than explain.

XLVII. Yet no man in his Wits Whether Analogon be the same with the Rational
Soul.
will call this Analogon the Rational Incorruptible Soul, since it proceeded
from Corporeal Corruptible Matter, and is propagated by Generation, and not
only operates imperfectly, but is also corruptible, and perishes with the Body:
whereas the Rational Soul did not proceed from the Matter of the Body, but was
created apart by God, and by him infused, operates perfect Actions, is
incorruptible and immortal, and is separable from the Body, and not only
extends its Actions much farther than that corruptible Analogon, but to
Infinity. According to that of the Heathen Prince of Philosophers, It remains
that the Mind alone comes from without, that she is only Divine * for no
Corporeal Act communicates with her Actions. For she contemplates not only the
Substances of Things, but Things also divested of their Substances. She
comprehends Knowledge, beholds the Invisible God, reaches to the Seats of the
Blessed, dives into the Nature of Offices of Angels with admiration; she
contemplates her self, and knows what she is joined to the Body, and what
abstracted from it; views things long past as present; examines Futurity, and
what will never be, Possibilities and Impossibilities, and endeavors to
comprehend things innumerable and infinite. None of which Operations are
performed by the Analogon. Which being Corporeal, contemplates only things
Corporeal.

Concerning this Matter has the Learned Willis written most elegantly; who
after he has alleged the knowing Faculty of the Corporeal Soul to be Fancy or
Imagination, which comprehends corporeal things under an appearing Image only,
and not always under a true one, at length in these Words, But indeed, says he,
the Intellect presiding over the Imagination, beholds all the Species deposited
in its self, discerns or corrects their Obliquities or Hypocrisies, sublimes
the Phancies thence drawn forth, and divesting it from Matter, forms universal
Things from singular; moreover it frames out of those some other more sublime
Thoughts, not competent to the Corporeal, so it speculates both the Nature of
every Substance, and abstracted from the Individuals of Accident, viz.
Humanity, Rationality, Temperance, Fortitude, Corporeity, Spirituality,
Whiteness, and the like; besides being carried higher, it contemplates God,
Angels, its Self, Infinity, Eternity, and many other Notions far remote from
Sense and Imagination. And so as our Intellect, in these kind of Metaphysical
Conceptions, makes things almost wholly naked of Matter, or carrying it self
beyond every visible Species of Matter, it considers them wholly immaterial:
this argues certainly, that the Substance or Matter of the Rational Soul is
immaterial and immortal. Because if this Aptness or Disposition were corporeal,
as it can conceive nothing incorporeal by Sense, it should suspect there were
no such thing in the World.

XLVIII. Therefore the foresaid Analogon The said Analogon is the more
excellent Spirit.
is the more excellent Spirit instructed by Nature, produced out of corporeal
Matter, far exceeding the Condition of other Spirits produced out of Matter,
which Aristotle affirmed to participate of the Nature of the Element of the
Stars: alleging that there is contained in every Seed a certain Spirit nobler
than the Body, which in Nature and Value answers to the Element of the Stars,
by which the Formation of the Birth in Brutes, and other Actions are performed.
This is that Vivific Spirit, which no man hitherto could perfectly describe.
Which being drawn forth out of the Matter by Heat dissolving the Matter, acts
again upon the Matter, and variously disposes it, in such a manner, that
besides many other Actions, it produces the Nobler Actions in Brutes. But this
Disposition of the Parts, which is an Effect of this Spirit, or rather of
Nature latent in the Spirit, and the Medium by which it operates, Modern
Philosophers, contrary to Reason, constituted to be the Efficient Cause of the
said Operations; and so have made the Fabric of Brutes like the Fabric of
Engines moving by Clockwork; not considering that the appropriated disposition
of Wheels and other parts in them, proceeded not either from the Engine it
self, or from the Concoction, Blowing or Motion of the Air, Fire or other
Matter, but from the Hand of some Artificer, who by that disposition carries on
that Motion which he designed in the Engine. For Example sake, the Wheels and
other Parts of a Clock are so disposed as to show the Hours, yet will it be of
no use as to that purpose unless the Artificer pulls up the Weight at prefixed
times, and makes the Clock go slower or faster, according as the Weights are
either lighter or heavier, which he hangs on. So in Brutes, though the Parts be
proportionable and well disposed for the performance of Actions, yet unless
there be something to change and excite those Parts to their designed
Operations, they will act nothing. So that Action proceeds neither from the
innate disposition of the Parts, nor from the Objects; but from hence, that it
knows and perceives the Objects and incites the disposed Parts to various
Operations; which being but slightly considered by some, was the reason that
they understood not that the Propriety of Parts in Brutes required likewise
some more noble Artificer to direct that disposition, and to be the Cause and
Author of it, and of the foresaid nobler Actions.

And by reason of these Operations of the Fancy in Brutes, as in Mankind,
proceeds that more copious Influx of the Animal Spirits in Brutes, and
consequently their continued Generation of Milk.

XLIX. Hence it appears how ill they An Objection refuted.
argue, who denying all Knowledge and Understanding in Brutes, allege, 1. That
Brutes, seeing there can be no thinking Substance assigned to 'em, are deprived
of all Senses. 2. Every thinking Substance is immortal. 3. There is no Sense
without Conscience. 4. No Conscience without the Thing thinking. 5. No Thing
thinking without any Rationality. 6. No Rationality without Immortality.

L. The first is to be contradicted by The refutation.
every Ploughman; for who will presume to deny, That Beasts do excel some more,
some less in all the five Senses? Who dares say, That their Organs of Sense
were assigned 'em to no purpose by the Supreme Creator; or that they know not
what is hurtful, and what is for their Benefit and Advantage. To the Second, we
have already answered, That though such Actions cannot be performed without
some thinking Substance, yet is it not requisite that that Substance should be
Immortal, but something Analogous. The Third and Fourth we grant to be true;
yet we must distinguish in the mean time between the Thing Thinking, which is
imperfect and mortal, etc. and the Thing Thinking, which is immortal and
perfectly rational; of which, the first is but a certain Analogon, or slender
Shadow; which proves the Falsehood of the Fifth, when some Thinking Thing may be
without perfect Rationality; though, as the Sixth says, no perfect Rationality
can be without Immortality.

And so much for these Things; having been more prolix in the Examination of
Lactification, by reason of the Obscurity of the Subject. And here might be
added a farther Discourse of Milk, as it consists of diverse Parts, Caseous,
Butirous, and Serous; but I shall stop here, for fear of transgressing too far
beyond my Bounds.

CHAP. III. Of the Diaphragma.
I. WE now go to the Inner containing Parts of the Middle Belly, among which
comes first to be considered that same remarkable Enclosure which the Greeks
call Diaphragma, from (...), to distinguish; The names.
by the Latins, Septum Transversum, or the overthwart Enclosure, because it
distinguishes the Trunk of the Body into two Bellies. Aristotle calls it (...),
or the Girdling, (...), and (...): but Macrobius calls it Disseptum. By
Hippocrates and many of the An cient Physicians, it is called (...) and (...),
that is the Mind; because that being out of order, the Mind and Senses are
disturbed: and for that the Senses go beside themselves when it is inflamed.

II. It is a Muscle serving for the It Is a Muscle.
Use of Respiration with other Muscles of the Ribs, in shape almost circular,
and much varying in Situation from the rest of the Muscles, answering in
bigness to the overthwart largeness of the Lower Breast.

III. It consists of a fleshy Substance, The Substance.
in the middle for the better strengthening of it, membranous and nervous, to
which Mediety run forth fleshy Fibers from the Periphery of the Breast, as to
the Center; to which Center all Wounds that reach, are esteemed mortal. But
Galen affirms, that Wounds in the fleshy part of it, are not mortal; which
Holler, Iacotius and Alexander Benedict confirm by Examples, and which we have
also experienced in Practice.

IV. It is invested with a double The Membranes.
Membrane; the uppermost of which is the expansion of the Pleura, to which the
Mediastinum and Pericardium stick close, and sometimes, but very seldom the
Lobes of the Lungs, by means of little Fibers. The lower Membrane joins to the
Peritonaeum.

V. Being fastened to the Ribs on The site and connection.
both sides the lower part of the Sternon, and to the Cartilago Mucronata, it
is spread over the Thorax, and about the Vertebrae of the Loins, it is stretched
forth first into two Fleshy, then two Tendinous Portions, strongly fastened to
the said Vertebrae, and descending to the Os Sacrum, through which the Great
Artery descends, with the Nerves of the Sixth Pair applied to the Ribs, and the
Vein Azygos ascends.

From these Portions, many with Galen, describe its Original; others from the
Sword shaped Gristle; others with Fallopius, from the Extremities of the Ribs;
others, with Vesalius and Sylvius, from the middle membranous Center into which
the Nerves enter. Which last Opinion displeases, to whom that Membranous Part
seems rather to be one general Tendon of all the Fibers standing round about:
but the Insertion of the Nerves into the Nervous Part, shows the contrary, as
being always inserted into the Head of the Muscle.

VI. It is penetrable about the middle The Holes.
on the right hand for the Passage of the Vena Cava, on the left hand for the
Passage of the Gullet and Stomach-Nerves. As for the Aorta, that does not
penetrate the Diaphragma, but resting upon the Vertebrae, it is comprehended by
it, as it were within a Semicircle.

VII. It has two Arteries, called Vessels.
Phrenic Arteries, from the Trunk of the great Artery adjoining to it: It has
also two Veins, called Phrenic Veins, carrying back the Remainder of the Blood
after Nourishment, which it inserts into the Trunk of the hollow Vein. It
receives three remarkable Nerves, dispersed through the whole Substance of it;
from the Fold of the Nerves of the Neck, and the Branches of the second
Vertebral pair in Men, and the Brachial Nerves descending through the
Mediastinum, the principal Occasions of the Consent of the Diaphragma with the
Head, and by reason of their Commixture with the small Nerves of the Iaws and
Lips tending to the Muscles, the Authors also of Sardonic Laughter. To these
from the lower Part little Nerves join themselves from the Costal and
Stomachical Nerve passing thither. All these Nerves are inserted near its
middle membranous Part, which is not here the Tail, but the Head of this
Muscle, as toward which the Circumference is drawn with the Ribs annexed.

VIII. In breathing inward, it becomes Its Motion
flat, and from a unequal Laxity falls level, but is stretched out with any
stress; but in fetching the Breath, it is as it were stretched out with
violence, and attracting the Ribs by that same distention, it begins and ends
Expiration with some violence; which Ribs presently following, the Tension
ceases, and a Laxation ensues. For this Act of Breathing is just as we see in a
Casting-Net, which is thrown spread abroad into the Water; but being drawn up
again, is contracted by the inner Ropes of its Circumference. Thus in breathing
inward, the Diaphragma spread abroad in Expiration, contracts its Circumference
by its Fibers together with the Ribs annexed to it, and so returns to its loose
Convexity. In like manner as in Ringing, when the Bell goes up, the Rope is
upon the full stretch, but coming down again, the Rope falls loose and to spare
to the ground. But it is not necessary that the tension or stretching of the
Diaphragma should last so long as Expiration lasts; for the Ribs being drawn by
one forcible violence, presently follow without any farther violence, and by
the gentler contraction of the intercostal Muscles, the Sacrol^mbal and
Triangular assisting, are reduced again nearer one to another. Thus any one may
try upon himself, that the first part of Expiration is done with some force,
the rest follows more gently without any violence: which is remarkably observed
in deep Sighs, and violent fetching the Breath. From whence it is apparent that
the Diaphragma is the Primary Muscle that causes Expiration.

John Swammerdam assigns to it a Use altogether contrary; I say contrary, nay
and impossible too. For he writes that the Diaphragma by extending itself,
dilates the Breast, and procures ^reathing inward, which Sylvius also inculates
in his Praxis Medic. The same also John de Bruyn, a most learned Professor of
Philosophy in our Academy, and John Mayo, an Englishman, in his Tract of
Respiration, endeavors in a long Discourse to maintain the same thing, when as
the Action of all Muscles whatever, and consequently of the Diaphragma, is the
same; that is, to contract themselves, and to bring the Part fastened to them,
toward their Head, and hence also it is impossible* that among all the rest of
the Muscles, the Diaphragma only should be able by extending, to dilate both it
self, and the Ribs which are fastened to it, and that without the assistance of
the other Muscles serving to Inspiration; for it is a thing unheard of and
contrary to the Nature of Musculous Fibers, to act by extending. If he meant,
that the same dilatation of the Thorax was caused by the contraction of the
Diaphragma, then he contradicts Reason and Experience in such a manner, that no
man can excuse him any longer. For seeing that the Diaphragma must of necessity
bring the Ribs toward its Head, and the Head of it being the middle membranous
Part, and that situated in a higher Medium, and a more elevated Place, than the
Ribs annexed to it below, of necessity while it contracts it self, it must
bring the lower Ribs inward toward its Head, and so must streighten, not
dilate the Capacity of the Breast. Moreover, it is another Mistake of his to
think that the Diaphragma in the act of drawing in the Breath, drives the
Bowels of the Abdomen downward, whereas they are moved upward, as any one may
find in himself, and find true in the Dissections of living Animals. Reason
also teaches us, that in the Act of Breathing inward, the Convexity is reduced
to a Flatness, because the sides of it together with the Ribs annexed, are
moved outward and upwards, and hence also the Muscles and Bowels annexed to the
Diaphragma, must of necessity ascend upward and outward. Moreover Swammerdam
himself writes, that in Expiration the Abdomen is forced inward and downward,
and therefore in drawing the Breath inward, which is the contrary motion, it
heaves upward. Lastly, he adds; That in Expiration the Diaphragma ascends
upward, whereas at that time in the middle, where it adheres to the
Mediastinum, which is annexed to the Sternum-Bone and the Vertebrae of the
Back, it is moved neither upward nor downward, but descends every way in
compass downward, and then returns to its former Oven-like Convexity.

IX. Riolanus disputes whether the Whether the Situation of it be Natural or
Animal.
Motion of the Diaphragma be Natural or Animal; and seems to conclude, That the
Motion of it is Natural, because it does not depend upon our own Will, and
follows the Condition of Respiration. But his Opinion is repugnant both to
Truth and Experience, as we shall show, Chapter 13. And seeing it is performed by
the Muscles of the Thorax, of which the greatest part composes the Diaphragma,
of necessity the Motion of the Diaphragma is Animal. In vain also does Riolanus
distinguish between it free Motion, when it is moved of its self; and its
violent Motion; when it follows the Motion of other Muscles: which Motion does
not consist in acting alone, but in being able to act. And therefore when the
Diaphragma, or any other Muscle ceases to act for a time, and for a while
follows the Motion of other Muscles, we must not presently deny the Motion of
it to be animal; for it is able to move its self at pleasure at any time: and
if it cease from its Motion, or follow the Motion of other Muscles, this also
proceeds from its own Will, because it can do otherwise.

CHAP. IV. Of the Pleura, Mediastinum, and Thymus, or Canel-Bone-Kernel.
I. THE Pleura is a Membrane The Pleura.
hard, white and strong, spread under the Ribs and their Muscles, and girdling
all the inner parts* of the Thorax.

II. Lindan over-curiously enquires The Names
into the Etymology of the Name, and thinks it to be called Pleura erroneously,
seeing that (...) signifies a Rib, and not a Membrane; and therefore with
Aretaeus and Ruffus he would rather have it called the Girding Membrane.

Certainly it is a frivolous thing Its duplicity.
to be so nice in Etymologies of this Nature, when we know what the Thing is,
and what all Physicians for so many Ages have meant by the Pleura*Membrane. But
such Critics as these seem more desirous to know the Bones, than taste the
Kernels.

III. It is thought to be double, which Doubling seems to be more conspicuous
about the Vertebrae of the Back, and in the Mediastinum. However Riolanus
denies any such doubling, with whom some others agree; because it is not easily
demonstrated beyond the Mediastinum.

On the inside, where it looks toward the Lungs, it is very smooth; but on the
outside, being more rough, it sticks fast to the Mid- Pleura Muscles, the Ribs,
the Sternon, and the Vertebrae of the Back; but not immediately to the Bones,
but by means of the Periosteum, with which those Bones are most neatly clothed.

IV. Inwards, sometimes in one, The little Fibers.
sometimes in both sides, it often sends forth from its self nervous diminutive
Fibers, by means whereof many times the Lungs (and that in healthy People) are
annexed to the Pleura, without any Inconvenience to Respiration.

V. Both above and below it is pervious Holes.
with several holes, for the Passage of the great Artery, the hollow Vein, the
Gullet, and several other Vessels.

VI. It is furnished with Arteries, Its Vessels.
Veins and Nerves from the Intercostals.

VII. It is said to have its Original Its Original.
from the Bones of the Spine, from which it ascends on each side, through the
sides to the Sternon; under which the Membrane of each side joins together,
dividing the Lungs and the Capacity of the Breast into two parts, and
constituting that Fence in the middle of the Breast, which is called
Mediastinum; which conjunction of The Mediastinum.
the Membranes of each side is then most conspicuous when the Sternum Bone is
torn from it.

VIII. Between these Membranes, Its Cavity.
from the Clavicles to the Pericardium, some there are who assert a certain
Cavity, wherein vicious Humors frequently gathered together, occasion several
Distempers, believing that Cavity which they made by tearing the Membrane from
the Sternum-Bone, to have been there before. Which is a perfect Mistake. For
that, if you begin the dissection from the hinder part, the Ribs being
loosened, then you shall find the doubled Pleura annexed, without any Cavity
between.

IX. The Mediastinum receives Its Vessels.
Arteries from the innermost Mammary Arteries, and sends forth Veins to the
mammary Veins, and the Vein without a Pair, which are seen upon removing the
Sternum. Moreover it inserts a Vein called the Mediastin, into the subclavial
Branch of the hollow Vein: which Vein is sometimes single and larger, and
sometimes double and slenderer.

X. The Use of it is to sustain the Its Use.
Heart as it hangs, and to defend it from Injuries, also to divide the Breast
and Lungs into two Parts; that the one being endammag'd or out of order, the
other may perform the Office of Respiration, also to contain the Diaphragma
upward, lest the Bowels hanging from it, the Liver and Stomach should draw it
too much downward with their weight.

XI. To this same Mediastinum, The Kernel under the Canel-Bone or Thymus.
about the Throat in the uppermost part of the Breast, grows the Thymus, close
joined to the Divisions of the subclavial Arteries and Veins* which is a
glandulous, soft, spongy and whitish Body, bigger in Women and moist Bodies,
than in Men and dry Bodies.

This Part in new born Infants is distinguished with a small triple Kernel, and
seems to have some Assinity of Substance with the Sweetbread: in People grown
up, the Moisture being consumed, it is much thinner. Wharton saw in an Abortion
in the sixth Month, the lower part of the Thymus grown to the Pericardium, and
thence being bifork'd as it was, under the Canel-Bone without the Breast,
ascending the sides of the Weazand. So likewise in Calves, it adheres at the
lower part to the Pericardium; whence it increases into a bigger Bulk, and
being divided, leaves the Thorax above, and ascending both sides of the
Weazand, runs forth to the Maxillary Kernels, and sometimes to the Parotides.

XII. And in these Creatures it is Lactes.
very great, called Lactes, and coveted as a dainty Bit.

XIII. It has also little Arteries and Veins from the Iugulars, so small, Its
Vessels*
that they are hardly to be seen in Dissection.

XIV. Wharton allows the Thymus Nerves from the sixth Pair, and Its Juice.
the subclavial Contexture, which he thinks do empty into this Kernel their
nutritive Liquor defiled with some impurity and extraordinary acrimony, and
resume it again when refined. But this is an erroneous Opinion; for Wharton
takes the Lacteal Vessels to be Nerves, and describes 'em as such: which in
these Glandules are never more commodiously to be seen, than by inspection of a
Calf newly, calv'd, and fed with Milk, in the same manner with those that are
scattered among the Kernels of Breasts that give Suck. Moreover Wharton does
not observe what Juice is contained in the Thymus of a newborn Birth, that is
to say, whether Chylous or Milky, such as Harvey found therein; and Deusingius
saw plentifully flow out of it; and such as you shall find in sucking Calves
killed an hour or two after they have sucked. Which Juice does not flow thither
through the Nerves, but through the Lacteal Vessels, to be brought to more
perfection therein, and so to be transmitted through the subclavial Veins to
the Hollow Vein and Heart. But because this Juice in grown People, by reason of
the narrowness of the Lacteal Passages tending thither, as being dried up,
flows in very small quantity, or not at all, into the Thymus, hence in such
People, that part is very much diminished and contracted, in like manner as in
Women's Breasts when they grow dry.

Therefore there are no Nerves that are manifestly carried into the Thymus, as
being of little use to this Part, neither sensible nor wanting the Sense of
Feeling. Tho perhaps it may permit some invisible Branches of Nerves, to bring
about some private Effervescency for its own Nourishment.

XV. Wharton affirms that he has Lymphatic Vessels.
often seen Lymphatic Vessels running through this part, and emptying
themselves into the Subclavial Vein. Nor do they pass thither without reason;
seeing that in the preparation of the milky Matter, that Lympha is requisite to
raise a fermentaceous Effervescency in the Heart.

CHAP. V. Of the Pericardium and the Humor therein contained.
I. THE Pericardium ( as it were thrown about the Heart, which Hippocrates
calls (...), the Sheath or little Capsule of the Heart) is a membranous
Covering, every way enfolding the Heart, whereby it is contained within its
Seat, and defended from all external Injuries.

It is contiguous to the Heart, but so far distant from it as the Convenience
of Pulse and Agitation requires.

II. It arises at the bottom of the Its Original.
Heart from the common outward Tunicles taken from the Pleura, enfolding the
Vessels of the Heart, which being about to enter the Heart, leave it for the
forming of the Pericardium.

III. Riolanus allows it a double Its Membranes.
Membrane, the outermost of which he will have to be derived from the
Mediastinum, but the innermost from the Tunicle of the Vessels of the Heart.
But it would be too great a Difficulty to demonstrate that Duplicity. Moreover
the outermost Tunicle of the Vessels of the Heart is derived from the Pleura,
as is also the Membrane of the Mediastinum. Besides that it would be absurd
that from one single Pleura two Tunicles should meet together toward the
Forming of the Pericardium; one from the Tunicle of the Vessels, and another
from the Mediastinum, and that in the mean time the Mediastinum should remain a
peculiar Membrane. The same Riolanus, inconstant to himself, writes in his
Animadversions upon Laurentius, that the Pericardium rises from the Pleura, in
the doubling of which it is contained; and in his Animadversions upon Bauhin,
That there is not a double, but only one single Tunicle of the Pericardium:
forgetting perhaps what he had written concerning their duplicity in his
Anthopograph. l. 3. c. 7.

IV. The outermost part is tied to Its Connection.
the Mediastinum with several little Fibers, and appears conjoined, and
continuous to it about the bottom of the Heart, where it gives way for the
greater Arteries and Veins to pass through. The lower part of it sticks to the
Center of the Diaphragma.

V. For Nourishment it has such Its Vessels.
slender Arteries, that they can hardly be discerned. It sends forth little
Veins to the Phrenic and Axillary Veins. It also admits diminutive Nerves from
the left Branch that turns back, and the Sixth Pair passing to the Heart.

VI. It contains within it a serous The Liquor of the Pericardium.
Liquor, ruddy in Bodies naturally constituted, bred from the Vapors sent from
the Heart, and somewhat condensed in the Pericardium, to the quantity of one or
two Spoonfuls. This is the true Cause of its Generation; and therefore they are
not to be heeded, who think it to be produced from Drink, Spittle, Fat of the
Heart, or any other Causes. Nicholas Stenonis however believes it to be emptied
out of certain Lymphatic Vessels into the Peritonaeum.

VII. This Liquor moistning the Its Use.
Heart withoutside, and rendering it slippery, makes its Motion also more easy,
and prevents overmuch Dryness. But the long want of it causes Dryness, and many
times a Consumption. The want of it proceeds, when through some Wound of the
Pericardium, Exulceration, or some other Solution of Continuity that same Sweat
of the Heart condensed therein, flows out of it, and cannot be contained
therein. Yet some Practitioners have observed then, when it has flowed out
through some Wound of the Pericardium, that Wound being cured, it has bred
again, and the Patients have recovered their Health. Of which we have many
Examples alleged by Galen, Cardan, Beniverius, Peter Salius, and others.

This Liquor is found as well in the Living as Deceased, as appears by the
Dissection of living Creatures; which clearly convinces Matthew Curtius, who
will not allow it in living Animals.

VIII. In diseased Bodies we have Wh^ such it is i^ diseased Bodies.
found it of a more watery Color, sometimes like Urine, at other times like
troubled Water, but much more in Quantity. For I have met with many Anatomies
in our Hospital, in which I have found half a Pint of this Liquor at a time. In
the Year 1651. in the Body of an English Man that had long fed upon ill Diet,
and so falling into a Flegmatic Cachexy, at length died, we showed to the
Spectators at least two Pints contained in a distended and very much loosened
Pericardium, which was observed by several as an unusual Accident.

This liquor I always found to be less The cause of the difference in Quantity.
in Quantity, and more ruddy in Men of a hot Temper, in whom the Vapors
exhaling from the Heart are more thin, and but a small Quantity condensed in
the Pericardium, and such as were condensed were sooner attenuated by the
violent Heat of the Heart; and sooner exhale through the Pores of the
Pericardium. On the other side I observed it more watery, more plentiful, and
pale in colder Complexions, in whom through ill Diet, a diseased Constitution,
or some other Causes, their Heat was less strenuous. For which reason thicker
Vapors sent from the Substance of the Heart, and collected and condensed in
greater Quantity in the Pericardium, were not so soon dissipated for want of
sufficient Heat. Hence* Vesalius affirms it to be more plentiful in Women than
in Men: And Riolanus observed it more plentiful in old Men than in young Men.

X. Moreover we observed that a The plenty of it does not cause Palpitation of
the Heart.
greater Quantity of this Liquor does not cause the Palpitation of the Heart;
which is generally asserted however by most Physicians, from Galen's Opinion.
For in all those, in whom after they were dead I found a greater quantity of
this Liquor in the Pericardium, during all the time of their Sickness I
observed no Palpitation of the Heart at all, not so much as in the Englishman
before mentioned, but on the other side, a languid and weak Pulse. Neither does
the Plenty of that Liquor cause such a Narrowness of the Pericardium, as is
vulgarly believed, that the Heart cannot move freely within it, and therefore
palpitates. But on the other side we always found, that the Pericardium was
thereby rendered so broad and loose, that the Heart might move more freely
therein, than in lesser Liquor. So that the Plenty of this Liquor does not
cause Palpitation, which is rather excited by any Liquor tho but small, which
contrary to Custom suddenly and violently dilates, or by its Acrimony,
Corruption, or griping Quality molests the Heart, and stirs it up to expel so
troublesome an Enemy.

CHAP. VI. Of the Heart in General. See Table 9.
I. COR, the Heart, seems to take its The Names.
Name from Currere to run; for which reason the Belgians call it Heart, or Heart,
that signifies also a Heart or Stag: because as that Beast excels all others in
Swiftness and Motion, so does the Heart surpass all other parts of the Body in
the same Qualities. Which Belgic word nevertheless seems to be derived from
Harden, which signifies Duration, or from Hard, which signifies Hardness,
either because its Motion lasts all a Man's Lifetime; or else because it
exceeds the Muscles, and other Parenchyma's in hardness of Substance. Riolanus
deduces the word Cor from the Greek (...), contracted of (...), from (...) to
burn, because from thence the Fire of our Body proceeds. And so the Belgic
Heart, may be derived from Heert, which signifies a Hearth. Meneti^s derives it
from (...), to Shake, or Brandish. Chrysippus deduces it from (...) or (...)
signifying Strength, or from (...) to be strong in Empire, because it performs
most strenuous Actions, and governs all the other parts of the Body.

II. However it is the Principal of It is a principal Part.
all the Bowels, the Sun of the Microcosm, the Principle of the Actions of
Life, the Fountain of Heat and Vital Spirit, and the Primum mobile of our Body.
Which being vigorous and active, all the natural Functions of the Body continue
in a vigorous and flourishing Condition; when that languishes, they languish;
and when that fails, they cease altogether. For in this is contained the Fuel
and Flame of natural Heat; while all those parts of the Body grow stiff and
numm'd with Cold, to which the Blood is hindered from coming from the Heart; and
that Blood grows cold that is absent longest from this Fountain of Heat, and
the wast of natural Heat can be repaired in no other part of the Body than in
this. All which things are confirmed by the Testimony of the Senses, for that
if you put a Finger into the Heart of a dissected living Creature, so
extraordinary a Heat is felt therein, as the like is not to be felt in any
other part of the Body.

III. This Heat, tho so excelling The Fuel of Heat.
from the Principle of Heat it self, as it is, and tho it be implanted and
fixed within it; yet certain it is, that it is maintained and augmented by the
Humors infused into its Ventricles, and there fermenting, and is continually
fed by that continual Fermentation or Effervescency of Humors discharged into
it. Limestone burns through the mixture of Water, by reason of its
Fermentation or Effervescency; what wonder then if the Heat of the Heart be
presently inflamed by the Fermentation of Humors flowing into it? and that
Flame should be more or less according to the greater or lesser fermentaceous
Effervescency, which greatly depends upon the aptitude of the Matter to be
fermented? For the innate hot Spirits of the Heart, act upon the Matter that
flows in, and ferment it with its Heat, and cause it to boil, and so renew the
Flame that would extinguish by degrees, till it went quite out.

IV. It is seated in the middle of Its Si^ation.
the Breast, surrounded with the Pericardium and Mediastinum, somewhat reflexed
with the Point toward the left, by reason of the Diaphragma, and fastened to it
in none of the adjoining parts, but hanging only from the Vessels going in and
out at the bottom, to which it is united. But its Pulsation is felt most in the
left side, below the Pap, because the Sinister Ventricle arises toward the
fore-parts of the Thorax with the Aorta, which both together strike the left
side. But the Right Ventricle lies deeply seated toward the right side, and
therefore its Pulsation is less felt without upon the right side. It is very
rare that the Heart changes this Situation, and that the right Ventricle lies
in the left side, and the left Ventricle in the right Side, and beats in this.
Yet Riolanus affirms he observed this Situation in a Man of forty Years of Age,
and in the Queen Mother of Lewis the XIII.

V. The Substance of it is firm, Its Substance.
thick, compact; some thinner and softer in the right side, thicker and more
compacted in the left side; closer and harder at the Point: Yet at the end of
the point where the left Ventricle ends, thinner, as consisting of the
Concourse of the inner and outer Membrane.

VI. This Substance Galen affirms Its Fibers.
to be interwoven with a threefold sort of Fibers, whom most Anatomists follow.
But if the Fibers of the Heart be diligently considered, and sunder'd by
degrees (which may be done as well in a boiled Heart, as in one newly taken
out) there are no transverse Fibers to be found, whatever Vesalius has
imagined, but they seem all to be wound about with a periwincle Chanel, that is
somewhat bowing and arched about the middle; yet they do not all reach the
Point neither, but are turned upward with their Extremities. For those which
first descend from the Orifices of the Ventricles are shorter, next to which
are others somewhat longer, yet not reaching to a Cone. To these are joined
others somewhat longer: So that at length, the last, which are the longest,
reach to a Cone, and contain the rest which are shorter and placed under them,
and annexed to them. And because the shorter contained under the longer make
the Heap the higher, it comes to pass that the upper and middle part of the
Heart is somewhat more bunchy, when the longer, to whose Extremities the
shorter cannot reach, end in a sharper Cone. Nevertheless according to the
Observation of Nicholas Steno, this same Course of the Fibers seems rather to
be observed in the Region of the right than left Ventricle. He observed this
Course in the right Ventricle to ascend the Fibers obliquely descending
inwardly from the Septum toward the hinder Parts along the exterior
Superficies, and so to elevate a little the bottom of the right Ventricle
toward the Basis; and hence it happens that in Contraction, the Heart in the
right side comes to be not only shorter, but sometimes rounder and thicker, and
by reason of this greater shortness and thickness of the right and left side of
the Walls, of necessity the Hollowness of the Ventricles become narrower.

VII. By reason of these Fibers, Whether the Heart be a Muscle.
and the Motion of Pulsation, Hippocrates asserted the Heart to be a Muscle;
which has hitherto been stiffly denied by all the Schools of Physicians who have
generally asserted that it is the Chief Bowel in the Body.

1. Because therein is generated the most noble Humor together with its
Spirit; viz. The spirituous Vital Blood; whereas there is no particular Humor
or Spirit generated in any Muscle. 2. Because in hardness of Substance it
exceeds the Substance of all Muscles. 3. Because fleshy Fibers do not make a
Muscle; for otherwise the Stomach and the Piss-bladder, by reason of their
fleshy Fibers might easily be reckoned into the number of Muscles: From which
they are nevertheless exempted by common Consent. 4. Because the Heart has
Ventricles and Valves, which are not to be found in any Muscle of the whole
Body. 5. Because the Muscles are the Instruments of voluntary Motion, which are
moved at Pleasure and not perpetually but by Intervals, and are tired by long
and vehement Motion; and so compelled to desist from Motion. Where on the
contrary the Heart is moved not with an animal, but with a natural unwearied
Motion, which cannot be altered, increased, lessened or stopped at pleasure; but
continues from the beginning to the end of a Man's Life.
Now tho these be very strong Arguments, nevertheless Nicholas Steno goes on,
and pronounces that the Heart is nothing else but a Muscle, because it has all
those things that are allowed to a Muscle, neither is there any thing found in
the Heart which is denied a Muscle; and hence excuses it from the duty of
sanguifying and generating natural Spirits, and lays it up among the servile
Muscles, despoyl'd of all the Privileges hitherto allowed it, perhaps intending
to write its Elegy in a short time, with the same Applause as Bartholine makes
his Epitaph upon the Liver; as if I should say, because the Pissbladder has all
those things which are allowed the Stomach, as Membranes, Nerves, Arteries, and
Veins, and a globous and hollow Form, therefore the Bladder is the Stomach, and
appointed for the same Uses.

VIII. The Heart resembles a Pyramid Its Figure.
with the sharp end turned downward, or broad above and pointed below. To which
purpose it is divided into the Base, or upper part, and the Cone or sharp part,
which terminates below in a Point.

IX. The Bigness of it varies according Its Bigness.
to Age and Temper. Yet considering the Bulk of Body, it is bigger in Men, than
in any other Creatures. The ordinary length of it in Persons grown to ripe
years, is about the depth of six Fingers, and four Fingers broad. It is also
observed that in men of hot Constitutions, and Courageous, it is lesser and
harder, but in cold Constitutions, and Men that are timid, it is bigger and
softer. In like manner in all other timorous and slothful Creatures, according
to the Proportion of the Body it is very large* but in such as are bold and
daring, small or of a moderate bigness. Bauschius however produces some
Examples of Lions dissected, whose Hearts according to the proportion of the
Bodies of those Creatures, were much larger than in any other Creature.
Sometimes, but very rarely, there has been observed a wonderful Excess of the
Heart in bigness. And so that Man had a monstrous Heart, which Dominic de
Marchetti asserts to have dissected at Padua; which was of so vast a Magnitude,
that the Lungs being very small, it possessed the whole Concavity of the
Breast, and depressed the Diaphragma, having the Pericardium joined to the
Pleura at the sides, and its Ventricles so large, that they were able to
contain the ordinary Heart of any other Man. No less monstrous was that of
which Kerkringius writes, that being dissected out of a Woman of forty years of
age, weighed two and twenty Ounces, and whose right Ear only equalled an
ordinary Heart of a Man. The Pulmonary Artery also, and the hollow Vein, were
of an extraordinary Bigness. Many other Examples of Hearts of an extraordinary
Bigness Bartholinus sets down in his Observations, as having been seen by
himself.

X. It is wrapped about on the side Its Coats.
with a proper and thin, but strong and compact Tunicle, and hardly separable
from it, for the Security of the Bowel; and such a Tunicle as this, is that
same thin proper exterior Tunicle of the great Arteries: And as the thin
Pellicle on the inside enfolding the Ventricles is continuous and common with
that same thin Pellicle, which like a smooth little Skin enfolds the greater
Arteries on the inside; hence it is very likely, that the Arteries borrow these
Tunicles from the Heart, as the Nerves borrow two Tunicles from the Meninges of
the Brain.

XI. To this exterior Tunicle, about Its Fat.
the bottom grows a hard sort of Fat, on purpose to moisten it, which Riolanus
has observed to be more copious and yellower in Women than in Men. This Fat has
been seen so abounding round about the Heart in Beasts, that formerly the
Southsayers have been often deceived thereby, and have thought the Beasts had
no Hearts. Thus Spigelius writes, that in an Eagle dissected at Padua, he found
the Heart surrounded with such a quantity of Fat, that he could easily have
persuaded many that were present that the Bird had no Heart.

XII. It is a very rare thing to find Its Hairs.
the Heart Hairy; which however has been observed in some Hearts. As in that of
Hermogenes the Rhetorician, by the Report of Caelius Rodiginus. And in Leodina
and Lisander the Lacedaemonian, by the Testimony of Plutarch. Also in
Aristomenes of Messina, as Valerius Maximus witnesses. Of modern Authors
Beniverius, Amatus of Portugal, and M^retus affirm that they have observed
hairy Hearts.

XIII. Through the outward parts of Its (...)*
the Parenchyma are scattered several Vessels called Coronary, because they
encircle the bottom of the Heart like a Crown; and are both Arteries and Veins.

XIV. There are two Coronary Coronary Arteries.
Arteries, arising from the beginning of the Aorta, before it goes forth from
the Pericardium, which some think is furnished with a little Valve at its first
rise, to hinder the return of the Blood. These Arteries encompass the Heart,
and extend many little Branches from the Basis to the Cone, of which the most
and largest are conspicuous in the left side. Their Use is to convey the
spirituous Blood immediately issuing out of the left Ventricle, for the
Nourishment of the Parenchyma. Harvey believes that the Heart, by means of
them, together with the Blood, receives both Heat and Life. Which Opinion
Riolanus derides, who asserts it to be absurd for the Heart to receive Life and
Heat from that Blood, since the Heart it self is the Fountain of Life and Heat,
from whence arises the heat of that Blood, and hence concludes, that the
outward parts of the Heart are only nourished by these Coronary Arteries, and
the Fat preserved. To which he might have added that the Heart makes the Blood
and causes it to be, and lives and is moved before there is any Blood.

XV. The Coronary Veins also Coronary Veins.
are two; Which like the Coronary Arteries encircle the Heart, and are inserted
into the hollow Vein, and empty the Blood which remains after Nourishment, and
out of many lesser little Branches ascending from the Cone to the Base into the
hollow Vein. To these, though very erroneously, Bauhinus, and Spigelius allow a
Valve, by which they believe the Influx of the Blood out of the Coronary into
the hollow Vein is prevented. Whereas of necessity that Influx ought to be
uninterrrupted and free, and if there be any little Valve there, it ought to be
placed after such a manner, as to hinder the Influx of the Blood out of the
hollow into the Coronary Vein, in regard that to the same purpose there is a
little Valve annexed to the emulgent Jugular, and several other Veins which
open into the hollow Vein.

XVI. Besides the Coronary Vessels, Nerves.
Galen asserts, That the Heart also receives small and invisible diminutive
Nerves from the sixth conjugation or joining together of the Nerves: but as
Riolanus observes, it receives them from the fold of the stomachic nerves
existing at the Basis of the Heart toward the Spine. Of these Nerves of the
Heart Picolomini, Sylvius, Bauhinus, Bartholin, and others make mention. And
Dissection teaches us, that they are difficultly to be found, and not to be
discerned within the Substance it self of the Heart: and this Fallopius
testifies, in these Words; Under the Basis of the Heart, says he, where the
Arterial Vein begins to turn to the left side, and where that remarkable
Arterial Passage in the Embryo is, which joins the said Vein with the Aorta, is
a certain Fold, or Nervous Complication, strong and solid, from whence a great
quantity of Nervous Matter embraces the whole Basis of the Heart, through which
several Branches of little Nerves thence produced are scattered, and run
through its whole Substance (which he adds by conjecture) though I cannot
follow them exactly and particularly with my eye.

Thus Galen could not exactly discern the insertion of the Nerves into the
Substance. Only, says he, its covering the Pericardium, seems to receive the
Branches of slender Nerves, from which being divided, other conspicuous
Branches, at least in Animals of larger Bulk, seem to be inserted into the
Heart it self: but they are divided into the Substance, that cannot be
perspicuously discovered by the Senses.

These Nerves by reason of their extraordinary slenderness, are so
extraordinarily imperceptible, that it was questioned by many, and even by my
self formerly, whether any little Nerves or no did enter the Heart. However at
length, after a more diligent Search, I found several diminutive Nerves, like
small Threads, extended from the Fold to the Basis of the Heart, and the
Orifices of the Ventricles, in the same manner as Fallopius discovers them,
which I found a most difficult thing to follow into the Substance it self of
the Heart; for that being scattered in the Basis it self, and the exterior
Tunicle, they seemed presently to disappear, and only two somewhat of the
larger size, seemed to enter the substance of the Parenchyma: whence I thought
it probable, if any Branches ran any farther, that they are only extended like
thin and invisible Threads into the substance, and bequeath it a kind of dull
sense of Feeling. Fallopius attributes to the Heart a most acute sense of
Feeling, but contrary to experience: For its dull sense of Feeling is
sufficiently apparent in every strong Pulse, which is not felt either in or by
the Heart. Nay not in that same sick person mentioned by Fernelius, who
consumed away insensibly, in whose Heart, after he was dead, he found three
Ulcers, and not a little hollow, and full of Matter, contracted long before;
which must have occasioned a most sharp pain in so sensible a Part: of which
nevertheless Fernelius makes no mention (nor Dominic de Marchettis, in a
Patient of the same Nature) without doubt because the Patient never complained
of any pain. And the same Experiment is added of a Person wounded in the Heart,
whom we saw our selves, who nevertheless complained of no pain in his Heart.

Here perhaps it may be objected, That the Inconvenience of Palpitation is
sufficiently felt. To which I answer, That it is not felt in the Heart, but in
the Pericardium, the Mediastinum, the middle of the Diaphragma, and other
adjoining Parts, which being of quick sense of feeling, are soon and violently
pained by a strong motion of the Heart putting a force upon them. But what
shall we say, when fetulent Vapors carried from the Womb and other Parts to the
Heart, put it to great Pain, does not that Pain proceed from its acute sense of
feeling? I answer, if the Heart felt any twinging vellication, it would
complain; but it does not complain: therefore. Whence I infer, That though we
allow a kind of dull sense of feeling to the Heart, especially in its outward
Tunicle, and the Orifices of the Ventricles; nevertheless we must believe, that
these Alterations and Pains whatever they are, especially the sharper sort,
chiefly proceed from hence, either because the Heart has but a dull sense of
feeling, or else, 1. Because that the Blood which ought to be dilated in the
Heart, is thickened, coagulated, or otherwise depraved by those corrupt and
vicious Vapors and Humors, so that it cannot be dilated as it ought, or is
usual for it to be in the Heart; whence proceeds its faster or slower,
disorderly or otherwise discomposed Motion. 2. Because the innate Spirit of the
Heart, the principal Cause of Motion, is overmuch coagulated, refrigerated or
dissipated by those Humors. 3. Because other more sensible Parts being pained
and tormented by those vicious Humors, are very much agitated, contracted and
loosened; and for that reason they force the Blood from themselves toward the
Heart after an unusual manner, whence it happens that the Blood is attenuated
also in the Heart after an unusual manner, so that the Pulse being altered, it
is not sent conveniently to the Brain, by which means it happens that the
Animal Spirits are generated out of order, and sent out of Order to the Nerves.

Descartes observing no remarkable or The Opinion of Descartes.
apparently manifest Nerves to be extended into the Substance it self of the
Heart, was unwilling confidently to affert it, but in the mean time, that he
might the better explain the Passions of the Mind, affirms with Fallopius, that
there are certain diminutive Nerves which reach to the Orifices of the
Ventricles of the Heart: for he says that there are particularly to be observed
certain Nerves inserted into the Basis of the Heart, which serve to dilate and
contract the Orifices of its Concavities; and upon this foundation he reared
his Learned Treatise of the Passions of the Mind.

XVII. These Animal Spirits therefore, The Use of the Animal Spirits in the
Heart.
as has been said, contribute a certain faint sense of feeling to the Heart;
for it ought not to have a quick sense, lest it should be disturbed and
molested by its continual motion, and the Passage and Fermentation of sharp and
corroding Humors. Besides, the Parts being altogether completed, they
contribute also a kind of fermentative power to the Nourishment of the Heart,
of which, at the beginning, it had no need, because the sharp particles of the
ingendring Seed collected together in the formation of the Heart, contain in
themselves a sufficiently sharp fermenting quality, proportionable to the
tenderness of the Matter wherein they operate. But afterward when the Bulk of
the Heart enlarging it self there is in need of stronger Matter, than there is
required the assistance of Spirits somewhat more fermentative. Lastly, These
Spirits loosen or contract the Orifices of the Heart, or its Ventricles; by
which means there happens a freer Ingress and Egress of the Blood to the Heart,
in the Passions of the Mind; and hence at the same time proceed alterations of
the Blood. Hence in Fear, Palpitations of the Heart, in Grief, Contractions
with a small Pulse, in Joy, a grateful and pleasing heat about the Heart, with
a swift and strong Pulse.

XVIII. The Heart then is the principal The Dignity of the Heart.
and sovereign Bowel from which is diffused the vital Liquor, with perpetual
heat, the support of Life, to all Parts of the Body: of which when any of the
Parts are never so little deprived, they fall and die. And therefore the
Distempers that befall it, are chiefly dangerous, and the Wounds of Wounds of
the Heart mortal.
it altogether mortal, as Hippocrates pronounced; so that although some being
wounded in the Heart, have lived for a time, yet they could never be cured.
Nay, for the most part, so soon as the Wound enters the Ventricles, they fall
like men Thunderstruck, which I have seen three or four times with my own
Eyes; so that I have often stood in admiration, how a man could be so soon
deprived of all Life, Sense and Motion. Nevertheless the Reason is plain; for
that the Blood which ought to be forced into the Great Artery, and through that
to the Brain and all other Parts, by reason of the Wound, is poured forth into
the Concavity of the Breast. So that no Blood being carried to the Brain,
presently the motion of the Animal Spirits ceases in the Brain, nor are they
any longer conveyed through the Nerves to the several parts. Hence also there
happens a Cessation of the principal Faculties and Senses; and of all motion of
the Muscles, and among the rest of the Respiratory; which occasions the
suddenness of the Death. But if a small Wound do not penetrate into the
Ventricles, then sometimes, but very seldom, it happens that a man does not
fall presently, but lives for some hours. Thus Paraeus saw a man wounded in the
Heart, that ran above two hundred Paces. Schenkius also makes mention of a
Student, who having received a Wound through both his Ventricles, yet ran the
length of a whole Street, and was in perfect sense of Mind for an Hour.
Sennertus, Johnson, Muller, Heers and Tulpius produce several Examples of men
that have lived after they were wounded in the Heart for several hours; nav for
one or two day. Says Fernelius, Wounds in the Heart, which do not penetrate far
into the Ventricles, do not presently kill; In a certain Person, who lingered
and consumed away by degrees, and at length died, I found three Ulcers in his
Heart, hollow and foul, and long before contracted.

Somewhat like this, concerning an Ulcer in the Heart, Dominic Marchettis
relates, of a man who having been consuming a long time, died: in the
dissection of which person, he found a great Ulcer, which had eaten out not
only the Capsula of the Heart, but also a great part of its Substance, till it
had penetrated into the Cavity of the left Ventricle, and then killed the man.
But it is more wonderful that a great Wound in the Heart should be cured. Of
which Cabrolius saw a President in the Dissection of a human Carcass in the
Anatomical Theater. For he says he found in the Heart of a Thief that was
hanged, the remaining Scar of a Wound that had been cured, about two Fingers
long, and about the thickness of a Sixpence. But though such Accidents are
rare, nevertheless I never remember that ever I read so extraordinary an
Example of a Heart wounded, as what I saw with my Eyes, a Story so remarkable
that I thought fit to insert it in this place.

In the Year 1660. April 5. I was A rare Observation.
sent for to C^lenburgh together with some other Physicians and Surgeons, at
the Request of the Magistracy of that Town, to view the Body of a Young Man, of
about twenty years of Age, and very strong when he was alive, wounded with a
Sword, and dying of his Wound; to the end we might give our Judgments whether
he died of his Wound, or by any other Disaster. Upon opening the Body my self,
first we were informed that the young man after he had received the Wound,
walked about fifty or sixty paces, and then fell down, and then falling into a
Convulsion, was carried home, and in a little time after, came to himself
again. The Physicians and Surgeons who then looked after him, affirmed, that the
first and second day very little Blood issued forth from his Wound, which was
very narrow; but that afterward, the Wound being somewhat dilated, such a
quantity of Blood gushed forth, that they were forced to stop the Flux of Blood
by tying of his Body in several places. They added, That the Patient was all
along very sensible, and never complained in the least of any inward pain,
moved his Body of himself, and when he was tied, turned upon his side of his
own accord, and cough'd freely to promote the efflux of Blood out of his Wound;
that he eat and drank something every day, till at last his Strength failing,
he died, having lived nine days and eight hours after he had received his Wound.

Having heard this Relation, I went on to view the Body, and showed the Wound
that was given him between the fifth and sixth Rib of the Right Side, about a
Thumb's breadth before the Ribs run into Gristles. Removing the Sternum-Bone, I
found the Cavity of the Breast upon the wounded Side, to the Mediastinum,
filled with Blood; which being dried up with a Sponge, I perceived where the
Sword had gone in, without touching the Lungs, at the Heart, under the Sternum
through the Mediastinum and Pericardium, and had penetrated directly into the
upper part of the right Ventricle of the Heart, between the treble pointed
little Valves, near the entrance of the hollow Vein, and had gone no farther:
the Pericardium also was full and distended with coagulated Blood. It will seem
a wonder to many how this man after such a Wound could live so many days and
hours: however, I believe the Reason was this, because the Wound was very
narrow, and in the upper part between the little Valves; so that in the
contraction of the Heart, all the Blood which flowed out of the hollow Vein
into the right Ventricle, by reason of the obstruction of the Treble-pointed
Valves, could not be forced out of the Wound, but that the greatest part of it
was forced into the Lungs through the pulmonary Artery, which was much wider
than the Wound, and from thence to the Left Ventricle and the Aorta-Artery, so
that but a very little at a time could be forced by the several Pulses out of
the Wound into the Pericardium and Cavity of the Breast, which was the Reason
it was so long before his Strength failed him.

CHAP. VII. Of the Motion of the Heart.
I Have said in the preceding Chapter, that the Heart is the principal and
perpetual Mobile of our Body, from whence proceeds all the Natural Motion of
the whole Boyd, and perpetually lasts so long as the Motion of the Heart lasts.
But the Reason of its perpetual Motion is not so perspicuous; which is the
Reason that Opinions vary concerning it.

I. Some say, That the Heart is moved by the Animal Spirits. II. Others believe
that the Heart is moved by the dilatation of the Blood in the Ventricles of the
Heart. III. Others are of Opinion, That it is moved partly by the dilatation of
the Blood, and partly by the influx of Animal Spirits. IV. Others say, That it
is moved by a Subtle or Ethereal Matter. V. Others hold, That it is moved by
some certain Spirit in the Blood. VI. Some assert, That the Heart is moved by
the Respiration of the Lungs.
I. The first Opinion produces Three 1. Whether the Heart is moved by the
Animal Spirits.
very specious Reasons for its Support. First, Because that in our Bodies all
apparent and violent Motions are made by the influx of the Animal Spirits, and
that therefore the Motion of the Heart must proceed from the same Influx.
Secondly, Because the several little Nerves are not in vain inserted into the
Basis of the Heart: but rather to that end that they may convey the Animal
Spirits to accomplish its Motion. Thirdly, For that it is manifest in the
Passions of the Mind, that the Heart is more or less moved by the greater or
lesser Influx of those Spirits.

But though these Arguments are propounded with some appearance of Probability,
yet that this Opinion is far from Truth, several Reasons make manifest.

1. Because those Motions that proceed from the influx of Animal Spirits, are
arbitrary, especially in the Muscles, of which number they assert the Heart to
be; but the Motion of the Heart is not arbitrary, seeing it is not performed,
nor can be performed or altered at our pleasure. 2. Because the Heart beats in
a Hen-Egg, or other Conception, before the Brain is perfected, and begets
Animal Spirits; or before any Animal Faculty is produced into Acts of moving
and feeling. 3. Because the Nerves of the Heart are so small and slender, that
they cannot contribute a sufficient quantity of animal Spirits to perfect that
same durable Motion. For to all the moving Parts are allowed Nerves according
to the swiftness or diuturnity of the Motion. The Eye that sees, and is moved
all the Day, and rests all the Night, besides the visual Nerve, has another
large moving Nerve. So the Muscles of the Legs and Arms, as they cause swifter
or slower Motions, have greater or lesser Nerves; which happens also in all the
other parts. Seeing then that all the other moving parts, which rest much
longer than they are moved, require large and conspicuous Nerves, shall the
Heart that moves with a continual motion day and night, all a man's Life long,
and therefore requires a far larger quantity of Spirits, than any other part
that is moved? is it possible, I say, that the Heart should be furnished with a
sufficient quantity of Spirits to maintain that continual Motion by the means
of such slender and almost invisible Nerves? Besides, that it is as yet
uncertain whether those diminutive Nerves, whose productions are seen to extend
themselves to the Basis of the Heart, the Pericardium, the Orifices of the
Ventricles, and the external Tunicle, enter any farther into the substance it
self of Parenchyma: many indeed assert it, but no body demonstrates it. Galen
and Des Carts very much scruple it; and so does Thomas Willis, an exact
Searcher into the Brain and Nerves, to whose Industry in that Particular we are
very much beholding; who dares not assert any such thing positively, but says,
That more Branches of Nerves and Fibers are distributed into the little Ears of
the Heart and Vessels appendent, than into the Substance of it. We say that
very few Nerves enter the Substance it self of the Heart, and that they are so
small and few, that cannot afford or convey sufficient Animal Spirits to
perpetuate the Motion of the Heart, but only contribute some few which assist
to the Nutrition of the Heart. 4. Because that to cause Motion there is
required a great Quantity of Animal Spirits, but that for the Sense of Feeling
a very few suffice: And therefore all the Parts that are apt to feel, which
receive many Spirits to perfect their Motion, have also a most accurate Sense
of Feeling: But those which receive but few Spirits, they are not moved at all,
and have but a dull sense of Feeling, as is apparent in Palsies of the lesser
Degree. Nevertheless, That the Heart has Membranes proper for the Sense of
Feeling, as the outward and inward enfolding Tunicle, treble pointed and
miterlike Valves and proper Fibers, and yet is endu'd but with a dull Sense of
Feeling, is manifest from what has been said in the preceding Chapter; and
thence it is apparent, that it receives but few Animal Spirits: Which if it did
admit in so great abundance, as to accomplish its perpetual Motion, they would
without all Question occasion a most acute Sense of Feeling therein. 5. Because
the Hearts of several Animals, as Frogs, Serpents, Eels, etc. being pulled out
of their Bodies, will beat a long time after, whereas all the Parts about it
being cut away, as also all the neighboring Nerves, there can be no Influx of
Animal Spirits into them. To this purpose take a living Dog, and having slit
him all along from the Throat, take both Trunks of the Wandering Pair, through
which the Spirits flow to the Heart, and either tie it hard, or cut it off, the
Creature indeed will become silent and stiff, but the Pulsation or Motion of
the Heart will not fail for all that; nay he shall live so long, till his
Strength failing by degrees for want of Food, he is famished to Death: For he
refuses Meat, in regard there are no Animal Spirits which can come to the
Stomach and increase Hunger. 6. Because that seeing the Heart is formed and
perfected before the Warehouse of the Animal Spirits, the Brain, and proves
conspicuous, beats, and is moved before any the least Foundations of the Brain
at any time appear, as is apparent in an Egg set under a Hen, or any other
Conception. If you say that nevertheless in the Egg or Bubble certain
Delineaments of the Brain are in being, though not to be discerned by the Eye, I
answer that they are not yet come to any such Perfection as to operate, whereas
in the mean time the Heart both operates and is moved before it can have any
Assistance from those Rudiments of the Brain. 7. Because the Animal Spirits are
generated out of the Arterious Blood, which are generated by no other part
besides the Heart. Seeing then that they cannot be generated out of any other
Matter, and that this Matter cannot come to the Brain but by the impulse of the
Heart, wherein this Matter is generated, of necessity it follows, that the
Heart is moved of it self, before there are any Animal Spirits in any other
part; and is the first that forces to the Brain Matter adapted for the
Generation of those Spirits; that is to say, the Arterious Blood. Perhaps it
may be objected that the Heart is moved at first by those animal Spirits which
were mixed in the Seed of the Parents, and from that time still are intermixed
with it; which is but a frivolous Evasion. For the animal Spirit concurs indeed
to the making of Seed, but loses its own Nature; and being mixed, fermented,
and concocted with the vital Blood, becomes one Mass of another Nature with it;
and so both together put on the Nature of the Seed, wherein there is no longer
either animal Spirit or arterious Blood, but that Seed becomes a new Body,
generated out of both being mixed together, and changed by Concoction, which
particularly contains in it self, neither animal nor sanguineous Spirit, but a
new Spirit potentially vi^al arising out of the Mixture and Concoction of both,
which if at any time it be stirred up in the Womb, and proceed from Power to
Action, will immediately enliven, and form Vessels and Instruments that shall
produce Spirituous Blood and Animal Spirits. So that there are no Animal
Spirits any longer in the Seed that are able to cause the first Motion of the
Heart at the beginning. For as no Man in his Wits will aver that there is any
Blood really in a Bone, though the Blood, as a necessary Matter concurs to its
making Nutrition and Growth, so no Man will say of the Seed, that there is in
it either Animal Spirit or Blood, though both concur to its Composition. For as
in the Generation of Bone, the Blood concurring with the Animal Spirit, losing
altogether its Sanguineous Nature, becomes Bone, and is no longer Blood, as the
Spirit is no longer Spirit, as it was before: so likewise in the making of
Seed, the Animal Spirit and Blood remain no longer what they were before;
whence it cannot be said, that animal Spirits remain in the Seed that should be
able to begin the first Motion of the Heart. 8. Because the Motion of the
Animal Spirits does not proceed from the Brain, but altogether from the Heart,
and this Motion of the Heart ceasing, all Animal Motion ceases. As is apparent
when Wounds penetrate the Ventricles of the Heart; for that the Blood not being
forced into the great Artery and the Heart, but flowing out through the Wound
of the Ventricles, presently at the very same instant the Brain rests, and the
Animal Spirits are no longer sent through the Nerves to the moving Parts;
neither are they moved in the Brain, which is the reason that a Man so wounded
falls of a sudden, deprived of all his principal Faculties, and of all Sense
and Motion. The same appears in Convulsions and Fitts of the Mother affecting
the Heart, and such like Distempers; in which frequently the noxious Vapors
and Humors reach no farther than the Heart, but not as yet to the Brain, and
so the Heart ceases to beat, the Brain remaining unendamaged; which
nevertheless upon the ceasing of the Motion of the Heart, presently ceases to
be moved, nor does it begin to move again, till first the Heart begins to move.
But most manifestly of all does this appear in Wounds of the Head, that take
away some part of the Scull, and the Brain it self, as we have seen in the
Camp: For if the Patient fall into a Convulsion, presently we see the Motion of
the Heart ceases; but if the Heart begin again to beat; which is easily
perceived by the Patients Pulse, not before but presently after some Pulses;
the Heart begins by little and little again to be moved; and after the Brain,
by degrees, all the rest of the Members are moved.
These are all certain Signs that the Heart is not moved by the Animal Spirits,
thrust forward into it from the Brain; but that the Brain, and by means of that
the Animal Spirits are moved by the Blood sent upward. In the mean time I will
not deny, but that by reason of certain Nerves scarcely discernable, descending
toward the Basis of the Heart, the Orifices of it are somewhat less, sometimes
more loosened or contracted, as in the Passions of the Mind, and for this
reason, that the Blood in the Ventricles is sometimes more difficultly,
sometimes more easily expelled, according to the various Determination of the
Animal Spirits to those Orifices: Nevertheless the continual Motion of the
Heart does not proceed from thence; though this be not the cause of any
Impediments to hinder from performing its Motion freely and equally; as in the
respiratory Motion of the Breast, sometimes Impediments arise from the Muscles
of the Larynx, too much contracted by the help of the Animal Spirits flowing
thorough the Nerves, though those Muscles are no cause of Respiration.

And thus I have sufficiently displayed the Errors of the first Opinion.

II. The second Opinion believes Whether moved by the Dilatation of the Blood.
the Heart is moved by the Dilatation of the Heart in its Ventricles. For the
Blood falling into its Ventricles, becomes presently very much dilated, and
distends the Sides of the Ventricles beyond their just Poise, which by the
flowing forth of that dilated Blood thorough the great Arteries, adjoining to
both Ventricles, are presently contracted beyond their due Measure, and
distended by and by again upon the flowing in of new Blood. As it happens in a
Willow Twigg or other Tree; which if you pull down beyond its natural
Situation, being let go suddenly, it will fly up again beyond its proper and
natural Poise, and for some time Waggs up and down, through the remaining Force
of the Violent Motion. This is a specious Invention easily refuted. For if the
Motion and Pulse of the Heart should proceed from the Dilatation of the Blood
in the Ventricles, then the Influx of Blood failing, the Heart would not be
moved; because there is no Blood therein to be dilated: But on the contrary,
the Hearts of several Animals being taken out of the Body, and deprived of all
the adjoining Vessels and Blood, still move and beat for some time, when there
is no Blood contained or dilated therein: Nay the Hearts of Eels, Lizards, and
other Creatures being cut into pieces, the several Particles will move for some
time. Deusingius relates that in a live Dog he cut off the Tip of the Heart,
and for some time beheld strong Contractions in the Piece cut out, which could
never have been, were this Opinion true. Charleton, that he might avoid these
Rocks, chooses rather to join two Causes together, and to say, That the Heart
is distended accidentally by the Dilatation of the Blood flowing in; but that
it is moved and contracted by its own Fibers, and of its own proper Motion. But
the Heart of an Eel cut in pieces, shows the contrary; seeing there is no Blood
flows into that to be dilated, and for that the Fibers are cut, while
nevertheless alternate Contraction and Laxation remains.

III. Others, to avoid the Rocks Whether (...) part ly by the ^ation of the
Blood, and partly by the animal Spirits.
both of the first and second Opinion, joined the two preceding Opinions both
together, and assert, That the Blood sliding into the Ventricles of the Heart,
are inflamed and rarified by the innate Fire it self, and through its expansion
wanting more room, widen the Walls of the Heart: and then the Parenchyma of the
Heart being molested by that Expansion, calls the Animal Spirits to its
Assistance, which coming in sufficient quantity, contract the Muscles which
constitute the Parenchyma of the Heart, and so by streightning the Ventricles,
thrust forth the contained Blood into the Arteries; and hence, that the
dilatation of the Heaat caused by the Blood rarefying, is natural; but the
contraction by the Muscles, absolute and obedient to the Will, is Animal.

Certainly this Opinion is plausibly propounded, that at first sight there
seems no doubt to remain; but upon better examination it will appear that the
latter part does not well cohere with the former. For it supposes the whole
Parenchyma of the Heart to be composed of Muscles; which if it be true, then
the whole Heart is the Instrument of voluntary Motion, whose motion may be
increased, diminished, stopped, or otherwise altered at pleasure. But who, I
would fain know, can direct or alter the Motion of the Heart at his own
Pleasure? Besides, the Muscles to perform a continual Motion, want larger
Nerves, and a more copious supply of animal Spirits. But it is impossible there
should flow into the Heart any other than a very few Spirits through Nerves
almost invisible, not sufficient for a continual Motion lasting all a man's
Life. And whence I pray shall those Spirits proceed and flow into the salient
or jumping Point, which is observed to move first in the Bubble of an Egg,
before there is any delineation either of Brain or Nerves perceptible?

IV. Others, to avoid these Difficulties, Whether ^ov'd by ^n Ethere^l Matter.
choose rather to explain the thing, by giving it the Title of a Subtle and
Ethereal Matter, which is continually agitated and moved, and variously moves
other Bodies also upon which it lights; as it penetrates this way or that way,
with ease or difficulty, through the Pores of these or those Bodies. This
Matter, say they, lighting into the dilating Fibers of the Heart, and not able
conveniently to penetrate their Pores, by reason of their Situation and Figure,
is stopped therein, and filling, distends them: hence flowing out again, and
lighting upon the contracting Fibers, the first being already loosened* it
fills and distends them likewise: and so they tell us that these Fibers are
alternately filled and distended. But this is a Cause far fetched indeed. For
he that here flies to some general Cause of the Motion of all things, he
concludes nothing in specie, concerning the Motion of one thing, nor of the
Motion of the Heart: whereas in the Motion of the Heart, we are not to seek for
the general (which you may as well say is God) but for the special and next
Cause. Besides, no Reason can be given, why that subtle Matter should not light
at one and the same time upon both the Fibers, as well the contracting as the
dilating; but should proceed in an alternate order from one to the other, as if
guided by some peculiar Intelligence: nor wherefore in a Creature newly
strangled, when the Heart and other Parts are yet warm, that Ethereal Matter
does no longer move the Fibers of the Heart after the same manner. Should it be
said, that there is no Blood that flows then into the Heart to be dilated, I
shall answer, that the Heart is not moved by that dilatation of the Blood, as I
have already proved: or if that be the Cause of the Motion, then not the
Ethereal Matter; if it be an assistance without which that Motion cannot be
performed, where is that assistance in the Heart of an Eel newly pulled out,
and cut into pieces, whose several particles beat, though there be no Blood
therein to be dilated?

V. The Fifth Opinion differs much Whether moved by the Spirit of the Blood.
from the former, as asserting, That the Motion of the Heart proceeds from a
certain vivific Spirit, which is in the Blood it self, and generates it in it
self; the refutation of which Opinion may be seen in the following 11th.
Chapter.

VI. These Five Opinions being set Whether moved by the Lungs.
aside, Alexander Maurocordatus propounds a new and hitherto unheard of
Opinion, That the Heart is moved by the respiring Lungs, and the Lungs by the
Heart, and that these two parts give mutual assistance one to another. But this
Opinion is by us refuted in the following Thirteenth Chapter, to which we shall
only add these few Things. 1. That if the Motion of the Heart proceeded from
the respiring Lungs, whence does that Motion arise in the Birth which is
included in the Womb, where the Lungs are idle, and never heave; and which are
never to be found in the little jumping Point conspicuous to the Eyes in an
Egg? 2. Whence that Motion proceeds in Fish, and other Creatures that have no
Lungs, and but one Ventricle of the Heart? 3. By what is it occasioned in the
Hear of an Eel, which after all the adjoining parts are cut away, sometimes
beats after it is taken out of the Body? That, says Maurocordatus, is a
Trembling Motion. Which we deny, because that for some time it observes the
true measure of Beating, till the approach of Death, and then it comes indeed
to be a trembling Motion.

Among all the foresaid six Sentences, the second approaches the nearest to
Truth, but only it is to be explained a little more at large, and somewhat
after another manner: For here are two things wanting; in the first place, what
dilates the Blood; and secondly, it does not sufficiently explain how the Heart
is moved when the Blood does not flow into the Ventricles. Which two things are
to be more narrowly examined for the discovery of the Truth.

VII. In the first Conception, the Spirituous The true Cause of the Heart's
Motion.
Blossom, which is in the Seed, is collected and concluded in a little Bubble,
wherein there is a delineation made of all the parts by the vivific Seed that
lies in the Blossom, which gives to all the Parts their Matter, Form and Being;
and abides in all and singular the Parts being formed, and variously operates
therein according to their diversity. The most subtle and sharpest part of this
is settled in the Heart, which by its extraordinary acrimony obtains an
extraordinary power of Fermentation, by which the Humors pouring into the
Heart, are there dilated, as Gunpowder is dilated and set afire by the heat of
the Flame. And as Gunpowder has no actual heat in it self, but being kindled,
receives a burning heat, so the Blood in the Heart being dilated by that same
Spirit, waxes very hot and fiery. By reason of which heat Cartesius calls this
Spirit a continual heat abiding in our Hearts as long as we live, which is a
kind of Fire, which the Blood of the Veins nourishes, and is the corporal
beginning of all the Motions of our Members. For that this Spirit by its
continual agitation and dilatation, supplies the heat with a continual fuel.
But in regard it is much dissipated by this continual agitation, it has need of
continual supply, to the end the dissipated Particles may be continually
restored. This Supply is maintained by the most subtle Particles of the Blood
attenuated in the Heart, entering the Pores of the Heart, and infused into it
through the Coronal Arteries, which Blood, if it be good and sound, then this
Spirit is rightly supplied, and the Heart continues strong and vigorous; if
otherwise, through bad Diet and deficiency of the Bowels, then this Spirit is
ill supplied, and the Heart becomes weak and infirm.

Now this Spirit abiding in the whole substance of the Heart, forthwith dilates
in the Heart, both the Blood and all other proper humors whatever. Which Action
is sometimes swifter, sometimes slower, more vehement, or weaker, as the Matter
to be dilated is fitted more or less for dilatation, by the fermentaceous
Particles mixed with it: and the Spirit it self is more or less vigorously
stirred up into Act by the greater or lesser heat: for these two things are the
cause of all alterations of Pulses. Thus in Fevers, where there is more or less
heat, and the Matter to be dilated is thinner and more volatile, there the
Pulses beat thicker and swifter. But if that Matter, as is usual in putrid
Fevers, has many unequal Particles, some more, some less easy to be dilated,
then the Pulse becomes unequal: if the Blood be colder and thicker, the Pulse
is slow and beats seldom. When it is cooled, it diminishes at first, then
ceases altogether: but being warmed again with new Blood or warm Water, it
presently begins to beat again.

The said Spirit being stirred up by the heat, by and by dilates and ferments
the Humors, and that two manner of ways. First, By fermenting those Humors that
flow in great quantity through the hollow and Pulmonary Vein, into the
Ventricles of the Heart, by the fermentation and dilatation of which, and the
rapid agitation of the least Particles between themselves, a great heat is
kindled in the Heart. This heat presently whets and sharpens the same Spirit
abiding in the innermost and thicker substance of the Heart and its Fibers,
which so excited, presently somewhat dilates the subtle Blood infused into the
Substance and Fibers for Nourishment; and hence it is, that the Fibers of the
Heart are forthwith contracted, which causes an expulsion of the Blood in the
Cavity of the Ventricles. Then again new Blood flowing into the Ventricles,
there happens a dilatation of the same, with a sharp Heat, and by that means a
distension of the Ventricles at the same time, which by reason of the kindled
heat, presently follows dilatation of the same into the Pores of the Substance
about the Fibers, and by that means there happens again a contraction of the
whole Heart and Ventricles; which things proceed in a certain order so long as
Life lasts. Now this Motion proves the more vehement, because the Fibers being
dilated beyond their poise, presently when the Blood dilated in the Ventricles,
easily breaks forth through the broad Arteries, they are as easily again
contracted beyond their measure by the dilatation of the inner Blood; so that
same distension and contraction beyond the due Aequilibrium, causes indeed the
Pulses to be stronger, but yet they are not the first cause of the Motion,
which is only an alternate dilatation of the Blood, sometimes in the
Ventricles, sometimes in the Substance of the Heart.

VIII. Hence it appears, why Pulsation Why the Heart of an Eel taken out of the
Body beats.
remains in the Hearts of Eels, and other vivacious Creatures, being taken out
of the Body, though no Blood be then pout'd out of the great Vessels into the
Ventricles; because the said Spirit abiding in their hearts, is easily raised
into Act by the small remaining heat; and acts upon the Blood abiding in the
Substance it self, and by something dilating of it, contracts the Fibers.
Afterward that dilated Matter being somewhat dispelled, they are again
relaxed. Which not only appears in hearts that are whole, but in the hearts of
some after they are cut into pieces, and in the several pieces themselves. But
because in such cases there is no new Blood dilated in the Ventricles, and
consequently no new heat nor any distension of the Fibers beyond their
Position, hence in hearts that are taken out, and cut in pieces, the motion is
weak, and quickly ceases.

This I persuade my self to be the true cause of the Motion of the heart, till
some body else shall show me any other more probable.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Pulse and Circulation of the Blood.
I. THE Motion of the Heart is Digression*
by the Greeks called (...), by the Latins, Pulsus; by which the Heart
alternately rises and falls. It is performed by Dilatation and Contraction,
between which two Motions there is some little kind of Rest.

II. In Dilatation, the sides of the Dilatation.
Ventricles after they have expelled the dilated Blood into the Arteries by the
contraction of the Fibers, presently by the rarefaction of the Blood sliding in
again, they are thrust from the middle Septum, and so rise again. In
Contraction Bauhinus and Harvey believe, that the heart is extended in length,
the Tip receding from the Base; and so the sides of the Ventricles being thrust
forward toward the middle Septum, that the Blood is thereby expelled: which
also seems to be the Opinion of Ent. But the dissection of living Animals
teaches us the contrary, by which it is manifest that the heart in Contraction
is contracted every way together, that is to say, that the distended sides of
the Ventricles are contracted every way together, and together ascend the Cone
toward the Base, and so the heart being now swelled by the dilated Blood, grows
rounder and harder, and by that contraction of the whole that the Blood is
forced out of the Ventricles. Which that it is so, not only Experience but
Reason demonstrates; seeing that by the dilatation of the Blood contained in
the interior Pores of the Substance, all the Fibers of the Heart are at the
same time contracted every way together, as we have said already.

III. Here arises a Question, Whether When the Cavities are bro^* est.
the Cavities of the Vessels are larger and wider, when the Heart is contracted
into a rounder Figure, or when it is extended in Length. Harvey thinks the
Cavities are larger when the heart is extended in length, but narrower when the
heart is contracted. 1. Because that in Contraction the heart becomes harder.
2. Because that in Frogs, and other Creatures that have little Blood, it is at
that time whiter o^ less red, than when it is extended in length. 3. Because if
an Incision be made into the Cavity of the Ventricle, presently the Blood
gushes out of the Wound, otherwise than as it happens when it is extended in
length. Harvey might have also added this Experiment, by cutting away the Tip
of the Heart in a living Dog, and thrusting a Finger into the Cavity of either
Ventricle through the opened Passage: for then he would have manifestly
perceived a pressure upon the Finger by the contraction of the heart, and that
compressure to cease upon its being extended. Cartesius being quite of another
Opinion, tells us, That the Heart in Contraction becomes harder, but broader on
the inside, by reason of the contained and suddenly dilated Blood, and for that
it manifestly appears to the Eye, is not diminished in magnitude, but rather
somewhat augmented, and that for this very reason at that instant time it
becomes harder, and the Blood less red in Creatures that have very little
Blood; because by that dilatation the Fibers of the heart are extended, and by
virtue of that distention, press forth in good part at that instant of time the
Blood in the Pores of the heart, and renders it more ruddy. He confirms this by
an Experiment, and says, That if you cut away the sharp end of a heart of a
young Coney, then you may discern by the Eye, that the Cavities are made
broader at the same moment that the heart is contracted, and becomes harder,
and drives forth the Blood. Nay when all the Blood of the Body being almost
exhausted, it squeezes forth only some few little drops, yet the Cavities at
the time of expulsion retain the same breadth of dilatation: Lastly, he adds,
That in Dogs and other stronger Animals, this is not so visible to the sight;
because the Fibers of the heart are stronger in them, and possess a great part
of the Cavities. But though these Reasons of Cartesius are very strenuous, I
think however there is some distinction to be made as to the Time, that is to
say, in the beginning and end of the Contraction, and the very instant when the
Contraction first begins, the Cavities are wider, because of the dilated Blood
contained therein: but when the Blood breaks forth out of them into the great
Vessels, that they are at that very moment of time more narrow, the Fibers
being contracted every way toward the inner parts beyond their stretch: and
that I believe may be observed by diligent inspection into a live heart.

IV. Besides the Pulses, Bartholine Vicious Motions.
makes mention of two other Motions of the Heart, Undation and Trembling
Motion. But in regard that these are nothing else but certain Species of a
vicious and diseased Pulse, they are to no purpose described as new Motions.

V. The Use of the Pulse is to force The use of the Pulse.
the Blood dilated in the Heart through the Arteries to all the Parts of the
Body, to the end that all the Parts may be nourished thereby; and that the
particular Parts may be able by virtue of a proper Faculty to concoct, alter
and convert into a Substance like its own, some part of that Blood, and apply
it to themselves, and return the remainder to the Heart again; there to be
again dilated, spiritualized, and indu'd with new vigor.

VI. But seeing that by the daily reciprocation Circulation of the Blood.
of the Pulse, there happens a daily expulsion of Blood from the heart, there
is a necessity that the heart should continually draw from the hollow Vein,
Blood sufficient to fill the Vessels as Nature requires. But because the hollow
Vein is never exhausted, and moreover, because the Arteries, into which there
is a continual expulsion, never swell to excess, it follows, That this Motion
must proceed circularly, and that the Blood must be continually emptied out of
the Heart into the Arteries, and out of them into the Veins and Parts to be
nourished, and thence return from the lesser Veins to the hollow Vein, and so
at length to the Heart.

This Circulation is confirmed by three most strenuous Arguments.

VII. The great Quantity of Blood First proof from the plenty of Blood.
emptied out of the Heart into the Artery. Which is so much, that the hundredth
part of it cannot be supplied by the received Nourishment; when that emptying
proceeds and is carried on, as equally in a man that has fasted two or three
days, as in one that has fed well. So that unless the Blood should return from
the Arteries through the Veins to the heart, the heart in a short time would
want Matter to empty: besides, all the Arteries would burst in a short time,
and the Parts into which the Blood flows, would swell after a wonderful manner.
For the heart of a sound man in the strength of his Age, beats in one hour 3000
or somewhat more Pulses. Cardan reckons 4000. Bartholin 4400. And Rolfinch has
numbered in himself 4420. So that if by every particular Pulse only one scruple
of Blood should be emptied into the Aorta, it will be found by computation,
that eight or nine pound Averdupois weight of Blood must pass through the Heart
in one hour, and consequently thirty or forty pound in four hours: according to
the greater or lesser number of the Pulses. I mentioned the least weight; for
we find by ocular inspection, that two drams and more have been emptied by
every particular Pulse, in the dissections of live Dogs; and yet it is very
probable, that there is not so much Blood to be emptied in the whole Body of
Man. Moreover, if in Bloodletting we consider the quantity of Blood that
immediately flows out, and consider likewise how much in the mean while is
circulated at the same time through Myriads of other Veins, where the progress
of the Blood is hindered by no Ligature, all which Blood passes through the
Heart; we shall easily observe, that in a man by each particular Pulse, not a
few drops, not a scruple, not one or two drams, but much more, perhaps half an
ounce or more are emptied out of the Heart into the great Artery: which is yet
much more apparent in Artery-cutting. When if we consider what is emptied out
of every small Artery cut, by every particular Pulse, and what is emptied by
all the rest by the same Pulses, we shall find a vast quantity pass through the
Heart; since it is certain that there is as much Blood emptied out of one
Aorta-Artery, out of the left Ventricle of the Heart, as out of all and
singular the Arteries derived from the Aorta, if they were opened. Seeing then
that by so great a quantity, neither the Arteries are distended to excess, nor
that any other parts swell, nor that the hollow or other Veins are emptied;
certain it is, that the Blood emptied into and through the Arteries, flows back
through the Veins to the Heart.

VIII. The Situation of the Valves The Second Proof from the Situation of the
Valves.
in the Veins, which in all Men is such, that the Blood may flow freely through
them to the Hollow Vein; but nothing from the hollow Vein to the lesser Veins:
For if you blow into the hollow Veins with a Straw; nothing of that Breath will
enter the lesser Veins: But if you blow the lesser Veins, the Breath will
presently enter the greater, and so to the Hollow.

IX. The Ligature in Bloodletting. The Third Proof from Ligature in
Bloodletting.
For the Arm or Thigh being bound near the place where the Vein is to be
opened, the Ligature causes the Veins to swell underneath. Because the Blood
being forced through the Arteries toward the external Parts, returns thorough
the Veins and ascends upwards, and when it comes to the Ligature there it
stops; which causes the Vein to swell below the Ligature, so* that the Blood
not able to ascend any farther, flows out at the little Hole made with the
Lancet. Again, the Ligature being untied, the Efflux ceases, because the Blood
can then ascend more easily through its little Pipe, which is sufficiently
wide, than issue forth at the narrow Wound. Moreover, if that same Ligature be
tied so hard, that the Blood cannot pass through the Arteries themselves toward
the lower Parts, then nothing will issue forth neither; because the Blood is
not forced through the Arteries toward the lower Parts, and consequently cannot
ascend through the Veins to the upper Parts: But loosning that Ligature never
so little, and the Pulse more freely penetrating the Artery, presently the
Blood will flow out of the opened Vein. Moreover also, any Ligature or
Compression of the Veins and Arteries in living Animals, is forced through the
Arteries from the Heart, and through the Veins flows to the Heart. For above
the Ligature, that is, toward the Heart, the tied Arteries swell, by reason of
the Passage denied to the Blood; but the Veins fall, by reason of the free
Efflux of the Blood to the Heart. The contrary to which happens below the
Ligature.

These Reasons alone are sufficient to prove the said Circulation: Besides
which there are many others, apparent and probable, which here for brevities
sake I pass over, concerning which Harvey, Riolanus, Conringius, Ent, Highmore,
Deusingius and others, may be consulted, who have written whole Treatises
particularly concerning the Circulation of the Blood.

I shall add one thing concerning the manner of Circulation, wherein perhaps I
shall differ from others.

X. There are two Opinions concerning The manner of Circulation.
the manner of Circulation, of which one is Riolanus's, approved by few: The
other Common; which most Philosophers maintain.

XI. Riolanus holds, That the Riolanus his manner
Blood Circulates only through the larger Vessels; but that that which is
poured forth to the lesser Branches, never returns to the wider Channels, but
is consumed in the Nourishment of the Parts; moreover, that the Blood of the
first Region does not Circulate, but is consumed likewise in the Nourishment of
the Parts concealed therein. But this Opinion at this day is utterly rejected
by all learned Men; there being no Reason to be given, why the Blood, forced
through the Arteries in greater Quantity, than is requisite for the Nourishment
of the Parts, should not with equal necessity circulate through the smallest
Veins, as if it were forced through the greater Arteries. Or why the Blood
forced through the Coeliac and Mesenteric Arteries in great quantity to the
Stomach and Intestines, should not circulate thorough the Veins of the same
Parts. Especially seeing that Experience contradicts him in both these Cases.
For that if you cut the smallest Artery in the Extremity of the Hand or Foot,
more Blood flows out in one hour, than is requisite for the Nourishment of the
whole Hand or Foot, a whole day together. And our own Eyesight shows us, in
the Dissections of Living Creatures, that upon tying the Mesenteric Vessels,
the Blood is forced through the Arteries to the Intestines, and that a
sufficient Quantity also flows back through the Veins to the Por^evan.

XII. The common Manner affirms, The common manner.
That the Circulation of the Blood is caused by the Anastomoses of the Veins
and Arteries, by which the Orifices of the Arteries are united with the
Orifices of the Veins; and mutually open one into another: So that wherever
any such Anastomoses are, there is also Circulation. I thence conclude, that
where those Anastomoses are not, there is no Circulation.

It would be a very difficult thing to uphold this Opinion; for that those
Anastomoses are very few in the larger Vessels, and though they may be more
numerous in the small Ends of the diminutive Vessels, which however are not
every where discernable to the Eye; yet because of the extraordinary Narrowness
of such Passages, very little Blood can pass through them* not the sixth, no,
not the tenth part of what is forced through the Arteries can enter the Veins.
Besides, how shall the Parts be nourished by the Blood passing through those
Anastomoses, to which there is nothing contributed in that Passage? Perhaps you
will say, there is as much allowed 'em by Exhalation, as is sufficient. But
hence it would follow, in regard the thin Serum is most apt for such an
Exhalation, that all the Parts are nourished by Serum; because the Blood being
somewhat thicker, cannot easily exhale through the Pores of the Vessels. But
this is absurd; because the Serum is added to the Blood only for a Vehicle, and
not for the Nourishment of the Parts, and that carries the Blood thorough the
Ends of the Arteries into the Pores of the Substance, from whence it then
partly exhales insensibly, partly returns with the remaining Blood into the
Veins. Lastly, granting that Circulation is only caused by the said
Anastomoses, how comes it to pass then in a Dropsy, that Circulation shall
proceed from the Substance of the Parts into the Veins? For in the Dropsy the
Serum is not concluded in the Vessels only, but of necessity abides in the
Substance of the Parts. Shall then that Serum, which in that Disease is more
crude and thick, passing out of the Arteries by Exhalation, enter into the
Veins again by Inhalation, that so it may be circulated through the Heart, and
thence flow to the Urinary Passages, and be emptied through them? As the
Observations of Physicians teach us, that that same Disease is sometimes cured
by a copious Flux of Urine. How should the large soft Tumors of the Parts fall
in a short time, without any manifest Evacuation, if the Humors contained
without the Vessels in the very Substance it self of the Parts, never return
into the Veins? How can they enter them united together with the Arteries to
their Ends? All which things sufficiently demonstrate the Errors of the common
Opinion.

XIII. The true manner of Circulation The true manner of Circulation.
presently shows it self, upon the more accurate Consideration of what has been
said. And it is apparent, That the Blood does not only Circulate through the
said Anastomoses, but through the Substance it self of the Parts. For a great
quantity of Blood is conveyed through the Arteries, of which a good Quantity
flows through the Ends of the smallest Arteries, into the Pores of the
Substance of the Parts, for the Nourishment of which there is so much applied
to every part as is necessary, or fit to be applied and assimilated: The
remainder proceeds farther, and enters the Orifices of the smallest Veins
adhering to the Parts, and so proceeds farther still to the larger Veins: Now
that the Blood flows into the Pores of the Parts, and returns through those
into the Veins, is apparent from every slight Cut of the Skin, out of which,
the Vessels being untouched, the Blood presently gushes. But because the
Diminutive Arteries apparently ending in the Substance of the Parts, are very
narrow; thence it comes to pass that they transmit more Blood than is needful
for Nourishment; yet in the mean time the Blood which remains over and above,
is no less, which cannot be emptied through them into the Pores of the
Substance. Therefore that it should not settle and corrupt in the Arteries, the
chief Creator allowed these Anastomoses, that the Redundancy should pass
through them into the Veins. Such is that remarkable Anastomosis which we have
observed at the Entrance into the Spleen, and two others in the Birth, one in
the Heart through the Oval Hole, another in the Pulminary Artery, where it
joins with the Aorta. This Opinion of ours is confirmed by Harvey, Plempius,
Pecquet, and Charleton. Of which the latter two, not without reason, believe
that a greater part of the Blood returns through the substance of the Parts of
the Veins, then through the Anastomoses, with whom Nicholas Hobken agrees.
Rejecting any Anastomosis, says he, I say it suffices, if the arteries are so
inserted and joined to the Parts that are enlivened, as to penetrate deeply
into their Substance, ending in a Branch of small Threads variously spreading
it self: And if they continually and aptly enjoy the Company of the Veins in
like manner inserted into the Substance of the same Parts.

There is no reason to fear Tumors, Inflammations, Apostemes, and c. because
the Blood is poured forth without the Arteries into the Substance of the Parts:
For by reason of the Narrowness of the Arteries ending in the Substance, no
more flows in than can pass conveniently through the Pores, and be again sucked
in by the Orifices of the Veins. But some will say, that by labourous Exercise
and heating of the Blood, it is forced in more strongly, and in a greater
Quantity, then at other times; therefore then at least too great a Quantity
will flow into the Substance and produce those ill Effects. I answer, That the
Blood then, by reason of its greater Heat is thinner, and the Pores also
broader, and the Orifices of the little Veins more open for its Passage. But if
the Pores become more narrow, either by Constitution or sudden Refrigeration,
or by any other Accident, or that the Blood becomes thicker in the Parts, then
to be able to enter the narrow Orifices of the little Veins; then indeed too
great a Quantity of Blood would be gathered together in the Substance of the
Parts, and beget the same Mischiefs. For this is the chiefest Cause The Cause
of Inflammations.
of the Pleurisy, Quinzey, Inflammation of the Lungs, and c. Of which Cause
they were not aware, who thought the Circulation ran only through the
Anastomoses of the Vessels only. For they teach us that by reason of the
convenient Passage of the Blood denied, that the Vessels are filled to the
utmost; whence the Parts are distended into Tumovrs by the Vessels being
over-fill'd; but because more Blood cannot be forced into the over-fill'd
Vessels; hence the Blood which is collected within them, is deprived of a new
Afflux of Arterious Blood, and so comes to be refrigerated, and not inflamed,
as Regius will have it. But they do not consider, that the whole Blood does not
pass through the Anastomoses of the Vessels, but the greater Quantity of it is
forced into the Pores of the Substance of the Parts; out of which if the
redundant Quantity does not flow in due time into the Veins, then of necessity
there happens a swelling of the Parts. And because the several particular drops
of Arterious Blond, flowing to each Pulse, contribute their heat, hence by the
overmuch increase of the Blood in the Part, the Tumor increases, and there is
at the same time an augmentation of heat, and this intense heat begets an
effervescency of the collected Blood, and an inflammation of the Part with a
Tumor. Though I will not deny, but that Effervescency may be occasioned by a
small quantity of Blood, but sharp, and prone to boil, when it overflows into
any part; and then happens an Inflammation without a Tumor, as in St. Antony's
Fire.

For further illustration of this Matter, take a Sponge wrapped up loosly in a
piece of Leather, and furnished in the lower side with three or four Leaden
Pipes; then through a little hole cut in the Leather on the upper side, force
in a quantity of Water with a Syringe, it will conveniently be distributed
through the Pores of the Sponge, and there will remain in the Sponge as much
Water as will serve to moisten it; the remainder passing through the Pores of
it, and pass of its own accord through the Leathern Pipes at the bottom; but
not with such an impulsive Motion, as it is forced in at the upper part out of
the Syringe. I say, through the Pores, because there is no need of middle pipes
to convey the Water into the lower Pipes: for that the Pores of the Sponge
afford a sufficient passage. But if these Pores are straightened, and the lower
Pipes are contracted by any Accident, that the Water cannot pass equal in
quantity and swiftness; then the Sponge receiving more than it can transmit,
begins to swell, and consequently the loose piece of Leather wherein it is
wrapped, becomes distended, hard and tumid. The same will happen if any viscous
Matter be forced through the Syringe into the Sponge, by which the Pores and
Passages are stopped up; for then receiving much more than it can well discharge,
of necessity it will rise into a Tumor. He that will apply this Similitude to
the Body of Man, will find the Circulation of the Blood to be occasioned in
like manner through the Pores of the Substance, and hence perceive the Cause of
most Swellings.

XIV. There is an extraordinary and The use of Circulation.
manifold necessity of this Circulation.

1. Seeing that the Blood being once discharged into the Parts, the farther off
it flows from the Hearth of its Fire, is so much the more refrigerated, and
less a part for nourishment; there is a necessity of its return to the Fountain
of heat, the Heart, to be again new warmed and attenuated therein, which return
is occasioned by this Circulation. 2. Without this Circulation, neither could
the Blood be forced to the Parts that are to be nourished, nor could that which
remains after nourishment together with the Chylus, be carried back to the
Heart. 3. By means of this, all the Particles of the Blood are made fit for
nourishment by degrees, and according to a certain order. For there being no
long Concoction in the Heart, but only a certain swift Dilatation, therefore
the Chylus upon its first passage through the Heart, does not acquire the
absolute perfection of Blood, but at several passages, sometimes these,
sometimes those Particles become more subtle and fit for nourishment. 4. By
the help of this Circulation, the virtue of Medicines taken and applied, is
carried through the whole Body, or the greatest part thereof. 5. By means of
this the Blood is in continual motion; and preserved from congealing and
putrefying. 6. By means of this we come to the knowledge of many Diseases;
concerning which in former time many Disputes have arisen among Physicians. 7.
By means of this, Physicians also understand how to undertake the Cures of most
Diseases; whereas formerly they only proceeded by uncertain Conjecture.
There is no necessity that I should here refute in particular the vain
Arguments of Primrosius, Parisianus, and others, who stiffly endeavor to oppose
this Circulation, and uphold the darkness of former Ages; remitting the Readers
that desire to be more particularly informed of these things, to Ent, Highmore,
and several others, who make it their Business to refute the Arguments of such
as uphold the contrary Opinion. Whether the Chylus and the Serum circulate.


XV. But here remain two more Doubts;

1. Whether the Chylus circulates through the whole Body? 2. Whether the Serum
circulates in like manner?
I answer, That as to the Chylus, so long as it is not within the command of
the Heart, and before it has entered the Veins, it is not forced by the beating
of the Heart, and consequently does not circulate. Thus the Chylus contained in
the Milky Mesenteric and Pectoral Vessels, is thrust forward by the compressure
of the Muscles and other parts, but is not moved further forward by the beating
of the Heart, so long as it has not entered the Veins. So the Chylus falling
out of the Milky Vessels into the Breasts, circulates no farther, but like Milk
is either sucked, or flows of its own accord out of the Teats. But if any part
of it there enter the Mamillary Veins, that same still retaining the form of
Milk or Chylus, is conveyed together with the Vein-Blood to the Heart; wherein
being dilated, presently it loses the form of Chylus or Milk, and assumes the
form of Blood, at first more crude, or less spirituous; but afterward to be
more and more perfected by several passages' through the Heart. And so it does
not circulate through the whole Body in the form of Chylus, but in the form of
Blood, having no manner of similitude with the Chylus. Whence it comes to pass
that there is no Chylus to be found, or that can be found in the Arteries. In
like manner neither does the Chylus circulate in Women with Child toward the
Cheese-cake or Amnion. As neither does it in some Women not with Child, but
flowing likewise to the The Cause of vterine Fluxes.
Womb, is corrupted and putrefies about the Womb; and flows forth with more or
less ill smell, according as its Corruption is more or less. Which is most
probable to be the most obvious Cause of Uterine Fluxes. Also the Chylus, that
sometimes flows to the Urinary Bladder, cannot circulate. All which things
being considered, we must conclude at once, that the Chylus does not circulate
through the whole Body, but that entering the Veins, it retains the form of
Chylus only so far as the Heart, and there loses its form upon the dilatation.
As for the Serum, this is also to be said, that it does not circulate, but when
it enters the Blood-bearing Vessels. For no Humors circulate by virtue of the
beating of the Heart, till after they have entered the Limits of the Heart's
Command, and become subject to its Motion. But so long as they acknowledge any
other Mover, such as are the Peristaltic Motion of the Stomach, Guts, and other
parts, and the compressure of the Abdomen, etc. they never circulate. As the
Serum, when having passed beyond the Bounds of the Heart's Empire, it falls
into the Ureters and Bladder. And the Flegmatic Lympha, when separated from the
Blood of the Choroidal Fold, it comes to be deposited in the Ventricles of the
Brain, circulates no more; though it circulated before, when it was mixed with
the Blood.

CHAP. IX. Of the Parts of the Heart. See the 9th. Table.
I. IN the Heart are these Parts to The Parts of the Heart.
be specially considered: Two little Ears; two Ventricles with a middle Septum
that distinguishes them; eleven Valves; and four large Vessels, of which, two
adhere to the Right Ventricle; the hollow Vein of the Pulmonary Artery; and two
adhere to the Left Ventricle, the Pulmonary Vein, and the Aorta- Artery.

Now let us us see in what Order the making of that enlivening Nectar proceeds
in this Warehouse of Sanguification: To which purpose we shall produce the
several Parts in that Order, as Nature makes Use of 'em in the execution of
this Office.

II. The Little Ears are as it were The little Ears.
Appendixes to the Heart, seated on both sides at the Basis of the Heart,
before the Orifices of the Vessels, carrying the Matter to the Ventricles, and
from some sort of likeness to the Ears called the Little Ears of the Heart.

III. They are two in number, of Their number.
which the Right and looser is placed next the Vena Cava; the Left, which is
the lesser, thicker and firmer, joins to the Pulmonary Vein.

They are both remarkable for their more than ordinary bigness in the Embryo.

IV. They are composed of a peculiar Their substance.
Nervous Substance, though somewhat thin and soft, for more easy Dilatation
and Contraction.

V. Their outward Superficies appears The Superficies.
to be full of Wrinkles; but smooth when filled and distended.

VI. They are both concave, and Their Cavity.
supported on the inside with strong and nervous Fibers, as with Pillars;
between which are to be seen certain little Furrows, fewer on the Right side,
more on the Left.

VII. In the Birth and newborn Color.
Infants, they are of a ruddy Color, in Persons of ripe years somewhat darker
than the Heart; which nevertheless, in Dilatation, by reason of the Blood
received, grows more ruddy; in Contraction, the Blood being discharged, becomes
paler.

VIII. They are dilated and contracted, Motion.
like the Ventricles of the Heart, but varying in Time. For always the
dilatation of the Ventricles concurs with the contraction of the Ears; and the
contraction of the Ventricles concurs with the dilatation of the Ears: as
appears by the Dissection of Living Creatures. Which teaches us also, that they
continue a weak palpitation when the motion of the Heart sails, and are as it
were the last parts that die. Hence Harvey and Ent were of opinion that they
were first enlivened, and that the beating little Vessel that appears first in
the Egg, was the little Ear, and not the Heart: Which Deusingius opposes; and
which seems to be an Error by the number it self; seeing the Heart has two
little Ears, and only one jumping little Vessel appears in the Egg: which, in
all probability seems rather to constiture the Heart, which is single, than the
Ears, that are two.

IX. Their Use is to receive the Their use. The Ventricles.
Blood first of all from the Vessels that bring it in, slightly to ferment and
prepare it, and so prepared to send it to the Ventricles. Walaeus believes 'em
to be the Measures of the Blood carried to the Ventricles from the Vessels that
bring it in: which Opinion Riolanus also approves. But Sennertus, that they are
appointed for the particular Attraction of Air for the making of Spirits. But
how much he is deceived, we have already told you, and shall further declare in
the following Thirteenth Chapter.

X. The Heart has two Cavities, Unnatural Things
called Ventricles, distinguished by the Middle Septum, which is fleshy, close
and thick, gibbous on the Right side, concave on the Left, a wonderful piece of
Workmanship, wrought on both sides with little Pillars or Sinews, and several
little Caverns, but no where pervious. These Sinews some take for Muscles, and
little Fibers proceeding from them, and extended as well to the treble-pointed
as the Mitral Valves, and to be the Tendons of those Muscles conducing to the
Contraction of the Valves of the Heart. Whence appears the Error of the
Ancients, who wrote that the Blood passed through its broader pores from the
Right to the Left Ventricle. Certainly if there were any such pores, diligent
Nature had in vain provided that Oval Hole in the Basis of the Heart, and that
some middle Vessel, which joins the Pulmonary Artery with the Aorta; for then
there had been no need of these passages; if the Blood could have passed
through the pores of the Septum from the Right into the Left Ventricle. And
therefore Realdus Columbus deservedly opposes that ancient Opinion, and truly
informs us that the Blood is thrust forward into the Lungs out of the Right
Ventricle through the Pulmonary Artery; and from thence descends into the Left
Ventricle through the Pulmonary Vein. Farther also he writes, That he had found
that same Septum, by which the Ventricles are distinguished, to be gristly in
some Bodies; a certain sign that the Blood could not pass through that, from
the one to the other Ventricle. Let Riolanus therefore hold his peace, who so
stiffly defends the passage of the Blood out of the Right Ventricle to the Left
through the Septum, that he supposes Figments for Foundations, and affirms that
the Septum is not only conspicuously pervious toward the Point, but also that
there are certain little holes in it. Perhaps Riolanus might see these holes in
his Sleep, which never could be found by any Anatomist that was awake, either
in a raw or boiled Heart. Only Dominic de Marchettis writes, that he found once
two holes in the upper part of the Septum, which were furnished with Valves in
the Left Ventricle. But without doubt he was deceived by one great oval hole,
which in newborn Children is always to be seen, but afterward is closed
altogether, and this by reason of its extaordinary Breadth, he took to be two.

XI. In the Ventricles sometimes various bred in the Ventricles.
Things are bred contrary to Nature, though the Physician can hardly tell what
the Patient ayls. Sometimes we have found little Gobbets of Fat, and as it were
little soft whitish pieces of Flesh about the bigness of half an Egg, and
sometimes bigger. In October 1663. we dissected a Virgin about three and twenty
years of Age, who in her Lifetime had often complained of an extraordinary
heaviness and palpitation of her Heart, and had often fallen into swooning
Fits, and so died. In whose Body we found such a Gobbet of Fat, almost filling
the Right Ventricle, and another little one in the Lest, and after a more
diligent Search, we found, that it was no kind of Body bred by the coagulation
of Blood, but really a firm piece of Fat, not to be crumbl'd between the
Fingers. And this we judged to be the Cause of her Death: for we could find no
other in the whole Body. Neither did she complain in her Life of any other
Distemper than of that Anxiety, and those swooning Fits, which the ignorant
People of the House took for Convulsions or Fits of the Mother.

In December. 1668. In another young Wench of the same Age, we found in the Right
Ventricle such another Body of Fat about the bigness of half a Hen-Egg. And
both Bauhinus and Riolanus write, That they have often met with such pieces of
Fat. Smetius also tells us two Stories of a whitish Substance found in the
Heart, about half a Fingers length, a Thumb's breadth, resembling the Marrow of
the Leg of an Ox, furnished with several Appendixes. Tulpius tells us of a
Flegmatic Polypus, found by himself in the Left Ventricle. Vesalius writes,
That he found in the Left Ven tricle of the Heart two pounds of a blackish
Kernelly sort of Flesh (which seems to be an Error of the Printer, instead of
two Ounces:) the man, before his Death being very sad, very wakeful, and his
Pulse beating very unequally. Beniverius tells us, That he found in one Body a
piece of Flesh like a Medlar; and in another, a hard brawny Substance about the
bigness of a Nut. Nicholas Massa met with a Mattery Aposteme, with an
Exulceration of the whole little Ear. Matthias Cornax met with a corrupt
Exulceration and much Matter. Salius, Horstius, and Antonius S^verinus met with
Worms in the Ventricles. Hollerius, by the Report of Laurentius, met with two
little Stones, with several Apostemes. And Wierus has observed little Stones in
the Heart.

In November. 1668. we dissected a Person in the public Theater, of about five or
six and thirty years of Age, who in his Lifetime complained of many
Heavinesses, and a long Asthma; in whose Heart we found an unusual sort of
Body, white and firm, and truly nervous, which could not be crumbl'd between
the Fingers, about a short span long, and about the thickness of the little
Finger, covered with a peculiar Membrane, between which and the Body it self,
were two Vessels swelling with Blood, reaching on the one side from the top to
the bottom. The one, where it was larger and thicker, being solid without any
hollowness, adhered to the Ventricle it self. The other, forked, divided as it
were into two Legs, which were hollow, with little winding Cells. One of which
Thighs extended to the Pulmonary Vein, the breadth of two or three Fingers; the
other to the Aorta-Attery. Such like, but lesser Polypus's we found in the
Right and left Ventricle, in Feb. 1670. These Bodies hindered the free passage
of the Blood through the Heart and Lungs, by which means the Lungs were very
much swelled; and when they were cut, a frothy kind of Liquor flowed out of
'em. There were also in the Lungs little Veins, which in healthy People are
hardly conspicuous, swelled up in several places with Blood, to the thickness
of a Lark's Quill. And such a sort of Polypus, Bartholine describes in his
Anat. Hist. which was also found in a Heart: of the generation of which
Polypus's, read Malpigius in a peculiar Treatise upon that Subject.

XII. There are four large Vessels adhering Vessels.
to the Ventricles of the Heart; the hollow Vein, the Pulmonary Artery, the
Pulmonary Vein, and the Aorta.

XIII. The Right Ventricle is thinner, The Right Ventricle.
larger and bigger, but not exactly round, but almost Semi-circular, neither
does it reach to the end of the Point. Therein the Veiny Blood, together with
the Chylus brought from the Subclavial into the Hollow Vein, being admitted
through the little Ear, is forthwith attenuated, and rendered spirituous, and so
converted into true spirituous Blood; Being first prepared, exactly mingled
with the Chylus, and moderately dilated in the Auricle.

XIV. This Veiny Blood, either with The hollow Vein.
or without the Chylus, the Ventricle receives out of the Hollow Vein, which is
the largest Membranous Vessel in the whole Body, consisting of a simple and
soft Tunicle, and in its progress, for its more security, wrapped about with the
Coverings of the next parts. Into this Vessel, as all Rivers run into the Sea,
so all the veins of the Body empty their Blood to be carried back to the Heart,
to be there concocted and dilated anew.

This Vein is inserted or joined with a large open Orifice to the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, so that it cannot be separated whole from it.

XV. To this Orifice grows a Membranous The Treblepointed Valves.
Circle, which is presently divided into three Membranous Valves, looking
toward the inside, called vulgarly Tricuspides, or Treble* pointed, and that
from their triangular Form, as some think; though they are neither of that
Form, neither are they extended into three Points. Rather the Name is given 'em
from hence, because they have each of 'em three Fibers, or three or four little
strings, by which they are sasten'd to the fleshy little Columns of the Septum.
These Valves being open in the Dilatation of the Ventricle, admit the Blood out
of the hollow Vein: but falling, and shutting in Contraction at the same
moment, prevent the influx of new Blood out of the hollow Vein into the
Ventricle.

XV. Which Blood is then forced out The Pulmonaery Artery.
of the Right Ventricle into the Lungs through the Pulmonary Artery, which is
another large vessel annexed to it at the upper part, which our Ancestors
erroneoussy called the Arterious Vein, though it be nothing like a Vein: as is
apparent,

1. From its Substance; being a double, thick and firm Tunicle. 2. From its
Use, which is to convey the spirituous and boiling Blood. 3. From its Motion*
because it beats like the rest of the Arteries, as we find by the Dissections
of living Animals.
XVI. Close to this Orifice are fixed Sigmoid Valves.
three membranous Valves, looking outward, called Sigmoides, from their
similitude to a Greek Sigma, which was anciently like a Roman C. These hinder,
lest the Blood forced to the Lungs, should slide back again to the same
Ventricle, by the depression of the Lungs, and dilatation of the Heart. Through
this Vessel therefore the Blood is largely discharged out of the Right
Ventricle of the Heart into the Right and Left part of the Lungs; of which the
least part is expended in the Nourishment of the Lungs; but the greatest part
being forced into the little Branches of the Pulmonary Vein, which are joined
with the Branches of the Artery by Anastomoses, and dispersed through both
Lobes of the Lungs, like a Net, together with the Branches of the Artery, is
conveyed to the Auricle and Left Ventricle of the Heart, through the Trunk of
the Pulmonary Vein.

XVII. The Left Ventricle of the The left Ventricle.
Heart is narrower than the Right, but much more fleshy, thicker, harder and
longer; having a Cavity somewhat round, and reaching to the Point. In this the
Blood being refrigerated by the Inspiration of the Lungs, is again fermented,
dilated, boiles, and is rendered spirituous, and acquires its utmost perfection.

XVIII. And the Ventricle receives The Pulmonary Vein.
this. Blood to be thus brought to further perfection, through the Pulmonary
Vein, which is a large Vessel descending from the Lungs, inserted into the
upper part of the Ventricle, and continuous to it, which was formerly, though
erroneously, called the Veiny Artery; whereas it is no Artery, but a Vein; as
is apparent,

1. From its simple and soft Tunicle, which is like other Veins. 2. From its
Use, which does not afford a spirituous and hot, but a refrigerated and
temperate Blood. 3. For that it does not beat like the rest of the Arteries.
XIX. To the Orifice of this Vein, The Mitral V^ves
are joined two membranous Valves, called Mitral, because that being joined
together, they seem to resemble a Bishop's Miter. These differ little or
nothing in Matter and Form from the Tricuspid Valves, and looking toward the
inner parts of the Ventricle, prevent the reflux of the Blood out of that
Ventricle into the Lungs. To that end, for their greater strengthening, they
are tied to flat fleshy pieces, and long filaments, with two or three thick and
fleshy small Sinews, or little Pillars, rising upwards from the lower part of
the Septum, which some believe to be Muscles, and that the Filaments are
Tendons.

XX. The Blood perfected in this The Aorta.
Ventricle is discharged into the Aorta-Artery, inserted and continuous to it,
being the Root of all the Arteries, except the Pulmonary and Trachea, being of
a more solid and harder Substance, and furnished with a double Tunicle, the
innermost thicker, the outermost thinner, and a thin Membrane of the
neighboring Parts for its further security.

XXI. At the Rise of this Artery The Half Moon Valves.
stand three Valves, extended outward, by the Ancients called Semilunares, as
resembling a Half Moon, altogether like the Sigma formed. These sustain the
violence of the Blood, striving to flow back out of the Aorta.

XXII. In some Brutes, especially The Bone of the heart
in Hearts, there is bred of the Orifice of the Aorta hardened, a little Bone
that sustains the Valves. Galen makes mention of this Bone in several places.
Plempius writes, That he has sometimes taken such a Bone out of the Hearts of
Oxen. But he does not believe it to be any part of the Aorta turned into Bone,
but a peculiar Bone; because it is observed to be in the fleshy Substance it
self of the Heart. Nicholas Stenonis writes, That he has not only observed it
in larger Animals, but also in Sheep, and believes it to be nothing but a part
of the tendonous Orifice turned into a Boney hardness: Bartholine however met
with one in the Heart of a Phthisical Person, and asserts, that another was
found in the Heart of Pope Urban the 8th. Riolanus reports, that there was a
Stone found in the Heart of a President, and of the Queen Mother; and boldly
asserts, That it is not only frequently to be met with in the Hearts of Old
Men, in whom he had observed it himself above thirty times; perhaps, because
Riolanus was more used to the Dissections of Old Men than other Anatomists, who
generally meet with the Younger sort.

CHAP. X. Of the Union of the Vessels in the Heart of the Birth. See Figure 7.
Tab. 9.
HOW the Blood is moved through the Heart in its Vessels, in Men born, has been
sufficiently explained; but because in the Birth, while it abides in the Womb,
the Vessels ore somewhat otherwise disposed, let us examine how the Work of
Sanguification proceeds there.

I. In the Birth, the Blood does The Motion of the Blood in the Birth.
not pass out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart through the Lungs to the Left
Ventricle, as in a Man born; neither is it fermented, concocted and dilated in
both Ventricles, but in one. For that which is concocted and dilated in the
Right, does not thence proceed to the Left, to be there dilated; and that which
is dilated in the Left, was not dilated before in the Right.

II. To this purpose there are double Double Unions of the Vessels.
Unions of the Vessels in the Birth, through which that Passage of the Blood is
made, which in grown persons are quite defaced.

III. The first Union is made in the The Oval Hole.
Heart by Anastomosis, being a large and wide hole of an Oval Form, seated
under the right Auricle, near the Coronary, before the hollow Vein, distinctly
opens it self into the right Ventricle: Hence called the Oval Hole, by which is
made the Union of the hollow vein, called the Pulmonary Vein.

IV. To this Hole next to the Pulmonary Vein, is annexed a membranous thin
Valve, but firm and hard, bigger than the Hole, hindering the reflux of the
Blood flowing into the left Ventricle out of the hollow Vein.

V. The other Union is made about Its (...)
two Fingers Breadth from the Basis, without the Heart, by a long Channel, by
which the Pulmonary Artery is joined to the Great Artery, which Channel has the
Substance of an Artery, as also the same thickness and wide Cavity, and ascends
with an oblique ascent from the pulmonary Artery to the great Artery, and
discharges into the Aorta the Blood forced from the Right Ventricle of the
Heart into the Pulmonary, so that it should not fall into the Left Ventricle.

But because the heat of the Birth is The other Union.
like a new Fire, which begins first to be kindled by a little Spark, and so
increases to a bigger Fire; hence it come to pass that its Blood while it
abides in the Womb, is not yet arrived to that degree of Heat, as to want
Refrigeration, and the double Concoction of the Heart: for it requires not as
yet that Acrimony which is afterward necessary for a firmer Nutrition of the
Body. Which is the reason that the Birth does not breathe in the Womb, and that
the Lungs are idle and useless for a time, and remain thicker: by reason of
which Density, there is no free passage through the Lungs for the Blood
concocted in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and thence forced into the
Pulmonary Artery. For which nevertheless that there may be a way and passage
open, the supreme Creator ordained that Channel, through which that Blood
should be discharged out of the Pulmonary Artery into the Aorta, there being no
more allowed in the mean time to the Lungs, than what is requisite for their
Nourishment.

VI. But lest the Right ventricle The Use of the Right Ventricle*
of the Heart, wherein the more subtle, and spirituous Blood is made, should
remain idle for want of Matter; the Oval Hole is placed at the entrance into
the hollow vein, to the end the Blood falling out of the hollow vein, should
discharge it self, partly into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, partly through
the said Hole into the Pulmonary Vein, and so into the Left Ventricle.

And thus the Blood in the Heart of the Birth, is concocted or dilated only
simply and once in either of the Ventricles, and that which is concocted and
dilated in the Right Ventricle, is mingled in the great Artery with that which
is dilated in the Left.

VII. This Oval Hole which is The Oval Hole is abolished in Children, when born.
wide in the Birth, being of no Use to Men born, becomes so closed and stopped
up within a few weeks, that there is not the least Figure of it that appears.
For it is a very rare thing to find it pervious in People of ripe years, as
Pinaeus, Marchettus, Riolan, and Bartholin, and others have written that they
have seen it: yet is it not to be seen in one of ten Thousand. And most
commonly it is so closely stopped up, that you would swear there was never any
hole there. For it is so stopped up and consolidated by the Valve aforesaid, in
a short time after the Birth comes into the World, that there is no more
passage to be seen, although in many people of ripe years, the same Valve, now
fully corroborated, is so transparent, that it appears distinct from the rest
of the Substance of the Septum. And therefore what Riolanus writes, is most
absurd, and repugnant to Truth, That the Anastomosis frequently, nay almost at
all times remains open by means of this Hole.

VIII. In like manner the said Channel, The Channel also closes up.
though it be very wide, and the Substance of it remarkably thick like that of
the Aorta, yet after the Child is born, it dries and consumes away in such a
manner, that there are not the least Footsteps of it in people of ripe years.

The foresaid Unions of the Vessels, for want of humane Birth, may be
conveniently demonstrated in Calves newly Calv'd, and Lambs newly yean'd.

CHAP. XI. Of the Office or Action of the Heart.
I. PLato, Galen, and several of the The Opinions of the Ancients concerning
the Seat of the Soul in the Heart.
Stoics assert, That the Heart is the Seat of the Irascible Soul. But
Chrysippus, Possidonius, and many of the Aristotelians, not only of the
Irascible, but Concupiscible Soul. From whom Hippocrates does not very much
differ, while he alleges, That the Soul abides in the hottest and strongest
Fire; and plainly affirms moreover, That the Mind is seated in the Heart of
Man. This was also the Sentiment of Diogenes, as Plutarch witnesses; and of
Zeno, according to Laertius. To which Opinion Apollodorus also subscribed, as
Tertullian testifies; and which Gassendus likewise, among the modern Authors,
endeavors to prove. Nor do the Sacred Scriptures a little contribute to the
confirmation of this Doctrine. Where we read, That God is the Searcher of the
Heart; That out of the Heart issue evil Thoughts; That Folly, Wisdom, Judgment,
Counsel, Repentance proceed from the Heart. Whence the Prophet David thus
prays, Psalm. 119. Give me Wisdom, and I will keep thy Law, and observe it with
my whole Heart. Incline my Heart to keep thy Testimonies. The Lord hates the
Heart which imagines evil Thoughts.

Besides this, they produce several Reasons.

1. Because the Heart first lives and moves, and last dies, and being wounded,
the whole Structure falls. 2. Because it is seated in the middle and most
worthy part of the whole Body. 3. Because this Bowel only makes the Blood and
vital Spirit, and nourishes and enlivens every Part of the Body: and that the
Soul abides in the Blood, is apparent from the Sacred Text, The Soul of the
Flesh is in the Blood. 4. Because the Heart being out of order, the whole Body
suffers with it; but when other Parts are vitiated, it does not necessarily die
with them. 5. Because the Brain, to which most ascribe the Seat of the Soul,
depends upon the Heart; and the Motion of the Brain proceeds from the Heart. 6.
Because a Part of the Brain may be corrupted and taken away, the Life and Soul
remaining, but no part of the Heart, all whose Wounds are mortal. 7. Because,
although Perception, Thought, Imagination, Memory, and other principal Actions
are performed in the Brain, it does not follow that the Seat of the Soul is in
the Instrument by which those Actions are performed. The Workman by the Clock
and Dyal which he makes, shows the whole City what time of the Day it is, and
numbers the Hours by the striking the Bell; yet hence it does not follow, that
he himself abides or has his fixed residence in the Clock; it is sufficient he
affords the Clock what is requisite for the performance of the Action, though
he live in another place. Thus the Soul may operate indeed in the Brain, as in
the Instrument, but may have its Seat nevertheless in the Heart. Hence
Picolomini acutely alleges, That the Soul is tied to us upon a double Account.
1. By Nature, and so abides absolutely in the Heart. 2. By Operation, as it
sends Faculties to the Instruments by means of the Spirits discharged out of
the Heart; by the operation of which Faculties the Presence of the Soul is
discerned. In the same manner Avicen will have the Soul with its Faculties
abide in the Heart, as in the first Root, but that it gives its Light to all
the Members. That is to say, that the Heart is the beginning of the Animal
Faculties; but makes use of the Brain as the Instrument of Feeling; so that the
Animal Faculty is radically in the Heart, but by way of Manifestation in the
Brain.
And these and some others, like these, are the Authorities and Reasons,
wherewith some, going about to describe the Office of the Heart, endeavor to
defend their opinion, which Cartesius nevertheless most strenuously opposes.

But they seem to be all out of the way, who going about to describe the Office
of the Heart, presently fall a quarrelling about the Seat of the Rational Soul,
and prosecute it with that heat, as if the whole Question depended upon that
Hinge. But we are going about to examine the Office of the Mortal Heart, not
the Seat of the Immortal Soul.

II. Now the Chief and Primary The Office of the Heart.
Action of the Heart in the whole Body, is to make Blood, and by Pulsation to
distribute it through the Arteries to all the Parts, that all may be nourished
thereby. This Office of Sanguification, the most ancient Philosophers always
ascribed to the Heart. Thus Hippocrates calls the Heart the Fountain of Blood.
Plato, in his Timaeus, asserts the Heart to be the Fountain of Blood, flowing
with a kind of violence. Aristotle asserts the Heart to be the beginning of the
Veins, and to have the chief power of procreating Blood. But after them came
Galen, the Introducer of a new Opinion, who excuses the Heart from the Function
of Sanguification, and ascribes it sometimes to the Liver, sometimes to the
Substance of the Veins, and sometimes to both. Vesalius, Iacobus de Partibus,
Columbus, Picolomini, Carpus, Bauhinus, Ioubertus, and several others imitate
Galen with great Applause, especially those who are mere Followers of the Flock
that goes before; going not where they are to go, but where the Galenists go;
and had rather admire Galen's Authority, than enquire any farther into the
Truth. But in this our Age, the ancient Truth, that lay long wrapped up in thick
Clouds, again broke forth out of Darkness into Light.

For ever since the Knowledge of Circulation has illustrated the whole Body of
Physic, it has been certainly found out, That the Office of Circulation agrees
with the Heart alone, and that therein only this General Nutriment is made, by
which all the Parts of the whole Body are to be nourished, and for that reason,
that there is a perpetual Pulse allowed it on purpose to disperse that
Nourishment, and communicate it to all the Parts.

This Sanguifying Duty the most Famous Philosophers at this day allow the
Heart; so that there are very few left that uphold the Galenic Sentence of the
Liver any longer. Though Swammerdam has promised to restore the Liver to its
former Dignity, but upon what Grounds, and with what Applause we longingly
expect.

III. But Glisson revolts from both Glisson's New Opinion.
Opinions, as well the Ancient one, concerning the Heart, as the Galenic
Opinion, concerning the Liver. Who finding that the Seed being conceived and
altered by the Heat of the Womb, the Vital Spirit, that lay asleep, is raised
up from power to act, and that then that Vital Spirit moves the Vital Juice in
which it abides, every where; and also makes Channels and Passages for it self
through the Seminal Matter; moreover, that Sanguineous Rudiments appear, before
the Heart, Liver or other Bowels can be manifestly seen; from all these things
he concludes, That the Blood is not generated and moved in the Heart, but that
the Heart and Blood are generated by the Spirit, or vivific Juice which is in
the Blood it self. To which, he adds an Axiom, Because, says he, the same,
quatenus the same, always operates the same. And hence he concludes, That the
Cause that made the first Blood in the first Conception, the same, or at least
a Cause aequipollent to it, ought afterward also to be esteemed the Fountain
of Sanguification. This Opinion he confirms with many specious Reasons, which I
omit for Brevity's sake.

IV. But we answer to the most The Reply to Glisson's Opinion.
Learned Glisson, That the Vivific Spirit is the first Mover in the Seed; and
that when it begins to rise into Act, and enliven the Seed, so disposes by its
Motion the vital Juice, to which it adheres as to its Subject, that out of some
of its Particles are made the Heart, out of others the Liver, out of others,
the Vessels, Membranes, etc. And so by that Motion they erect to themselves a
Habitation; the several and particular parts of which, according to the various
Disposition of the least Principles, perform various and distinct Operations,
over all which that Spirit presides, as General President.

For enlivening all the Parts together, it excites every one to the Function
properly allotted to them. Not that the Spirit performs the peculiar part of
every one: but whatever Aptitude to act it bequeathed to the several Parts in
the first Confirmation, that Aptitude it preserves by its presence, without
which they could perform no Operations at all. Therefore the Vivific Spirit,
according to the Axiom forecited, always performs one and the same Action in
the whole Body, that is to say, it enlivens. But it does not produce the Matter
to be enlivened, without which nevertheless it cannot subsist, when the
Consumption of its Subject, that is, the vital Juice requires daily reparation.
Therefore the several Parts enlivened, generate that Matter by degrees, and by
virtue of many and various Concoctions, and other preparatory Operations, which
the Vivific Spirit cannot perform without those Parts: For it could not
Chylifie without the Stomach, nor Sanguifie without the Heart. And hence, though
that Spirit be the general Life of the whole Body, without which nothing can be
done, and which is presupposed to abide and be in all and singular the Parts
specially operating, nevertheless, because it cannot perform those Operations
without the said Parts, it cannot be said that it absolutely performs those
peculiar Operations: but it is better, and indeed necessary to say, That they
proceed from the Nature of the several living Parts. And so the Ventricle in
respect of its proper Nature Chylifies, and the Heart only sanguifies, and no
other Parts of the Body can perform the same Actions, because no others have
the same Propriety of Nature. False therefore it is, what Glisson says, That it
is not the Heart, but this vivific Spirit, which he certainly presupposes to be
in the Blood, that generates other new Blood in the Blood it self, and is the
Cause of the Motion of the Blood. That the first is untrue, is apparent from
hence; for that if the Blood were generated out of the Blood existing in the
Blood, then the Blood being out of order, and distempered, there will be a stop
to Sanguification. But the contrary appears in Persons Scorbutic, and laboring
under Cachexies; in whom Sanguification nevertheless goes forward, nay the
Corruptions of the Blood are mended and corrected by the benefit of the Heart;
which otherwise could never be corrected by reason of the distemper of the
Blood. On the other side, if the Heart be out of order, presently there is a
stop to Sanguification, and the Blood it self is depraved. The latter is false,
as appears by the Dissections of Living Animals: For if the beginning of the
Aorta-Artery be tied with a string near the Heart, presently all Motion of the
Blood ceases in the Arteries; which would still continue, if it contained
within it such a Spirit-mover of it self, and had not its Motion from without:
but cut the string, and presently the Motion of the Heart returns by virtue of
the Pulse of the Heart. The same is also manifest in faint-hearted persons,
who, at the time of letting Blood, fall into a Swoon upon the Surgeon's
pricking the Vein; nor can you hardly perceive their Heart to beat; so that
there is little or no Blood moved through the Vessels, nor will the Blood flow
from the small Wound; but when the Patient comes again to himself, and that the
Heart begins to beat, presently the Blood moves again, and spins out at the
little hole made by the Lancet.

Whence it appears, that the Blood is not moved or generated by the Vivific
Spirit which is in the Blood, but by the Heart; and that the Vivific Spirit
abiding in all the Parts of the Body, does only revive the Parts; and that
those enlivened Parts, according to the variety of their several Dispositions,
act specially, and after various manners upon the Matter to be enlivened.

V. Moreover I think it requisite, Whether any vivific Spirit be in the Blood.
more accurately to examine, Whether any Vivific Spirit, as Glisson presupposes,
be in the Blood? I know indeed, That the Vital Spirit, generally so called, is
generated in the Heart, that is to say, apt to be enlivened, and to promote
Sanguification by its Heat; yet I cannot believe, that this Vivific Spirit,
that is already actually living and enlivening, is mingled with the Blood, when
that Spirit is of a higher Order, and only abides in the German, and Blossom of
the Seed, and the necessary primogenial moisture of the Parts themselves of the
Body, and must be roused into Action, by the flowing in of the hot vital
Spirit: in regard the Blood it self is not yet a Part of the Body, nor
enlivened, but to be enlivened, when it shall be assimilated to the Parts.

VI Thus an Artist, who has made A Simili^.
a Clock, does not move the Wheels, nor show the Hours, but he makes the Clock,
which could never move the Wheels, nor tell the Hours, unless the Artist had
made that Engine, and bequeathed such an Aptitude to it, which afterward he
preserves to it also: So the Vivific Spirit, although at the first Creation of
the Parts, it made the Heart, and endu'd it with a Sanguifying Aptness; which
afterward it also preserves therein by its presence; yet is it not that Spirit,
but the Heart which must be said to Sanguifie.

As to the first Principles of the Blood, which, as Glisson says, are observed
at the first time of Conception, before the Heart appears; I say, that those
Rudiments are also produced by the Heart; for these Rudiments are not to be
seen till the leaping Bubble begins to move, which is the first beginning of
the Heart: and although the whole Structure of a live Heart, does not appear to
the Eye; yet that it is there, and generates the first Principles of the Blood,
the Effect teaches us. I wonder indeed that Harvey, who asserts the Blood to be
made before other things, did not take notice of this, especially writing as he
does, That at the same time, that the Blood begins to be discerned in the Egg,
that its Receptacles, the Veins, and beating Pulse manifestly appear. Whence it
is sufficiently apparent, That the Blood is not to be discerned, but with the
beginning of the Heart; which as soon as it begins to act, makes the Blood; and
then the same Cause acting that made the Blood, afterward continually
generates the Blood, as being the only Fountain from which the Blood
perpetually springs.

There remain Three other Arguments of Glisson, which he thinks to be Herculean.

First, says he, The Heart borrows all its vital Heat and Activity from the
vital Blood contained in its Ventricles, and distributed into its Substance
through the Coronary Arteries, without which Heat and Vitality, it would grow
number and languid. Hence he concludes, That the Heart is moved, nourished, and
lives by the Blood; but that the Heart it self neither moves or generates; and
this he demonstrates by the Example of a Heart plucked out of a Living Animal,
into the Ventricles of which, as yet beating, if any Liquor be infused, it is
not changed into Blood. An egregious Comparison of the Operation of a Heart
contained in a sound and healthy Creature, with its Operation when pulled out
of an Animal, and utterly debilitated: And indeed as base a Comparison of any
raw Liquor infused into the half dead Heart cut out of a Living Creature, with
the Chylus prepared by various Concoctions, for Sanguification; and naturally
discharging it self into a sound beating Heart. But if the Heart borrows Heat
and Activity from the Blood, what is the reason that the Heart being distempered
by some malignant Vapor, and beating little or nothing, presently all the
Sanguineous Parts are refrigerated; whereas there is a sufficient quantity of
good Blood in the Vessels, able both to warm those Parts, and to flow into the
Heart it self? But we find this sudden Refrigeration in the beginning of the
Fits of Agues, in Frights and Syncopes, etc. Certainly no body will believe
otherwise, but that this happens merely because the Blood receives its Heat and
Motion from the Heart; and when that ceases to move, then the Blood of the rest
of the Parts, becomes deprived of Heat and Motion, and consequently to be
refrigerated. Besides, the Heart does not simply languish by reason of the
failing Influx of the Blood into the Ventricles, which occasions a defect of
Heat and Vital Spirits, but for want of convenient Matter, out of which to
generate Vital Spirits; and so to make convenient Nourishment, both for it
self, and the whole Body.

His Second Argument is taken from the Color: For he says, The Chylus cannot
obtain a red Color from the Heart, and consequently be changed by it into
Blood; because the Blood it self is much redder than the Heart, or Substance of
the Heart; and that therefore the Heart is not sufficiently Assimilar to the
Blood, as to perform that Office; seeing that every Part that is apt for
Sanguification, ought to be like the Blood.

And Lastly, He adds, How should any thing act beyond the Sphere of his
Activity, and communicate that to another, of which it is destitute it self?
Therefore because the Heart, Liver and Veins, are paler than the Blood, how
should they contribute to it a more lively Color than their own? But here
Glisson seems to have forgot himself: For a little before, he said, That
frequently by Heat and Motion, Colors from white and pale, become more ruddy;
which is apparent by the Boilings and Bakings of Fruit, Flesh, and by a
Thousand other Experiments: And now he will not allow of a red Color from
Motion and Specific Heat, but from a like Color: Which how ill they cohere, is
apparent. Fruits, Flesh and other Substances baked in an Oven, acquire a ruddy
Substance. The Juice of the larger Consound, digested in Horse-dung for several
days, puts on a ruddy Color; whereas neither the Oven nor the Horse-dung are
red. The Stomach, by a Specific Concoction, gives a white Color to the Chylus,
which it has not it self. The Choler in its Vesicle, acquires a green Color by
overmuch Concoction and stay therein, and is naturally of a yellow Color;
whereas neither the Liver, or the Gallbladder, are green or yellow. Many times
salt, sharp, and greenish Humors distill from the Brain, which is white it self,
and without any Greenness, Saltness or Acrimony. In a virulent Gonorrhaea,
greenish and yellowish Seed flows forth; whereas the Spermatick Vessels have no
such Color. Certainly they are mightily out of the way, who attribute to
Color that same Efficacy which is to be ascribed to the Heat, and specifc
Concoction and Mixture proceeding from the Propriety of the Part: which Color
does not proceed from the Similitude of the acting Part wherein it is
concocted, but from the Heat acting specifically in that Part, according to the
specific Constitution, Temper, and Formation of the Parts. And hence it is,
that the Heat of the Stomach extracts a white Chylus out of the Aliments, and
why the Heart changes the Chylus into white Blood. Lastly, If the Chylus gain
only a red Color from the Redness of the Blood, I would fain know what it is,
that in the first Conception changes the white Seed into red Blood.

His Third Argument is taken from Concoctions: For, says he, Natural Bodies, as
much as in them lies, labor to assimilate to themselves all other Bodies that
are within the Sphere of of their Activity; and hence the Heart, should it
betake it self to the Function of making Blood, would bring the Chylus to the
similitude of its own Substance, and there stop, and never proceed to induce
the Form of Blood.

But wherefore does not Glisson say the same of the Stomach and Liver? Why do
not these Bowels change the Aliments into a Substance like themselves, and
there stop; but rather into a Substance quite contrary, that is, white Chylus,
or yellow and green Choler? Which, if it be allowed them to do, for the common
Good of the whole, why shall the Generation of a dissimilar Substance be
allowed the Heart for the benefit of the whole? But the Learned Glisson does
not sufficiently distinguish between public and private Concoctions; nor does
he take notice, That in public Concoctions, the Matter is prepared for the
Nourishment of the whole: in private Concoctions, the alteration of that
prepared Matter, is made into the Substance of the several Parts. And hence it
is necessary for those Bowels that serve for second Concoctions, that they
should make the Nutritious Matter to be prepared for the whole, not like to
themselves, but such out of which all and every the Parts may assume and
assimilate to themselves something convenient and proper for themselves. And so
likewise those Bowels themselves are nourished by a private Concoction, with
that common Aliment, which they have prepared for the whole Body, that is to
say, the Spirituous Blood; and out of that assimilate to themselves convenient
Particles, and then stop in that first Concoction, while in the mean time, they
proceed farther in the public Concoction.

And thus the foresaid new Opinion seems to be sufficiently refuted,
notwithstanding Charleton has showed himself so obstinate in its Defense. But
in regard that Glisson uses the same Words and Arguments, there is no need of
any farther Refutation of him, although he assert the sole quantity of the
Blood to be the occasion of its Motion, and therein seems to differ something
from Glisson.

CHAP. XII. Of the Blood, Vital Spirit, and Nutrition.
I. THE Blood is called by the The names.
Greeks, (...), by the French, du Sangue, by the Italians, Sangue, by the
Germans, Blut; by the English, Blood; and by the Low Dutch, Bloet; and which is
chiefly to be admired at, there is no Synonimous Word by which that Humor may
be absolutely signified. Among the Latins indeed the Word Cruor is frequently
used; but that Word does not absolutely signify Blood, but only the Blood
which flows from Wounds and Ulcers; or corrupted Blood, or such as remains in
the Vessels after Death. So likewise (...) in the Greek, and Grumus in the
Latin, signifies Clotted Blood.

II. Now Blood is a red Juice made Its Definition.
in the Heart, out of the Chylus, for the nourishment of the whole Body.

III. Its Substance consists of two Its Substance.
several Juices, by means of the Serum, so united in the Serum it self, through
several Concoctions of the Bowels, as to become one Bloody Mass together.

IV. One of these Juices is Sulphury, Its Juices.
though Malpigius, not dreaming of Sulphur, calls the same Juice every where
Fatness; the other, Salt: the one somewhat fatty, oily and viscous; the other,
altogether different from all manner of Fatness. I call 'em Juices, so far as
Sulphur and Salt in Fusion, concur to the Mass of Blood. And therefore in
dissolution, they cannot be well mingled without loss and tumult, (for Fat with
watery Salt never mixes well) unless some Mercury intervene, so familiar to the
Nature of both, that both may be exactly mixed as well with it, as in it. This
Mercury is the Serum, as in which the more watery Particles of both the said
Juices are dissolved and mixed by Concoctions. And hence that is constituted,
not only out of the Watery part of the Elements alone, but also out of some
Sulphury and Salt particles melted therein by Concoction; and so it partakes of
a certain middle Nature, so that therein there may be a convenient Mixture,
and, as it were, a union of the Sulphury and Salt Juices. These Particles are
discerned by the Saltish Savor of the Sweat and Urine; the Sulphury, by the
Smell of both: the one, by the Salt which is separated from the Urine by
Chemistry; the other, for that stale Urine being heated at the Fire, the
exhaling Vapor presently burns when it comes near the Fire. And therefore it
is requisite that the said Serum be mixed in a sufficient quantity, and well
concocted with the rest of the Juices. For if it be too little, or none at all,
the active Principles, that is to say, the Salt and Sulphury Juice, close too
strictly together, and too vehemently exagitate and combat one with another,
and in that mutual Conflict waste and corrupt one another: whence the Body,
either deprived of Nourishment, consumes away, or else upon the corruption of
the Blood, falls into Diseases, and dies. But if either a too watery Serum, or
over-raw abound, then the said active Principles are too much eloin'd and
separated one from another, and their Combination becomes too loose, so that
they do not sufficiently agitate each other; and hence the Blood being
over-moist, and subject to Corruption, the whole Body that is nourished with
such Blood, grows weak and infirm.

Now that the Blood consists of these Principles, is easily demonstrated: For
that ^ulphur is in it, the many oily, swe^t, ^at and sulphury Nourishments that
we (...), sufficiently declare; out of which, nothing else but something
Sulphury can be extracted by the Concoctions of the Bowels, and mixed with the
Blood. And this farther also, for that we find, that the most fat and sulphury
Parts of the Body are generated out of the Blood, which receive their Softne^s,
Oiliness and Tenderness from Sulphur. That there is Salt likewise in it, is
apparent from the Salt-Meats which we feed upon, from the Salt which is
extracted out of the Blood by Chemistry, and from the Salt which is in the
Urine, and is separated from the Blood, together with the superfluous Serum.
And that the Serum is in it, is visible to the Eye. There are some also that
add Earth to the other Principles: but seeing that is nothing else, but the
remainder of thick Salt, very crude, and hard to be dissolved, it ought not to
be allowed for a peculiar Principle, as being that which cannot be melted and
dissolved by Concoction, but by a long and vehement Heat, like another crude,
tartareous Salt: as is manifest in Bricks made of Earth, and baked in the Kiln;
for the Bricks next the Fire, through the vehemence of a continued Fire, melt,
and run like thick Glass.

In this mixture of a Sulphury and Salt Juice in the Serum, the Sulphury Juice
contributes a stronger and swifter Activity, but the Salt Juice constitutes the
primary Mass: as that which being of a more fixed Nature, hinders the easy
dissolution of the Sulphury Juice, mixed and blended with it, and so retards
the dissolving of the Sanguineous Mass, and resists Corruption, Stench, and
Inflammation; and being prone to Fixation, thence it is the Cause that the
Blood being in^us'd into the Substance of the Parts, becomes a good part of it
coagulated therein, and adheres, and is assimilated to it.

Here arises a notable Doubt to A Doubt.
be considered: Seeing these fat or oily and sulphury Parts of the Blood, are
hotter than the others, and so seem able to promote the Salt parts to a
stronger Activity, how it comes to pass, that in fat People, in whom the
sulphury, oily Parts abound in great quantity, there happens less Agility of
the whole Body, and less Activity of the Animal Spirits, but that they are
generally sloathful and sleepy, and more troubled with Drowsiness, Apoplexies,
and short Breath than leaner People? This comes to pass, because that in such
People the oily sulphury Particles of the Blood are too much abounding above
the Salt, and too much enfold and blunt them with their greasy Oiliness, so
that they cannot boil, be attenuated, and be made Spirituous; and hence they
are less fit for the Generation of Animal Spirits in convenient and sufficient
quantity, so that the Animal Operations grow dull and heavy, and soporiferous
Effects prevail. Moreover, the Heat of the Sulphury Particles themselves
asswages, and loses its Vigor, unless there happen an Effervescency in the
Blood by means of the sharp salt Particles, and through the stronger and
smaller Particles among themselves, a fiercer Heat be raised. Which
Fermentation is prevented, if the oily Particles too much exceed the salt. Here
it may be octjected, That in Agues, the sulphury Heat predominates, and yet the
Animal Actions are not always dull and numm'd in such Persons. Which comes to
pass, because that in such Persons the sulphury and oily Particles of the Blood
do not exceed nor stupifie the Salt, with their Oiliness and Quantity, but by
their Heat and Motion stirring up their Acrimony to more vehement Action,
produce an Effervescency either too strong, or vicious and Aguish.

VI. But to return to the Business: Double Spirits.
Out of the Sanguineous Mass, by convenient Concoctions and Fermentations of
the Bowels, double Spirits are raised; that is to say, Sulphurous and Salt;
the one sweetish, and the other sour; both very subtle and thin, and confused
together, and yet one more volatile than the other; like the Sulphury Spirits
in Oils chymically extracted out of Vegetables; and the Salt Spirits Chymically
drawn from Salts and salt things. But that the Sulphury Spirits are more thin
and volatile, is apparent in the Distillation of Vegetables; for they are first
of all and most easily separated, and ascend the Alembick, unless too much
perplexed among the Salt, or being less attenuated by them, by reason of their
Oiliness: but the salt Spirits ascend last, and with more difficulty; whose
Acrimony the Taste distinguishes from the Sweetness of the Sulphur.

But the foresaid Spirits of the Sanguineous Mass, out of which they are raised
by Fermentations, are mingled with it, and carried forthwith to the Heart, and
there being often attenuated, and dilated, are so exactly united, that they wax
as it were one Spirit, which we call Vital.

VII. Now the Vital Spirit is the Vital Spirit.
most subtle and efficacious Part of the Blood, generated out of its Sulphury
and Salt Particles, dilated by the Fermentation of the Heart.

I say, the most subtle and efficacious Part of the Blood, that is to say,
that which is raised out of its Sulphury and Salt Particles: for every thin and
vaporous Substance, as that which is raised out of the serous part of the
Blood, is not so be called a Spirit; because it is no efficacious part of the
Blood, though sometimes less to be discerned than the effectual Spirit it self:
but that which through the copious admixture of it self, breaks the efficacy of
its Spirits, and withstands their Agility.

When the Blood slides into the Heart, presently the frame and composure of the
whole Liquor is dissolved, and the Spirituous Particles, the Bond of mixture
being loosened, are exactly united together, and endeavor to expand themselves
every way, but being restrained by the Vessels on the inside, they are mixed
with the other Liquor, and so burst forth into the open Tubes or Channels of
the Arteries; through which, together with the Blood, they are poured forth
over the whole Body, with the Blood and Effluviums of Heat.

VIII. Now some there are, who with Whether this Spirit be different from the
Blood.
Argenterius, stiffly deny this Spirit different from the Blood, to be in the
Blood; though others with no less heat assert it. But this Contention seems
easy to be composed, if we allow it to be the most subtle part of the Blood
freed from the thicker Matter, and exalted to an extraordinary Thinness; mixed
indeed with the whole, but easily separable from it; for that the perfection of
the Blood consists in its Mixture, which without this Spirit would be only a
crude and unprofitable Humor. In like manner as in Wine, the Spirit gives the
Wine its perfection, and is the subtilest part of it; and by how much the
Spirit is better, by so much is the Wine better: Yet this is separable by
Chemistry from the Wine; but then the remaining Substance of the Wine becomes a
crude, watery and unprofitable Liquor. And therefore the foresaid Question may
be thus decided: If we mean good and perfect Blood, then it may be well said,
that the Vital Spirit is in the Blood, and that it is not different from it, as
being the most subtle part of it raised out of it self, which by its presence
constitutes the perfection of the Blood. But if we mean Blood simply so called,
as being that which is dissipated from the Blood, the Blood remaining, such as
is to be found in dead People, which is not perfect, because there is no
volatile Spirit remaining therein; then the Spirit may be said to be different
from the Blood, or to be generated in it, the Blood still existing; which
moreover were it in it, would predominate in it, and agitate the thicker
Particles of the Blood one with another. But when, as Aristotle witnesses,
nothing is agitated or moved by it self, it may be well said, that the other
thicker particles of the Blood are not moved by themselves, but by another
Mover, that is, the Spirit; which nevertheless is nothing else but a part of
the Sanguineous Mass exalted to Spirituosity.

Here perhaps some will object, If this Spirit agitates other Particles of the
Blood one with another, then the Blood contains in it self the Cause of its own
Motion, and is not moved by the Heart. I answer, That the Motion of the Blood
is double; one circulatory, which without doubt proceeds from the Heart; by
which Motion, being in good part spiritualized, it is carried through the
Arteries to all the Parts of the Body. The other Fermentaceous, which is made
by this Spirit, by which the least Particles of it are agitated one among
another, while this Spirit passes through them like a Ferment, and divides 'em
one from another; which vehement Fermentaceous Motion is observed in the
Crisis's of Fevers, and the Emotion of the Flowers. But this Motion also
proceeds from the Heart, so far as it continually begets this Spirit, by
dilating the Blood, mixes it with the Blood, and quickens it by its Motion into
Act; so that the Motion of the Heart ceasing, this also ceases.

IX. This Vital Spirit, while it always The Heas of the Blood.
endeavors to fly away by reason of its extraordinary Volatility, continually
agitates the other thicker Particles of the Blood, that retard it, and
reassume its flight, and by them shaken after a various manner, and by reason
of way denied it, often beaten back again, by which means it divides them one
from another, conquers, subtilizes, and detains them in a continual
Fermentative Motion; from which Motion and Agitation of the subtle Matter,
proceeds Heat; which being moderate in a moderate Agitation, small in a small
one, and violent in a violent Agitation; hence it happens, that the Blood,
according to the variety of this Agitation, which may happen and alter upon
diverse Accidents, becomes more or less hot.

By this Motion thus stirred up by the Spirit, the Blood is not only preserved
in its Heat and perfect Soundness, that is, by the bond of exact Mixture; but
is also rendered fluid, thin, and apt for Nourishment, which deprived of that
Motion and Spirit, grows thick, corrupts and grows unprofitable. The same
Spirit also contributes such a Thinness of Parts to the Blood, as to be able to
pass the most narrow Passages, and to be conveyed to any Parts whatever; all
which Parts this Spirit quickens to their several Functions; and by its
continual Agitation and Heat thence proceeding, continually wastes and
dissipates the more fluid Particles of the Parts, and continually repairs, and
as often increases them by means of the Blood.

X. But the Blood, as also the Vital The Temper of the Blood.
Spirit raised out of it, if it consists of the two Principles, Sulphurous and
Salt mixed together, and equally agreeing in Strength; then is the Blood best,
and well tempered according to Nature. But as the Force of these Principles
exceeds one another, it is colder or hotter, and its Temper varies according to
the strength and prevalency of the Principle. I say, Colder, not that any cold
Quality proceeds from Salt, or from a salt Spirit, as from its proper Subject;
but because while that predominates, the Sulphury Spirit is more obtunded and
fixed; whence happens a weaker Agitation of the small Particles one among
another, and consequently a lesser actual Heat. And another Reason, why Salt
and its Spirit may be called Colder, is, because that being cast into the Fire,
it only crackles; but does not flame out like Sulphur, or a Sulphurous Spirit.

XI. Now out of the Blood thus The quantity and quality of
composed of the said Principles, sometimes more, sometimes fewer Spirits the
Spirits various.
are raised. For if the Blood to be rarified in the Heart, be well concocted in
the other Bowels, and prepared for Fermentation, and as I may say, brought to
full Maturity; then there happens a right Fermentation or Dilatation in the
Heart, by which a convenient quantity of Spirits is raised up with a moderate
Heat; but if ill prepared and raw, then is the Effervescency less, and the
Dilatation more difficult; and fewer Spirits rise, and hence proceeds a cold
Temper of the Body. If over much concocted, and that the Particles either Salt,
or Sulphurous, or both, are too much attenuated; then the Dilatation is
overmuch in the Heart, and the Spirits are over-sharp and hot; and hence
proceeds a hot Temperature, Corruption of Humors, Inflammations and Fevers,
especially if the Sulphury Spirits prevail above the other.

XII. By the way, we must take notice An Error concerning the Spirits.
that they are in a very great Error, who besides the Principles constituting
the Essence of the Blood in Mixture, add another Spirit, and assert a necessity
for it to concur and be mixed with the Salt and Sulphur in the Serum. Whereas
this Spirit of which they speak, is not any thing peculiar concurring to the
making of the Blood; but only a thin and spirituous Vapor, attracted out of
the Salt and Sulphur it self, by force of the Heat; as is performed by
Chemistry in other Things: For though all Bodies are composed of Salt and
Sulphur, as their Principles, united by the Assistance of Mercury; yet in
regard that Salt and Sulphur are not Bodies altogether simple and equal, but
composed of unequal Particles; hence the Bodies that are composed of those
Principles, consist of unequal Particles, some thicker, some thinner, others
more or less fixed, and others more or less fit for Fusion and Attenuation: For
the Heat acting upon Bodies composed of these Principles, dissolves first of
all and more easily the thinner and less fixed Particles, attenuates and
renders them Spirituous, frees them also from the thicker Particles, and by
means of the thicker Particles, agitates and moves them; and those Spirituous
Particles so attenuated, are called Spirits, as being endu'd with an
extraordinary Tenuity and Mobility. Not that they are any thing different from
Salt or Sulphur, concurring to the composition of the Mixture; but only some
thinner Substance melted, attenuated and extracted by the Force of Heat, out of
the same Mixture, which, upon the absence of that Heat, again condenses, and is
quietly united as before, with the other thicker Particles not yet brought to
Fusion.

XIII. Nor are they less in an Error, An Error concerning Air.
who hold, That there is a copious Quantity of Air mixed with the Blood, as
being necessarily requisite to its Perfection. Which Air they pretend, is mixed
four ways with the Blood.

1. As being mixed and swallowed with the Meat chaw'd in the Mouth: with which
Nourishment it is so united in the Stomach, that at length entering the Region
of the Heart, it is incorporated with the Blood. 2. By entering the Mass of
Blood through the Pores of the Skin. 3. When it is not a little mixed with the
Blood by the drawing in of the Breath, hastening through the Lungs to the Left
Ventricle of the Heart. 4. When by the same breathing in of the Air, it is
carried to the Vessels and Ventricles of the Brain. But if the Air be necessary
to complete the perfection of the Blood, then ought it always necessarily to be
mixed with it; but no Air can come at the Birth included in the Womb and its
Membranes, and yet the Blood bred therein is no less sound and perfect, than in
those that being born, both breath and suck in the Air.

XIV. Here it may be questioned, The Original of the Principles of the Blood.
Out of what things the said Principles are extracted? I answer, From the
Aliments which contain both Sulphur and Salt in themselves; and consist of them
mixed and concocted after a Specific manner. Yet some are more, others less
Spirituous, and hence arise variety of Qualities; which is the Reason, that
some Nourishments agree better with hot, others with cold Constitutions.

But, to the end these Principles may be extracted out of the Aliments, and
that Blood may be made out of 'em, it is requisite that the Nourishments be
prepared after another manner; that their first Mixture may be altogether
dissolved, and the latent Sulphurous and Salt Particles be exalted to Fusion,
and a more extraordinary Tenuity; so that being freed from their first Union,
they may be again mingled after a new manner. To this purpose, besides their
Dissolution by Cookery and Dressing, being admitted into the Body, in the first
place those things that are hard, are bruised and softened by the Teeth in the
Mouth, and being prepared by the admixture of the Spittle, are swallowed down
into the Stomach. In the next place, they are farther fermented and dissolved
after a specifical manner in the Stomach. 3. The more profitable Chylus, and
more dissolved Particles, are separated from the thicker Particles by another
peculiar Effervescency, and are yet more dissolved and attenuated in the Milky
Vessels, and many Kernels of the Mesenterium, and by the Commixture of
Lymphatic Juice; and these being mixed with the Veiny Blood, and carried to the
Heart, are therein dilated; and so being united with the rest of the Blood,
become perfect Blood. But when they are the first time dilated in the Heart, it
is not a Spirituous Blood that is presently made out of 'em, but a thicker and
cruder Blood, which is mixed with the rest of the Blood several times
circulated through the Heart, and by that means rendered very Spirituous, and
by frequent Circulations and Attenuations in the Heart, rendered still more
Spirituous.

XV. In the mean time, certain The Chylus passing through the Heart, ceases to be
Chylus.
it is, That the Chylus, passing through the Heart, and therein dilated, loses
the Form of Chylus, and at the very same moment assumes another, that is to
say, the Form of Blood.

XI. But here arises a weighty Whether the whole Chylus be changed into Blood.
Question; Whether the whole Chylus in its passage through the Heart, loses
altogether the Form of Chylus, and assumes the Form of Blood in such a manner,
as that no Part of it remains Chylus? This Doubt was started by Gualter
Needham, who says, That the Chylus dilated in the Heart, remains a considerable
part of it actually Chylus, and that it circulates through the whole Body,
being mixed with the Blood; and is again separated from the Blood in several
Parts for private Uses, especially in the Amnion and Breasts.

XVII. This Opinion of his, he The Proof of the former Opinion.
proves from hence, For that frequently crude and indigested Chylus has been
drawn from the Arms ^of such as have been let Blood. The same Opinion also, the
Observances of other Physicians seem strongly to confirm; of which Bauschius
has collected several in his Germanic Ephemerides. 1. Of a Girl, afflicted with
a continual Fever, whose Blood, at three several Blood-lettings, appeared
Milky. 2. Of a sick Patient, out of all whose Veins, when opened, there always
issued forth white Blood. 3. Of a certain Virgin, who, upon a Suppression of
her Courses, after she had eaten her Breakfast about Seven a Clock, was let
Blood at Eleven, and the Blood that came from her, was purely white; and being
warmed upon the Fire, hardened like the White of an Egg. 4. Of an Apothecary of
Cambray, who, being pricked in the Arm, the Blood looked red, as it came forth;
but was white in the Porringer. 5. Of a certain Person troubled with the Itch.
6. Of a Woman that gave Suck, that lay ill of a Malignant Fever. 7. Of a Woman
with Child, sick of a Fever. 8. Of another Woman with Child: And, 9. Of a Maid
that was troubled with a Suppression of her Courses; from all which Persons,
upon their being let Blood, there flowed a white Liquor together with the
Blood. And Regner de Graef mentions two Stories of white Blood seen by himself.

XVIII. But though such a long Series Its Refutation.
of Observations seems to confirm Needham's Opinion, yet because those Examples
are quite from the Matter, it is impossible they should be able to support it:
For all those Cases concern unhealthy Bodies only, from whom a whitish Matter
issued forth together with the Blood. Concerning which Matter, there has been a
sharp Dispute between the Physicians to those Patients, whether it is to be
called Phlegm or Chylus; whether Milk or Matter; and many uncertain Conjectures
have been made about it. When as it is well known by daily Practice, that by
reason of some certain Infection of the Blood, proceeding from the bad
concoctions of the diseased Bowels, many times upon opening a Vein, the Blood
will look sometimes whitish or yellowish, and sometimes of another Color.
Moreover, if any thing of a Chylus should be mixed with it, and circulate with
it, then would it sometimes be seen to flow out with the Blood upon opening a
Vein; which was never yet seen by any Person. And in my own Practice, I have
ordered innumerable Persons, both Men and Women, some with Child, and others
that have given Suck, to be let Blood, but never could observe the least drop
of Chylus in the Blood that has been drawn forth. Neither did any of those
eminent Physicians, with whom I discoursed this Point, ever see the same.
Neither can any man produce an Example of a Man sound in Health, out of whose
Veins, being opened, Chyle ever flowed with the Blood, or was ever separated
from it. Perhaps it may be objected, That Reason shows us, and Experience
confirms it, That in big-belly'd Women, and such as give Suck, if they are in
perfect health, the Chylus is separated from the Blood, and poured forth into
the Breasts of the one, and into the Amnion of the other; which could not flow
thither, but out of the Sanguiferous Vessels carried toward those Parts. To
which I answer, That the Chylus, that is carried to the Breasts and Amnion, as
also that which flows through the Womb and Bladder, was never infused into
Blood-bearing Vessels, or mixed with the Blood, and so neither can be carried
through the one, nor separated from the other; but flows to those Parts through
other quite different concealed Parts; of which Passages, we have sufficiently
discoursed, l. 1. c. 18. and 31. and c. 2. of this Book. Besides all which,
Reason is altogether repugnant to this Opinion. For when the Aliments and
Alimentary Humors lose their first Forms, by reason of the Concoction of the
Bowels, and assume another Form, the same thing cannot but happen to the Chylus
concocted in the Heart. For Example; An Apple being eaten, and concocted in the
Stomach, is altogether deprived of its Form, and is made into Chylus, which is
no more an Apple, and of which no particles can be again reduced to the Form of
an Apple. So the Chylus being dilated in the Heart, cannot but by its strong
and sudden Effervescency, presently lose all its Form of Chyle, and receive the
Form of Blood; which, though it be rawer at the beginning, than the rest of the
Blood, frequently circulated and dilated in the Heart, yet is it Blood, wherein
there is not the least Form of Chylus remaining. But some will say, That
Crudity presupposes that some particles of that Chylus are not altogether
changed into Blood, but still retain the Form of Chylus, and are so mixed with
the Blood. I deny it, for that is not called crude Blood, wherein all the
Particles of the Chylus are not sanguify'd; but that which is not reduced to a
just Spirituosity and Maturity. And hence the Blood which is made first of all
out of the Chylus dilated in the Heart, though it be cruder, yet it is not a
Chylous and Flegmy part of the Blood: wherein there are no Particles of the
Chylus remaining, only it wants as yet a just Spirituosity in some measure. In
like manner, as the Seed, which is made of the Blood, becomes to be crude and
unfruitful in Old Men, not that there are any Particles of Blood in it, that
are not as yet changed into Seed; but because that Seed, by reason of the
weakness of the Spermatic Parts, is not yet reduced to a just Spirituosity and
Maturity. For no man, how quicksighted soever, observed any Particles of Blood
in crude Seed, much less shall be able to separate any Blood from it. Thus an
unripe Apple is called crude, not that any Earthy or Arboreous Particles are
conspicuous in it, or any way separable from it; but because the Spirit latent
therein, is not yet reduced to such a Thinness and Maturity, as to put forth it
self; which Maturity it afterward acquires by the Heat of the Sun, and thence
a farther Concoction.

However, seeing that the Serum, Choler, and sometimes other corrupt Humors
contained in the Vessels, passing through the Heart together with the Blood,
frequently retain their own form, and remain what they were before, why may not
the same thing befall the Chylus? Because the Chylus is an Alimentary Juice,
grateful to Nature, by previous Concoctions, and Mixture with the Lymphatic
fermentaceous Juice, in such a manner, and to that end prepared and made fit,
that it may be presently dilated in the Heart, and be turned into Blood, no way
able, being once dilated in the Heart, to retain the form of Blood. As
Gunpowder is dilated of a sudden by the Fire, and loses its Form. But it is
otherwise with the Serum, Choler, and other corrupt Humors mixed with the
Blood, which are neither prepared after a convenient manner, nor to the same
end, but unfit to make Blood, though passing with the Heart through the Blood;
and hence it is, that they remain what they were before. Like a Clod of Earth
impregnated with Oil, and so thrown into the Fire, retains the Form of Earth;
because its Substance is not so easily deprived of its Form by the Fire; though
the Oil, with which it is impregnated, being dilated and kindled by the Fire,
loses the Form of Oil in such a manner, that not a drop of it remains, nor can
it ever be reduced to the Form of Oil.

XIX. It is therefore another Question, W^ (...) part of the Chylus may not be
mix^d with the Blood.
Whether if not always, and a considerable quantity, yet sometimes, and a small
quantity of mere Chylus may not be mixed with the Blood? This we altogether
deny of Arterious Blood, but not always of the Veiny Blood; for that sometimes
there is a Milky and Chylous Juice in the hollow Vein, as well infused out of
the Milky Pectoral, into the Subclavial Veins, as in Women that give Suck,
carried through the Mammary Veins, to the Hollow Vein it self. Perhaps it may
so happen, that by reason of some Mixture, the Color of the Blood may be
altered from Red to White; as Oil of Vitriol and Aquafortis change the Red
Color of Cloth into White, but then that which appears white in the Blood, is
not Chylus, but rather some Blood which is corrupted: Like that which sometimes
in a certain Cacoch^ o^ the Body, and in some malignant Diseases, appeared died
of a whitish color. Of which Bauschius gives us an Example of a Priest that
lay sick of a Malignant Fever, who, being three times let Blood, every time his
Blood appeared white; having an Ulcery Substance, like the White of an Egg. I
shall add another remarkable Example, seen by my self at Nimmeghen; where, at
that time, the Pestilential Fevers were very ri^e. In this Distemper, if the
Patients were let Blood the two first days, they bled very well, and very good
Blood; but they that were let Blood after the sixth o^ seventh day, their Blod
came forth generally whitish, and yet for want of Appetite, they had hardly eat
or drank in all that time; for the Fever perplexed the Patients more with its
Malignity and extraordinary Anxiety, than with its Heat and Drought. Thus, in
many sick People, who, by reason of long Fasting, little Chylus happens to be
in the Stomach; and besides, what they do take, soon corrupts, by reason of
some ill habit of Concoction; and in some Crazy People, in whom, by reason of
vicious Concoctions, ill Humors increase in the Body, I have seen a whitish
Film swimming upon the Blood, when it has been cold; but quite different from
Chylus; which doubtless deceived Needham, and others, maintaining their
Opinion. But as to what Needham adds in Confirmation of his Error, That the
Chylus may be separated from the Blood by Art, and that by strewing upon it a
certain Powder, I very much suspect the Truth of it, especially since he
produces his Experiment from the far-fetched Relation of another Person unknown
to him; from whom, as he says, one Schneiderus had it by Report. But I, that am
not to be seduced by these little Histories, do say this, That I will undertake
to change the red Color of the Blood into white and milky, by Infusion of a
certain Liquor; but thence it does not follow, that I am therefore able to
separate by that means the Chylus from the Blood; but rather, that I corrupt
the good Mixture of the Blood. But omitting these Trifles, let us return to the
Business.

XX. From that Concoction and Whence the red Color proceeds.
Dilatation, which happens in the Heart, the Blood acquires a Redness, to which
the Heart is not at all contributary, as many think, because of its Redness;
but by accident is caused by that Concoction which is made in the Heart: By
which the Salt and Sub-acid Particles, now more exactly mixed with the
Sulphury, in a short time produce that Color from themselves. For Chemistry
teaches us, That by the exact Mixture of Salt, and especially of Acid
Particles, with Sulphury, a red Color is produced, as appears by the
Distillation of Saltpeter, that contains in it many Sulphury Particles. So
never so little Oil of Vitriol, being mixed with Liquors or Syrups of a pale
Red, become of a deep red color, if there be any thing of Sulphur in those
Liquors. Now these Salt and Sulphury Particles are carried with the Chylus it
self, in which nevertheless they do not beget a red color, because the Salt
Particles do not as yet seem to have attained to any degree of Acidity, and
hence are not sufficiently attenuated and mixed with the Sulphury; but being as
yet both crude, and too much encumbered in the viscous Particles, lie hid, out
of which, they are at length set at Liberty, and grow Spirituous, by the
singular Heat and Fermentation of the Heart: and then being equally mixed in
Spirituosity, and concurring with equal Vigor and Force, they produce that red
color. And it is known in Chemistry, that Sulphury Spirits rise with a smaller
Heat; Salt, not without a brisker Fire; and so it happens in the Concoctions of
the Bowels. By the Concoction of the Stomach, and the Fermentation raised by
the Choleric and Pancreatic Juice, the Sulphury Particles are moderately
dissolved and separated from the Aliments, and then enclosed within the Salt
Particles, which cannot be brought to such a perfect Dissolution by so soft a
Heat, which prevents the Dissipation of the Sulphury Particles, by reason of
their extraordinary Volatility. Now the Salt Particles, by their Mixture with
the Sulphury, by degrees becoming more dissolved, and turned sub-acid, at
length attenuated by the intense Fermentaceous Heat of the Heart, burst forth
more Spirituous; and then being exactly mixed with the Sulphury Particles, with
which they are dilated, become exactly red: But if the Heart afflicted with any
Malignant Distemper, has not a Fermentative Power, so vigorous, as sufficiently
to attenuate, dilate and unite the Salt with the Sulphury Particles, then the
Blood is not altogether so red; but several pale Humors are found to be mixed
with it, as is seen upon Blood-letting in Malignant Fevers; which are no part
of the Chylus, but only corrupt Humors.

XXI. This is the true manner of How the Parts are nourished by the Blood.
making the Blood which serves for the nourishment of all the Parts; and
contains in it self Matter adapted for the nourishment of all and singular the
Parts; out of which that is appropriated to every one, which is most convenient
for their nourishment; to some Particles more concocted and subtle; to others,
less concocted and thicker; to others, Particles equally mixed of Salt and
Sulphur, as in fat Bodies; to others, more Salt and Tartarous, as in Sinewey
and Boney People; and to others Particles are united and assimilated; some
disposed one way, some another.

XXII. This Apposition proceeds The Diversity of Figures.
chiefly from the Diversity of Figures, which, as well the particular Particles
of the Blood, as the Pores of the several Paris obtain. For hence it happens,
that the Blood being forced into the Parts, some Particles more easily enter
some sort of Pores, and others, another sort; and are figured one among another
after various shapes and forms; and so are immediately united with the
Substance of the Parts, and are converted into their Nature; and those which
are not proper for such a Figure, are carried to other Parts; till the
remaining and improper portion is again transmitted back to the Heart, there to
be concocted anew, and endu'd with another more proper Aptitude. It is vulgarly
said, That the several Parts attract from the Blood, and unite the Particles
most similar to themselves. But there is no such Attraction allowed in our
Bodies; neither are the Parts endu'd with any Knowledge to distinguish between
Particles similar or dissimilar. But the Blood, such as it is, is equally
forced to all the Parts, but the Diversity of Figures, as well in the several
Particles of the Blood, as in the Pores of the Parts, is the Reason that some
Particles stick, and are united to these, and others to other Parts; to these,
after one manner; to those, after another. From which Diversity, the Diversity
of Substances arises, some softer, some harder, some stronger, and some weaker.

XXIII. This Nutrition by the The Nourishment from the Blood twofold.
Blood, is caused two manner of ways.

1. Immediately, when the Particles of the Blood are immediately opposed,
without any other previous or remarkable Alteration; as is to be seen in the
Fleshy and Fat Parts. 2. Mediately, when Apposition happens, after some
remarkable Concoction or Alteration preceding; as in the Bones, to whose
Nourishment, besides the Salt Tartareous Particles of the Blood, there concurs
the Marrow, made before out of the Blood; as also in the Sinews, which are not
nourished only by the Blood, communicated to their outward Tunicle, through
invisible little Arteries, from the continuation of those Arteries that pass
through both Membranes of the Brain and Spinal Marrow; but also by the Salter
Sanguineous Particles, first prepared by the Concoction of the Brain.
XXIV. But in this Nutrition The Degrees of Nutrition.
from the Blood, three Degrees are to be observed.

1. When the Body is so nourished, as to grow by that Nourishment. 2. When it
is nourished, and remains in the same Condition. 3. When it is nourished and
decays.
XXV. Now that the Cause of this Four Things necessary to Nutrition.
Diversity may be more plainly known, we are to consider, That there are Four
Things necessary to perfect Nutrition.

1. The Alimentary Juice it self. 2. The Apposition of this Juice. 3. Then its
Agglutination. 4. And lastly, Its Assimilation.
The Alimentary Juice is the Blood, which is forced by the Beating of the
Heart, through the smallest Arteries, to the Parts that are to be nourished,
and is thrust forward into their Pores; by which means the Substance of the
Parts does as it were, drink it in. And because in these Pores, something of
Humor, tending toward Assimilation, remains over and above, hence it comes to
pass, that the convenient Particles of the new-come Blood, more agreeable to
that Humor, are mingled with that Humor sticking there before, and being there
concocted by the convenient Heat and proper Temper of the Parts, are by degrees
agglutinated, and more and more assimilated to the Substance of the Parts, and
are so prepared and disposed by the Vital Spirit continually flowing into the
Parts, together with the Arterious Blood, that they acquire Vitality, and
become true Particles of the Parts, endu'd with Life and Soul, equally to the
rest.

XXVI. If now, while that Nutrition Growth.
is made, the smaller Particles of the Parts, by reason of their moister
Temperament, or cooler Heat stick but softly to each other, then upon their
first Apposition, by reason of the great Plenty of Alimentary Humor flowing in
by the impulse of the Heart, they easily separate from each other, and admit
more Nutritive Humor than is requisite to their Nutrition; from the Plenty of
which, being agglutinated and assimilated, happens the Growth of the Parts by
degrees, because more is appos'd and agglutinated than is wasted. But when Stay
of Growth.
by the increase of Heat, the smaller Particles are dried up, and become hard
and firm, as in Manhood, then they no longer separate one from another, by
reason of the Alimentary Juice forced in, and the Juice that is poured into the
Pores in great quantity, is vigorously discussed by the more violent and
stronger Heat, that no more can be appos'd and assimilated than is dissipated;
whence there follows a stay of Growth; wherein the Substance of the Parts will
admit no Excess or Diminution of Quantity.

Lastly, Those smaller Particles of Decay.
the Parts, are not only dried up by that same stronger Heat, and the Pores are
streightn'd so as to admit less Alimentary Juice; but the Alimentary Juice it
self, by reason of the Heat dimimish'd by Time and Age, and consequently a
worse Concoction of the Bowels, grows weaker, and less agreeable to the
Substance of the Part it self; and then, as in Old Age, the Parts themselves
decrease and diminish: For the unaptness of the Pores in the Parts, and of the
Nutritive Juice it self, as also of the concocting Heat, and the small Quantity
of the said Juice, are the reason that less is appos'd than is dissipated* Now
^his Decrease is chiefly and most manifestly observed in the softer Parts,
whose smallest Particles are moister, and more easily dissipated, as the Flesh,
the Fat, etc. But it is less observable in the Bones, and other harder Parts,
whose smallest Particles are more fixed, and not so easily dissipated.

XXVII. Here, by way of Parenthesis, Whether Old Men grow shorter.
a Question may be proposed; Whether Old Men grow shorter than they were in
their Prime? This many affirm, and confirm by Ocular Testimony. Spigelius
absolutely denies it: For, says he, That they grow shorter, I deny; but that
they grow leaner, I grant. For the Bones, according to which the Length of the
Body is extended, being hard and solid Bodies, are neither diminished by Age,
nor the Force of any Disease: But the Flesh is wasted and consumed, as well by
Age, as by many other Causes: So that if they seem to be shorter than Young Men
it proceeds from hence, because that all their Joints are bowed, as well by
Muscles shrunk for want of Heat, as by the Ligaments dried up, and covered with
Brawn. But though Spigelius brings these Reasons for his Negative Opinion, yet
the Affirmative seems the more plausible; seeing that Decrepit Old Men, not
only by reason of the bowing of their Joints and Body, seem shorter, but
because of necessity they must be somewhat, though not much shorter, by reason
of the Gristles between the Vertebrae of the Backbone, and the Joints of the
Thighs, and other Parts; which being softer and more tumid in Young Men, and
consequently separate the Bones more at a distance one from the other, of
necessity must extend the Body somewhat more in Length; but in Old Men, waxing
drier and thinner by degrees, must of necessity, for the same Reason, shorten
the Body: To which we add, That the Ligaments of the Joints, being dried up,
contract the Joints closer one to another. And this is apparent in such Old
Men, who being stronger, walk still upright; for if they measure with the same
Measure wherewith they measured themselves in their Youth, you shall find 'em
to want the breadth, some, of a Thumb, some, of half a Thumb, others, of two
Thumbs of their Height in their youthful days: which we have known true by
Experience. Two doubts


XXVIII. From what has been already said concerning the making and Principles
of the Blood, two obscure and doubtful Matters are brought to Light. First,
That there are four Humors in the Blood, Phlegm, pure Blood, Choler and
Melancholy. Secondly, Whence proceed the Temperatures of Bodies.

XXIX. Phlegm is that part of the Of the four Humors of the Blood. Phlegm.
Blood, which being first made out of the Blood, and not much circulated or
dilated in the Heart, becomes more crude, and less Spirituous.

XXX. Pure Blood is that part of Blood.
the Sanguineous Mass, which being several times circulated and dilated in the
Heart, attains to moderate Spirituosity.

XXXI. Choler is that Part of it, Choler.
which by frequent Circulations and Dilatations is exalted to a more
extraordinary Thinness, and becomes most Spirituous and boiling hot.

XXXII. Melancholy is that Part, Melancholy.
out of which, by several Circulations and Attenuations made in the Heart, the
Spirituous Particles are for the most part drawm out and wasted, and hence the
Blood becomes colder, thicker, and more earthy.

Here by the way take Notice, That we do not mean by Phlegm, Choler and
Melancholy, the Fermentaceous Humors which are bred in the Stomach, Liver and
Spleen, as if the Mass of Blood consisted of those Humors being mixed together;
only that these Names are comparatively applied to the Blood, as the Parts of
it are more or less, or overmuch concocted.

XXXIII. But in regard, That because The four Humors are always in the Blood.
of the continual Waste and Consumption of lost Spirits, there must be a
Reparation of new ones, by means of fresh Nourishment, hence it follows, that
these Four Humors are necessarily in the Blood, and that the Blood should
consist of them. For out of the Aliments sufficiently prepared, and first
dilated in the Heart, there comes a Flegmatic Juice, which by degrees, by means
of several Circulations and Dilatations in the Heart, turns into pure and
excellently well tempe'd Blood But proceeding farther, above its just Temper of
Heat, turns into Choleric Blood: And having lost its m^re subtle Particles,
turns into Melancholy. And thus all these four Juices, which consist all of
Salt and Sulphu^y Particles, nor differ one from another, ^ut only in their
stronger or weaker Concoction and Spirituosity, are mixed together, and so by a
certain Perpetuation of Qualities, the Excesses inspringing one upon another,
as long as a man lives, they constitute the whole Mass of his Blood, united and
rendered fluid by means of the Serum. Which Serum, especially its Watery Part,
is not assimilated to the Parts that are to be nourished; but to them conveys
the nourishing Particles of the Blood, and by them, when once apposited and
assimilated, is evacuated and discussed by means of their Heat. Thus in the
Gilding of Metals, the finest Gold is beaten into thin Leaves, and mingled with
Quicksilver, to make the Gold stick on, which could not be done without the
Mercury: afterward, the Vessel being Gilded, and brought to the Fire, the Heat
of the Fire discusses, and sends the Mercury packing, while the Gold sticks
close to the Vessel on which it was laid; such a sort of Mercury is the Serum
in living Bodies, conveying and apposing the Blood to the several Parts.

XXXIV. As to the Temperatures Whence the Temperaments of the Body proceed.
of our Bodies, they proceed from the various Mixture and Redundancy of the
four forementioned Juices.

XXXV. If the Chylus be made Phlegmatic Temperament.
of cold and moist Juices, wherein there is little subtle Spirit, or else sent
out crude from the Stomach, or not sufficiently dissolved for want of
convenient Ferment, such a Chylus produces a Flegmatic Sanguineous Juice, which
though frequently circulated and dilated in the Heart, yet cannot be exalted by
the Heart to a sufficient Spirituosity; and hence there is a greater Quantity
of that, and a lesser Quantity of the rest of the Juices; and because the whole
Body then is nourished with a Flegmatic sort of Blood, thence the Constitution
of the Parts is more moist and cold, and so there is a Flegmatic Temperature of
the Body. (...).


XXXVI. If the Chylus be well tempered, well concocted, and made out of well
tempered Nourishment, or so made by a good Concoction of the Bowels, then
happens a Redundancy of that Blood, and consequently a Sanguine Complexion, and
a good Temper of Body. (...).


XXXVII. If the Chylus be made of Nourishments hot and sharp, or sharply
fermented through the more intense Heat of the Bowels, then after a few
Circulations, it turns to a very hot and spirituous Juice; which predominating,
begets a Choleric Temper. (...).


XXXVIII. If the Chylus be made of thick Earthy Nourishments, abounding with
much crude and fixed Salt, and those not well concocted and dissolved; then few
Spirits are extracted out of it, by the Circulations and Dilatations made in
the Heart, and there remains only a thick Juice, without much Spirit; whence
proceeds a Melancholic Temper.

Now the vast Excesses of these Temperatures, are called Distempers, and breed
several Diseases, Hot, Cold, etc. Whether (...) (...) and Spirits (...).


XXXIX. After this Description of the Principles, and manner of making the
Blood and Vital Spirits, before we come to their Use, let us say something of
their Vitality; about which, Philophers so much dispute, and Physicians
dis^ent. While the one in Defense of Vitality, say,

1. That the Blood and Spirits variously move themselves according to the
Diversity of the Motions of the Mind and Imagination; in ^ear, toward the
Heart; in Shame, toward the Cheeks; in Lust, toward the Genitals. 2. The Holy
Scripture says, That the Soul of the Flesh remains in the Blood. 3. That the
Seed being potentially animated, is made out of Blood and Spirits. 4. Because
they are nourished, as Hippocrates witnesses; which could never be, if they did
not live.
However* they who deny the Blood and Spirits Life, seem in our Judgment to be
most in the Right. 1. Because the Blood and Spirits have not within themselves
the Principle of their own Motion, as bequeathed to them from the Soul; but
because they have their Motion by force of the solid Parts, which are moved by
the Soul, as the Heart, Brain, etc. By the Force of which, and that often
according to the diversity of the Motions of the Mind, the Motion of the
Chylus, Choler, and sometimes of the Excrements, and various other Humors, is
promoted and excited, which no man however in his Wits, will affirm to be
living. 2. That the Soul of the flesh is said to be in the Blood, so far as
animated or enlivened Flesh wants Blood, nay and Air too, as the next Support,
without which his Life cannot subsist. To the Third, That Seed Potentially
enlivened, and living, is not generated out of the Blood and Spirits, because
the Spirituous Blood, out of which it is made, is living, but by reason that by
a new Specific Mixture, and Disposition of the Sanguineous Mixture, brought to
Perfection by the Heat and Specific Property of the Seminifying Parts, a new
and potentially Vital Form is introduced, which was not before in the Matter
not Vital: as we see dead Bodies, rotten Wood: Cheese, Rainwater, and Vinegar
long exposed to the Heat of the Sun, will produce Worms alive, whereas there is
no Life in any of these things. To the Fourth, That Hippocrates does not
ascribe Nourishment, properly so called, to the Blood and Spirits, but only
their continual Generation and Supply out of the Chylus. As we say the Flame of
a Lamp is nourished with Oil, because the Oil is the next Matter with which the
Flame is nourished. To these I add, That in an Animal, Life cannot be but in
the Parts of the Body; out of which number, that the Blood and Spirits are
manifestly excluded, we have sufficiently demonstrated, l. 1. c. 1.

Here some one will urge, That the Seed is no Part of the Body, and yet it
lives Potentially, and therefore why not the Blood?

I answer, That though the Seed is a Part of the Body, as of Peter, being
present; from whom it was cut off, and still perhaps remains in his Spermatic
Vessels; nevertheless it is only Part of the Body of a future Animal which is
to live; even such a Matter, as contains in it self the Ideas of all the Parts
of the Animal that is to be formed. But the Blood cannot be said to be a Part
of Peter, or the Living Creature, but only a Humor or Juice next nourishing the
Parts, and to be agglutinated and assimilated to the Substance by new
Concoction, and so to be enlivened with it at the same time.

XL. From what has been said, the The Use of the Blood.
Use of the Blood appears to be for the Nourishment of all the Parts; that is,
not only to afford Matter to be assimilated to every Part; but to convey a hot
Vital Spirit, which excites the Actions and Concoctions of all and singular the
Parts, and to cause the fit Matter for Assimilation to be assimilated, and
supplied in the room of that which is wasted and dissipated by the Heat.

XLI. But seeing the Blood is carried What Blood nourishes.
as well through the Arteries, as Veins, the Question is, Whether the Parts are
nourished by Veiny or Arterious Blood? Anciently it was believed that the Parts
were nourished by the Veiney Blood, because the Blood was thought to be made in
the Liver, and thence to be carried through the Veins to the Parts. Which Error
being discovered by the Circulation of the Blood, since which time, it has been
observed, that the Blood is made only in the Heart, and from thence forced
through the Arteries to the Parts, and only carried back from the Parts through
the Veins; thence it has been apparently made clear, that the Body of Man is
nourished chiefly by Arterious Blood. I say ( chiefly) because though it cannot
be denied, while the Blood returns through the Veins to the Heart, but that
some small part of it sweating through the Pores of the Vessels or Tunicles,
are fixed up and down to various Parts, and nourish them; and that the Tunicles
of the Veins themselves are nourished by the Blood which they carry; and that
the greatest part of the Liver receives its Nourishment from the Veiny Blood,
as is apparent from the vast number of Veins, and small quantity of Arteries
that creep through it; yet in some other places, where the Arteries accompany
the Veins, it is manifest, that the Parts are chiefly nourished by Arterious
Blood, being more spirituous and concocted, and with greater violence forced
through the Ends of the small Arteries into the Pores of the Parts.

XLII. This ancient Opinion, received Charleton's contrary Opinion.
by all the Physicians in the Schools, about the Nourishment of the Parts by
the Blood, has Gualter Charleton opposed with great Heat, and endeavors to
destroy it with most Strenuous Arguments, as he believes, by showing the
unaptness of the Blood for Nutrition.

The Sum of all his Arguments are His Arguments.
these:

1. The Blood consists of Four Juices; which, by farther Concoction degenerate
all into Melancholy; with which impure Juice all the Parts cannot be nourished;
yet all would be nourished with it, were they nourished by the Blood. 2. The
Blood never comes to many Parts, as the Brain, the Bones, the Sinews, the
Ligaments, etc. 3. Lean men, who have most Blood, eat most, and are less
nourished than fat People, who have nevertheless less Blood, whose Veins are
narrower, and their Diet more sparing. 4. They that die famished, or of a
Consumption, have a great quantity of Blood remaining in their Veins after
their Decease, which therefore might have served for farther Nourishment, and
have prevented their Death. 5. The Blood in all parts preserves its Redness,
neither does it lose its Color in those parts that incline to White; therefore
it does not nourish them. 6. Hippocrates cured a Consumptive Person (whom
Victuals did no good) by frequent Blood-letting. 7. The Blood is carried
through the Arteries to the Parts, is mixed therein with a copious Serum, and
is there much less Fat and Oily, than in the Veins, through which it is carried
back from the Parts. 8. The Blood is of a quite different Nature from many
Parts of the Body, as the Brain, Bones, Membranes, etc. 9. The manner of
Nutrition is the Progress of the Nourishment from a state of Crudity or
Fixation, to a state of Fusion, by which its Spirits before fixed, are exalted
to a farther degree of Activity; which Spirits adhering to the Blood, and like
a Glutton, devouring, dissolving and dissipating the Nutritive Substance of the
Parts, render it unfit for the nourishment of the Parts, for the consolidating
of which, a more fixed nourishment is required. 10. The Blood it self is
nourished by the Chylus, therefore it cannot nourish other Parts; because
moreover there is contained in it a Heat that preys upon the Substance of the
Parts. 11. All the several Parts ought to be nourished with a certain Juice of
the same Nature with that out of which they were first formed; but that is not
the Blood, but the Colliquation of the Seed; and therefore their Growth and
Nourishment cannot proceed from the Seed.
All which being thus concluded, Charleton at last produces a Similitude
between the Flame of a Lamp, and that Fermentaceous Flame which is raised in
the Heart; and thence concludes the Use of the Blood to be the Food of the Lamp
of the Flame of Life, and the next Matter for the Generation of the Spirits.

To the First, That Charleton greatly The Refutation.
mistakes, while he presupposes that all the Parts must be nourished with
impure Melan holy, if they were nourished by the Blood. For it has been showed
already, that the Nourishment must be various, according to the various Nature
of the Parts, while some are nourished with a cruder, others a more temperate,
others with a hotter and thicker part of the Blood, and all those Parts are
always in the Blood, and if there be an Excess of the one or the other, then
there happens either an Atrophy or a Cachexy. Besides, he does not consider,
That the Melancholic part of the Blood is not called an impure Juice, but only
a thicker Juice, and which upon the dissipation of the more Spirituous Part, is
not easily exalted again to a farther Spirituosity, by reason of the weakness
of the Bowels that concoct and prepare the Ferments. Which Bowels, if they
happen to be restored to their former Soundness by proper Remedies, then the
Blood is reduced to a just Spirituosity, and in that manner the Hypochondriacal
Affection, the Scurvey, and other Melancholic Diseases are cured, by Remedies
corroborating the Bowels, dissolving the Fixedness of the Humors, and subliming
them to Spirituosity. Lastly, He does not consider, that there are several
Parts that require this same thicker Parts of the Blood for their Nourishment.

To the Second, I say, That there are no Parts to which the Blood does not come
In the middle of the Substance of the Brain, innumerable bloody Spots are to be
seen budding forth. The Sinews admit Blood, which flows to them; through the
continuation of the Vessels creeping through the Membranes of the Brain.
Through the Bones pass Arteries and Veins to the innermost Spungy Substance,
and to the Marrow; and their Periostia are washed on the outside every way by
the Blood.

To the Third, I say, That as for lean men, though they abound with Blood, yet
the Bulk of their Bodies does not increase so much by reason of the violent and
sharp Heat of the Blood. For the violent Heat quickly dissipates whatever is
assimilated, contrary to what befalls fat Men, who have less Heat and Acrimony
in their Blood, and therefore out of their less Quantity there is more appos'd
than dissipated.

To the Fourth, I answer, Men may be starved two ways to Death. First, When the
Body is full of evil Juice, and a great Quantity of vitiated Blood abounds in
the Vessels. For in such there is a Necessity, that the Heart should be
frequently supplied with new and good Juices to comfort and cherish i^; so that
it Famine be not the occasion of Death, yet the Blood becoming more hot, more
sharp, or some other way more corrupt, the ^eart must be overwhelmed with bad
Humors, though there be store of Blood remaining in the Vessels; for it is not
Quantity alone, but good Quality that is required for the Support of Life.
Secondly, Because that, as well in sound, as depraved Constitutions of Body,
the Blood is wasted by long Famine; for though those that die famished, have
much Blood remaining in their Vessels, yet it seems to be too little to suffice
for the Nourishment of all the Parts, and hence all the Parts and Bowels being
weakened, Death ensues.

To this purpose, in November. 1656. upon the dissection of a Person that had
starved himself to Death, I could discover in him no Mesaraic, Intercostal, or
other lesser Veins, because they were quite emptied, so that there were hardly
three Spoonfuls of Blood in the Hollow Vein, and the Great Artery was
altogether emptied.

In November. 1660. we dissected another Person, who by reason of a long want of
Appetite, had wasted himself to Death; in whom we found the Veins and Arteries
exhausted after a wonderful manner, so that there were hardly two Spoonfuls in
the hollow Vein, and nothing at all in the Aorta.

To the Fifth, I affirm it to be an Untruth, That the Blood does not lose its
Redness in the Nourishment of Parts inclining to White: For the contrary
appears in the Brain; which, that it is nourished by the Blood passing through
its Pores, the innumerable Bloody Spots, every where conspicuous in a dissected
Skull, do show; and yet the Brain is white. Moreover, I say, That the Red
Color is easily perpetuated by the Specific Concoction of the Heart in the
Circulating Blood; because the Sulphury Particles readily concur with the Salt,
and mixed with Spirituosity, are as easily united: But in the Blood that already
stops in the Parts for Nutrition, that Color is easily changed again by
another Specific Concoction of the Parts inclining to white; when the greatest
part of the Sulphury Particles are again separated from the Salt, or mingled
after another manner. Lastly, I add, That in the Blood, besides the Red
Particles, there are many white, and other Particles of various Colors, which
the intense Redness does so conceal, that they are not to be discovered but in
the separation of the Particles of the Blood. In the same manner as in Red Wine
there lies hid a most Limpid Spirit, and a watery pellucid Part, whose Lympid
Color, however, is not conspicuous in the Wine, but presently appears upon
Distillation.

To the Sixth, I say, That the Blood of some Men is over-salt, sharp, thick, or
corrupted, who therefore are not relieved by Medicines, unless Nature be first
relieved by letting out some considerable Quantity of that Blood, that she may
be the better able to digest the new Juices of Nourishments, and convert 'em
into purer Blood, whereby the better to nourish the Body in due manner; and
such, no question, was that Person cured by Hippocrates, with frequent
Blood-letting.

To the Seventh, I say, That there is not always and necessarily required an
Unctuosity of Blood for the Nutrition of all Parts whatever; but such an
Aptitude as agrees with all and every the Parts; which Aptitude does not
consist in Unctuosity alone, as is before said.

To the Eighth, I answer, That the Blood considered in the whole, seems indeed
dissimilar from many Parts of the Body; but considered in its Particles,
contains in it self what is like to every Part, there being no Parts which are
not composed of Salt and Sulphur, by the Assistance of Mercury, variously
mixed, according to the Nature of the several Parts; which Salt and Sulphur are
likewise the Principles of the Blood. Moreover, Similitude does not lie in the
Color, which may be easily altered by any new Concoction; but in the Particles
that constitute the Substance, as well of the Parts, as of the Blood.

To the Ninth, I say, That Charleton confounds Nutrition with Sangnification,
and that what he speaks here of Nutrition, belongs to Sanguification; between
which there is a great Difference. For Aliment is not sublimed to a greater
Spirituosity, for the Benefit of Nutrition, but for the making of good Blood;
which afterward undergoes another Change, for the procuring of Nutrition;
which Nutrition does not consist in a farther Sublimation of the Spirits, but
rather in a certain new Fixation. To which I farther add, That the Vital
Spirits do not, like Cormorants, consume the Substance of the Solid Parts, but
preserve it in its Saneness, neither do they render the Blood unfit for
Nutrition, but fit, and that those Spirits infused into the Parts with the
Blood, excite them to their Functions, and as it were, force them to an
Assimilation with the Nourishment brought; which Assimilation could never be
brought to pass without the Assistance of these Spirits. Now how the Spirituous
Nourishment is again fixed, see l. 3. c. 11.

To the Tenth, I say, It is no fair Consequence; The Blood is nourished by the
Chylus, therefore it cannot nourish other Parts. For so it would follow, Wheat
is nourished by the Juice of the Earth, therefore being eaten, ot cannot
nourish the Chylus. So also I say of Heat; Wine, Wheat, and other Nourishments
contain in themselves a hot Spirit; therefore they cannot be changed into
Chylus and Blood, Why? Because a hot Spirit uses to pr^y upon the fluid Parts.
What vain Conclusions these are! By reason of the Spirituous Heat of the Blood,
without which the Blood is altogether unprofitable for Nutrition, it is said
that it cannot nourish the Parts; shall therefore any cold Body, or Humor void
of all Heat, be Nourishment, or profitable for Nourishment?

To the Eleventh, I say, That here Charleton altogether forgot himself: For
before, out of Harvey, he had asserted, That the Blood was allowed to be,
before any other Part of the Body appeared; and that out of that proceeded the
Matter of which the Birth was formed, and its Nourishment. If this Position of
his were true, where is the Difficulty, but that the Parts which are made out of
the Blood, should be nourished with the Blood? Moreover, if the Colliquation of
the Seed, be like the Parts that are to be nourished, and that again like to
the Blood, then shall the Blood be like the Parts that are to be nourished?
Nevertheless, we that do not believe the Parts to be framed out of the Blood,
give this Answer to his Proposition, That the Parts are at first formed out of
the Spirituous Liquor of the Bubble, and nourished with the Colliquation of the
Seed; but that the whole Substance of this Seed is taken out of the Arterious
Blood, flowing through the Spermatic Arteries to the Stones, to which also the
Animal Spirits are also sent through several little Nerves, therefore the whole
Matter of the Seed, Bubble and Colliquament is in the Blood, and being
concocted specially in the several Parts, acquires no less an Aptiude to
nourish the several Parts, than being generally concocted in the Stones, it
obtains an Aptness generally to form at first all those Parts; and so we must
conclude, That all the Parts have their first Conformation, and their
subsequent Growth and Nutrition, from a Juice altogether similar, which is
prepared before the one in the Stones, before the other, in the several Parts;
and so the Ancient Axiom is true; We are nourished with the same things of
which we consist. And that other Oracle of Aristotle; The Matter is the same
which augments the Growth of a Creature, with that out of which it was first
formed.

Lastly, I answer to the Conclusion, That the Comparison was ill made between
the Fermentation in the Heart, and the Flame of a Lamp: Which Comparison is
easily endured among Poets and Orators, who only mind Ornament and Elegancy of
Words; but not among Philosophers, that are enquiring after the Mysteries of
Nature. For Flame does not only dissipate the Subject to which it adheres, but
also destroys it, and dissolves the whole Mixture of it, and renders it
useless; but the Fermentation of the Heart does not destroy the Blood, nor
utterly dissolve its Mixture, but by means of the dilatation of the whole Mass,
renders it more exact and strong, and so brings the Blood to a greater
perfection, and generates Spirits therein; which as they are thin, hot and
pure, entering the whole Mass of the Blood, preserve it in its perfection, and
together with the Blood, which is their own Subject, of which they are a part,
being infused into the Parts of the Body, by their extraordinary Heat, raise
into Act the drowsy Heat of all the Parts. True it is, that those Spirits, by
reason of their extraordinary Subtility and Mobility, continually exhale in
great Quantity, and by dissolving them with their Heat, cause a Dissolution of
many fluid Particles of the Body; but this is not because of any Destruction,
but by reason of their extraordinary Subtility. I will give you a Similitude.
Wine, when it is distilled, the Spirit of Wine arising out of it, is not
destroyed by the Heat of the Fire that promotes the Distillation, but is
sublimed to a greater Subtility and Perfection, there remaining all the while
in it the Sulphury and Salt particles in a strict Union; the most part of whose
Subtility therefore exhales, and is dissipated in the Air. But the contrary
happens in the Oil of a Lamp, which is indeed attenuated, but so far from being
brought to a greater perfection, that it is totally destroyed: For the Oil is
not made the better, or more Spirituous, but the whole Composition of it is
destroyed; neither does it remain any longer Oil, nor is made Spirit of Oil:
Like Wood, when it is burnt, is thereby reduced to Smoke and Ashes. Or if the
Spirit of Wine should take Fire, it would not thereby be made more perfect, but
wholly destroyed. And thus it is with our Bodies as in Distillation, and not as
in the Flame: and therefore the Comparison of Fermentation with Flame, is
altogether absurd. I confess, Blood is the Matter and Subject of the Animal
Spirits; but thence it does not follow, that it cannot nourish all the parts of
the Body: Rather we are thence to infer, that it nourishes all the parts,
seeing it contains the Nutritive Matter, and the Vital Spirit that promotes
that Nourishment.

And thus falls this new Opinion, so obstinately by some defended, and by
others as unwarily embraced.

XLIII. N. Zas, In his Dutch Whether the Lympha be nutritive.
Treatise, Of the Dew of Animals, believes, That the Lymphatic Liquor only
nourishes the Spermatic Parts; For this is that which he understands by his
Dew: Of which Judgment also is Clemens Niloe. Which latter likewise writes,
That the Blood is altogether unfit to nourish the Parts.

1. Because it is of an Earthy Substance. 2. Because neither the Blood nor the
Chylus out of which it is generated in Distillation, are forced upward into the
Alembic, into which only a Watery Liquor falls; and therefore the Blood is not
subtle enough to come to all the parts, and afford 'em Nourishment. 3. Because
such a Spirit as is extracted out of the Blood by Chemistry, is extracted also
out of the Lympha, which is collected out of the Lymphatic Circle, placed near
the Jugular Veins. 4. Because there are many Parts to which the Arteries and
Veins that convey the Blood, cannot reach. This Opinion of Clemens Niloe,
differs from Charleton's and Glisson's in this, because they think Nutrition to
be performed by a certain Juice flowing out of the Nerves; the other by the
Lymphatic Juice. But Niloe's Arguments are of little moment.
First, For that the Blood is composed as well of thicker and serous, as of
spirituous particles, which are both requisite for Nutrition; nor can one
subsist or act without the other.

The Consequence of the Second, is of no force; because the spirituous and
serous parts ascend through the Alembic, but not the terrestrial; for then it
is apparent, that the Blood nourishes the better for that reason: For if it
were volatile and spirituous in all its Particles, it would be too hastily
dissipated, and could never be appos'd to the Parts for Nutrition.

The Third is altogether as invalid; For he ought to have proved that Spirit
altogether similar, was extracted out of the Blood and Lympha, whereas there is
a manifest difference to be observed in the Acrimony. Then grant that such a
similar Spirit be extracted out of both; yet I affirm, That ten times as much
Spirit may be extracted out of one Pint of Blood, as out of two Pints of
Lympha. Then it is no wonder, that the Spirit of Blood should seem to have some
likeness with the Spirit of Lympha: seeing that the Lympha is continually mixed
with the Blood, and becomes a part of it, and is again generated by it, and
separated from it in the Liver, Glandules and other parts, therein to acqui^e a
new Fermentaceous Power, and returns with it into the Veins, and so prepares
the Blood for dilatation and perfection in the Heart, and then again becomes a
part of it. Can any man hence conclude, that only the preparing Lympha, and not
the prepared Blood nourishes? Moreover, there is a subtle and sharp Humor
drawn out of Urine; nay frequently more subtle, or at least sharper than out
of the Blood: Shall it thence be concluded, that not the Blood, but the Urine
or Serum of the Blood nourishes the Parts, as that which penetrates with the
Blood, no less to all the Parts than the Blood it self.

The Fourth is contrary to what we see with our Eyes, seeing there is no part
of the Body, to which the Blood does not come, as we have already demonstrated.

And thus vanishes this new Opinion; and Aristotle's Maxim is restored, viz.
Blood is the last Nourishment. To which Opinion, as formerly, so now the whole
School of Physicians deservedly adheres.

As for what Charleton, following Glisson, endeavors to persuade the World,
That the Nutritious Humor is carried to the Parts through the Nerves only, that
Fiction we shall refute, l. 8. c. 1.

XLIV. From what has been said, are abundantly demonstrated the Generation,
Malpigius ^is Observations a^out refrigerated blood.
Nature and Use of the Blood in Man; now we shall add some Particulars observed
by the quick-sighted Malpigius, which he has found out in the Blood extracted
out of the Body by Blood-letting, and cooled in the Air; which gives not a
little Light to the more inward understanding the Constitution of the Blood. If
you desire to see, says he, a remarkable Sight, view this Blood with a
Microscrope, and you shall behold a Fibrous Contexture, and a Net, composed, as
it were, of Sinewy Fibers, in whose little Spaces, as in little Cells, stands a
Ruddy Matter, which being wrp'd away, leaves this whitish Net-like Folding
behind; which to the Eye resembles a mucous or slimy Membrane. Now that this
Net-like Portion of the Blood, with the Film swimming at the Top, consists of
the same Matter and Nature, perhaps a diligent exploration of the sanguineous
Film, will make out: For if the clotted Blood, which is covered with a white
and thick Film, which, though it does not swell with a thickened Serum, yet
seems to be skinny, soft, and easily folded, be slit along, and several times
washed; you shall observe in the upper part of it a Film consisting of whitish
little Skins, and hollowed through with little Passages, and diminutive
Bladders, which are full of transparent and less heavy Juice; and prosecuting
farther the Production of this Substance, by and by where the clotted Bulk of
the Blood begins to look red, you shall sind it, being divided and slit
downward, prolonged into little Fibers, and within their elegant Contexture,
shall observe several little Passages and Hollownesses, which swell and are
died with certain little red Atoms knit together, and in some larger Spaces, a
yellowish Serum is comprehended or mixed with the red Matter* Wherefore Sense
seems to intimate to us; that this whitish and sanguineous Net-like Fold
strengthens the Body of the whole clotted Matter, and endows it with a more
able Corporature, and that same Division at the bottom, which shows us so many
various Images of things, depends upon the various coloring Matter contained
in the small Hollownesses: for in the upper Superficies, where those bloody
whitish Threads are united, there arises a whit^sh and compacted Tunicle, but
where the Pores are loosed by degrees, it admits a portion of the yellowish
lighter Serum, and folloms a Structure somewhat looser, and easily dissolved.
At length, the Passages being more open, while they swell with a red Substance,
presently that Film vanishes, and then comes a Contexture of Fibrous Blood,
drawn out in length downward; which because it contains those red Atoms,
compressed by the force of the superior weight, it shows a new manner and
color of Substance; for there follows a Flaccidness from the last Productions
of the Fibers being lan^'d; and a black Color, the contained Particles being
thickened, which deceives many with a show of Melancholy; whereas upon the
changing the situation, they become purple. Whence I thought to take notice of
one thing by the way, that in the spaces of the Film, as also in the whole
circuit of the Fibrous Blood, sometimes in some Diseases, the Serum therein
contained grows thick; hence a pale Color, and that Slimyness and manner of
Substance as in the Gelly'd Serum, or White of an Egg. Sometimes we have
observed certain Appendixes drawn out in length through the whole Blood, to
which are affixed lesser Folds, produced in the form of a Net, which are
sometimes discernable without a Microscope. This Blood being frequently washed
with Water, and the half congealed Serum being washed of, which forms that
conspicuous Net, certain Channels hollowed in the Fibrous and White Portion of
the Blood appear, which does not happen in the small Fibrous Folds
abovementioned, though washed a long time, but still new Folds, and a brisker
Whiteness appears.

From this accurate Observation of Malpigius, is perfectly discovered what is
generated by the various Concoctions of the several Bowels out of the Salt,
Sulphur and Serum, concurring to the Generation of the Blood, and what little
Bodies are found out of 'em, of which rightly generated, mixed and united, good
Blood is made, or depraved by a filthy or vicio^s Fermentation.

XLV. And thus we have finished the The Differences of the Blood.
whole Discourse of the Blood, only that some Differences of it, remain to be
considered.

1. In respect of Quantity; the Blood is either very plentiful or scarce. And
this Difference is considered not only among diverse sorts of Animals, of which
some have more, some less Blood; but also among Men themselves; among whom the
Quantity of Blood is different according to the diversity of Age, Sex,
Temperament, Diet, and Season of the Year, etc. 2. In respect of Quality, the
Blood is either good or bad, hotter or colder, moister or drier; and that
difference is considered according to the Varieties aforesaid, 3. In respect of
Consistency, the Blood is either thick or thin, congealed or fluid. Spigelius
observes, That those People who have a hard and thick Skin, breed a thicker
sort of Blood that easily congeals; on the other side, where People have a soft
thin Skin, their Blood does not so soon thicken. But Experience teaches us,
that the good or bad, swift or slow Concretion of the Blood proceeds from the
various Quality of the Blood. So that it is moderately thick, and congeals well
in sound People; on the other side in Dropsical, Scorbutical, Hypochondriacal,
and other People, it is watery, and hard to thicken. 4. In respect of Color,
the Blood is either red and well colored, or pale, yellow, blackish, or died
of some other bad Hue. 5. In respect of the Humors mixed with it, the Blood is
either full of Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy or Serum. 6. In respect of the
Containing Vessels, the Blood is either Arterious or Veiny.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Lungs and Respiration. See Tab. 9, and 10.
I. THE Lungs ( in Greek, The Definition.
(...) from (...), to Breath) is a Bowel in the Middle Belly, serving for
Respiration, for the Refrigeration of the Blood forced from the Left Ventricle
of the Heart, and the Expulsion of many Vapors.

II. It is of a remarkable Bigness; Its Bigness.
so that being displayed and widen'd by the Breathing in of the Air, it fills
the greatest Part of the Cavity of the Breast.

III. Several Anatomists formerly Its Substance.
ascribed to it, though erroneously, a fleshy Substance, not unlike that of the
Heart or Spleen; but Malpigius, an accurate Examiner of the Lungs, finds its
Substance to be quite different; and by ocular Experience and Reasons, has
clearly demonstrated, That the Lungs consist of a soft, spungy, loose and
bladdery Parenchyma, interwoven with slight and thin small Membranes,
continuous to the inner Tunicle of the rough Artery, which Membranes being
extended and arched, form an infinite number of small orbicular and hollow
Vesicles, constituting the whole Substance of the Parenchyma, so placed, that
there is a Passage open from the rough Artery, out of one Part into the other,
and at length all terminate in the Clothing or Containing Membrane.

These Vesicles in the Lungs of an Ox, Sheep, or other Animal, newly plucked
out, and either cut or turned to the Light, are conspicuous by the help of
Microscopes, and are observed to swell with Air, especially about the outward
Superficies, though they are apparent enough in the inner parts upon blowing up
of the Lungs, and in every part dissected, appear formed out of a slight
Membrane extended. How these Cavities are disposed, Malpigius declares in these
Words: After the little Lobes, the Spaces are to be observed; not every way
bare Cavities, and empty Spaces, for they have many extended Membranes,
sometimes parallel, sometimes angular, which are propagated not only from the
external Superficies of the Lobes laterally placed, but also from the internal
Substance of the Lobes. Between these Membranes run forth several Vessels
issuing out of the little Lobes, which enter those that are opposite. By these
Membranes the Air is received and ejected, as in the more spacious
Hollownesses, which have a mutual Communion together, that the Air may be
compressed out of one Part into another; so that the Spaces are the same
Membranous Vesicles of the Lungs, Diaphanous only and very Thin.

Therefore all the Vesicles are continuous with the inner Tunicle of the Aspera
Arteria, and Gristles of the Windpipe; and hence there is an open passage out
of the Aspera Arteria into the Bronchia, or fistulous part of the Windpipe,
transmitting the Air, that passes to and again. But whether the Vesicles are so
disposed, that the Air may go in at one side, and out at the other; or whether
it comes and goes through the same passages; or whether there be some that
reserve the Air for some time, as we see in Frogs, the Air may be reserved in
the Lungs, cannot be fully discerned. However, that all the Air breathed in, is
not presently breathed forth again, but remains for the greatest part in the
Vessels, and Winding-holes, which are never found empty, the Lungs of Dogs
being opened alive teach us; in which, after Expiration, there still remains
very much Air. Also the Lungs of People deceased, wherein is contained very
much Air, which may be squeezed out with the Finger. Hence Hippocrates calls
the Lungs the Habtation of Air; and Galen, the Venitricle wherein the Air
inhabits.

This Air retained in the Lungs, contributes to them an extraordinary Softness
and Smoothness, which is chiefly necessary, lest the smallest Blood-bearing
Vessels should be oppressed with weight; but that they may always remain
passable; and that the Air within the Right Ventricle of the Heart, being
attenuated into a subtle Vapor, cannot so descend to the Left Ventricle out
of the Lungs, passing, as it were, through the Middle Region of the Air, may be
condensed, and so more quickly pass through the Pulmonary Vein to the Left
Ventricle of the Heart. Preternatural things in the Lungs.


IV. Now that the Substance of the Lungs is Bladdery, Reason, besides common
Sight, instructs us; for many times round, thick and stinking Spittle,
impostumous Matter, little Bladders, Worms, little Stones, and other
preternatural things are generated in the Lungs: Of which Accidents Bauschius
has collected several Examples; and we, in our Practice have seen many strange
Things spit out of the Lungs; and found other things as strange in Persons
dissected, which certainly were not bred in the Blood-bearing Vessels, nor in
the fistulous part of the Pipe, which would have caused a Suffocation, violent
Asthma, and perpetual Cough, but of necessity had been bred in the Vessels, and
might, yea must have been contained there a long time.

V. In the Year 1649. I dissected a Stone-Cutters Observation.
Boy that died of an Asthma, in whose Lungs I found a great Quantity of
Stone-dust sucked in with the Air, and stuffing almost all the Vessels,
insomuch that I seemed to cut through a heap of Sand; so that the Vesicles
being filled with Dust, could not admit the Air, which was the occasion of the
poor Fellow's Death.

The next Year, two like Cases happened of Stone-Cutters that died after the
same manner, and were by me dissected in our Hospital. At the same time, the
Master Stone-Cutter reported to us, that while the Stones are cut, there flies
into the Air such a subtle Powder from the Stones, as was able to penetrate
the Pores of an Oxe's Bladder, that hung up blown and dried in his Shop, so
that about the end of the Year, he found a handful of Dust at the bottom of the
Bladder; which Powder was that which killed so many Stone-Cutters, that were
not very careful how they preserved themselves from that Dust. So that if such
a Quantity of Dust penetrates by drawing in the Breath into the Vesicles of the
Lungs, there is no question but Air runs through all those Vesicles. We saw a
Third that died of an Asthma, who was wont to cleanse Feathers for Beds, whose
Lungs were stuffed full of the Dust that usually gathers among those Feathers.

VI. The said Bladdery Substance The Clothing Membrane
is clothed on the outside with a thin and porous Membrane, which most
Physicians and Anatomists believe to be derived from the Pleura: But I am of
Opinion, that it is derived from the exterior Tunicle of the Vessels entering
the Parenchyma, and hence it is very dull of Sense. The Porosity of it easily
appears, if the Lungs be strongly blown up with a pair of Bellows; for by that
means the Pores are often dilated so wide, that they may be manifestly
discerned by the Eye, though the Air blown through them, does not go out again;
as appears from hence, for that the Lungs being distended by the blowing in of
the Air, if you tie a convenient Knot at the upper part near the Aspera
Arteria, it retains the Air till it become quite dried up. Hence we easily
judge the Constitution of these Pores to be peculiar, that is, such, that they
will permit nothing to pass forth from the inner Parenchyma; but such things as
lie next the Lungs on the outside, in the capacity of the Breast, seem rather
probable to emer the inner parts of it, if they be not over-thick. But if this
Distention by Wind, be violent, and such as it is probable never happened to any
living; yet by that is the Porosity of the said Tunicle made manifest, though
larger in some, in others lesser, and from that Diversity it comes to pass,
that not in all such Empyics, or such as are troubled with Impostumes in the
Lungs, the corrupt Matter enters the Lungs out of the Cavity of the Breast, and
is evacuated by Spittle or Urine, without doubt; because in many, by reason of
the thickness of the Matter, the Pores are not wide enough. I remember, at
Nimmeghen I opened the Breasts of six or seven Empyical Persons between the
Ribs, for the evacuation of the filthy Matter, and having evacuated the Matter,
to some I used bitter abstersive Injections, which I Syring'd in to cleanse the
Lungs; the bitter taste of which, they did not only perceive in their Mouths,
but also spit out a good part of it; which was a certain Sign that the Pores of
the Tunicle of the Lungs were so narrow in those diseased Persons, that they
could not admit any thicker Matter, but only thin Liquors.

Riolanus considering these Pores, the better to explain the manner how the
thick Matter is evacuated out of the Cavity of the Breast by Spittle, pretends,
that the Air freely insinuates it self into the Capacity of the Breast through
the Spaces between the Gristles; and that through them the Steams and purulent
Matter contained, returns, and yet no Air issues forth through the Pores of the
ensolding Membrane into the Cavity of the Breast: Which Opinion Helmont
maintains with many Arguments, and Bartholine refutes, l. De Pulmon. Sect. 4.
For though Experience tells us, that many times Matter and injected Liquors are
sucked up through the Pores by the Lungs; yet the same Experience tells us,
that the Air breathed in, does not issue forth again through those Pores into
the Cavity of the Breast: For many times with a pair of Bellows we have blown
up the Lungs taken out of a Beast newly killed; but we have observed, that the
Vessels of the whole Parenchyma were very much distended by the Wind, but that
no Air issued forth through the Pores, or would so much as stir the Flame of
the Candle; but if the least Incision were made into the Tunicle, presently we
found the Wind to operate upon the Flame. Which is a sign that those Pores are
so placed, and as it were, fortified with Valves, as to admit some Liquors from
without, but not to send forth any intrinsic Air.

VII. The Color of the Lungs in The Color
sound People, is like that of Ashes, or Vary-colour'd; but in diseased
Persons, especially such as took too much foul Tobacco in their Lifetime, I
have found it of a blackish Color. Also in one that was a Slave to Tobacco and
Brandy, and afterward died of a long Asthma, I found all the Lungs not only of
a blackish Color, but dried up to an indifferent hardness, with some small
Ulcers scattered here and there, full of Matter, not fluid, but thick and dry.
In another great Tabacco-taker, I found the Lungs of the same black Color,
full of Ulcers, but not dried up.

VIII. Most Anatomists write, that The Color in a Child before it is born.
the Lungs in the Birth are of a red Color, and a thicker Substance, so that
being cast into the Water, they sink; quite otherwise than in Men of ripe
years, in whom they are altogether Spungy, and of an Ash Color, or
Vary-colour'd, and somewhat enclining to white. Which seems a thing so constant
to Swammerdam, that he reports, how that in the opening the Breast of the
Birth, he always found the Lungs plainly contracted, and of a red Color, and
without any Air in the inside. The same thing Harvey also asserts; but
Charleton absolutely denies; who writes, that he has many times tried, but
found no difference of Color between the Lungs of the Birth and a Man born:
But there is a Mistake on both sides; which is easily removed, if the times of
the Birth be rightly distinguished; for I have observed by Ocular View, that
till the Fifth Month and a half, or thereabout, the Lungs are red, and
indifferently thick; but afterward somewhat soster, looser, and of a Color
somewhat palish, and variegated, and that it is to be found such in dissected
Births.

In December 1665. I dissected a Woman Seven Months gone, and found the Lungs
of the Birth enclosed in the Womb less turgid than in Men born, but different
in Softness and Color.

In November. 1666. In a mature Birth dead in the Womb, a little before Delivery,
a Color somewhat redder than in grown People, but somewhat variegated, and of
an Ash Color, and such a Softness and Sponginess of the Substance, that the
Lungs swum when they were cast into the Water: But in regard that Lightness and
Spunginess of the Lungs, which prevents its Swimming, and somewhat changes the
Color, arise from the Air contained in the Bladdery Substance, the Question
is, How that Air enters the Lungs, the Birth not yet breathing? That Air is
bred in the Lungs themselves, out of the most subtle Vapors raised by the Heat
out of the moist Substance of the Blood, and so acquiring an Airy Tenuity:
After which manner likewise that same Air is generated, which possesses the
Cavity of the Abdomen, and that which is found in the Guts of the Birth unborn.
But this small Quantity of Air in the Lungs, which is neither sufficient in
Quantity, nor sufficiently thick and cold, and can never suffice to refrigerate
and condense the Blood which is forced from the Right Ventricle of the Heart
into the Lungs, can never serve for the Use of Respiration; only by diminishing
by degrees the thickness of the Lungs, it renders them so fit for Respiration,
that the Infant may be able to breath as soon as born, which otherwise it would
not be able to do of a sudden, unless the breathing Organ were first prepared
by degrees for its performance in that manner.

IX. The Lungs are divided into The Division.
the Right and Left Part, by the means of the intervening Mediastinum, each of
which many have taken and described for different Lungs, which is the reason
they never use the Word Lung, but Lungs in the Plural Number. Some rather choose
to call the two several Parts the two Lobes of the Lungs; but there is no
necessity of cavilling about the Plural or Singular Number, so we agree about
the Thing it self.

Every one of these Parts is again divided into the upper Lobe, which is
shorter, and the lower Lobe, which is larger; rarely into three Lobes: Yet in
Dogs, especially Hounds, there are several Lobes.

The several Parts resemble in shape the Hoof of an Ox; on the outside gibbous,
where they look toward the Ribs: on the inside hollow, where they so tenderly
embrace the Heart.

X. Beside the foresaid Division Their Division into little Lobes
of the Lungs, Malpigius by accurate Inspection has found out another, That the
whole Body of the Lungs consists of many little Lobes, mutually joined
together. I have observed, says he, in his first Epistle to Borellus, a more
wonderful and more remarkable Division: For the whole Bulk of the Lungs
consists of infinite little Lobes, enclosed within a proper Membrane, furnished
with common Vessels growing to the Branches of the Rough Artery. Now these
little Lobes may be discerned, if the Lungs being half blown up, be held to the
Light or Beams of the Sun; for then certain Spaces appear, as it were
diaphanous, which if you follow with a slight Incision, you shall separate the
little Lobes, adhering on both sides to the rough Artery and the Vessels, and
shall find them involved in their proper Membrane, the Air being breathed in
through the rough Artery: which may be separated by diligent Incision, and
shines against the Light. But these little Lobes will more clearly appear by an
elaborate Dissection of the Spaces after a gentle boiling of the Lungs.

XI. The Lungs are fastened in a The Connection.
hanging posture from the Rough Artery, insinuating it self into the middle of
its Substance, and by means of that Artery, adheres to the Neck. Fallopius
writes, That only in Man they are naturally fastened to the Clavicles and
uppermost Ribs. But Riolanus has several times observed them altogether
separated from the Ribs and Clavicles; which has been also more than once
observed by me my self.

But from the Pleura they are for the most part found to be free. I say, for
the most part, because many times they are also fastened to it, sometimes in
the whole Circumference, sometimes in some particular Parts, with fibrous
Knittings; and in Dissections I find this Connection Observation.
in near the third part of Bodies opened. For we meet with many Bodies, wherein
the Lungs are fastened to the Pleura with innumerable little Fibers. Nay, many
Bodies wherein the outward Membrane it self of the Lungs adheres the greatest
part of it immediately to the Pleura. In our Hospital and Anatomy-Theatre, I
have shown many Bodies, Bodies, wherein the Lungs have stuck so close almost in
every Part, to the Pleura, that they could not be separated without a forcible
dilaceration, which Men neverthelefs in their Lifetime never (...) of any
Difficulty or Inconvenience of Breathing. Whence it appears how little Truth
there is in what Massa, Riolanus, Bartholinus, Lindan, and some others write,
that for that very reason Difficulty of Breathing becomes diuturnal and
incurable. In November. 1660. I dissected the Body of an arch Thief that was
hanged, who had lived in Health without any difficulty of Breathing, whose
Lungs on both sides were so closely fastened every way not only to the Pleura,
but to the whole Diaphragma and Mediastinum, that they could not be separated
without much Dilaceration: But though such a Connection of the Lungs happen to
many men after they are born (for I never heard that any man was born with it)
and continue without any detriment to Health, yet in Beasts, especially those
of the larger sort, as Horses, Cows, Sheep, Goats, etc. this Bowel uses to be
free from the Pleura, and scarcely ever grows to it, unless the Pleurisy,
Inflammation of the Lungs, or some other Disease with an Exulceration
preceding; so that in whatever Beast that is killed, such a Connection appears,
such an Accident is suspected to have been the Effect of some such Disease.

XII. In Practice I have observed Several Observations.
this worthy taking notice of:

1. That those in whom I judged by certain Signs, that their Lungs stuck to the
Pleura, more easily and frequently fell into the Pleurisy, than others; during
which, if a Suppuration happened, they more readily and sooner spit up a Bloody
Matter from the Side affected. But that in others, whose Lungs were free from
the Pleura, they were less frequently troubled with the Pleurisy; which if it
came to Suppuration, was rately cured by spitting up of Matter, but for the
most part turned into an Empyema. The Reason is this; because that in the first
case the Matter may immediately flow out of the Aposteme of the Pleura, into
the Substance it self of the Lungs annexed to it, and together with the Pleura,
perhaps by reason of its Vicinity and immediate Connection, be somewhat also
enflamed, and so be spit forth. In the latter Case, it cannot but flow into the
Cavity of the Thorax or Breast, out of which there is no easy Entrance into
the Pores of the Lungs. 2. Moreover, I have observed the Falsehood of the
Doctrine of Platerus, Zecchius, and others, stiffly maintaining, That in a
Pleurisy, which is a common Disease, never, or very rarely the Pleura is
enflamed, but always (...) outermost Membrane of the Lungs; in which, by reason
of its exquisite Sense, such cruel Pains are felt; but that in a Peripneumony,
the inner Substance of the Lungs is enflamed; which being obtuse of Sense,
therefore the Pains therein are more obtuse and dull. For in the manifold
Dissection of Bodies that died of the Pleurisy, we have found it to be
otherwise; that is, that in all People troubled with the Pleurisy, the Pleura
was inflamed, and that only, if the Lungs were free from its Connection. But if
the Lungs stuck close to the Pleura, then that also the adhering part of the
Lungs was inflamed as well as the Pleura. 3. In December. 1656. I dissected in
our Hospital a Woman that died of a Pleurisy, with which she was most cruelly
tormented for the first fourteen days: afterward, the Inflammation coming to
Suppuration, the Disease grew more gentle for some few days, though at length
she died. In her we found the Lungs altogether free from the Pleura, and in the
Right Side the whole Pleura from the Armpits to the Diaphragma inflamed; but
that the Aposteme was brok'n about the fifth and sixth Rib. Which two Ribs, by
reason of the breaking of the Aposteme, were laid bare from the Pleura about
the breadth of two Fingers; and that the Matter had flowed to an indifferent
quantity into the Cavity of the Breast; but the Lungs were found without any
Inflammation, or any other ill Affection. 4. The like Accident I showed in a
Man that died of a Pleurisy, in the Year 1657. who being overheated with
Hay-making in the midst of Summer, drank a great Draught of cold Beer, by which
he contracted a Pleurisy, and died in a few days. In this Body the Lungs were
altogether free from the Pleura, and never annexed to it toward the Ribs, and
the whole Pleura of the Right Side was inflamed, without any damage to the
Lungs. 5. Hence it is apparent, That what Regius asserts, is not true; viz.
That in all Pleurisies there is an Inflammation of the outer part of the Lungs,
as the Dissections of all Bodies deceased of the Pleurisy, teach us; in whom
the Lungs are found affected, the Pleura always remaining untouched. But I
believe this good Gentleman writes and teaches these things, out of an Opinion
pre-conceiv'd or learned from others; as being one that assumes to himself the
Writings and Sayings of others, and inserts them into his Books for his own;
for he himself was never either any Practitioner nor Anatomist, nor ever
dissected the Body of any one that died of a Pleurisy. For mere Inspection it
self demonstrates the contrary, as appears by the manifold Dissections of
Bodies dying of the Pleurisy: in which we never found the Pleurisy to have
happened without detriment to the Pleura. But in such Bodies where the Lungs
were affixed to the Pleura, in such we found the Lungs to be affected, in that
Part where they stuck to the Pleura: in Bodies where the Lungs were free from
the Pleura, the Lungs were never endammag'd in the least. In which particular,
we rather trust to our own Eyes, than the Sayings of others, that never saw any
such thing. If Platerus, who is to be credited, writes, That he observed some
such thing, I do not wonder; in regard that among the many Bodies by him
opened, he never dissected any that died of the Pleurisy; or in those few
which he met with, the Lungs were never fastened to the Pleura; but as for
such, whose Lungs were free from the Pleura, he does not seem to have dissected
any: Of which sort, we have shown many whose Pleura's have been highly
inflamed, without any detriment at all to the Lungs themselves. 6. Moreover,
there can be no acute Pain in the Membrane enclosing the Lungs, from any
Inflammation thereof, seeing that Experience teaches us, that it is very dull
of feeling. We have met with two or three Bodies that died of an Inflammation
of the Lungs, in whom the whole Lobe of the Lungs of one side, together with
the exterior Membrane, was found inflamed; and yet the Persons themselves, when
alive* complained of no acute, but only a dull, heavy kind of Pain; which must
of necessity have been acute, were it true what Regius write, That a most sharp
Pain proceeds from an Inflammation of the Membrane clothing the Lungs. 7.
Lastly, Wounds passing through the Lungs, though the Membrane be penetrated,
cause no great Pain in the Lungs; and what Pain there is, the Patients only
feel it in the Pleura and Muscles. So likewise Ulcers caused by corroding
Humors in the Lungs, are little painful, though the outward Tunicle be also
eaten away. Which I showed publicly in our Anatomy-Theater in the Years 1660,
1663. in two Bodies, whose Lungs were so ulcerated, that hardly half the Bowel
remained; and yet those Men, while they lay sick in our Hospital, complained of
little Pain in their Lungs. Which is also daily conspicuous in Phthisical
Persons, in whom we have found by Sight and Experience, not only the inner
Substance, but also the outer Membrane of the Lungs corroded and ulcerated,
without any great Pain. 8. I shall add one more notable Example. In the Year
1660. I was sent for to open the Body of a certain Countryman, who about two
and twenty Months before he died, was stabbed in the right side of the Breast,
between the fifth and sixth Rib; which Wound I then said had pierced the Lungs;
but being believed neither by the Patient, nor the Surgeons that had undertaken
the Cure, my Advice was neglected: The Patient never complained of any inward
Pain; the Bloody Purulent Matter, that flowed in great Quantity out of the
Wound, stunk very much. Six Months after the Man was wounded, he went about his
usual Occasions, and for half a Year held on his wonted Rioting and Drinking,
the Wound still remaining open, and sending forth a stinking corrupted Matter
in great Quantity. Two or three Months before he died, he was taken with a
slight Fever, and waxing very lean, died of a Consumption. When his Breast was
opened, we found the Lobe of the Lungs of the wounded side, so consumed with
Suppuration, that not the least Bit of it remained on that side; nay, you would
have sworn there never had been any Lungs on that side; which made us wonder
how the Man could live in Health and Strength so long a time. Moreover, during
the whole Course of the Distemper, the Patient complained of no Pain in his
Lungs, which must have been very tedious, as well by reason of the Wound, as
the Inflammation and Exulceration succeeding, had there been any acute Sense of
Feeling in the Membrane enclosing the Lungs.
XIII. Three large Vessels are inserted The Vessels.
into the Lungs.

XIV. The First, which is the largest The rough A^tery.
Vessel of all, appointed for conveying of Air and thick Vapors, is the
Trachea, or Rough Artery, furnished with many Productions, called Bronchia.

XV. The Second and Third, are The Pulmonary Vein and Artery.
two large Blood-bearing Vessels, viz. the Pulmonary Artery and Vein; which
being divided into small, and almost invisible Branches, hardly discernable,
but by the help of a Microscope, and intermixed one among another, run through
the whole Bladder-like Substance, like an Artificial Net, opening one into
another with innumerable mutual Anastomoses.

Through the little Branches of the Artery, a Spirituous Blood dilated into
Vapor, forced out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, and in
them somewhat condensed by the cold breath'd-in Air, passes into the little
Branches of the Vein, and so distills into the Left Ventricle; neither in a
Natural Condition of Health does any thing of Blood seem to flow into the
Bronchia or Vesicles, so as to die them of a Bloody Color. But if by the
corrosion of any sharp Humor, a strong Cough, or any other violent Cause, there
happen to be an opening of those Vessels at any time, then the Blood flowing
out of them into the Vesicles, out off those into the Bronchia, is cast forth
by Spittle, and causes a spitting of Blood. In the mean time, in that same
Passage of the Blood through these Vessels, the serous Vapors, which, together
with the Blood in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, are attenuated into a thin
Exhalation, transpire in great Quantity through the thin Tunicles of the small
Vessels, and mixed in the small Vessels with the cold breath'd-in Air, and by
that somewhat condensed, are expelled with the same by Expiration into the
Bronchia, and so forth of the Body; by which means, the Blood is freed from a
great part of the serous Vapors, of which, a remarkable Quantity is chiefly
conspicuous in cold Weather and Wintertime, when the Vaporous Breath,
proceeding from the Mouth, being condensed by the external Cold, occur to the
Sight, and moisten every thing upon which they light.

XVI. However, here arises a Whether the Blood passes only through the
Anastomoses.
Doubt; Whether all the Blood passes through the Anastomoses of the said
Vessels? Also, Whether many Ends of those Sanguiferous small Vessels end in the
Substance it self of the Lungs; and whether the Arteries pour their Blood into
it, and the Veins convey it out again as we have said that there is a
Circulation in most other Parts? Which, that it is so, the Reasons alleged in
those Places, seem to confirm: but the Eye sight contradicts it in the Lungs;
by which we find the whole Parenchyma to be almost altogether without any
Blood; neither is there any thing of Blood worth speaking of, to be found in
its Substance (though it transmit eight, nine or more Pints of Blood in the
space of an hour) otherwise than happens in the Liver, Muscles, or other Parts
that transmit much Blood; in which there is a great Quantity of Blood found
without the Vessels.

Moreover, should that Blood be poured forth without the Vessels into the
Bladdery substance of the Blood, it would partly fill the Vessels appointed to
receive the Air, and so render them unfit for Respiration; partly occasion
frequent Spittings of Blood, which nevertheless are very rare, and manifestly
happen, when the Vessels being broken or corroded, the Blood bursts forth into
the Bladdery Substance, or the Bronchia, and never but upon the opening of
those Vessels.

Some perhaps may wonder, that I should say, that the Substance of the
Parenchyma should be void of Blood, that is, that no remarkable Quantity of
Blood should be seen therein, when it is nourished with Blood, like all the
rest of the Parts; and seeing that Hippocrates writes, They who spit Blood,
spit it out of the Lungs; and seeing there is also much Blood found in the
Lungs of those that are hanged. To the First, I answer, That the Lungs are
nourished with Blood like the Arteries, Veins and Nerves; which Vessels take to
themselves out of the Blood and Spirit that passes through them, what is
convenient for their Nourishment, and also receive what is necessary for them,
through invisible Passages, and little Arteries. Moreover, the Lungs, and that
chiefly too, are nourished by that Blood which is conveyed through the
Bronchial Artery. And then again, We must distinguish between a very little
Blood, which serves for the Nourishment of the Lungs, and a great deal of
Blood, requisite for the Nourishment of the whole Body: The one may be infused
through invisible Passages into the Bladdery Substance, and yet be hardly ever
seen. The other, by reason of its extraordinary Quantity, cannot pass, but
through some conspicuous Conveyance; and it is of the former, not of the
latter, that Anatomists speak, when they talk of the Passage of the Blood
through the Lungs. To the Second, I say, That Hippocrates, in the forecited
Aphorism, speaks of the whole Lungs in general, as it consists of its own
Substance, Vessels, and Membranes, and not particularly of the proper Substance
of the Parenchyma only. And so when he says that the Blood is spit from the
Lungs, he means that Blood which is spit from some corroded or broken Blood
bearing Vessels, running through the Substance of the Bowel. To the Third, I
say, That the Blood which is found in the Lungs of such as are hanged, did not
flow out of the proper Substance, but into the Vesicles out of the Vessels,
broken by reason of the Obstruction of the Circular Passage.

XVII. Frederic Ruysh, describes another The Bronchial Artery.
peculiar Artery, hitherto overseen by all the Anatomists, found out by his own
singular Industry; which he calls the Bronchial Artery, which chiefly seems to
convey the Blood to the Nourishment of the Lungs, or the Rough Artery, or the
Bronchia. This, says he, we thought fit to call the Bronchial Artery; for that
creeping above the Bronchia, it accompanies them to the End. It takes its Rise
from the hinder part of the great descending Artery, about a Finger's breadth
more or less above the uppermost Intercostal little Arteries, arising from the
descending Aorta; and sometimes two Fingers breadth above the aforesaid
Arteries: Sometimes also I have found it to have its Original below those
Arteries; for Nature delights in Variety: Sometimes it rises single, sometimes
double; so that oft-times the Great Artery being taken out of a Carcass, the
Intercostals and Bronchials being cut away, the remaining little Trunks of the
Bronchials seem to counterfeit the Rise of the Intercostals. Hence it obliquely
runs under the Lungs, and accompanies the Bronchia under the Veiny Artery, to
the very End, till becoming no bigger than a Hair, it vanishes out of Sight. In
the Lungs of Men I have frequently observed that Artery to creep through the
forepart of the Bronchia, which I have seldom seen in the Lungs of Brutes.

XVIII. Besides the forementioned Lymphatic Vessels.
Blood-bearing Vessels, by the Report of Bartholine, Olaus Rudbeck as^res us,
That he has observed certain diminutive Lymphatic Vessels, creeping along the
Superficies of the Lungs; which also Frederic Ruisch affirms he has seen; and
farth^r, that they empty their Liquor into the Subclavial, Axillary and Iugular
Veins.

XIX. Little diminutive Nerves Nerves.
proceed from the Sixth Pair; which some will have to be dispersed through the
external Membrane only; but Riolanus has observed to te^d toward the inner
Parts; and B^rtholin has always observed them to accompany the Bronchia from
the hinder Part; besides a little Branch that creeps through the outward
Membrane from the forepart. Thomas Willis asserts, That those little Nerves,
together with the Blood-bearing Vessels, are distributed through the whole
Lungs, and ^each both the Channels of the Bronchia, the Veins and Arteries,
sending their Branches every way. But I cannot persuade my self, that there
should be such a great Quantity of Nerves dispersed through, since Reason
teaches us, they must be very few; and very small, by reason of the obtuse
Feeling of that Bowel, as has been already said. Riolanus and Regius indeed
allow to its exterior Tunicle, an exquisite Sense of Feeling, as derived from
the Pleura, contrary to Reason and Experience, as we have already demonstrated.

XX. The Office of the Lungs is to Office.
be serviceable for Respiration.

XXI. Now Respiration is an Alternative Respiration what!
Dilatation and Contraction of the Breast, by which the cold external Air is
now forced into the Lungs, and then cast forth again, together with the Steams
and Vapors, that by the Reception of the cold Air, and the Expulsion of it,
together with the Serous Vapors exhaling through the thin Tunicles of the
Blood-bearing Vessels, from the Spirituous Blood driven forward into the Lungs,
and collected together in the Windings of the Vesicles, that the hot Blood,
spirituous, and dilated into a thin Breath, proceeding from the Right Ventricle
of the Heart, may be refrigerated, and somewhat condensed in the Lungs, and
many Serous Vapors separated from it, that so it may more readily descend into
the Left Ventricle of the Heart, and there be dilated and spiritualized anew,
and be wrought to a greater Perfection.

XXII. For because the Blood breaking Its End.
forth from the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, is much dilated,
very light, and requires twenty times a larger Room than condensed Blood, which
the left Ventricle cannot afford, hence there is a necessity that that same
Vapor sealed up, be again condensed into the Thickness of Blood, and so become
heavier; partly, that by reason of its being more heavy, it may descend to the
Left Ventricle; partly, that being by that means more compacted, it may more
easily be comprehended by that Ventricle, and so be dilated anew. For, as in
Chemical Stills, the Liquor being reduced into a thin Vapor, cannot be
contained in so small a Room or Vessel, as it was contained in before
Attenuation; nor cannot be gathered together, and again distilled to a greater
Perfection of Spirit, till that Vapor lighting into a cold Alembic, be again
condensed into Water, and flows through the Neck of the Alembic, to be received
by another Vessel, and after that, to be again distilled. So the Blood in the
Right Ventricle of the Heart being rarifyd, and become Spirituous, of necessity
must be some what condensed again by the Refrigeration of the Air sucked in, to
the end that being so made more ponderous, and possessing less Room, it may
flow to the left Ventricle, and refresh the fervent Heat of the Heart with a
new Refreshment. Moreover, beside the foresaid Refrigeration, the cool
suck'd-in Air affords another Benefit; that it presses forth out of the small
Pulmonary Arteries, into the smaller little Veins, the Blood which is thrust
forward into the Lungs, and by the said Refrigeration prepared for Defluxion,
and now ready to go forth by means of the Distension of the whole Bowel, and
consequently, the great Compression of the Vessels; and from these Arteries,
drives it forward through the great Pulmonary Vein, into the Left Ventricle of
the Heart; which is the Reason that so little Blood stays in the Lungs, and so
little is found therein when a man is dead.

XXIII. Whence it is manifest what What kills People that are strangled.
it is that kills those that are hanged or strangled. For besides that the
Serous, or, as others say, Fuliginous Vapors, for defect of Respiration, are
not dissipated, the Spirituous and Boiling Blood forced into the Lungs, is not
refrigerated nor condensed; whence the Lungs are over-fill'd and distended with
an over-abounding vaporous Spirit, so that there can be nothing more supplied
out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart (as no more Air can be forced into a
Bladder which is full already) and by reason of its extreme Lightness, nothing,
or very little can descend to the Left Ventricle: so that it wants new
Nourishment, and has nothing to pour into the Aorta, and so the Circulation of
the Blood is stopped, and the Heart faints away for a double Reason; and then
the Blood not flowing to the Brain, by and by the Brain ceases its Function,
and generates no more Animal Spirits, or forces them to the Parts; and so the
Sense and Motion of all the Parts fail. And hence it is apparent, why in a
Cause of Swooning in Stoves.
Stove that is overheated, many times we fall into a Swoon; because the Air
being sucked in, cannot sufficiently condense the vaporous Blood, for want of
Cold; so that the Lungs become filled with that Blood, and afford but little or
no condensed Blood to the Left Ventricle, to be dilated anew.

XXIV. That this is the true Reason The necessity of Respiration.
of Respiration, it appears from hence; That Animals, which have but one
Ventricle of the Heart, have no Lungs; and the Reason why the Birth does not
breathe in the Womb, is, because the Blood is not moved by the Lungs, from the
Right, to the Left Ventricle; so that it wants no Condensation in the middle
way, or Compression made by Inspiration; only the Lungs grow for future Uses.
And then the Reason why we are constrained to fetch our Breath quicker, when
the Blood is heated by Fevers, or Exercise, or any other Causes; as, when we
suck in a hotter Air, is this, to the end, that by frequent Respiration there
may be a swifter, and more convenient Refrigeration and Condensation of the
Blood.

XXV. But the said Refrigeration How the Blood is cooled.
does not come to pass in the Lungs, because the Air breathed in, is mixed with
the hot blood forced from the heart into the Lungs, (as was the Opinion of Ent
and Deusingius, and is still the Judgment of many other Philosophers at this
day;) but because the cool Air entering the Bronchia and Bladdery Substance of
the Lungs, cools the whole Lungs, as also the Blood contained in its
Blood-bearing Vessels; as Wine contained in Glass-Bottles, and set in cold
Water, or Snow, is cooled without any Mixture either of the Snow or Water.

Some indeed think, that though it be not much, yet there is some of the
suck'd-in Air which is mixed with the Blood (and among the rest, Malachias
Truston defends this Opinion) and carried with it to the Heart; to the end,
that by its Mixture, the Blood may be made more Spirituous and thinner; for
which they produce these Reasons.

1. Because there is some Air to be found in the Ventricles of the Heart,
besides the Blood. 2. Because that in the Plague-time, the contagious Air
infects the Heart. 3. Because they who fall into a Swoon, presently come to
themselves upon the holding of Vinegar, Rose or Cinamon-Water, or any fragrant
Spices to their Nostrils; because that Fragrancy entering their Lungs, together
with the Air sucked in, is presently mixed in the Air with the Blood, and
presently carried to the Left Ventricle of the Heart. But this Fiction seems to
be of no great weight: For, were it true, then ought the Air to be mixed at all
times with the Blood in the Lungs, nor could good Blood be generated without
its Admixture; but no Air can be mixed with the Blood in the Birth enclosed in
the Womb; and yet the Blood which is then made, is as good and as perfect
without any Mixture of the Air. And therefore I answer to the First, That the
Air which is contained in the Ventricles of the Heart, cannot be said to be
carried thither by any Inspiration, because it is equally as well in the Right,
as in the Left Ventricle; whereas there can no Blood descend with Air to the
Right, because of the Obstacles of the Semilunary Valves. Moreover, such a kind
of Air is to be found in the Cavity of the Abdomen; which cannot be said to be
carried thither by Inspiration: besides, that such a sort of Air is found in
the Abdomen and Ventricles of the Heart of Births enclosed in the Womb.
To the Second and Third, I say, That the inspired malignant Air does not
therefore infect the Heart, because it is mixed with the Blood; but because the
Blood passing through the Lungs, endues them with an evil Quality, which is
thence communicated to the Blood contained in the Vessels, and so to the Heart:
For as the hot Air impresses a hot Quality, so a cold Air, a cold one; so a
venomous or putrified Air, or a fragrant Air impresses a contagious or fragrant
Quality to the Blood and Lungs therein contained. For, that a Quality be
communicated to another Body, there is no necessity that the Body from which
that Quality flows, should be mixed with the Body to which that Quality is
communicated. For, that red-hot Iron should warm, there is no necessity that
the Iron should enter the Body that is to be heated: It Is sufficient that the
small red-hot Particles of the heated Iron, by their vehement Agitation,
violently also agitate the small Particles of the adjoining Body to be heated,
and so by that violent Motion cause Heat: As when a piece of Antimonial Glass,
put into Wine, gives it a vomitive Quality, there is no necessity the Antimony
should be mixed with the Wine; and so, when the Wine enters the Body of Man, it
suffices, that by its Quality (for it comes out exactly the same weight as it
was put in) it has so disposed the Substance of the Wine, as to make it
vomitive. When Corn is grinding, there is no necessity that the Wind should
enter the Wheels and Millstones; for by the Motion of the Sails the Wheels and
Millstones will move, though the Wind, that gives the Motive Quality, do not
enter the Flowr or Wheat. Lastly, if the Air inspired should be mixed with the
Blood, then if a man should blow into the Lungs, when fresh, with a pair of
Bellows through the Rough the Artery, the Breath would break out through the
pulmonary Artery toward the Left Ventricle of the Heart, which we could never
observe in any Experiments that ever we made. Moreover, if the Air should enter
the Blood-bearing Vessels, not only those Vessels, but the Parts themselves
which are nourished with the Blood, would be puffed up with the Air, and be
continually infested with flatulent Tumors.

XXVI. Charleton utterly rejects Charleton's Error.
this same Refrigeration of the Lungs, and the Use of Breathing; and opposes it
with three or four Arguments, but so insipid, that they deserve no Refutation;
and then he concludes, That the Air is sucked in for the finer Subtilization of
the Blood, and heating of the Vital Spirits. Which Willis also affirms in his
Book against Highmore. But because it is an Opinion repugnant to the very
Principles of Philosophy, it needs no great Refutation. For it is a known thing
in Philos^hy, That Cold condenses, but Heat attenuates. The First is so true,
that in the Instrument called a Thermometer, it is so conspicuous to the Eye,
that it is never to be contradicted. So that there cannot be a greater
Subtilization of the Blood by the cold Air sucked in by the Lungs, but without
all question, a Con^ensation rather. Now if those Learned Men beforementioned,
would have held, That there is a greater Subtilization of the Blood by sucking
in of the hot Air, we should have readily granted it; but then we must say too,
that that Subtilization will soon be too much, unwholesom, and in a short time
will prove deadly: And that it is not the End of Respiration, for the Blood to
be subtiliz'd by it; but that being subtiliz'd, and forced out of the Right
Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, it should be there condensed. But if for
all this, they will still maintain the contrary, then of necessity they will
run upon a hard Rock of Necessity: For then it will follow, that the hotter the
Air is, that is sucked in, so much the swifter and easier will the Blood be,
and the Refreshment of the Heart greater; and Men that live in a hot Air, would
have less need of Respiration. And by Consequence also in a Fit, where there is
present need of Refreshment, as in Burning Fevers, where the Spirits are very
much wasted, it would be requisite to lay the Patients (for the quicker
restoring of their lost Spirits, and refreshment of the Heart) in warm Beds, or
exposed to the roasting Heat of the Sun, lest the Blood should be too slowly
subtiliz'd in a cold Bed by the cold Air breathed in, and so the Heart and
Spirits want their due and seasonable Refreshment. But how contrary these
things are to Reason, and Experience, is obvious unto them, who have but so
much as saluted Physical Practice at a distance. Which, when Gualter Needham
had thoroughly considered, he will not permit the Lungs any Faculty to heat or
subtilize the Blood, and proves his Opinion by strong Arguments.

XXVII. Alexander Maurocordatus The new Opinion of Alexander Maurocordatus.
of Constantinople, opposes this Opinion of the Lungs having the Gift of
Refrigeration, and brings several Arguments to uphold his Undertaking: Of
which, the chiefest are these;

1. Seeing that the cold Air, which is sucked in, does not enter the
Blood-bearing Vessels of the Lungs, but is only circumfus'd about 'em in the
Bowels, of necessity it can never diminish, but by Antiperistasis, will rather
augment the Heat of the Blood in those Vessels. 2. Because that in the Birth,
which is enclosed in a hot place, there must be a greater Heat, and yet no such
urgent Necessity of Respiration, but that the Lungs themselves lie idle. 3.
Because those that are expiring, breath forth a colder Breath.
To the First, I answer, That a moderate Cold does not cause that same
Antiperistasis; only that Antiperistasis happens in vehement and sudden
Refrigeration. But such a vehement Cold cannot be occasioned by Inspiration in
the Breast, which is a hot Part*

To the Second, I answer, That the Heat in the Birth, is not come to such a
Perfection as to want the Refrigeration of Breathing.

To the Third, That the Air breathed forth by dying Persons, does not feel so
hot as that which is breathed forth by healthy People, because that through the
Weakness of the Heart, the Blood which is forced into the Lungs, is not so hot
at that time; and for that the Bowel it self does not heat so much; for which
reason also, the Air breathed in, is less hot, and so the Breath seems to be
colder to Healthy People that stand by, who are sufficiently warm; whereas that
Breath of Dying Men does not come forth without some Heat, which it had
acquired from the Lungs, though less than the Heat of the Skins of those that
feel it.

XXVIII. The same Author, after Whether the Lungs wheel about the Blood.
he has rejected the Refrigeration of the Lungs, concludes, That the Use of the
Lungs is to carry about the Blood, and is a kind of a Vessel appropriated to
the Circulation of the Blood. Which, if it were true, then in the Birth
enclosed in the Womb, and not Breathing; as also in Fish, that are destitute of
Lungs, there would be no Circulation of Blood, because that same Vessel is
either wanting, or else lies idle. Which Opinion John Majow refutes, by
producing an admirable Experiment, in his Treatise of Respiration.

XXIX. Malpigius will have the Malpigius his Opinion.
Lungs to be created, not for Refrigeration, but for a Mixture of the
Sanguineous Mass, that is to say, That all the smallest Particles of the Blood,
the White, the Red, the Fixed, the Liquid, Chylous, Sanguineous, Lymphatic,
etc. should be mingled exactly into one Mass, which Mixture he supposes to be
but rudely ordered in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, but exactly completed
in the Vessels of the Lungs; and for this he brings many Arguments* which,
however, are not so strong, as either to prove his own, or destroy the ancient
Opinion. For the most exact Mixture of the Blood is occasioned by Fermentation;
by which all the Particles are dilated into a Spirit or thin Vapor; but this
Fermentation is performed in the Heart, forbid in the Lungs where Fermentation
is forbid, and the dilated Mass of the Blood is condensed. Moreover, if the
Blood expelled out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, were necessitated to
acquire an exact Mixture in the Heart, where must that have its exact Mixture,
which is forced out of the Left Ventricle into the Aorta, or that same Blood,
which neither in Fishes, nor in the Birth enclosed in the Womb, ever enters the
Lungs?

Malachy Thruston, desirous to Thruston his Opinion.
bring something of Novelty upon the Stage of this Dispute, excuses the Heart
from the Office of Sanguification, and imposes that Office upon the Lungs;
because that the Lungs being distempered, as in a Consumption, all the Parts
being nourished with bad Blood, grow lean and consume. As if the same thing did
not happen, when the Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Kidneys, Mesentery, and the like
Bowels, which are known not to make Blood, are affected with any Ulcer or very
great Distemper. Afterward he adds, That the Chylus is but rudely mixed in the
Heart with the Blood, but most exactly in the Lungs, and there ferments, boils,
is subtiliz'd, and acquires its Fluidness, and is changed into true Blood: But
these things are repugnant to Reason. For shall cold Air breathed in, produce
Effervescency and Subtility of the Blood in the Lungs, when Cold hinders
Effervescency, and thickens the Blood, as daily Experience teaches us in the
Cure of hot Distempers? And whence, I would fain know, has the Womb that
Effervescency and Subtility of the Blood, where the Lungs lie idle? Then he
produces two great Opinions, as he thinks; the one, from Phlebotomy, the other,
from Sighs. By Phlebotomy, says he, Apoplectic Persons, and such as are hardly
able to fetch their Breath, and are almost choked* feel great Ease: Because
that by that means, the Blood which was hastening toward the Lungs, or else
heaped up there before, is drawn off another way; and so the Lungs by degrees
are freed from that Burden. But I shall not grant the Learned Man his
Argument: True it is, that in such Distempers we let Blood freely, that the
Heart may be weakened, and that that being weakened, less Blood may be forced
to the other Parts; and so that Blood which sticks next to the Lungs or Brain,
and stops up the little Passages, may have the more time to flow out, and empty
it self; and so the Cause of Suffocation is removed from the Lungs. For
Example, If many People are gathered together in any Room, and would crowd
altogether out at the door, they stop one another; but the less they that are
behind press forward, the sooner they that are before get forth. Thus it
happens in an Apoplexy, Asthma, or any such like Affection. For in these
Distempers, the stronger the Heart is, and the more Blood it sends from it
self, the more are the Lungs, Brain, etc. obstructed and stuffed up; but the
more the Heart is weakened by a moderate Abstraction of the Blood, and the less
forcibly, and the less Blood it sends to the Parts obstructed, so much the more
easily the Blood, which already stops up the Passages, being dissolved and
attenuated by the Heat of those Parts, flows farther, and the Obstruction is
opened, to the Ease of the Party grieved. But this makes nothing for Thruston's
Opinion; as neither does his Argument taken from Sighs. For Sighs do not
happen, as he thinks, by reason of the stronger Effervescency of the Chylus in
the Lungs, but by reason of the weaker and slower Respiration; which they who
are thoughtful and sad, forget to exercise so frequently as they ought, and
consequently a Refrigeration not sufficient of the Blood forced into the Lungs
from the Right Ventricle of the Heart; so that the vaporous and dilated Blood,
remaining in too great a Quantity, and therefore flowing more slowly into the
Left Ventricle, and keeping the Lungs distended, perplexes the Patient, who is
therefore constrained by deep Sighs, and the introducing a good Quantity of
cold Air to condense that vaporous Blood, to the end that it may flow more
swiftly out of the Lungs through the Pulmonary Vein to the Left Ventricle of
the Heart, and may be also more swiftly expelled by reason of the larger
distension of the whole Lungs, because of the great Quantity of Air sucked in,
oppressing its Vessels. To which, in the last place, we may add, That the
Chylus dilated in the Heart, presently loses the Form of Chylus, and becomes
Blood; so that nothing of the Chylus enters the Lungs to be there fermented,
but that the vaporous Blood enters the Lungs, made of the Chylus dilated in the
Right Ventricle of the Heart, to be therein somewhat condensed by the Cold of
the Air sucked in, and to be attenuated out of Vapor into Liquor. By the force
of these Reasons, several other of Thurston's Arguments may be easily confuted,
which he deduces from Exercises, Asthma's and the Boylean Engine, and several
other things, for the Confirmation of his Opinion.

XXXI. Therefore it remains unquestionable, The Conclusion.
That Respiration no way conduces toward the making of Blood in the Lungs, nor
for the Respiration, Mixture or Circumvolution of it; but only for its
Refrigeration. Which is apparent farther from hence; for that if the
Refrigeration required in the Lungs, could be effected by any cooling thing, or
Cold coming any other way to the Lungs, Respiration were in vain, and ought to
cease for a time; as is manifest by many Examples to be produced in the
Question, Whether a man might live without Respiration?

XXXII. The Secondary Use of the The Secondary Use of the Lungs.
Lungs, is in Expiration to enable the Spirit to send forth Vocal Sounds, and
to Cough.

XXXIII. But the Motion of the The Motion is passive.
Lungs, in reference to Dilatation and Constriction, which happens in
Respiration, is not Active, but Passive: (Hence Galen assigns no Action at all
to it) because this Bowel is not moved of it self in its proper Breathing
Motion, but follows the Motion of the Breast; which is apparent from hence; for
that the Lungs on both sides are firmly knit and fastn'd to the Pleura; for in
such Men it would be hindered by its Connection, in that Motion; whereas they
feel no hindrance in Respiration, because the Lungs are dilated and drawn
together according to the Motion of the Breast.

XXXIV. Platerus is of another Contrary Opinions.
Judgment in this Matter; as also Riolanus; who believe the Lungs in moderate
Respiration, to be moved by their own Motion, proceeding from their innate
Force, without any manifest Motion of the Breast: Nay, in Apoplecticks, where
the Motion of all the Muscles is abolished, the Lungs are not only moved of
themselves, but also by their own Motion move the Breast; and in Dogs also, and
in other Living Creatures, if the whole Thorax should be opened of a sudden, so
that the Muscles could conduce nothing to the Motion of the Lungs, yet the
Lungs are to be seen moving violently upwards and downwards for all that. The
same thing Averrhoes believed of old; who produces this Argument for its
Confirmation. If Respiration, says he, which is perpetual, should follow the
Motion of the Breast, then there would be a perpetual violent Motion in our
Breasts; but the latter is absurd, and therefore the former. Sennertus also is
of the same Opinion. The Lungs, says he, are moved by their proper Power, and
the Lungs and Thorax are moved together, because they conspire to one end. The
Lungs are dilated by an innate Force; which that it may be done more
conveniently, and find Room wherein to be dilated, when the Lungs are moved,
the Animal Faculty also moves the Breast.

XXXV. To these Difficulties I The Refutation.
answer, That the two first Assertions are false, in regard that no man can
breathe when the Motion of the Muscles of the Thorax and Abdomen ceases
altogether; neither could any such Disposition of the Parts of Man be found,
wherein the Lungs do move, the Thorax remaining unmovable. For the Truth of
which, I appeal to the Experience of every Man: For though in Apoplectics, the
Motion of the Muscles of the Thorax is not altogether abolished, but only
impaired, yet when it ceases altogether, Respiration ceases, and the Party
dies; as always the Breathing Motion of the Lungs perishes, when the Motion of
the Thorax ceases. Neither is that Motion of the Lungs, which is seen in Live
Dogs, upon the sudden opening of the Thorax, a breathing Motion, which happens
with the expansion of the Lungs, but an accidental Motion, raised by the
Diaphragma, as drawing with it upward and downward the annexed Mediastinum of
the Lungs adhering to it; but without any Dilatation, without which there can
be no Respiration, nor any Air admitted.

To the Argument of Averrhoes I answer, That whatever follows the Motion of
another Part, does not of necessity follow by violence; for then the natural
and perpetual Motions of the Arteries and Brain, were to be said to be
perpetual violent Motions, because they perpetually proceed from, and follow
the Motion of the Heart. Besides, that is no violent Motion that proceeds
according to the customary Course of Nature; although it follow the Motion of
another Part; but that which is preternatural and disorderly, as happens in a
Convulsion. Lastly, for a Conclusion, I add, That not only the firm Connection
of the Lungs with the Pleura, but also Experience it self teaches us, That the
Breathing Motion of the Lungs is not spontaneous. For do but open the Thorax of
a living Animal on each side, the Breathing Motion in the Lungs of Dilatation
and Contraction ceases; there being a free Passage for the Air through the
wound into the cavity of the Thorax; so that in the Dilatation of the Thorax,
the Air does not necessarily enter into the Lungs through the Rough Artery, and
distend it to fill the concavity of the Breast: which Cessation of Motion would
not happen, if the Lungs should move of themselves; for there is no reason to
be given, why it should be less dilated upon the opening of the Breast, than
when it is shut. Which sufficiently refutes the Opinion of Sennertus, who
believes that the Lungs are filled like a pair of Bellows, because they are
dilated; for by the foresaid opening of the Breast, it is apparent, that the
Lungs are not dilated of themselves; seeing that by the Dilatation of the
Breast, the Air is compelled for the prevention of a Vacuum, to enter the Rough
Artery, and so to fill and dilate the Lungs.

XXXVI. From this Opinion of Averrhois, Whether the Lungs be moved by the Head.
and our own, Aristotle dissents; who teaches, That the Lungs are moved by the
Heart; in which Particular Hoffman also agrees with him. This others as stiffly
deny, and others as badly interpret of the Breathing Motion. But the Mistake of
all sides proceeds from hence, That they do not sufficiently distinguish
between the Natural Motion which the Heart contributes to the Lungs, and the
Breathing Motion, which does not proceed from the Heart. For that the Heart
does contribute some certain small Motion to the Lungs, is most certain; for
when the dilated Blood is forced through the Pulmonary Artery into the Lungs,
out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, Reason it self shows us, that the
Lungs are moved and heave; as for the same Reason the Arteries are moved and
swell; though this small Motion is so obscured by the forcibly Breathing
Motion, that in live Lungs it can hardly be perceived by Ocular Inspection. And
Aristotle is to be understood of this Motion. Yet is not that the Breathing
Motion, of which the Anatomists generally discourse, when they talk of the
Motion of the Lungs* which indeed neither proceed from the Heart nor the Lungs,
but is accidental, and follows the Motion of the Breast. Moreover, If the
breathing Motion should proceed from the Heart, the Pulses of the Heart and
Respiration would of necessity keep exact time together, and the Lungs would
equally swell upon every Pulsation of the Heart, as in the Arteries; and hence
the Breast would be dilated, and when the Motion of the Heart stood still, the
Lungs would also stand still. Moreover, the Inequality of Respiration would be
a Sign of an unequal Pulse; but Experience tells us the contrary: For the
Respirations are much less frequent than the Pulses of the Heart. Moreover,
Respiration may be slower or quicker, more or less, according to the pleasure
of him that breaths; whereas the Pulse cannot be altered at the Will of any
Person.

What has been said, sufficiently refutes Maurocordatus; who, ascribing the
whole Motion of the Lungs to the Heart, says, That when the Heart contracting
the Sides, causes a Systole, then the Diaphragma is erected, and the Rings of
the Rough Artery are contracted, and so the Lungs exspire, or breathe outward:
But when the Heart causes the Diastole, then the Diaphragma descending, draws
down the Lungs, and dilates the Rings of it, which causes breathing inward.
Which Opinion of his, he endeavors to confirm with many Arguments, which are
destroyed however by the aforesaid Reasons; as is also that Argument, That in
an intermitting Pulse, Respiration does not stop upon the intermitting of the
Motion of the Heart; which, if the Mover stopped, must of necessity stand still
it self.

And as for what he from hence concludes, That the Blood is drawn out of the
Vena Cava by Respiration, into the Right Ventricle, to supply Respiration, and
from thence, into the Pulmonary Artery, etc. These things need no Refutation*
since there is no such Attraction to be allowed in their Body^, since all the
Humors are moved by Impulsion.

XXXVII. Therefore the Motion of The manner of Respiration.
Respiration depends neither upon the Heart, nor the Muscles of the Breast,
which when they dilate the Heart, presently the Air enters the Lungs through
the Aspera Arteria, and dilates them; but when they contract the Breast, they
expel it the same way, together with the Serous Vapors. But whether we say this
Entrance of the Air be either to avoid a Vacuum, as some believe; or by the
pressing forward of the external Air, by the dilated Breast, and by that means
the Impulsion of it through the Aspera Arteria into the Lungs, as others
assert, comes all to one pass; when both may be true, about which some men so
idly quarrel.

XXXVIII. In reference to this Motion What sort of Action it is.
of Respiration, there is a Question debated among the Philosophers, what sort
of Action it is? For some say it is Natural, others Animal, others mixed of
both.

XXXIX. But it is apparent by It is an Animal Action.
what has been said, That Respiration is an Animal Action, because it is
performed by Instruments that all serve to Animal Motion; that is to say, the
Muscles; and may be quickened or delayed, augmented or decreased at our own
Pleasure, as in those that sing, and sound any sort of Wind-Musick; and there
may be some resolute Men that have held their Breath till they have died; as
Galen tells the Story of a Barbarian Slave, that killed himself by holding his
Breath. And we find two other Examples in Valerius Maximus, of the same Nature.

XL. If any one Object, That a voluntary An Objection.
Act is done with ones Consent, and cannot be perpetual; and that all animal
diuturnal Motion causes Lassitude, which Respiration does not; which moves
continually Day and Night, even when we are asleep, and know nothing of it: I
answer, That those are truly to be called Animal and Voluntary Actions, which
may be, or are done according to our own Will and Pleasure; so that although
Respiration go forward when we are asleep, and know nothing of it; nevertheless
it is an Animal Action, when it may be guided by our own Will so soon as we are
awake, and know any thing of it. They that walk and talk in their Sleep, though
they know nothing of it, yet are talking and walking no less Animal Actions for
all that. For the Animality of Actions does not consist in Acting only, but in
being able to Act by the management and directions of the Will. And therefore
we are to understand, that what Galen teaches us, That the Animal Actions, some
are performed by Instinct, and are free, and that others serve to the
Affections of the Mind; that the one proceeds perpetually, and without
impediment, when we least think of it; yet might be otherwise directed by us,
i^ we were aware; of which number is Respiration. Others are not perpetual; as
Fighting, Running, Dancing, Writing, etc. In the one, according to Custom,
there is a sufficient and continual Influx of Animal Spirits into the Muscles;
and for this reason, there is no Lassitude, though the Actions are diuturnal:
But in the other, the Spirits, according to the determination made in the
Brain, flow sometimes at this, sometimes at that time; sometimes in greater,
sometimes in less Quantity; and thence proceeds Weariness.

XLI. There is one Doubt remaining, Whether a man might live without
Respiration.
Whether a Man born, may live for any time without Respiration? Galen says it
is impossible, but that a man that breaths, should live, and that a living man
should breathe. And again, he says, Take away Respiration, and take away Life.
And indeed all the Reasons already brought for the necessity of Respiration,
confirm Galen's Opinion; and it is no more than what daily Experience confirms.
Yet on the other side, it is a thing to be demonstrated by sundry Examples,
that some men have lived a long while without any Respiration.

XLII.

Those Diverse in India, who Stories of of such as have lived long with out
Breathing.
dive for Pearl and Corals to the Bottom of the deepest Rivers, will stay for
the most part half an hour and more under Water, without taking Breath. 2. A
very stately Ship, being built at Amsterdam, for the King of France, by
Misfortune was sunk near the Texel; into which the Spanish Ambassador, having
put aboard a Chest full of Gold, he hired a Seaman, that was a Diver, to go
into the Ship as it lay under Water, and to endeavor to get out this Chest.
This Diver staid half an hour under Water, and upon his Return, said he had
found the Chest, but could not draw it out. 3. I saw my self two notable
Examples at Nimeghen. In the Year 1636. a certain Country Fellow, who died of
the Plague, as 'twas thought, lay three days for dead, without any sign of
Respiration, or any other Symptoms of Life. At length, when he was just ready
to be carried to the Grave, he came to himself upon the Bier, and lived many
years afterward. 4. In the Year 1638. a certain Woman at the upper end of
Nimeghen-City, fell into the River, where at that time rode the greatest part
of our Navy, and carried away by the swiftness of the Tide, passed through the
whole Fleet under Water; and within a quarter of an hour after, when no body
thought but that she had been dead, rose again at the lower end of the Fleet,
and was taken up alive and safe by the Seamen. 5. In the Year 1642. a Citizen
of Nimeghen's Wife, sitting at the Brink of a Well, fell in backward, with her
Head downward, and her Feet only above Water; in which condition she was above
half an hour for want of due Help; but at length, being drawn out of the Well,
and laid in her Bed for dead, after she had lain for two hours without any
Signs of Respiration, or Symptoms of Life, she came by degrees to her self, and
the next day coming to me, committed her self to my Care, and by Administration
of due Remedies, was restored to her former Health.

To these Testimonies of my own, lest they may not seem sufficient, I will add
three more out of other Authors, which are of great moment.

6. The First is a Story out of Platerus, of a Woman, who being condemned for
killing her Child, was thrown into the Rhine bound hand and foot; who, after
she had continued under Water above half an hour, was at length drawn out again
with Ropes, and breathing a little at first, came to Life again; and being
perfectly recovered, was married, and had several Children. To which Platerus
adds two Stories more of the same Nature. 7. The Second, is a Story reported by
John Mattheus, from an Inscription upon a Stone in the Church of the Holy
Apostles at Cologne; where it is related, how that certain infamous Persons
opened the Grave at Midnight, of a certain Woman that was buried the Night
before, for the lucre of her Rings and Bracelets which she carried with her to
her Tomb; but when they came to lay hands upon her, she came to her self, and
revived; thereupon the Robbers in a Terror fled: Upon which, the Woman making
use of the Lanthorn which the Thieves had lest behind, went home. Now, no
question, this Woman was not dead, but lying without Respiration, was taken for
dead. 8. A Third remarkable and sad Example of a Woman that was buried for
dead, and afterward reviving again, is related by Di^med Cornarius and Matthew
Hessus, and by us from them recited, l. 1. at the end of the 25th. Chapter.
And several other Stories of this Nature are to be found in Levinus Lemnius,
Hildan, James Crastius, and several others.

XLIII. Which are suffi^ient to convince us, that a man may live sometimes The
Reason of what has been said.
for some time without Respiration. There remains only to give an Account of
the Reason of it. Galen, by many strong Arguments, drawn from Experience and
Sense, tells us, That the Heat of the Heart is the Cause of the necessity of
Respiration: For so long as the Heart by its Heat attenuates the Blood, and
sends it dilated out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, there
is a necessity for that Refrigeration which is occasioned by Respiration, that
the hot attenuated Blood may be again condensed. and so fall into the Left
Ventricle. Which Re^rigeration being denied, the Vessels of the Lungs are
presently filled with vaporous Blood, and the Bladdery Substance with a serous
Vapor; neither can any thing descend to the Left Ventricle, so that a man is
presently choked. Now from this Foundation there follows another; that is to
say, as often as the Heart is overmuch cooled, or the Heat and Motion of it is
so oppressed by Morbific Causes, that it begets no Effervescency o^ Dilatation
of the Blood flowing in; then also there is no need of any Refrigeration (for
the cause of the Necessity being taken away, the Necessity it self is taken
away) and so long a man may live without Respiration. Now in all the aforesaid
Stories and Accidents, even by the cold Water alone, the whole Body and the
Lungs are so refrigerated, that that same Refrigeration is sufficient to
condense and cool the Blood, which is forced out of the Heart into the Lungs;
or else the Heart is so refrigerated and contracted by the extraordinary Fear
and Cold together, that it ceases almost to beat, and so a Fit comes, as seemed
to happen to those Women in the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Story. Or else the Heat
of it is so oppressed by Malignant Vapors and Humors, that it absolutely gives
over dilating the Blood, and driving it forth by Pulsation. Now the sending
forth of Blood to the Lungs beating, there is no need of Respiration, so that a
man may want it, and yet live, he not continuing long in that Condition, that
is, till the innate Heat be quite extinguished. But then a man lives without
Sense or Motion, like Flies, Frogs, Lizards, and other Beasts in the Winter,
which lie for dead without Respiration, because the Heat of the Heart is
oppressed, and as it were extinguished, and wants no Refrigeration. Which being
so, what shall we say to Galen's Words, cited in the beginning of this
Question; who says, it is impossible for a living man to breath? But Galen
himself foreseeing this Difficulty, flies to Transpiration, which is made
through the Pores of the whole Body; and supposes that to be the lowest and
meanest sort of Respiration, or rather its Deputy, which in such Accidents he
believes to be sufficient to support Life. But this Subterfuge will not serve
the Turn: For when the Heart and Humors are not stirred, then the whole Body is
presently refrigerated, and neither is the hot Vapor expelled, nor the cold
Air admitted to the Heart: And therefore we must rather conclude, that the
first Opinion of Galen is true of the common manner of living, but not of such
rarely happening Accidents as those before mentioned, where Things fall out
quite otherwise.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Trachea or Rough Artery. See Table 11.
I. THE TRACHEA, or Its Definition.
Rough Artery, by some called the PIPE or CANE of the Lungs, is a Channel which
descends from the Iaws to the Lungs, and enters them with several Branches,
through which the inspired Air is sucked in, and the same Air expired, is
breathed out again with the Serous Vapors and Steams, for the Refrigeration
and Ventilation of the Vital Blood, and the Production of the Voice and Sounds.

II. It is seated in the forepart of the Its Situation.
Neck, resting upon the Oesophagus, and so descending from the Mouth to the
Lungs.

III. About the Fourth Vertebra of Its Division.
the Breast, it is divided into Two Branches, each of which enter the Lobe of
the Lungs of their own side. These are again subdivided into two Branches, and
those also into others, till at length they end in small Branches dispersed
among the Roots of the Pulmonary Artery and Vein, and continuous with the
Vesicles of the Lungs, and opening into the same. Which Branches, so long as
they continue pretty big, are called Bronchia. Bronchia.


IV. The Bulk of the Artery differs Bigness.
according to the Variety of Sex, Age and Temperament.

V. The Forepart of it is of a Cartilaginous Substance.
Substance, that it should not close, but remain open always for the free
passage to and again of the Air and Spirits. The Hinder-part is Membranous,
lest the Dilatation of the Oesophagus should be hindered by the leaning of a
harder Body upon it.

VI. The Gristly part is not continuous, The Rings.
but compacted as it were of several Rings, of which the uppermost are the
biggest. These Rings are equidistant one from another, and behind, where they
rest upon the Gullet, are deprived of the lower part of their Circumference,
while a Membranous Substance supplies the Defect. The rest entering the
Parenchyma of the Lungs, remain whole, and cease to be semilunary, as in the
upper part, but variously formed, some round, some square, some triangular; and
the deeper they enter the Parenchyma, the more Membranous, and less hard like
Arteries, and continuous they are to the Vessels of the Lungs. But all the
aforesaid greater Rings are exactly joined one to another by Fleshy Ligaments,
the lesser are joined together only with Membranes.

7. This Rough Artery is covered with a double Membrane; one external, which is
very thin, proceeding from the Pleura, and firmly fast'nd with Ligaments of
Muscles. The other internal, more contracted and thicker, and continuous to the
Palate, exquisitely feeling, for the distinguishing of all Annoyances. This is
besmeared with a fat slimy Humor, to prevent drying, and to sweeten the Voice;
which Humor being wasted by sharp Catarrhs, the Voice grows hoarse, but being
dried up by extraordinary Heat, as in Fevers, becomes shrill and acute.

It has double Arteries, some from the Carotides, others from the Bronchial
Artery, which accompany all its Ramifications. It sends forth Veins to the
External Jugularies. It borrows Nerves from the Turning-back Nerves of the
Sixth Pair, chiefly dispersed through the inner Membrane, to which they
contribute a most exact Sense of Feeling. Which Lindan not considering, will
not allow it any Nerves at all.

The Rough Artery is again divided Division.
into the Bronchus and Larynx.

The Bronchus is the lower and longer Part, displayed with several Branches
into both parts of the Lungs.

The Larynx is the upper Part, of which we are to treat in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Of the Larynx and Voice.
THE Head of the Rough Artery, or the Beginning, continuous to the Mouth, is
called the Larynx, from (...), to call with a wide Throat, and is the Organ of
Speech, and framed of several Gristles and Muscles, for the forming and
expressing of Words.

I. The Figure of it is Circular, extuberant Figure.
before, and somewhat depressed behind, to give way to the Gullet in swallowing.

II. It receives Arteries from the Vessels.
Carotides, which convey the Blood, and send that which remains after
Nourishment, through the little Veins to the external Iugulars. And the animal
Spirits are brought by the Turn-again Nerves of the sixth Pair.

III. The Bulk of it varies according Its Bulk.
to the Age, Sex or Temper of the Person; and hence also the Variety of Sounds
in Voices, which in young People, and those that are of a dry Temper, is
shrill, by reason of the narrowness of the Larynx; in those of riper years, by
reason of its wideness, is deeper: Which Variety may also happen from the
length or shortness of the Larynx; also a strong or weak expulsion of the Air,
or plenty or want of it, in respect of which, the Voice is sometimes shriller
or deeper.

IV. Besides the Membranes mentioned Substance.
in the former Chapter, the Larynx is compounded of five Gristles, and thirteen
Muscles.

V. Columbus chooses rather to Gristles.
place the Gristles among the Bones, as approaching nearer to a Boney than
Gristly Substance; and which sometimes in Old Men turned to absolute Bone, and
more he affirms, that they contain a Marrowy Substance, like Bones. But he
would have much ado to make out that Marrowy Substance. Moreover, although it
turn to Bone in Old Men; yet they are not therefore to be numbered among Bones;
for they may be at first for a long time Gristles, and yet afterward turn to
be Bones; as we have sometimes observed the Gristles between the Vertebers of
the Ribs, and the Spine, have turned Boney; which, before that Alteration, no
man could have said were Bones.

VI. The first of these Gristles The Scutiformis.
is called Scutiformis, because of its Resemblance to a Buckler, being almost
foursquare like the Bucklers of the Ancients, or rather like an
Iron-Breastplate, Gibbous without; which Gibbosity, because it is more
conspicuous in men than in Women; therefore in Men it is called Adam's Apple,
because it is vulgarly believed, that part of that Fatal Apple stuck in Adam's
Throat; for a punishment of his Transgression; and that for that Reason this
Gristle grew Bunching out, and the Protuberation became hereditary to his
Posterity* But because it is distinguished in the Middle by a certain Line,
therefore some have described it as double; whereas it was never found to be
double in this World; or if ever any Body did live to see it so, it was a
Wonder, and no common Accident.

In its Angles it has Processes; above, two longer, by which it is joined to
the lower Sides of the Bone Hyoides, by the help of a Ligament; and two shorter
below, by which it adheres to the lower Muscle.

Fallopius writes, that he has met with the Thyroides Gristle Boney, not only
in decrepit People, but in such as have been but newly entering into Old Age.
Moreover, he adds, That when the Thyroides began to grow long, it hardened first
in the Sides.

VI. The Second is called Anuulary, The Annular.
because it is round in form of a Ring, and encompasses the whole Larynx.

VII. The Third and Fourth is called The Guttal.
the Guttal, because the Processes being joined together, resemble that part of
an Earthen Pitcher, out of which the Water flows when we pour it forth.

Fallopius writes, that he never found the Guttal Gristle Boney, which Riolanus
affirms he has seen.

VIII. The Fifth, Epiglottis, seated The Epiglottis.
at the Root of the Tongue, and is the Covering of the little Chink or Glottis,
lest the Meat and Drink should slip into the Aspera Arteria in swallowing;
though it be not so exactly joined, but that some Moisture may slide in between
the Junctures into the Trachea.

This is softer than the rest of the Muscles; resembling an Ivy-Leaf, or the
Tongue it self, and therefore is called Lingula.

Nicolaus Stenonis observes a certain piece of Flesh, composed of Glandulous
Berries, in the upper part of a Calves Epiglottis, from which, he says, there
are conspicuous Passages to be seen through the Gristle it self to the lower
part.

IX. These Gristles of the Larynx, Muscles.
are furnished with thirteen Muscles, for the Motion and Modulation of the
Voice; by which the Chink is either dilated or contracted.

Of these, there are Four which are Common, and Nine Peculiar; which are called
the Vocal Nerves, proceeding from the Turn-again Branches of the Sixth Pair.

The Common Nerves are they which are implanted into the Larynx; yet have not
their Original from it. The Peculiar are they which rise and end in the Larynx.
Of which first, there are four; of the latter, eleven.

X. The first Pair of Common ones, Common ones.
which is the lowermost, called Sterno Thyroides, arising from the uppermost
and internal part of the Sternum, is inserted below into the sides of the
Scuti-form'd Gristle, and while it draws down the Scutiform, it contracts the
Chink.

XI. The other Pair, which is the Hypothyroides.
uppermost, called the Hypothyroides, arising from the lower Seat of the
Hyoides-Bone, is inserted into the bottom of the Target-fashion'd, and by
raising it up, dilates the Fissure. Riolanus believes that this Pair is
particularly related to no Gristle; but that it raises up the whole Larynx.

XII. The first Pair of Proper Muscles, The Proper Muscles.
which is very small, according to the Opinion of Veslingius, and most
Anatomists, derives its Original from the Annular Gristle, and ends in the
sides of the Scutiform, or Target fashioned Gristle; and hence is called
Cricothyroides Anticum, and is thought to move the Gristle somewhat obliquely
downward. On the other side, Bartholinus, from the Insertion of the Nerves,
judges, that the foremost Pair arises from the lowest part of the Scutiform,
and ends in the Annular Gristle, and draws it gently to the Scutiform, and is
almost immovable, that so they may be joined, and so kept joined; and
therefore that this Part ought more properly to be called Thyrocricoides.

But this Opinion of Bartholine, Riolanus, according to his Custom, sharply
derides, as one that will not easily fuffer any man to dissent from himself, or
to invent, or know any thing in Anatomy, which he either saw not, or knew not
before.

XIII. The Second Pair proceeds The hinder Cricoartaenoides.
with a Fleshy Beginning behind, from the Annular, and ends with a Nervous
Substance in the lower part of the Guttal, or Artaenoides, and by the
separation of the two Artaenoides- Gristles, opens the Larynx. It is commonly
called by Anatomists, the hinder Cricoartaenoides, and by Casserius, the
Cuc^lar Pair.

XIV. The Third Pair, called the The Lateral Cricoartaenoides.
Crico-Artaenoides, arising above from the Sides of the Annular, is inserted
into the Sides of the Guttal, at the Joint, opening the Larynx, by an oblique
Separation of the Gristles.

XV. The Fourth Intrinsecal and Thyro-Artaenoides.
Broad Pair, called Thyro-artaenoides, both foremost and hindermost, arises
from the Scutiform: Or as Riolanus suspects, from the Cricoides, and ends in
the sides of the Guttal or Arsenoides, by closing which, it shuts up the Larynx
in a right Channel.

XVI. The Ninth Muscle (by others, The Ninth Muscle.
the Fifth Pair, and called Arytaenoides) arises from the hinder Line of the
Guttal, and carried on with Transverse Fibers, is inserted into the Sides os
the same, and binding the Artaenoides- Cartilage, closes up the Larynx.

XVII. The Epiglottis in Men is The Muscle of the Epiglottis.
furnished with no conspicuous Muscles, (though John Van Horn writes, that by
the Industry of the Anatomists, he found two small suspensory Muscles) neither
is it moved by any Arbitrary Motion, but by the weight of swallowed Victuals,
and drawing the Tongue backward, seems only to be depressed. In larger Animals
that chew the Cud, and continually gape, through their perpetual devouring of
Meat, and have a large Epiglottis, it is furnished with apparent Muscles; of
which some rise from the Hyoides, and being inserted into the bottom of the
Epiglottis, raise it up; others, being seated between the Tunicle, and the
Cartilage of the Epiglottis, draw it down, and so close the Larynx.

XVIII. The Larynx being formed The Kernels.
of the foresaid Parts, to the end that in the Modulation of the Voice, it may
conveniently perform its Office, wants continual moisture and smoothing; to
which purpose, there are fixed to it several little Kernels. The most
conspicuous of these are two greater, at the upper Seat of the Larynx, or the
Root of the Tongue; seated at the Sides of the Uvula or Cover of the Larynx,
upon each side one, called by the Latins, Tonsillae, and vulgarly, the The
Tonsillae.
Almonds, though they nothing resemble the Form of Almonds, covered with the
common Tunicle of the Mouth, and furnished with small Veins and Arteries,
arising from the Carotides and Jugulars. These are loose and spungy, and full
of little Hollownesses; one large and oval, opens into the Mouth, which in Cows
and Oxen, easily admits the Top of the Little Finger, and several small ones,
which receive the Spittle, and Moisture of the Brain, and with that continually
moisten and make slippery the Larynx, the Jaws, the Tongue, and the Gullet; and
so me think, that the Spittle is there made out of the Humors that fall from
the Brain.

Fallopius well observes, that sometimes the opening of the large Hollowness,
or Concavity, resembles a little Ulcer; and sometimes is handled for such a
thing by unskilful Surgeons, especially when it gapes overmuch, by reason of
the copious falling of the Humors into the Kernel. Now how far it gapes
sometimes, I saw in a certain Country-woman, who, in the Year 1652. being
hungry, had eaten boiled Prunes, and by reason of her hasty swallowing, I know
not by what Accident, one of the Stones entered into the Opening of the large
Concavity. Presently the Kernel swelled, and by its Compressure, shut up the
Passage of Meat and Drink, in such a manner, that she could swallow neither
Meat nor Drink, so that she was forced to seek my Advice. Upon my keeping down
her Tongue, I saw the Kernel very much swelled in the Right Side, but not
inflamed, and the Opening of it gaping at a more than usual rate; but I could
not see the Stone. Presently I gave the Woman to sup a little Decoction of
Barley mixed with Syrup of Dialthea, and put my Hand withoutside upon the Region
of the swelled Kernel, and squeezed it very hard, bidding the Woman at the same
time to endeavor with all her force to swallow the Liquor in her Mouth. The
first time the Liquor burst forth at her Nostrils; but the second time, by
reason of my hard squeezing with my Thumb, and by drawing back the Tongue
toward the hinder parts, it came to pass that the Stone leapt out of the
Kernel, into her Mouth, and then the Woman could presently swallow both Meat
and Drink.

In May 1664. another Prune-stone slipped into the same Kernel, and I cured again
the same way. In December 1661. I saw an Accident of the same nature, that
happened to a Citizen of Utrecht, into whose Opening of the said Concavity,
there fell a piece of hard Cheese, and immediately stopped his swallowing of
any Victuals. But his Cure was not so sudden as the former, but gave us the
Trouble of some Days; so that we were forced to draw out the piece of Cheese
with a crooked pair of Tongues, made for that purpose.

Wharton, contrary to all Reason, believes Wharton his Error.
these Kernels, which are hardly endu'd with any remarkable Sense of Feeling,
to be the true and primary Organs of Taste. Moreover, he believes, that the
Spittle-Matter flows from the Brain to those Kernels through the Nerves; as if
such a copious Quantity of thick and viscous matter could flow through the
narrow, and almost invisible Pores of the Nerves. The Refutation of which, see,
l. 1. c. 16. and, lib 8. c. 1.

Below the said Tonsils, are two other little Kernels, adjoining to the lower
Region of the Larynx, of each side one, near the sides of some of the first
Rings of the Rough Artery. These, because they are furnished with several
little Arteries and Veins, have a more Bloodlike and solid Substance, than the
other Kernels; and are not so easily cut with the Pen-knise. What their Use is,
is much questioned: Some believe 'em to be framed on purpose to moisten the
Larynx on the outside with a slimy and fat Moisture, and to render the Gristles
more fit for Motion. But in regard there is little need of this Use, for that
the Larynx does not require this Humectation on the outside, I rather think it
fit to be inquired, Whether some Spittle-Vessels do not proceed from them?

XX. Next to these, stand the Parotides.
Parotides, the Jugular and Maxillar Kernels, seated under the Tongue: Of all
which, see l. 3. c. 24.

And thus we have described the Organs that form the Voice.

XXI. Now the Voice is the articulate The Voice.
Sound of a Man, produced by the Tongue, through the Repercussion of the Air
breathed in, to express the Conceptions of the Mind.

XXII. Scaliger, having a regard to A Digression.
this End, not impertinently alleges out of Aristotle, That Reason is the Hand
of the Intellect, as the Speech of Reason, and the Hand of Speech. For the Hand
executes Commands, Commands obey Reason, and Reason is the Power of the
Intellect. Also out of Cicero, That Nature has armed Man with three
Assistances; Wit for the Invention of Necessaries; Speech, for Succor; and
Hands, to bring those things to perfection which the Wit has found out; or we
have learned by Speech from others. For by the means of the Voice and Speech,
we beg of others what we want, and learn what we know not. Moreover, by the
same means, we command what we would have done, and declare what we desire to
communicate.

Therefore not every Sound, as, Coughing, or Hauking, etc. is a Voice; but only
that which is made in the Tongue, and directed by the Mind, by the means of the
Muscles of the Tongue. Hence most Brutes, though they have the Organs of
Speech, as a Larynx with Muscles, Lungs, etc. yet they do not send forth an
Articulate Sound; because the Air breathing outward, is not artificially
directed, or articulated through the said Organs, by the Rational Soul, which
they want; so that they either Low, or Neigh, or bark, or send forth some other
inarticulate Sound, by the Instinct of Nature only. Nevertheless by Art,
Sparrows, Mag-pies, Ravens, and some other Birds, are taught to speak and Sing
articulately.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Oesophagus, or Gullet. See Table 11.
THE Oesophagus or Gullet, by the Greeks, (...) and (...), by the Latins, Gula;
by the Arabians called Meri; is a round Channel, or Pipe, through which the
Nourishment descends from the Mouth to the Stomach.

I. Taking its Beginning from the Its Situation.
Iaws, under the Rough Artery, it first descends downright; thence turning a
little to the Right, to the Fifth Verteber of the Thorax, then winds again to
the Left, toward the Ninth Verteber, and at length passing the Diaphragma at
the Eleventh, it grows continuous to the upper Orifice of the Stomach, and
holds it, as it were, in a hanging posture.

II. It is annexed to the Iaws and Its Connection.
the Larynx by the Tunicle of the Mouth, continuous to it self and the Stomach,
but to the Rough Artery, the Vertebrae's, and other adjoining Parts, it is
joined by Membranes arising from the Ligaments of the Back.

III. It receives Arteries from the Its Vessels.
Carotides, and the descending Trunk of the Aorta; many times also from the
Intercostals and the Bronchial Artery, found out by Frederic Ruysch. Sometimes
also it sends forth some few Veins to the Vein that has no Pair, and sometimes
to the Jugulars. And it has some little small Nerves from the Branches of the
Sixth Pair.

VII. It consists of a Fleshy and Its Substance.
Membranous Substance, that it may be commodiously extended, and full again,
and it is formed of five Tunicles. The first of these is outermost; it is said
to be also common to the Stomach: But there is a manifest Difference, when the
Membrane of the Gullet rises from the Pleura, but that of the Stomach from the
Peritonaeum. The second, which is the middlemost, and proper to it, is very
thick, soft, and fleshy, like a Muscle boar'd through, interwoven with round
and transverse Fibers, obliquely meeting one another, as Opposites, and cutting
each other like a St. Andrew's Cross. The Third, which is the innermost, and
proper to it also, is continuous to the Membrane surrounding the Mouth and
Jaws, thin, hard and nervous. Which some affirm to be sprinkled with straight
and long, others with transverse and circular Fibers; but indeed they are so
small and tender, that it is not an easy thing to make any Judgment concerning
them.

V. For the moistning of the Gullet, Kernels.
several Kernels are annexed to it. That is to say above, next the sides of the
Tongue and Larynx, two Tonsils, affording Moisture to smooth the inward
Concavity; of which, in the foregoing Chapter.

On the outside, the two inferior Glandules are said to moisten it, seated in
the hinder part of the Gullet, near the first Vertebra of the Thorax (in the
same place where the Gullet, giving way to the Trunk of the Aorta, turns a
little to the Right;) and many times lie so concealed between the Gullet and
the Oesophagus, that they are not to be found, but by diligent Search; and yet
about the bigness of a French Bean, and resembling the shape of a Kidney; and
adhering with the unequal part to the Oesophagus, so that in their place, they
seem like a Kidney divided in the middle. However, they happen sometimes to be
less, and to exceed the number of Two; and then they vary also in their Shapes,
being in number sometimes 3, 4, and 5. and they have also their Vessels,
diminutive Arteries from the Neighboring Arteries, and Diminutive Veins, which
they send forth to the next Veins and Lymphatic Vessels, conveying Lympha to
the Lymphatic and Pectoral Channel.

Wharton also asserts, that they receive remarkable Nerves from the sixth
Conjugation, as also from the twelfth Pair of the Vertebrae. But in regard they
are neither sensible of feeling, nor are moved, I think it may be questioned,
whether they have any remarkable and conspicuous Nerves or no? Or whether they
receive any at all, or at least only such as are hardly visible? Perhaps the
Lymphatic Vessels, which proceed from 'em, deceived Wharton, who took those for
Nerves.

Some there are who believe, that these Kernels not only moisten the Gullet
without, but also withinside, to facilitate the swallowing of Nourishment. But
in regard that outward Irrigation is no way necessary, and for that there is no
Passage extended from the Kernels toward the outward Concavity of the Gullet,
it is apparent, that that can be none of their Use; but that they rather
collect the Lymphatic Liquor, or suck it from the neighboring Parts, and mix
it with the Chylus, through the Lymphatic Channels.

These Kernels sometimes swell to that degree, by reason of the Afflux of
Humors, that they compress and streighten the Gullet overmuch, and so obstruct
the Passage of the Nourishment, and starve the Patient to Death; of which we
have met with three or four Examples in our Practice.

VI. The Gullet is moved with three Pair of Muscles, and a peculiar Sphincter.

The first Pair, which is called Cephalopharingae^m, dismissed from the
Confines of the Head and Neck, is expanded with a large Fold of Fibers into the
Tunicle of the Gullet, and by raising it upward, streightens the Jaws in
swallowing.

The second Pair, called Sphaenophari^, arising from the Cavity of the Inner
Wing of the Wedge-like Bone, and being obliquely extended into the Sides of the
Palate and Gullet, dilates the Gullet. To this, there are some who add another
Pair, inserted into the Lateral and Hinder Part of the Jaws and Gullet, by
drawing which Part downward, they dilate the Cavity of the Jaws and Gullet.

The third Pair, called Stylopharingaeum, arising from an Appendix of the
Pencil-fashion'd Bone, and reaching the Sides of the Gullet, dilates it with
the first Pair.

The Sphincter of the Gullet, called also the Oesophag^an-Muscle, springing
from both Gristles of the Wedge-like Bone, encompasses the Gullet like a
Sphincter, and by streightning it, thrusts the Meat downward.

VII. The Use of the Gullet, is to swallow Its Us^.
the Meat taken in at the Mouth, which is performed by the Fibers of the
Gullet, and chiefly by the Oesophagus. Galen numbers this among the Natural
Actions; but in regard that Swallowing is an Arbitrary Action, and performed by
the Instruments serving to voluntary Motion, that is to say, the Muscles, it
seems rather to be reckoned among the Animal Motions. And though it serve to a
Natural Use or Action, which is Nourishment; however, it is no less an Animal
Action than Respiration; which is assistant to Nourishment, yet is an Animal
Action.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Neck.
THE Uppermost Appendix of the Middle Venture is the Neck, called Collum, a
Colendo, to be worshipped; because it usually is most adorned. Which Etymology
no way pleases Us, in regard the Neck was long before the Use of Jewels, and
other Ornaments; and therefore we rather derive it from Collis, as rising like
a Hill above the Shoulders.

This Neck, do we, as most Anatomists do, reckon among the Parts of the Breast;
as well by reason of the Vertebrae's with the rest of the Vertebrae's of the
Back, as by reason of their common Use, in regard they afford a common Passage
with the rest to the Marrow of the Brain: Though Spigelius thinks that Office
rather ought to be attributed to the Head.

Upon this Part the Head is set, as upon a more eminent Hill, that from thence,
as from a Watchtower, it may take a Prospect every way of what is to be
desired, what avoided, and be moved about with an easy Motion.

I. The hinder Part of it, though Cervix*
it be generally comprehended under the Name of Collum, yet is more
particularly called Cervix.

The Neck consists of the common Coverings of the whole Body; as also of
Arteries, Veins, Nerves, seven Vertebrae's, and eight Muscles; of which more
hereafter.

II. The hinder Part of the Neck Epomis.
descending, is properly called (...), by Aristotle, (...), as being seated
above the Shoulders.

III. Underneath this, stand the Shoulders.
Shoulders; by the Greeks called (...); being those Parts which are seated at
the Sides of the Neck, which give a beginning to the whole Arm, and are
constituted by that Eminency which the Head of the Arm makes, when it is joined
to the broad Bone of the Scapula.

IV. The contrary Part to this is Axilla or Arm-pit^.
hollow, seated under the Joint of the Arm, by the Greeks called (...), or
(...); by the Latins, Axilla; and for shortness sake, Ala.

V. Hippocrates makes a Judgment of Judgment of the Strength of a man's Body.
the strength of a Man, by the Thickness or Slenderness of his Neck; and says,
that a slender Neck betokens Imbecility, and a thick Neck, Strength: Not
without Reason, in regard that such as are the Vertebrae's of the Neck, such
are generally the Vertebrae's of the Breast, the Loins, and the Os Sacrum; nay,
such indeed are all the rest of the Bones, and other Parts answering the
Bigness of the Bones, as the Arteries, Nerves, Veins, Ligaments, etc. If
therefore the Neck be slender and weak, all the other Parts of the whole Body
answerable to it, of necessity must be proportionably such; but if thick and
strong, the rest of the corresponding Parts of the Body must be proportionably
large and strong, unless some Monstrosity of the Neck occasion an Exception to
the General Rule.

The End of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF ANATOMY. TREATING Of the UPPER BELLY, or HEAD.
CHAP. I. Of the Head in General.
ORder and Method now requires that we should survey the Upper Region of the
Body, and enter the Royal Palace of Minerva, and that Superior Mansion of Hers,
garrisoned with all her Lifeguard, where is the Seat of that most Noble Bowel,
to which the Supreme Architect subjected the Government of the whole Body.

This uppermost Region, or uppermost Venture, is the Head, wherein is contained
the Chief Organ of the most Noble Functions of the Soul.

I. It is called Caput, a capiendo, Its denomination.
from containing; either because it contains the Brain, which is the most Noble
Bowel; or else because the Senses and Animal Actions derive their Beginning
from it. By the Greeks it is called (...), as much as to say, (...), or (...),
a Shell; because perhaps the Skull encloses the Noble Bowel like a Shell;
whence it is called by the French, La Test. Its Situation.


II. It is seated in the uppermost and most eminent Part of the Body; which the
Platonics think was therefore done, because there was a necessity; and no more
than what was just, that the Understanding, which is the Queen of all the
Faculties, should be uppermost exalted. But the Galenics think it therefore
done, that from thence, as from a Watchtower, all things to be desired or
avoided, might be discovered by the Sight, Smell and Hearing.

III. The Figure of it is Sphaerical, Its Shape and Bigness.
somewhat flat on both sides; and in Man above all other Creatures remarkable
for its Bigness, to the end, the Brain, which is the most Noble Bowel of all,
may the more safely abide in it, being encompassed, besides other Coverings,
with a Boney Scalp, on every side, which sustains and preserves the Shape and
Figure of the whole Head. Concerning which, see more, L. 9. c. 3.

Spigelius finds out the convenient Proportion of the Shape and Bigness by the
means of four Lines. To the end the Parts of the Head, says he, may be
proportionable one to the other, it requires four equal Lines. The First is,
that which we shall call the Equal Line of the Head, and reaches from the lower
part of the Chin to the upper part of the Forehead. The next is that which we
call the Line of the hinder part of the Head; and reaches from the top of the
Head to the first Vertebra of the Neck. The Fourth reaches from one Ear (in
which place are the Mamillary Processes) extending to the highermost Part of
the Forepart of the Head. Now if these four Lines are equal one to another, it
may be called a Proportionable Head; but if they decline to a certain
Inequality, they may be said to want so much of a certain, just and natural
Constitution, as they approach or recede from the forementioned Proportion: For
if the Face-Line prove the longest, it may be called a Long-Head; if shorter, a
Short-Head. If the Forehead-Line be longer than the rest, it shall be called a
Broad-Head; if the Line of the hinder Part of the Head be longer than the rest,
then it shall be called a Coppid-Head: If all the Lines are equal, then Round
and Natural; if all unequal, or some or most, then will the Head be of that
Form which Galen and Hippocrates call (...), or like a Town-Top.

IV. The Head is divided into the The Division.
Hairy Part, and the Smooth Part. The one is called the Hairy Scalp, the other,
the Face.

The Hairy Scalp is divided into the Forepart, the Hinder-part, and the
Temples: The Face, into the Forehead, and the Parts beneath it; as, the Nose,
the Cheeks, etc. which are usually comprehended under the Name of the Face.

The Region of the Forehead extends it self from the Top of the Nose to the
Hair. Hence the Forepart of the Head proceeds to the Coronal Suture: Between
which and the Lambdoidal Suture, is comprehended the Bregma, or Top of the
Head; to which adjoyn the Lateral Parts, or Temples, circumscribed by the Bones
of the Temples between the Ears and the Eyes. The Hinder-part, from the
beginning of the Lambdoidal Suture to the first Vertebra of the Neck, is called
the Hinder-Part of the Head.

CHAP. II. Of the Hair and its Generation.
ACcording to the common Order, we shall first enquire into the Hairy Part of
the Head, and discover many things concerning it, which have hitherto been
concealed.

In this Part, some are the Extreme Parts, wrapped about the most Noble Bowel,
both for Ornament and Safety: others internal.

I. Among the External Parts, in the The Desinition.
first place, we meet with the Hair; which are small, long, cold, dry and
flexible Bodies, growing out of the Skin; I say, out of the Skin, because they
are rarely seen to break out from any other Part; though they have been
observed sometimes to grow in the Heart, as we have already related, l. 2. c.
6. And not many Years since, we saw in a Woman such a hideous Quantity of Hair
grow from a stinking nasty Ulcer in her Thigh, that it was a great hinderance
to us in the Cure, and forced us to eat away the spungy, putrid, proud Flesh of
the Inside of the Wound, that so fertilly produced those Hairs.

II. They are called Pili, from the The (...).
Greek Word (...), which signifies any thing that is round and oblong.

But Pili is the general Name for Hair, and signifies any sort of Hair in
whatever Part of the Body it breaks forth. But besides the general Name, there
is also a particular Name for the Hair of the Head, by the Latins called
Capilli; by the Greeks, (...); from (...), to shave; which the Ancients called
(...), or Hairs in the Head. Also in both Sexes they are called Crines; and
more especially in Men, (...), or Caesaries, from frequent cutting; in Women,
(...), from (...), to adorn; by the Latins, Coma, from the extraordinary Care
that is taken of it.

Nature has produced a fruitful Crop of this Hair, not only in the upper part
of the Head, but more especially in Men, about the Mouth and the adjoining
Parts, to preserve the more Noble Bowel from the Vehemence of Cold, and the
Extremity of Heat; and moreover, to the end that Divine Creature Man might show
more Graceful and Majestic, by means of this Ornament, denied to other
Creatures: For,

Turpe Pecus mutilum, turpis sine Gramine Campus;
Et sine Fronde Frutex, and sine Crine Caput.
III. Here some may Query, Since Why Women have no Beards.
Hair was given for an Ornament to the Face of Men, why Men are more graced
with the Ornament of Beards than Women? This comes to pass, because that the
first Architect, as he designed a Distinction between their Instruments of
Generation, so was he pleased to distinguish between their Ornaments; and
therefore he allotted to Man a Beard about his Mouth, which in Women would have
been deformed and unhandsom: And to the end there might be no necessity to
inspect the Genitals of either Sex, to find the Distinction, which would have
been unseemly and shameful: And therefore Boys, before they arrive at Man's
estate, are destitute of Beards, till they are able to perform the Act of
Manhood, which is Generation. Any other Natural Reason can never be given; for
that in both Sexes, the Parts about the Mouth are equally formed, and yet in
those Parts the Mark of Distinction is placed as an Ornament, at that very time
when there is a necessity for that Distinction; that is, at the time when the
Procreative Faculty begins to move, when it is requisite that Boys should be
distinguished from Maids by some external Mark obvious to the Sight.

IV. The Hair breaks through the The Place where they break forth*
Pores of the Skin, yet not through all the Pores, but only such as are endis'd
with a certain Aptitude to suffer that Eruption: Which Aptitude not being in
the Palm of the Hand, nor in the Soles of the Feet, nor in Scars, therefore no
Hairs grow there.

V. They are fixed in the Skin with Their Roots.
certain little Roots; and in regard it was ordained, that they should be most
plentiful in that same part of the Head which is called the Hairy part,
therefore is the Skin much thicker there than in other Parts of the Body, from
whence they give forth less numerous and smaller.

VI. The Hair is divided into The Division.
Hair brought forth with the Body, and growing afterward. The Hair with which
we are born, is the Hair of the Head, the Eyelids, and Eyebrows. The other
Hair, is that which afterward appears upon the Face, Privities, Breast, under
the Armpits, in the Nostrils, Ears, Arse-hole, Thighs, Legs, and other Parts
of the Body.

VII. The Hair is also a Heterogeneous They are Heterogeneous Bodies.
Body, though it seems Homogeneous, as appears from hence, that they live and
are nourished: For there is no Life in any Body which is homogeneous and
simple; and the Concoction and Preparation of Nourishment, Separation of useful
from unuseful, as also Apposition and Assimilation, are necessarily performed
by the diversity of the smaller Particles. And therefore though Aquapendens,
and several others affirm this Part to be a Similar Part, yet that is only to
be understood in the Gross; not that they are really Homogeneous and Similar,
but seem to be so to the Sight.

VIII. The Form of the Hair is The Form.
twofold; the one Essential, and the other Accidental. The Essential Part is
that which gives the Hair its Being and Life, which is its Soul. And because
this Form is to us unknown, and the Presence of it only perceptible to the
Mind, nor can well be expressed in Words. We, with other Physicians (who take
their Temper from whence all their Action proceeds, for the Form of the Parts)
will likewise agree, That their Essential Form is their cold and dry Temper.
The Accidental Form of the Hairs, is their Figures and Shape, whatever it be,
long, crooked, straight, curled, round, square, etc. For the Hairs at first
Sight, seem solid, and exactly round; yet upon a more narrow Inspection, you
shall observe other things. Spigelius says they are square, and Riolanus, that
they are hollow. We also affirm, that the Hairs are porous, and that some are
square, others triangular, and other round. For all these Figures manifestly
appear, if the Hairs being cut small and short, and well viewed with a
Microscope; but the Pores are chiefly extended according to their Length, as
you may observe much better in the Bristles of a Hog.

IX. The Efficient Cause of Hair, The Efficient Cause.
is the same which perfects the Generation of other Bodies; that is, a
convenient Heat acting upon apt Matter, and disposing it to an Animation proper
for Hair. And though in dead Bodies, in which the Hair will grow for some time,
there seems no Heat to remain; yet there is such a Heat, and so much, as is
sufficient to promote the Generation of Hair, there being no extraordinary Heat
required for that work. Hence the Heat forms, animates and pushes forth Hair
out of fit Matter; which being thrust forth by the ambient Cold, become much
drier and harder. And hence those Hairs that come into the World with us,
because they have remained long in a moist place, in Newborn Infants, are very
soft and moist; but the Child being born, they are soon dried by the Air.

X. Concerning the first Original The first Original.
of Hair, there is some Dispute among the Philosophers; while some believe 'em
formed in the first Delineation of the Parts, out of the Seed; others will not
have 'em to proceed originally from the Seed. The former produce several
Arguments to confirm their Opinion, and do not believe there can be any
Question made, but that the Hair which comes into the World with us, is formed
out of the Terrestrial Part of the Seed, in regard that the Matter of Hair is
chiefly Analogous to the Seed; and hence the Substance of the Hair born into
the World, as also the Form and Color of it, resembles the Substance, Form and
Color of both Parents; and for that Men abounding with Seed, are more hairy,
whereas either through much Use of Venery, or defect of Seed, they fall off, as
in old Age. As to the Hairs that grow after the Birth, they say, that it grows
from the same Seminal Matter sticking in the Parts which are to be covered, and
not yet stirred up into Act; but afterward, in its own due time, swelling
through Heat.

The latter sort, much more to the purpose, maintain, That the Hair is not
formed in the first Formation, out of the Seed with the rest of the Parts; but
afterward, when the Parts are already delineated, and somewhat grown, that in
some of those Parts more proper, and more fit for this purpose, that same
peculiar Matter fit for the generation of Hair, increases by the Nourishment
which is brought, and at length out of that Matter agitated by the Heat, the
Hair is formed and stirred up, being endu'd with a particular Soul and Life
distinct from the rest of the Parts, because they are not stirred up, and
endu'd with Life with the rest of the Parts out of the same Seed; but apart,
out of other Matter afterward generated. Now that they live by virtue of
another peculiar Vegetable Soul, that has no Communion with the other animated
Parts of the Body, is apparent from hence; for that they do live only while a
man is alive, but after his Decease, are nourished and increased, after the
same manner as Polypody-Moss, etc. grow upon old Trees, both before and after
the Tree dies; because they have each a proper Soul, distinct from the Form and
Soul of the Tree, out of which, and wherein they grow.

XI. There is great Diversity of The Diversity.
Hair, which though it be to be observed in all the Hairs of the Body, yet is
chiefly observable in the Hairs of the Head for they differ, First, in Plenty.

Hence some have very thin and small Heads of Hair; others are very hairy upon
their Heads from their Births, or else after they are born; and that by reason
of the great store or scarcity of the Matter convenient, which produces the
Hair. But as for those who afterward become bald, that befalls 'em not only
from the small Quantity, but from the Defect; as in Leprous Persons, or the
unaptness of the Matter, or the closeness of the Pores out of which they grow.
Wonderful was the vast* Quantity of Absolon's Hair, of whom the Scripture says,
That when he shaved his Head, which was but once a year, the Hair of his Head
which he cut off, weighed two hundred Shekels; every She* kel, according to the
public weight of the Jews, weighing an Ounce.

Secondly, In Thickness. Hence some Heads of Hair are thicker, others thinner,
by reason of the various bigness of the Pores through which they pass, or the
Redundancy or Plenty of Matter.

Thirdly, In Length. For some Hair grows shorter, other Hair grows longer; and
generally Women's Hair grows longer than Men's, by reason of the Redundancy of
Matter, and the Wideness and Narrowness of the Pores: For if the Pores are
over-wide, the Hair falls off, before it grows to any Length; but if
straighter, then the Roots stick faster, and plenty of Matter supplying their
Nourishment, they grow in Length.

4ly. In their external Quality. Hence some Hair is harder, some softer; some
curls, some hangs lank, and sometimes dry or moist; partly from the various
Disposition of the Pores through which they pass, either in streightness, or
winding tortuosity, Hence also it is, that sometimes the Hair shoots forth in
Bushes, and without Order; as upon the Head, Privities and Beard; in other
places orderly, and as it were in a perfect Row, as in the Eyelids.

5ly. In Color. Hence some are redhair'd, others black, others white, others
gray, and others of a midling Color between both.

XII. This Variety of Colors proceeds The reason of the Colors.
from the Variety of Humors that are mixed with the Juice with which the Hair
is nourished; with which, if Phlegm be mixed, the Hair becomes white; and
therefore Flegmatic People, who are of a cold Temperament from their Births,
are generally whitehair'd. If Smoaky Vapors, either through overmuch Heat, and
burnt with too much Concoction, are mixed therewith, then the Hair becomes
black. Hence those that are of a hot Constitution, and concoct their Meat well,
and therefore breed those fuliginous Vapors in great abundance, are generally
blackhaird; if yellow Choler be mixed therewith, then they become red-hair'd:
If Phlegm abounds in one part of the Skin, Fuliginous Vapors, or Choler in
another, the Hair will be of several Colors; in one place white, in another
black or yellow: And those Colors, proceeding from the same Humors, settled in
the Skin, then also many times, as in Brutes, the same Colors are imprinted in
the Skin; whence Aristotle, not considering those Humors settled in the Skin,
and giving it a Color, affirmed, That the Skin conduced to the coloring of
the Hairs, and that they were of the same Color with the Skin. Thus you shall
see some gray in one part of the Head, in another black-hair'd; and in Dogs and
Horses of several Colors, we see the same Colors, as well in the Skin, as in
the Hair; because the same Colors were imprinted in the Skins of those
Creatures, at their first coming into the World; which Colors remain as long
as the same Humors are settled in the Skin; with which, if afterward other
Colors happen to mix, then the Color changes. Thus in Horses and Dogs of
several Colors, when they grow old, by reason of the Increase of Phlegm, and
its more copious mixture, the Hairs grow white, and the Spots that were black
before, grow gray. Hence also it is apparent, why the Egyptians, Arabians,
Indians, Spaniards and Italians are generally black-hair'd; because they
inhabit hot Countries, and are used to strong Wines, and other hot Diets; by
which Heat a greater Quantity of burning Vapors are generated; which being
mixed with the Alimentary Juice of the Hair, imprint that Color into it, which
is thence also given to the Hair. Whereas the English, Hollanders, Scotch,
Danes, and other Northern Countries, are generally bright-hair'd; because they
inhabit colder Countries; whence there is great store of Phlegm generated in
their Bodies, which gives a whitish Tincture to the alimentary Juice of the
Hair; and thence it is that there are few People who are truly black-hair'd;
but several, who, till they come to be middle-ag'd, are between a White and a
Black. Add to this, that in those Countries, the greatest part sooner grow
Gray; whereas in hotter Countries the People are not Gray so soon.

Now, that this is the true Cause of the variety of Colors, and change of the
Colors of the Hair, is apparent from hence, for that the Hair does not always
keep the same Color which it was of in the Infancy of the Person; but changes
according as the Temper of the Person changes, or as other Humors are generated
in the Body. Thus Marcellus Donatus tells us a Story, of one that in the
Declination of his years, at what time he was quite gray, by the mixture of
great store of Choler abounding in his Body, with his Blood, not only his Skin
contracted a Gold-Colour, but that also all his gray Hairs lost their Greyness,
and became of a Yellowish Color inclining to Green.

But hence I would not have it concluded, that the Hair is generated out of
these Flegmatic, Sanguine, Choleric or Adust Humors, or that they are nourished
by them, as a proper Nourishment: For they are generated, and receive their
Nourishment from a Specific Juice, or Humor, prepared after a special manner;
which they take from the Part wherein they are settled, which prepares that
Humor out of the Blood, or some other Humor flowing to it. But this is that
which I mean, That the Color of the Hair proceeds from the mixture of this or
that Humor with the nourishing Juice. Hence it is that Hippocrates has left it
for a Maxim, That whatever Moisture the Skin has attracted, whether white, red,
or black, the Hair is always of the same Color. In this Sense Alexander
Aphrodisaeus writes, that sometimes the Hair will be almost of a Golden Color,
if yellow Color happens to be mixed with Phlegm; that is, when those two Humors
are mixed together with the Alimentary Juice of the Hair. Thus as a Man begins
to incline toward old Age, the Hair becomes more and more gray and white, not
from the defect of Alimentary Matter, but because of the colder Constitution,
greater store of Phlegm is generated in the Body, and mixed with that Juice
wherewith the Hair is nourished, and causes it to turn white.

XIII. Hence it is manifest, why the Why the Hair of the Head first grows gray.
Hair of the Head sooner grows gray than upon the Privities, under the Arms, or
upon the Thighs, etc. Because that in no Part of the Body, there is so much
Phlegm generated as in the Head; which being infused into its Skin, cannot choose
but settle more abundantly in the Alimentary Juice of the Hair, in aged People,
than in young Folks, who less concoct and dissipate more the crude Humor. From
which Phlegm more closely mixed, the white Color is given to the Matter, and by
that to the Hair. But in the other Parts, as in the Privities, Armpits, etc.
which are hotter, the Phlegm happens to fix later, and for that reason the Hairs
become later gray in those Parts.

XIV. The Galenists, from the Signs of the Temper of the Body.
Color of the Hair, make several Judgments of the Tempers not only of the
Skin, but of the whole Body. Thus, a White color indicate a Flegmatic; a Red,
a Choleric; a mixed Color den^tes a midling Temper. Nay, sometimes occult
Diseases also, and the Conditions of the Mind are discovered by the Color and
Constitution of the Hair. Thus the Disease and Cure of the Leprosy, which is
described in the Old Testament, was chiefly disclosed by the Color of the
Hair. Long, slender, and straight Hair denotes a mild and courteous
Disposition; curled Hair an inconstant and testy Disposition, and Quickness and
Cheerfulness in undertaking of Business: Soft Hair berokens Pusilanimity; harsh
Hair, especially inclining to Black, Resolution of Mind, and Strength of Body.

-- Durae per brachia Setae Promittunt atrocem Animunt. After all these things,
that there may be nothing wanting in reference to the Discourse of Hair, let us
enquire what is the Matter out of which Hair is generated, seeing that we have
already showed, that it is not generated out of the Seed at the first Formation
of the Birth.

XV. This Matter then is a certain The Materials of Hair.
thick, terrestrial, viscid Juice, bred out of the Blood, or some other Humor,
and prepared after a Specific manner. That the Matter is thick and terrestrial,
appears from hence; that is to say, from the hardness, the viscousness, from
the firmness and flexibleness of the Hair.

XVI. Out of this Matter, or out The manner of its Generation.
of this Juice, in the Parts adapted for the generation and fixing of the Hair,
is the Hair generated, animated and shot forth by the agitated Heat, and
afterward nourished after the same manner. For this Juice is attracted by the
Roots of the Body, and carried through the Pores to the Extremities, and so
nourishes the Hair, and passes into its Substance, as we may observe in the
Nourishment of Plants.

This Juice, I say, is concocted and prepared in certain Parts, out of which
the Hair shoots, and that at what time those Parts are become fit for the
Preparation of this sort of Matter; which Aptitude, when some Parts obtain
sooner, others later, hence it comes to pass, that the Hair grows sooner in
some Parts; as upon the Head, Eyelids, and Eyebrows; in others, later; as upon
the Chin, the Privities, the Breast, the Armpits, etc.

XVII. Riolanus's Judgment is other wise concerning this Matter; who thinks
Whether the Kernels afford Matter for the Hair.
this Juice is not prepared in the Parts which are to be covered, but endeavors
to prove, that the Matter of the Hair is afforded only from the Kernels.
Besides the Aptitude of the Skin, says he, there is required a certain
Glandulous Substance, as well to moisten the Skin, and to afford Matter for the
Generation and Nourishment of the Hair; wherefore where the Parts are slimy and
moist, there are also Kernels; for proof of which, we find, that where there
are Kernels, there is also Hair. The Hair therefore taking this Opportunity
from the Kernels, grows and increases, collecting that which abounds and ^lows
into the Extremities; but where the Body is dry, and no Glandules are, there
grows no Hair Moreover, there are Kernels on both sides the Ears, near the
Iugular Veins of the Neck, and Hair also in the same Place. Also under the
Armpits on both sides, there are Kernels and Hair: But the Brain is bigger
than all the rest of the Glandules, and therefore there is more Hair upon the
Head.

But though this be a specious Argument of Riolanus, as propounded according to
the Opinion of Hippocrates, yet it rests upon no solid Foundation. Rather the
contrary will follow, should we thus argue; Where there are no Glandules, there
is no Hair; which that it is false, many Proofs declare. For there are no
manifest Glandules under the Skin of the Legs, which are nevertheless very
hairy in most Men. Moreover, in Men they abound upon the Chin and Lips, where
there are no Kernels of any moment to be found. And therefore Riolanus vainly
endeavors, to force his Matter from remote Kernels near the Ears, and others
under the Tongue, to create Hair upon the Lips and Chin. Moreover, Hair has
been observed to grow in the Heart, where never any Glandules were yet known to
be. It has also been found that Hair has grown upon dried Carcasses; for the
Generation of which, the dried up Kernels can afford no Matter most certainly.
Moreover, if the Kernels afforded that slimy Matter for Hair, and Riolanus's
Rule were true, Where there are Kernels, there is also Hair; why does not Hair
grow in the same Parts of Women, seeing they have as many Kernels as Men? Why
have they no hair upon their Chins and Lips, like Men? Why are not their
Breasts hairy also like Men's; seeing their Breasts are full of such large
Kernels, so that by that Reason they ought to have the most Hair in those
Places? In the last place, Riolanus does very ill to number the Brain among the
Glandules; as we shall show in the Fifth Chapter following.

XVIII. But Galen, and with him, (...) (...) Matter of Hair be a^ Excrement.
many other Physicians and Philosophers dissent from our Opinion first
propounded, and the Doctrine of Riolanus, who believe, and teach, That the
Matter out of which Hair grows, and is generated, is no peculiar Juice, to that
end specifically prepared in the Parts to be covered, or supplied from the
Glandules, as Riolanus asserts, but that it is an Excrement of the third
Concoction, moist, fuliginous, thick, and terrestrial, raised from the Fat
which lies under the Skin, or from some slimy and viscous Humor, that lies in
like manner under the Skin, and sticks to it; which being applied to the Roots
of the Hair, shoots forth by degrees the preceding Particles, and causes 'em to
grow long. From which Opinion of his, they thus conclude, That no Nutritive
Matter passes through the Hair it self to its Extremities; but that their
Growth is caused by the said Apposition to the Roots; which is the Reason that
they do not grow all of an equal dimension Secondly, That the Hair is not to be
numbered among the Parts of the Body, partly, because it is not nourished with
alimentary Juice, but by fuliginous Vapors: partly, because they have not a
Soul and Life common to the rest of the Parts. And hence the Hair being cut, or
pulled up by the Roots, a man is not deemed to be deprived of any Part of his
Body; and for that they live after a Man is dead, and deprived of his Soul, or
at least for some time.

XIX. But this Opinion is opposed by Objections.
others, with many strong Arguments.

1. If the Hair were generated out of any such fuliginous Vapor, then in sane
Bodies, full of good and wholesome Humors, where there is least of this sort of
Excrement, there would little Hair grow; in Bodies full of peccant Humors, a
great deal of Hair. Whereas Experience teaches us, that the Hair grows best in
soundest Bodies, and sullest of good Juice; but that in Bodies full of peccant
Humors, it grows very thinly, and falls off; which causes that Disease called
Alopecia, or Falling of the Hair; which is cured by Medicines that evacuate
peccant Humors; and by good Diet, that creates good Blood, and consumes
fuliginous Excrements. 2. That the Hair is not nourished by any such Excrement,
or increased by its Apposition, appears from hence; for that the Hair being
cut, and consequently made obtuse at the end, would remain obtuse; whereas the
contrary is apparent; in regard the hair grows first at the Ends, and becomes
sharp. 3. The same thing is also manifest from hence; That if you pluck up the
hair by the Roots, you shall find many times something of Blood sticking to
them, out of which, being concocted in the Skin it self, and prepared after a
Specific manner in the hairy Parts, is made that same Juice which nourishes the
Hair, and by degrees passes through the Cavities and Porosities of the Hair it
self, to its extreme Parts, for the Supply of Nourishment: Which is much more
manifest in the Pli^a Polonica, a Disease so called; wherein, upon the cutting
away the Hair, the Blood is said to flow out; questionless much more crude, as
not being changed as yet into any such Juice in the Skin. Now concerning the
foresaid Cavities of the Hair, there is no question to be made of 'em; for that
they are extended inwardly to the full length of the Hair, is manifestly seen,
if being cut into small pieces, they be well viewed with a Microscope; which
may be easily discerned in the Hair of a live Elk, as Gesner observes.
Moreover, the Hair is nourished after the same manner as the Feathers of Birds;
for it is almost of the same Nature. Now the Quills contain in themselves, and
make an Alimentary Juice, in a certain Cavity which extends to their Ends, and
what if the Hair have such a Cavity? For this Juice seems to be made in the
Quills out of the Blood, in regard that every Quill has a little Artery
extended into the Cavity. And thus the Hair may have a peculiar Juice and
Cavity, through which that Nourishment is carried to the Ends of it, whether it
be generated out of the Blood, or other Humors. 4. If the Hairs growing gray
through Sickness, afterward return to their Natural Color, certain it is that
they are not put forth by Apposition, but are really nourished through the
whole Substance: As appears from hence, that when the Hairs begin to grow gray,
they grow first white at the end, and so gradually to their furthest extent
toward the Head. Whereas otherwise, if they were nourished by Apposition, that
Whiteness would begin at the Root, and that Blackness which was before in the
Hair, would remain, and another white Part were to be appos'd by degrees. Nor
is it less apparent from hence, that some Men have become gray in one Night,
the nourishing Humors being changed of a sudden through the whole length of the
Hair. 5. That the Hair is said not to grow forth according to all Dimensions,
is not true; for though they chiefly grow in length, yet there is some growth
and increase observed in breadth; for we find, that some slender and soft hairs
become afterward thicker and harder; especially in the Beard. Thus in young
Girls whose Hair is very slender and soft, yet afterward, though they never
cut their hair, it comes to its just Thickness and Length; which Bounds of
Thickness they never exceed, no more than the Teeth, Bones, Veins, and other
Parts; which having received to their full Growth, make a full Stop, and grow
no more: There being a certain Bound of Magnitude, and a certain Shape
prescribed to every Part by the Supreme Creator; whence it comes to pass, that
the Hair does not grow so much in Breadth as in Length. 6. If the Hairs were
nourished with a fuliginous Excrement of the Third Concoction, they would
increase to an immense Length, and would grow continually as long as a Man
lived; for there is a continual Flux and Supply of that Excrement; and so being
appos'd to the Roots, it would thrust forth the hair still farther and farther.
But on the other side, we see that the hair, when it has attained to a certain
Length, grows no farther, as we find in Women, who never cut their hair; as
also by the hairs of the Legs, Breast, Privities, and other Parts.
These Arguments have fixed an Opinion in the Minds of many, That the Hair is
really a Part of the Body, and enjoy the same Life and Nourishment with the
rest of the Parts.

XX. But if the Reasons on both sides be well weighed and considered, The
^lution.
we shall find that the former Opinion is for the most part to be rejected; and
yet there are some things desicient in the latter, which is the truest.

For, in the First Place, it is well alleged, That the Hair is not thrust
forth by the only Apposition of any Matter, but that they receive Nourishment
through their whole Substance. But here they do not explain, how the Hair
should turn gray of a sudden by such a Nourishment.

Secondly, They do not show, whether the Hair be to be called a Part of the
Body or no. Neither do they unty this Knot, How any Part of the Body can live
and grow after a Man is dead? And therefore these two Doubts are to be more
clearly unfolded.

XXI. As to the First, Sometimes Turning Gray of a sudden.
that Men, out of extreme Terror or Fear of Death, in the space of a Night or a
Day, have turned gray; is most certain: Which I was an Eyewitness of, in a
certain Captain taken by the Enemy, and fearing to be hanged the next day. And
Story is full of Accidents of the same Nature; as we may read in Suetonius,
Nicolaus Florentinus, Crantzius, Scaliger, Adrianus Funius, and others;
Collected by Marcellus Donatus.

XXII. The Cause of this sudden Alteration, The Reason.
some have ascribed to a sudden Dryness; others, to a sudden Putrefaction of
the Humor nourishing the Hair; but neither of these Causes can be the true one,
since neither can happen so suddenly. Therefore I judge this to be the Reason:
Upon a great Fear and Terror conceived in the Mind, the Heart by accident is
extremely troubled and perplexed; and hence there is a weak, or no Pulse at
all; so that some People fall into a Swoon; now by reason of this weak Pulse,
little or no Blood is carried to the extreme parts, so that they grow cold, and
shiver; then the Blood failing in the Heart, the Color may be soon changed in
the Juice that nourishes the Hair, which was conveyed into it before by the
humors mixed with the Blood. So that if by chance the Flegmatic Whitish humors
were settled in the Skin before, they by the predominancy of their Tincture,
give a Dye to the Juice that nourishes the Hair; which continually passing
through, and nourishing the Hair to its utmost extremity, the Color of the
Hair may be changed in a short space, and become gre^ or white, because the
substance of the Hair is diaphanous, easily admitting all sorts of Colors,
which are carried into it with the Nourishment. But if no Phlegm stick at that
time in the skin of the Head, but that some other fuliginous blackish Humor, or
of any other Color be there more firmly settled, then no sudden greyness can be
the consequence of the greatest Terror imaginable: And therefore because more
frequently fuliginous and choleric Vapors or other Humors are settled in the
Skin, hence it comes to pass, that so few grow gray upon any sudden fright. But
perhaps it may be objected, That if this be the cause of suddenly growing gray,
then when the Fear and Terror is over, and that other Humors have their free
course to the Skin of the Head, that Greyness should suddenly vanish again, and
the Hair would resume again its pristine color. It Is granted, that if they
could flow back in so great a quantity, that they could with their own color
out-tincture the white color of the Phlegm: But for the most part by reason of
the extreme scarcity of the Blood flowing in time of dismal Affright, the pores
of the Skin are so closed and contracted by the Phlegm, that the more copious
quantity of Blood afterward flowing thither, or whether it be any other
fuliginous, blackish or choleric H^mor cannot enter to discolor the Flegmatic
Humor; which is the reason that gray colou^ cannot afterward be altered.
Though if it should happen that there should be any persons in whom those
forementioned Humors should get the upper hand of the Flegmatic color, which
rarely falls out, the Hair, it is very probable might then regain its former
Tincture. This I saw in the Captain before mentioned, whose Hair in one Nights
imprisonment, from very black, became as white as Snow; but afterward that
Whiteness in some measure, and by degrees lost its color, so that in two years
time, almost all his Hair was turned black again: I say almost, for that he
could never recover all his former color, but that still a fourth part of his
Hair continued still gray. The same thing also happened to that person already
cited, of whom Marcellus Donatus reports, that he was all over gray; but that
afterward being overflown with Choler, his Hair became of a color between
green and yellow.

The same Accident has been observed up and down in others; in whom, by reason
of the redundancy of Humors, that Greyness which before had whitened all their
Locks, was changed into another color.

XXIII. As to the latter, Whether Whether Hairs be Parts of the Body*
the Hair be to be numbered among the Parts of the Body, there needs no great
Dispute. For in several respects they may be called Parts of the Body, and
sometimes not, according to the various Definitions of a Part. For if we put
the Definition thus; A Part of the Body is any Corporeal Substance, making it
complete and entire with others, then Hair may be said to be a Part of the
Body; for that really and indeed together with other Parts, compleats and
perfe^ts the Body of Man; as Leaves make a Tree, and Feathers a Bird. For as a
Tree without Leaves, and a Bird without Feathers, can neither be said to be
perfect, so a man without Hair, cannot be said to have all his Accomplishments,
though he may live without it. But if we otherwise define a Part, A Part is a
Body cohering with the whole, and conjoined by common participation of Life,
appropriated and ordained to its Function and Use, then Hair can hardly be said
to be a Part of the Body; for though they live, yet they do not live the common
Life of the rest of the Parts, but a peculiar vegetable Life; as Moss or
Polipody growing upon a Tree, lives a separate Life from the Tree, though it
receive it is nourishment from the living Tree. Now the difference of its living
appears from hence, because that though the Tree be dead, yet the Moss still
lives, so long as it can receive any convenient Nourishment from the Tree, or
elsewhere. In like manner, the Hair, so long as it receives convenient
Nourishment from the Body, either alive or dead, lives its own peculiar Life;
which Life, that it is not common with the rest of the Parts, is proved from
hence; for that Death is not common to the Hair with the rest of the Parts: For
the Soul departing, all the Parts die that were enlivened with the same Soul;
but not the Hair, as growing after the Death of Men, by virtue of that peculiar
Soul wherewith they are endowed.

Now because the Hair is nourished with the Blood in living men, this does not
prove that they are Parts conjoined by common Life; for they are not nourished
immediately by the same Blood, but by a peculiar Juice, which in living Men is
made out of the Blood; yet may be also prepared out of other Humors, as appears
by the Woman before mentioned; out of whose Ulcer, filthy and stinking, there
grew a great quantity of Hair: And as is also manifest in dead Bodies, in which
a long time after they have been laid in their Graves, when there could be no
Blood remaining, the Hair has been observed to grow. Which is a certain sign
that that same Nourishing Juice was not generated out of the Blood, but out of
some other Humor remaining in the Body, which not being overmuch in dead
Bodies, therefore the Hair does not grow so fast in them as in living Bodies.
Moreover, as the Birth which is nourished by the Umbilical Blood through the
Navel, by means of the Cheese-cake, adheres to the Mothers Womb, is
nevertheless no part of the Mother, but rather a living Body by it self, begot
in the Mother, which in the Womb enjoys the Maternal Blood as Nourishment, as
also the Milky Juice; but afterward being expelled, the Womb shall be no less
sufficiently nourished, and live without that Blood and Milky Juice, and all
this while the Mother remains entire, and undeprived of any Part that
contributes to her Perfection, the same is to be thought of the Hair.

So that the Question, Whether the Hair be a Part of the Body, is only a
Question and Controversy about the Definition of the Part.

XXIV. But because mention has been made concerning Hair growing in dead
Bodies, we shall speak something to this Particular.

Aristotle says, that the old Hair grows in dead Bodies, but that no new Hair
comes again; so Plotin writes, that the Hair and Nails of dead Bodies, grows.
We shall not trouble our selves to recite the several Disputes of several
Physicians and Philosophers upon this Subject; but only produce our own
Judgment, confirmed by the Testimonies and Observations of several Physicians.
Among the rest, I must not omit Ambrose Paraeus; who writes, that he kept the
dead Body of a Thief that was hanged, in his House, by him, embalmed, and dried
it, to preserve it from putrefaction; whose Hair and Nails, being by him
several times cut and pared, he observed to grow again to their usual Length.
But I need not the Testimony of Paraeus, tho a Person of great Credit, as
having been a Witness of the same much nearer home.

XXV. In the Year 1636* the Plague An Observation.
raging at Nimeguen, where I then p^actic'd, one of the chief Magistrates
Children dying of the Distemper; which the Father, after all his other Vaults
were filled with his Relations, was resolved to bury in a Third of his own,
that had not been opened in 78 years, for the Burial, as I think, of his Great
Grandfather; at the opening of which Vault, he desired me to be present, and to
see whether the Body were dried up, as other Bodies buried in the same Church,
were observed to be. Thereupon, opening the Coffin, we found the Body whole and
entire, only the Cheeks were a little fallen; the rest of the Members lay in
their natural position; and long hairs grew out of the Shoulders, of a pale
yellowish Color. A broad long Beard also reached down to his Navel, of the
same color with the hair; though by the Picture which was showed me, he wore
the hair of his Head and Beard very short when he was alive.

I also observed, that when I went to turn the Carcass with my hand, the whole
Body, except the Bones, fell into a thin dust, which after we had taken out the
Bones, and caused 'em to be buried again, we likewise found to be so small in
quantity, that you might have grasped it all easily in one hand; though it were
the whole Complement of the Carcass.

XXVI. Lastly, By way of Corollary, Whether store of Hair contribute strength
to the Body.
I shall only add one thing more; Whether great store of Hair conduce to the
Strength of the Body? Levinus Lemnius maintains the Affirmative; and therefore
advises sound People never to shave their Hair to the Skin. For, says he, the
Use of it, destroys the Strength, and renders Men soft and effeminate; besides,
it dissolves and extenuates the Spirits and Natural Heat, and deprives the
Heart of a great part of its Courage and daring Boldness to look danger in the
face. And the Story of Sampson in Sacred Scripture, seems to favor Lemnius his
Party; who lost his extraordinary Strength upon the shaving of his Hair, and
recovered it, upon the growing again of his Hair. On the other side, we find
the Romans shaved their Wrestlers to the very Skin, to render them more strong
and lively. However, for my part, I am of opinion, that great store of Hair
conduces little to the strength of the Body, but much to the health of the
Body, while the Head is thereby covered and defended from many external
Injuries. But the Head, together with the Brain, being sound, great store of
Animal Spirits are generated, which gives strength to the whole Body of the
Nerves and Muscles, and so great store of Hair may seem to add to the strength
of the Body. But this can be no universal and perpetual Rule; because there are
many, in whom great store of Hair prevents the Transpiration of the Vapors, and
consequently weakens the Brain. For this same Tower of Pallas, being darkened
by Clouds of Vapors, the generation of Animal Spirits is thereby obstructed,
and thereby the Nerves and Sinews are weakened; besides that it is many times
the occasion of Catarrhs and other Diseases. For this reason, to quicken the
Sight, Ruates and Avicen commend Shaving of the Head; and Celsus, in great
Defluxions of Rheum, orders the Head to be shaved. For which Reason, Aristotle
also was wont to shave the top of his Crown. And Galen reports, That the
Physicians of his time were wont to shave to the Skin, for the Preservation of
their Health. And besides, Women, by reason of their great store of Hair, are
never accounted strong. To conclude therefore, we may say, that plenty of Hair
is sometimes a sign of Strength, and sometimes the occasion of Weakness and
Distempers, according to the Constitution of the Body. Though they that have
hairy Breasts, and Skins, are generally reputed strong; not that the Hair
confers any Strength upon the Body; but it is a sign the Heart and other Bowels
are sound and strong, and then the rest of the Body must be strong of course.

CHAP. III. Of the External Coverings of the Head.
AFter the Hair, follow the rest of the External Coverings of the Head:

I. Of which, the first that offers The Skin.
it self, is the Cuticle, then the Skin, which in the Hairy part is of an
extraordinary thickness, to defend the Head from external Injuries, and that
the Hair may have the deeper and firmer Rooting.

II. Under the Skin lies a small Fat.
quantity of Fat; but not too much, lest it should prevent the Transpiration of
the Vapors. Riolanus will not allow of any Fat.

III. Under the Fat, lies the fleshy Fleshy Pannicle.
Pannicle; and under that, several Muscles, to be treated of in another Place.

IV. Next to these, lies the Pericranium, The Pericranium*
which is a thin, soft, close, compacted and sensible Membrane, by reason of
the Nerves dispersed through it and the Temples, to the hinder part of the
Head. This encompasses the whole Skull, and is closely joined with Sutures and
nervous Fibers* running down through the joynings of the Bones to the hard
Meninx, and united with it, whence there is a great agreement of the Membrane
with both; Insomuch that the Pericranium is vulgarly said to derive its
original from the Meninx: from which Opinion Spigelius and Highmore, not
without reason differ; who deny this original, and only acknowledge a connection
of both by nervous Fibers. Lindan seems to deduce the original of the
Pericranium from the Tendons of the Muscles of the Forehead, Temples, and
hinder part of the Head, expanded about the Cranium; which seems less probable,
seeing that the Pericranium is extended above the Muscles of the Temples, and
their Tendons, and cannot be drawn off without their prejudice. Fallopius says,
the Pericranium is twosold; and in some parts of the Head may be divided into
two parts; of which, the one sticks to the Skin, the other grows to the Bone.
But Veslingius will not allow of this Duplicity, nor could we ever as yet
observe any such thing.

Above, before and behind, it encompasses the Cranium, only the Periostium
between. Only descending to the sides, it parts a little from it, and passes
over the Temporal Muscles, and comprehends 'em within it self, for their
greater security; not so far as their insertion, but as far as the Jugal Bones;
and in those places it is thicker and harder.

V. Under the Pericranium lies The Periostium.
the Periostium, which is a very thin nervous Membrane; by the benefit of
which, the Skull becomes sensible, as all other Bones, except the Teeth, which
have their sense of feeling partly from the Periostium, investing the Roots,
and partly from an inner little Nerve.

This as it is firmly fastened to the Cranium, so also it is so exactly joined
to the Pericranium, that it seems to make but one Membrane; which deceived
Fallopius, who thought it to be but one; which made him write, that the
Pericranium was the same in the Head as the Periostium in other Parts;
forgetting that the Periostium never passes over the Muscles, as the
Pericranium mounts over the Temporal Muscles. But Anatomical Separation shows
them to be two distinct Membranes.

To these exterior Membranes, the Vital Blood is carried through the external
Branch of the Carotid Arteries, and that which remains after Nourishment,
through very small Veins is remitted to the external Jugular. Some there are
who believe these Arteries, passing through the little holes of the Cranium,
penetrate and open into the large Cavity of the hard Meninx. Which however does
not seem very likely, when they only tend to the Diplois, and there end,
conveying the Blood thither, for the generation of the Spinal Marrow; but never
return from the Bones again.

VI. The Periostium adheres immediately Bones.
to the Bones of the Head, which are either of the Skull, or of the Iaws,

The Bones of the Cranium, are the Bones of the Forehead, forepart and hinder
part of the Head, the Sphoenoides, and the Bones of the Temples.

The Bones of the Iaws are many, and have most of them peculiar Names. Of which
see l. 9. c. 3. etc.

CHAP. IV. Of the Internal Coverings of the Brain: of the Scythe, and the
Cavities.
THE Cranium being taken off, the inner Parts are to be seen; among which are
first to be met with two Membranes, most acute in feeling; by the Greeks called
Meninges; by the Arabians, Mothers, which careful Nature wrapped about next to
the Brain, for the preservation of that most Noble Bowel.

I. The outermost, which does not Dura Meninx.
enfold the Brain immediately, is from the Thickness and Hardness of the
Substance, by Galen called (...), or (...); the thick or hard Meninx, by
Hippocrates, (...), by others, Dura Matter, or the Hard Mother, endu'd with a
most exquisite sense of Feeling.

This several Anatomists, together with Fallopius and Paulinus think to be
twofold; but because the Duplicature is not easily discerned, therefore
Riolanus rejects it.

It was framed by Nature, not only for the preservation of the Brain, Marrow,
and Nerves, but also to distinguish the Brain into two parts, as also from the
Cerebellum.

It loosly wraps about the Brain, as far distant from it as the convenience of
Motion will fuffer. It also surrounds the whole inner part of the Cranium with
a looser Folding, so that in some places it may be removed from it, as is usual
upon trepanning the Skull by a soft depression; but at the bottom it is most
closely knit, that it cannot easily be separated from it, and is firmly
fastened to the Sutures by Fibers, and about a Fingers breadth at the sides of
the Sagi^ral Suture, and many times near its meeting with the Coronal, by the
means of small Vessels, which it sends forth toward the (...), it sticks in
two, three, or four places; in which places, when the Cranium is pulled off,
certain little drops of Blood start out of the broken Vessels. Once Varolius
saw one growing to the whole Skull, which is very rare; though twice observed
by Hildan also.

II It is pervious with many Holes, Its Holes.
for the passage of the Vessels, and one large one, for the descent of the
Marrow; and one more as large toward the Spittle-Kernel. But where it sticks to
the Sieve-like Bone, it is perforated like a Sieve, or rather sends little
Pipes to the Nostrils through the small Holes of the Bone, manifestly
conspicuous in the Head of a Calf.

On the outside it is rougher and harder, encompassing the Cranium and its
Cavities, and with several Fibers transmitted through the Saw-like Sutures,
sticks to it; of which Fibers expanded on the out side, about the Cranium, some
believe the Pericranium to be made. On the inside, it is smooth and slippery,
bedewed with a watery Humor; and by means of the Vessels, it sticks in many
places to the thin Meninx.

III. It receives Arteries from the Its Vessels.
larger Branch of the Carotid Artery, passing through the holes of the Wedglike
Bone, and the Bone of the Forehead, which, in some places, especially in the
Region of the Crown, starting out of this Membrane, supply the thin Meninx with
Branches; by means of which, these Membranes stick one to another. It also
sends store of Veins to the Cavities, and the Branch of the Iugular Vein.

IV. It is doubled at the Crown of Its Duplicature.
the Head; where descending toward the inward Parts, it divides the Brain into
the right and left Part. This uppermost doubled part, because it is broader
toward the hinder parts, and contracted toward the fore-parts, and so seems to
represent the shape of a Mower's Scy the, is called Fal^, or the Scy the.

V. The Falx, or Scy the, with the The (...) or Scy the.
forepart of it runs to the top of the Nostrils, and grows to the Cockscomb,
or the Bony Enclosure, distinguishing the Papillary Processes. But the hinder
and broad part of it, being parted in the hinder part of the Head, descencis
toward the right and left side, and distinguishes the Cerebel from the Brain.
In which place, there is a Bone sticks out in Dogs, that supports the Brain,
left the Cerebel should be comprest by it.

Riolanus will allow no Duplicature of the Meninx in the Falx, nor in the
Enclosure between the strain and the Cerebel, which nevertheless the Cavities
formed in the said Duplicature, suffciently prove.

VI. In the said Duplicature, are The Cavities.
four Cavities, three larger, and one small one; the inward Hollownesses of
which larger Cavities are not large alike; but by reason of the many Vessels
that open into them, are somewhat unequal; as being broader in some places, in
some places somewhat narrower.

The first of these Hollownesses, being the uppermost and longest, runs along
the upper part of the Falx, from the top of the Nostrils, the whole length of
the Head toward the hinder parts, where it is divided into two lateral
hollownesses at the bottom of the hinder part of the Head descending near the
sides of the Lambdoides, and continued with the inner Branch of the Jugular
Vein.

VII. Where these Hollownesses meet, Torcular Hierophili:
there is that which is vulgarly called Herophilus's Wine Press, or the
Torcular Herophili.

But although these Hollownesses meet equally, yet sometimes their meeting is
found to be unequal; so that one of the inferior lateral ones enters the
straight one a little higher, and the other a little lower.

Besides the foresaid Hollownesses, Sylvius, and some other Anatomists have
observed three other Hollownesses, though not in all Bodies: One of which is
carried along the lower part of the Scythe, and is very narrow, and ends and
opens into the fourth beforementioned. The other two Lateral, lesser and
shorter, on each side one, in the hard Membrane distinguishing the Brain from
the Cerebel, lie distant from the larger about a Thumbs breadth, into which
sometimes they empty themselves, and sometimes run out as far as Hierophilus's
Wine Press.

Riolanus laughs at these lesser Hollownesses; perhaps, because he never saw
them, or else, because, according to his usual Custom, he takes it ill, that he
was not the first Discoverer; and therefore would deprive the first Inventers
of the Honor.

VIII. Into these Hollownesses, besides The Use of the Cavities.
the Branch of the hindermost Carotis, several little Arteries running through
the Meninx, make their Terminations; the innumerable small Orifices of which
are manifestly conspicuous in the uppermost larger Hollowness. Which abundantly
refutes Fallopius, who asserts, That there is no Artery which reaches these
Hollownesses. Moreover, many Veins of the Meninxes open into the same, pouring
forth Blood into them; which Willis and Wepfer have taught us by certain
Experience: For when they spurted in any black Liquor with a Syringe into the
Root of the Carotid Artery, they observed that black Liquor to pass through
innumerable Arterious and Veiny Branches, till it flowed at length into those
Hollownesses, and out of them into the Jugular Veins.

Bauhinus and Veslingius also write, Whether any small Pipes in the
Hollownesses.
That certain little Pipes belonging to the Hollownesses, run out between the
Veins and Arteries, into the Substance of the Meninxes and the Brain. Walaeus
also observing the wider Orifices of certain small Vessels open into the
Hollownesses, and that the ends of the small Arteries could not possibly be so
wide, believes that these small Pipes meet by Anastomosis with the Extremities
of the Arteries dispersed through the Meninxes and the Brain, and so receive
from them the Blood remaining after nourishment of the Parts, and empty it into
the Hollownesses. Which Anastomosis Highmore figures out with egregious big
Lines in his 18th. Table of his 3d. Book. But Walaeus does not consider, that
the Orifices of the little Arteries gaping into the Hollownesses, are not wide,
but very small; and that the Vessels which open into them with wider Orifices,
are Veins; which running large and numerous through the Meninx, empty
themselves into the Hollownesses. So that there is no necessity to feign any
small Pipes produced from the Hollownesses; when our Eyesight plainly tells
us, that those Arteries and Veins reach with their Extremities, and open into
the Hollownesses without the help of any small Pipes.

Into these Hollownesses therefore, the Blood which remains after nourishment
of the Meninxes and Brain, empties it self through the Vein; and that which
seeks to flow in greater quantity into those parts, through the Arteries; and
thither also flows the Blood redundant in the Choroides Fold, through the Vein,
which sometimes straight, sometimes forked, runs between the middle Fold, in
the third Ventricle, above the Pine-Apple-Kernel, (which Vein Galen calls the
Vein that rises from no other Vein) and ascends through the fourth Hollowness
into the upper large Hollowness, and thence by and by into the two lateral
Hollownesses, toward the Mastoides Excrescencies, or the Basis of the hinder
part of the Head, to return from thence into the innermost Branches of the
Jugular Vein, immediately united and continuous to them, and so to the Heart:
Now by means of that Blood being forced through the Orifices of the small
Arteries, into the Hollownesses, it comes to pass that in the Cranium of a
living Animal, there is observed to be a manifest Pulsation in the uppermost
large Hollowness; which may be easily tried in the Head of a Calf or Pig newly
calv'd or farrow'd. But because those Hollownesses are very wide, hence the
Blood which is poured into them, and forced forward by the pulsations of the
small Arteries, by and by flows to the lower parts; which is the reason that
the uppermost larger Hollowness, together with the two lateral Hollownesses,
are found for the most part empty, without any Blood, or containing very
little, and very seldom full of Blood; which nevertheless we have frequently
observed in People that were hanged. Hence it appears how grossly Lautenbergius
is mistaken, who believes the Animal Spirits to be generated in those
Hollownesses; as also Kyp^r, who writes, That the Blood is ventilated and
refrigerated in them, for the more commodious Uses of the Brain, and more
commodious Generation of Animal Spirits.

X. The other Membrane endu'd Tenuis Meninx.
with an exquisite Sense of Feeling, and furnished with several small Arteries
and Veins, is (...). Tenuis Meninx and Pia Matter, or the Thin Meninx and Holy
Mother; so called, because it is extreme thin and slender, and like a tender
and pious Mother, immediately and softly enfolds the Brain and its Parts, and
prevents them from spreading abroad, and also more profoundly involves and
mantles its Cells and Turnings, and so renders the exterior Superficies of the
Brain as it were plain and smooth. Which upper Connection being loosned, the
Windings and Meanders, as being clothed with this Meninx, might be easily
unfolded and separated. From this thin Meninx proceeds also an extraordinary
thin Membrane, investing the innermost Ventricles of the Brain.

IX. This Membrane is interwoven The Fells of the (...).
wi^h wonderful and numerous Folds of small Vessels or little Nets, penetrating
to the innermost of the Kernels of the Rind of the Brain, and rising from the
Carotid and Cervical Arteries, joined together to and again with mutual
Closures, to the end that for the better nourishment of the great Bowel the
Brain, and the Confection of Animal Spirits, plenty of Blood might flow from
all parts through these innumerable Conduits.

Willis writes, that he has observed several little Kernels interspac'd between
these Folds of the Vessels, which, he says, may be easily perceived in a
moister or Hydropic Brain, though hardly visible in others. But without doubt,
those Glandules here observed by Willis, were some Kernels of the Rind it self
of the Brain, which swelling with serous Liquor, and rising outward, seemed to
him to be peculiar Kernels interspac'd between the Folds.

The Marrow or Pith of the Brain extended to the end of the Backbone, and all
the Nerves proceeding from it, receive a double Tunicle from these Me^inxes,
which being defended and preserved, they run forward to the several Parts for
which they are appointed

CHAP. V. Of the Brain.
I. THE Coverings being taken The Brain.
off, we come to the Brain, in Latin, CEREBRUM; by the Greeks called (...),
which is the general Organ of Sense; by means whereof the Soul, which is the
Princess and Governess of the Body, performs all the Functions of the inward
and outward Senses, and voluntary Motion. For here she sits and judges of the
Sensations of the sensitive Parts; and from hence, as from a Fountain, she
communicates to all the sensitive Parts of the Body, the Rays of all her
Benignity, the Animal Spirits begot in the Brai, through the Channels or
Rivulets of the Nerves, and by them supplies to every one a Faculty to perform
the Animal Actions.

II. Here in the first place, some Whether the Brain be a Bowel or a real
Kernel?
there are who raise a Question, Whether the Brain be a Bowel or a Real Kernel?
And whether to be reckoned among the number of the Bowels? Hippocrates seems to
have reckoned it among the Kernels: For, says he, the Brain is bigger than the
rest of the Kernels; as if he meant, that the Brain were the biggest Kernel.
Wharton says, it is a difficult thing to allow it any proportion common to the
rest of the Bowels, and therefore excludes it out of the number. With Wharton
also Malpigius seems to agree. Others, with Plato, have placed it among the
Marrows, by reason of its Friability, its Softness, and its being surrounded
with Bones; though it differ from the Marrow of the Bones; neither does it take
fire as that does. But they are all under Mistake, who number it among the
Kernels or the Marrow; seeing that both the diversity of the Substance and
Structure plainly show that it has no resemblance either with the one or the
other. But some will say that the whole Cortex or Rind is nothing but a heap of
Kernels: But because any part contains several Kernels, although they make
toward the necessary complement of the Part, it cannot be thence concluded that
the Part is a Kernel, for then the Liver, Spleen and Kidneys, because they
contain many Kernels interspac'd within their Substance, were to be called
Kernels, and excluded out of the Society of Bowels. The Nose also, the Tongue,
the Eyelids, by reason of the Kernels allowed 'em, and the Roof of the Mouth
were to be called Kernels. Besides the Dignity of the Brain it self, and the
Nobleness of the principal Operations which it performs, clearly demonstrate,
that it is really a Bowel, no less than the Heart, Liver, etc. and performs its
own and those the principal Actions, and generates the most noble Spirits of
the whole Body, that is to say, the Animal; and therefore most deservedly
called a Bowel by Galen, and also by Aristotle.

III. The Brain is formed out of The formation of it.
the Blossom of the Seed, at the same time with the rest of the Parts. And
therefore those Fictions are to be rejected, which Ludovicus de la Forge,
following Carnesius, has feigned, That the Brain is formed out of the thicker
Particles passing through the Pores of the Arteries, and thence by reason of
the narrowness of the Pores extending themselves into long Threads, and so
making the substance of the Brain, as it were composed of Strings; and through
the force of the Spirits bursting forth out of the Pineal Artery and the
Arteries adjoining, hollowing the inside of it by accident with various
Cavities or Ventricles: A Fiction easily refuted; for the Brain is not formed
out of the thicker or harder Particles of the Seed passing through the Pores of
the Arteries; for besides that the Seed does not flow through the Arteries,
there are no Arteries that appear before the Brain in the first formation; but
all the parts are delineated and formed together out of the Blossom of the
Seed, and not one after another, or by another. Nor could the Ventricles of it
be hollowed by any violence of the Spirits breaking out of the Pineal Artery or
Arteries adjoining, seeing there could be no such Violence in the first
Formation. Nor could that Violence be caused by an Instrument (the Brain) not
yet perfectly formed; (for such de la Forge supposes it to be at the beginning)
whereas the Pineal Kernel it self shows the contrary, that the Brain was formed
before that or any other Violence could be; for seeing that Kernel could be in
no other place, but either in the third or middle Ventricle, of necessity that
place could not be made by the Thing placed, or after the Thing placed, but
either together with the Thing placed, or before it.

IV. Sometimes the Brain in a The Division of the Name.
strict signification, is taken for that greater Part which is properly called
the Brain; and is distinguished from the Cerebel and Marrow.

V. The Bigness of the Brain of The Bigness.
Man, according to the Proportion of the whole Body, is bigger than the Brain
of any other Creature; as being that which exceeds the Brain of an Elephant in
quantity; and the Brain of an Ox double the weight, for it weighs four or five
pounds. Though Lynden affirms, That according to the Proportion of the Body, a
Sparrow's Brain exceeds that of a Man. Fernelius, Veslingius, Riolanus,
Bartholine, Highmore and Lindan, following Fallopius, tell us, that according
to the Wane or Increase of the Moon, the Brain of man diminishes or increases.
But no certain Alteration of the Animal Actions ever made out any such change
in this most Noble Bowel. Nor can this Opinion ground it self upon any
Experience; because that the Brain of one and the same Animal can never be
inspected and weighed at the two different Seasons of the Moon: And from
different Inspections at different Seasons of the Moon, nothing of Certainty
can be gathered; for the Quantity of the Brain, though in Animals of the same
kind, is not always alike; for that the Brain-pans of some are bigger, in some
less; so that the quantity of the Brain, less or more, is not to be attributed
to the Moon or her Seasons; but to the form and bigness of the Part containing.
In April and May 1661. I attended the Cure of a Sayler dangerously wounded with
a Stone in the right Bone of the forepart of the Head, with a Fracture and
Depression of the Cranium; we took out the broken Bones about the breadth of a
large Doller; Afterward, the Dura Matter, very much endamag'd by the Contusion,
being separated of its own accord, was taken out to the same breadth, the thin
Meninx remaining untouched. The Brain in that place remained depressed about
the breadth of half a Finger; and for two Months together that the Cure lasted,
we could not observe the least decrease or increase of the Brain,
notwithstanding all our diligent observation upon all the Changes of the Moon.
At length, the Flesh growing largely out of the thin Meninx (which was never
seen, read, or hard of before) and contrary to all expectation, supplying the
place of the hard Meninx, and closing with the Flesh rising from the Diplois,
the despairing Patient, who had already agreed with Charon for his Passage,
recovered and was cured.

VI. As equally uncertain it is what Whether immoderate Venery diminishes the
Brain?
Horstius writes, That he saw the Substance of the Brain diminished by
immoderate Use of Venery. For how could he know whether the Person he spoke of,
had any more Brain before? Did he see and weigh it? Immoderate Venery weakens
the Brain, it is true; but whether it diminishes it or no, there is no man can
certainly tell.

VII. As frivolous also is that which Whether Men or Women have most Brains?
some deliver upon Aristotle's Reputation, That the Brain of a Man exceeds a
Woman's in quantity. For most certain it is, there can be no remarkable
difference discerned: For as Men have more or less Brains according to the
Capaciousness of the Skull, so it is with Women. If a Man compare a Man's
greater Head with a Woman's lesser, no wonder if he find more Brains in the
Man's than the Woman's Head; but alter the Comparison, and he shall find more
in the Woman's Head than in the Man's; but to find two Heads exactly
proportionable in both Sexes, and so to judge exactly of the Quantity, is
impossible.

VIII. The Shape of the Brain is The Shape.
somewhat round, bunching out toward the Forehead; the external Superficies
full of Windings and Meanders, and twining like the Guts, which Windings being
clothed with a thin Meninx, furnished with several little Caps of Arteries and
Branches of Veins, descend very deep, and some almost equal the depth of the
Brawny Body; but above are all collected and bound together by the same Meninx.
In Coneys and other small four-footed Beasts, the Superficies of the Brain is
not so full of Windings, but is more smooth; so that the Windings hardly
descend at all. But in most Birds, the external Superficies of the Brain appear
almost altogether equal, without any Meander-like Turnings.

IX. The Brain consists of a peculiar The Substance*
Substance, white, moist, soft, melting like Fat, rather than flowing, though
it be not Fat.

X. The Color and Softness of the The Color and Softness.
Substance is not all alike; for in the outward part, so far as the crooked
Passages descend among the Windings and Turnings, the Softness is more, and the
Color more resembling Ashes; but in all the rest of the inner part altogether
white, and the Substance more solid.

XI. Des Carts by many probable The Fibers
Conjectures maintains, That this Substance must be altogether Fibrous, as
being composed of Thousands of little Strings; which Strings Willis calls
little Channels or Plaights. And what Des Carts perceived with the Eyes of his
Mind, Malpigius demonstrates by Ocular Inspection; for he writes, That by the
help of his Microscope, he has often observed in the Brain of an Ox and other
Cattle as well raw as boild, that all the white Portion of the Brain seemed to
be divided into little Fibers flatly round, which were so manifestly
conspicuous in the Brains of Fish, that if they were held against the Light,
they represented an Ivory Comb, or a Church-Organ. The Extremities of these
Fibers, he says are thrust into the Cortex, or outward Ash colored part of the
Brain, as if they were to take their Alimentary Matter from thence; into which
Cortex a vast number of Blood-bearing Vessels branch themselves. Lastly, He
adds, That it is probable that the Sanguineous Juice, or something like it,
being carried from the Arteries, is, as it were, filtered by this Flesh of the
Cortex, and grafted into the Fibers, as into R^ots. Which he endeavors to prove
by this Experiment: For, says he, when the Order of Nature is at any time
interrupted by any Sickness or sickly Habit, we may often observe a copious
Collection of this Serum, being out of its Road, in the Ventricles, the
Substance of the Brain, and under the Meninxes. And to prove this, he brings
several Stories of sick People, who have had a great quantity of such Serum
gathered together in the Head. Tracassatus also writes, That he has observed
the same things in the Head of a Dog, and shows the manner of discovering it.
He also affirms the Brain and Marrow to be a great Sponge, consisting of Threads
twisted every and all manner of ways one within another. Moreover, he is of
opinion with Malpigius, that the whitish Marrowy Substance borrows something
from the said Cortex, as into which the Marrowy Fibers are inserted, and
therefore seem to take something from thence. Very probable it is, that the
thinnest salt Particles of the Blood are separated from the rest in that
Glandulous Substance, and so prepared, as to be received by the small Fibers,
as invisible Pipes, to be there converted into Animal Spirits. Tracassatus
calls those thin Particles, which I call salt, Concrescibile Serum and Nerveous
Juice; which he says is separated in the Cortex, and so infused into the Fibers.

XII. Picolhomini calls the outward The Cortex, and Pith, or Marrow.
Ash-colored Substance, the Brain, and the inner whitish Substance, the
Marrow; and so distinguishes the whole Substance into the Rind and the Marrow;
and Bauhine and Bartholine seem to do the like.

That same Ash-colored Substance, Rind or Shell, is not only spread about the
outside of the Brain, and descends into its Windings and Meanders, but appears
also in some places in the inner whitish Substance, and somewhat encompasses
the Spinal Marrow, and by the observation of Malpigius, enters a little way
into the inner parts of it.

XIII. Now though from what has How the Matter of the Animal Spirit is
separated from the Brain.
been said, a great Light is given for the deeper knowledge of the Brain, yet
there is one thing yet wanting to be discussed, that is to say, how the salt,
spirituous Matter is separated from the Blood, to be turned into Animal
Spirits. We have already said that the Choleric Particles are separated from
the Blood in the Liver, by means of the glandulous Berries; so the subacid in
the Spleen, and the serous Particles in the Kidneys. Which Office is here also
performed by certain small Kernels, hardly visible to the Eyes of Anatomists;
for the discovery of which Kernels, we are beholding to the quicksighted
Malpigius, who by his Microscopes discovered that the whole Ash colored Rind
was a heap of small Kernels of an oval figure, and formed out o^ that heap.
Which said Kernels being disposed in Wrinkles and Kernels, composed the outward
Meanders of the Brain, and that into the outward portion of those Kernels the
Blood-bearing Vessels entered that passed through the Meninx; but that from the
inner white portion there sprung out a white Fiber, as a proper Vessel, and so
to each Fiber there belonged a little Kernel, that wheresoever the Meanders
were crossed, a solid and determinate Heap of Kernels might be poured upon the
Marrow; and so he observed, that the Marrowy Substance of the Brain was
composed of a Contexture and Bundle of many small Fibers. He adds the Opinion
of Fracassatus, That the Glandulous Rind arises from the Concrescible Serum,
and the Marrowy Fibrous Substance, from the purer Salts that light in those
places. Lastly, He adds the way how to find out those Kernels of the Cortex. He
says, they are hardly to be discerned in the raw Head, though of a large
Animal, because they are torn by rending off the Pia Matter; and the intervening
Spaces, by reason of the Softness, are not so easily distinguished; but they
appear more conspicuous in a boiled Head: For their Substance growing thick in
the boiling, renders the spaces between more open; which upon taking off the
Pia Matter, become more apparent; especially when the Head is warm, and then
being sprinkled with Ink, and that sucked up again with a little Cotton, they
become conspicuous; for the Spaces between being blackened by the Ink, more
easily show the Kernels that lie round. In the same manner, he says, the said
Kernels may be discerned in the Heads of Fish and Fowl. Certainly we are highly
beholding to Malpigius for this Discovery; whereby we may be the more able to
judge of the Constitution, Office and Manner of the Brains acting.

XIV. From this Observation of Whether the Shell be separable from the Marrow*
Malpigius, now manifestly appears the great Mistake of Picolhomini, who
alleges, that in a Body newly deceased, the Marrow is to be distinguished from
the Cortex or Shell, with certain Lines, and may be exactly separated from it.
Which Bauhinus after him, averred; and Bartholine transcribed out of him;
whereas there is no Line between the white Marrow of the Brain and the Shell,
nor are those parts to be disjoined; but the Medullary Fibers enter the Kernels
of the Shell, and are so fastened to them, that they can be no way separated
one from the other without manifest prejudice.

XV. The Substance of the Brain, The Temper of the Brain.
because compacted out of several Particles of melted Salt, and few of Sulphur,
being compared with the rest of the Bowels, is moister and less hot; and
therefore its Temperament is concluded to be cold and moist; though it have
less Heat, yet such a Heat as is manifest enough; for that being every where
sprinkled with Arterious blood, it cannot but from thence partake of heat.

XVI. It receives Blood, for the nourishment and making of the Animal Its
Arteries.
Spirits, through the Arteries which are drawn from the Carotides and Arteries
of the Neck: Of which, the latter being divided into several small Branches,
pour store of Blood into the Substance of the Cerebel, the other into the
Substance of the Brain it self both above and below; which passes not only
through those invisible Branches, but also, like Dew, through the Pores of it;
of which, innumerable small Drops, upon dissection of the Substance, appear
starting out of its small Vessels and Pores. As to these Arteries, Franciscus
de le Boe Sylvius observes, that while they penetrate the thick Meninx, they
leave the other Tunicle, and are scattered together with the thin Meninx,
through all the Windings and Turnings of the Brain, accompanied with very few
Veins. Thomas Willis moreover, prosecuting their winding Ingress more
diligently, writes, that being to enter on both sides the proper Channel,
hollowed in the Wedglike Bone, for their better Defense, they assume an
additional Tunicle; which after they have passed the Wedglike Bone, and coming
to stay within the Cranium, they again leave off, and then near the sides of
the Turkish Saddle, with a winding Channel they creep forward till they come to
the Head of the Turkish Saddle; where again fetching another winding Compass,
they ascend directly, and penetrating the Hard Mother, they are carried toward
the Brain, before their entrance, sending forth several little Branches woven
artificially and wonderfully together, forming a kind of Net in most
four-footed Beasts, to stop the too impetuous influx of Blood through those
innumerable Windings and Turnings, which influx, because in Man that carries
his Head upright, it cannot be so impetuous, therefore in Man this wonderful
Net is but small, and but little conspicuous.

XVII. That the Blood is carried Whether the Arteries enter the Substance of
the Brain.
to the Brain through these Arteries, is without doubt; but the manner how it
is done, is much controverted by Anatomists. For some believe, that the little
Arteries do enter the Substance of the Brain: Others, that they do not enter
the Substance; but only pour the Blood into its Pores. The first Opinion is
maintained by Fallopius, Baukinus, Spigelius, Highmore, and several others, and
among the rest of late, by Willis and Wepfer; and they endeavor to prove it,
partly from the little Drops of Blood which spout out of the dissected
Substance of the Brain; partly from the swelling of the Carotid Artery, upon
the putting in of a little Pipe, and blowing into it; by which means, the Blood
being forced inward, dies the dissected Substance with innumerable little red
Spots; or else by the injection of Ink into the Substance of the Carotides, by
which means innumerable black Spots appear in the Substance it self of the
Brain. The Patrons of the latter Opinion, prove that the Blood is pou^'d into
the Pores only of the Substance of the Brain, and so is distributed through the
whole Substance by the motion of the Brain; because that never any Arteries
could be seen or discerned by the Eye in the Substance of the Brain; besides,
that by reason of the softness of the Part, the Arteries would be compressed
and closed up for the most part. Which Aristotle also asserts, when he writes,
That the Substance of the Brain contains neither Vein nor any Blood-bearing
Vessel within it self; and besides, that it is not so firm, that Arteries and
Veins should be dispersed through it, as in other Parts of the Body. But this
difference may be easily reconciled upon the joining of these two Opinions
together, and asserting, that the Blood partly enters the brain together with
the little Arteries, and that partly being poured into the Pores, it moves
forward through the Substance of the Brain, in the same manner as the blood in
the Liver is thrust forward through the Veins, and in the circulation of the
blood, passes through the Substance of the Parts. For if the subtle Arteries
should not penetrate the Substance of the brain, a sufficient supply of blood
could not be poured into it; and again, if the blood should not pass through
the Pores of the Substance, but that the innumerable little Spots of blood,
which are to be seen in the Dissection of the Substance, should flow out of the
small Vessel being wounded, certainly Myriads of small Vessels must be
contained in the Substance; nay, the whole Substance would seem to be woven and
compacted together out of that sort of small Vessels, which however seems less
probable.

XVIII. The remainder of the Blood The Veins.
which is infused through the said Arteries into the Brain, and there
concocted, is emptied into the Veins and Hollownesses of the Meninxes, to be
carried to the Branches of the Iugular Veins, and thence to the Heart.

XIX. As to these Blood bearing The Anastomoses of the Vessels.
Vessels, together with the Arterious and Veiny Vessels, Willis has observed,
that while they ascend upwards to the Brain, they are various, and in several
places close and meet together about the thick and thin Meninx; not only
Arteries with Veins, but Arteries with Arteries; that is to say, the Carotides
of the one side, with the Carotides of the other: moreover the Vertebrals of
both sides one with another; as also with the hinder Branches of the Carotides,
and that the mutual Closures of the Carotides are about the Basis of the Skull
under the hard Meninx and between it. To the knowledge of which Closures, and
as it were mutual Kissings of each other, he attained by this Experiment. As
often, says he, as I injected any Liquor died with Ink into either of the
Carotides, presently the Branches of each side, and the chief Disseminations of
the Vertebral Arteries, were colored with the same Tincture: Moreover, if the
same injection were repeated several times through the same Passage, the
Vessels creeping through every Angle and Corner of the Brain and Cerebel, will
be died with the same Color. And in those Parts which are overspread with that
miraculous Net, the Tincture injected of one side, will penetrate the
Net-resembling Folds in both sides: Whence it is apparent that there is a
Communication between all the Vessels that water the whole Brain.

At length he adds, That several small Kernels are interspac'd between the
diminutive Nets of the Vessels kissing each other, easily discerned in a moist
and hydropic brain, though in others hardly to be discerned.

XX. The Brain has no Nerves in Its Nerves
its own Substance; for in regard the Organ of Feeling is general, and judges
of all the Senses and Animal Motions, it ought to be void of Sense and Animal
Motion; for being endu'd with one Sense or Motion, it could not have rightly
judged of others, because the several Senses are moved but by one object only;
as the Sight by the visible object; and Feeling by the object of Feeling, etc.
If therefore the brain were endu'd with any one Sense or Motion, the Soul could
not by means of that organ make a true Judgment of any Sense or Motion; and
therefore being framed void of Sense and Animal Motion, it is neither in its
own Substance endu'd with any Nerves, though it contain some certain Fibers,
but so small, as hardly to be discerned without the help of a Microscope, and
which are the originals of the Nerves, and be formed and composed of them,
being woven together, and from their oblong Marrow give birth to all the
Nerves. Hence also Galen says, That the Brain was made not to feel; but to
confer the Faculty of Feeling: For which Reason he calls it the Organ that has
no Feeling.

XXI. The Brain properly taken, Its Division.
is divided into the Right and Left Region; the Scythe-like Duplicature of the
hard Meninx going between: which Division extends it self however no farther
than the Brawny Body. But being taken for the whole Bowel which is included in
the Cranium, it is divided into the Brain and little Brain, as being separated
for the greater part, by the intercession of the hard Meninx.

XXII. That the Brain is moved, Its Motion.
is a thing not to be questioned, as being obvious to Inspection. But
concerning this Motion, there are great Disputes among Anatomists, Whether it
be moved by its own proper Motion, not Animal, but Natural; or else, whether by
another Mover? Laurentius, Picolhomini and Bauhinus maintain the first, and
endeavor to confirm it by several specious Reasons. Of the latter Opinion, are
Fallopius, Vesalius and others; with whom we likewise concur: For the Brain is
immovable of it self; but is continually moved by another by Accident, that is
to say, the Heart, and that not by any Animal Motion, but by the Natural Motion
of Systole and Diastole; and follows exactly the Motion of the Arteries. For
the boiling Arterious Blood being forced out of the Heart through the Arteries
into its Substance, it is presently dilated; and when the same Blood is once
cooled in its Substance, it falls again* This Motion is apparent in Wounds of
the Head; where I have observed it several times, at what time the Substance of
the Brain after taking away the Bones and Meninxes, is easily conspicuous. For
then, as the Pulse in the Wrist is to be perceived quick or slow; after the
same manner was the Motion of the Brain to be discerned, and its Motion upon
the failing of the Pulse in the Wrist in a Fit, ceased at the same time, as
also did the Animal Motion of all the Parts; and when the Patient came to
himself, with the Motion of the Pulses the Motion also of the Brain returns,
and answered altogether to the Motion of the Heart. Which is a certain Sign
that the Brain is not moved by its self, but accidentally by the Heart, and
that its Animal Spirits flow into the Marrow and Nerves, merely by the impulse
of the Heart. Moreover, if the Brain were moved by the Animal Spirits flowing
into the Heart out of the Brain, then the Motion of the Brain must precede and
cause that Motion, but if the Motion of the Heart precedes that Motion of the
Brain, then it cannot be that the first Motion of the Heart should be produced
by the Animal Spirits flowing in after the first Motion of the Heart. Lastly,
That the Head cannot be movable of it self, Reason it self teaches us, seeing
that to the Work of Dilatation and Contraction, are required Muscles, or at
least Fibers so strong, as to contract themselves; both which it wants; and
thus it appears that the Brain is not moved of it self, but by the Motion of
the Heart.

But here arises another Question; Whether this Motion of the Heart happen at
the same time and instant, with an equal Motion? Columbus believes, that the
Motion of the Brain keeps exact time with the Motion of the Heart; and that
both Parts swell and fall exactly together. Which if Columbus had said
concerning the Motion of the Brain and Arteries, then he had spoken true; but
as to the Motion of the Heart, it cannot be true: For when the Heart is
contracted and falls, then by reason of the Blood impetuously forced into them,
the Arteries swell, and as they swell, the Brain is dilated; therefore it is
dilated at the same moment with the Arteries when the Heart falls, and falls
when the Heart is dilated. Hence Riolanus more truly judges, that the Motion of
the Brain is contrary to the motion of the Heart, so that when the Brain is
compressed by Systole, the Heart is elevated by Diastole.

XXIII. Hence it is evident how Whether the Brain move by its own proper motion?
strangely Fernelius was out of the way, who consenting with Galen, avers, that
the Body of the Brain is moved of it self, and of its own accord, with a
constant agitation. Of the same opinion are also Vesalius, Fallopius, Bauhinus,
Riolanus, Sennertus, Plempius and others. But Andreas Laurentius observes a
Mean between both these Opinions; for he says, the Heart is moved partly of its
own motion, and partly by the motion of the Arteries. Highmore will not allow
the Brain any Motion at all, either accidental or proper; and asserts, that
that same Motion which is seen and felt upon taking off the Cranium, is a
Motion of the Membranes, happening by accident; by reason of the Arteries
inserted into them; For proof of which, he alleges, that the Spinal Marrow is
immovable, and has no Pulse at all. But had he seen so many Wounds of the
Brain, after taking away part of the Substance it self, as Plempius, Hildan and
my self have done, and observed the Motion of the Brain laid bare, he would
readily subscribe to my opinion. For the immobility of the Marrow extended in
length, proves nothing, in regard the Brain may beat or be moved, and the
Spirits thrust forward out of it into the Marrow, though the Marrow be not
manifestly moved; perhaps as one Wave pushes forward another, so the Spirits
are pushed forward through that into the Nerves. As we find the like to happen
in the Veins through which the Blood is moved and passes without their
Pulsation; whereas it flows into them through the Pulsation of the Arteries;
and the Pulsation of the Arteries ceasing, it ceases to be moved; which is many
times observed in letting blood in the Arm, when the Ligature binds the
Arteries too hard, or that the Patient fa^ls into a Fit; for the Pulse of the
Arteries of the Arm ceasing, nothing of blood will flow out at the Incision
made in the Vein; but upon untying the Ligature, or upon the Patient's coming
to himself again, and the Arteries consequently beating again, the blood flows
forth again. And in this manner the Spirits may be moved out of the Brain
through the Marrow without any manifest Motion of the Marrow. Besides, who
knows but that the Marrow may be moved after the same manner as the brain? That
this may be certainly known, first, the Skull of a living Creature is to be
opened, then the Vertebers must be laid open, and the long extended Marrow to
be laid bare, that a Judgment may be made upon the inspection both of the
Marrow and the Brain; but before any true observation could be made, the
Creature would die, and the inspection of a dead Carcass would signify little:
And therefore Plempius, upon probable Grounds believes, that the Marrow or Pith
is likewise moved, because it is a kind of production from the brain, which
therefore should be moved with the brain, to the end that the Animal Spirits
being admitted by Dilatation, may press them out again by its Contraction.

XXIV. The necessity of the said The necessity of the said Motion.
Motion, though accidental, is chiefly necessary, that while it is dilated, it
may receive the Arterious Blood out of the Arteries, and by its falling again,
may be able to force the Animal Spirits made out of that Blood toward the
Nerves, and the remainder of the Blood to the Hollownesses and Veins of the
Meninx; neither of which Actions can be performed without that Motion.

XXV. The Brain then, as has What Organ it is.
been said, is the Organ wherein, and by the help of which, the Animal
Faculties, by the assistance of the Animal Spirits generated therein, are made.

XXVI. But in regard the Animal The Seat of the Animal Faculties.
Faculties both feel, desire and move, there is a Question arises, In what part
of the Brain they every one inhabit?

Fernelius believes, that the feeling Faculty resides in the Meninxes of the
Brain, because they feel and are not moved. That the moving Faculty is seated
in the Marrow of the brain, because that is moved, yet has no feeling: Which
opinion Plempius refutes, and rightly informs us, that both Faculties are
generated and dwell in the Substance it self of the brain, and are thence
communicated to the rest of the Parts.

Then again, as to the principal Faculties, the Imagination and Memory, the
Controversy runs high, whether they are in the whole Substance of the brain?
whether all in one part of it, or all distinct in distinct places? Aetius and
some others that follow the Arabians, affirm, that they abide in distinct
Seats, and allow to the Fancy the forepart, to the Reason the middlemost, and
to the Memory the hindmost part of the Head; induced by these Reasons.

1. Because it rarely happens, that one Faculty being depraved, the other
remains sound. 2. Because the forepart of the Head receiving a Wound, the
Fancy is disturbed and impaired; and the hinder part of the Head being hurt,
proves detrimental to the Memory. Others affirm these Actions to be exercised
in the whole brain, and only differ in the manner of their operation, and that
the brain is variously employed about them. Which opinion Sennertus and
Plempius uphold by strong Reasons. But Ludovicus Mercatus seems to unite both
these opinions together; For, says he, though all the Faculties are in the
brain, however we must believe that one Faculty is more predominant in this or
that Cavity than another, as the Spirits are more thin, more perfect, and more
elaborate in this Cavity, and the Temperature more proper for this or that
operation.
But Experience acknowledges all these opinions to be very uncertain, and that
nothing can be positively determined either as to the Place where, or the
Manner how these operations are performed. For there are many Examples produced
by Massa, Carpus, Fallopius, Arcaeus, Augenius, Andreas a Croce, Peter de
Marchetois and others, of Patients, who having been wounded in their Heads,
have had considerable portions of their brains which have either dropped or been
taken out, while the principal Faculties have remained safe and sound; which
seems not very possible, if these operations are performed in the whole Brain,
or any part of it, seeing that the operating Organ being grievously wounded,
and some part of it taken away, surely those most Noble Action^s must be very
much impaired. I produce an Example a little lower of a certain young Person,
who had a large Impostume that grew in his Brain, and penetrated to the upper
Ventricles, who nevertheless lived for 7 weeks together in perfect soundness of
his Senses. Another remarkable Example I met with Ian. 1670. in a young Girl,
upon whose Head by Misfortune had fallen a Stone that weighed near thirty Pound
weight, and broke all the right side of her Head with a Fracture of the Skull
and Forehead about the Coronal Suture, and the Brain wounded and much endamaged
withal. Which Brain, two days after the taking out of fourteen pieces of broken
Bones without any covering of the Me^inxes, began to shoot upward from the
broad Wound, and that by degrees to such a height, that it came out without the
Skull, first as big as a Pigeon's, next, as big as a Hen's, and lastly, as big
as a Goose Egg; which protube^ant part being cut away with a filthy Stench,
another like it shot up again, and so several putrified parts fell off of
themselves, so that during the Cure, the quantity of the putrid Brain that was
separated from the rest, amounted to the bigness of a Man's Fist, in which
condition the Patient lived six and thirty days with a perfect soundness of
Mind and Memory, and all the Animal Actions performing their Duties, though she
were in that time taken with three Convulsion Fits and a Hickup. After she was
dead, the Skull being taken off, we found a large hollowness in the right side
of her Brain, by reason of the wa^e of so much of her putrified Brain, which
extended it self all along the upper Ventricle of the same side, and sideways
passing the third or middle Ventricle as far as the Sphoenoides Bone. This
memorable Accident shows us how uncertain all things are which are conjectured
concerning the Seats of the Faculties, either distinct, or ascribed to the
whole Brain, seeing that in this Maid all the operations of Life and
Intellectuals remained in their full force, and no way impeded by that
putrefaction of the Brain which was emptied out of her Skull.

But this may seem little, if compared with what Theodore Kerckringius relates
of a total deficiency of the Brain; for he writes that he dissected a Boy that
had lain five Months and a half sick o^ a Dropsy in his Head, in whose Skull
he found no Brain, but only a little slimy Water, which was a thing never
before, as he says, taken notice o^ by any Anatomist: Though many years before
him Zacutus Lusitanus tells us of a ^ad that was cured of a Wound in his Head,
and three years after died of a Dropsy in his Head; which being opened, there
was nothing to be found but only a pure Water, that was no way offensive to the
Smell, nor insipid to the Taste. Something like this Coster^s relates of a Boy
born without a Brain, which Boy Fontanus and Carpus ass^e us, that they saw the
26th. of December. 1629. Now in these Children where were the Animal Spirits
made? Where was the Seat of the principal Faculties and the common Sensory? We
must answer, that these Observations contain a manifest Error, not out of
wil^ul Mistake, but the more slight and careless inspection, of Kerckringius,
Zacutus, Costerus, and the rest. For s^st, the Brain might not have been
altogether defective, as they thought, but only through the extraordinary
redundance of the Serum was so softened that it seemed to be a perfect Slime,
which was the reason that few Animal Spirits were generated and that the
operations of the principal Faculties were weakly performed, and so at length
the Children died. Secondly, Kerckringius, Zacutus and Coster, through their
overhasty inspection, might not observe whether there were not something
remaining of a more solid Brain by which the foresaid operations might be
performed. Vesalius in the Ventricles of the Brain of one that died of the same
Distemper, found nine pints of Serum, by which means the upper part of the
Brain to the thickness of a Membrane, by means of its extension, was become
very thin. However, all this while the Cerebel, and all the bottom of the
Brain, as also the Productions of the Nerves were all in their natural
condition. In like manner, in all the former Examples produced by Kerckringius,
the upper part of the Brain might be extended, thin and soft; for which reason
they examining no farther, too rashly gave their Judgment, that the Brain was
altogether wanting. Moreover, what Kerckringius adds, to confirm his Opinion
from the Relation of an ignorant Butcher, of certain silly Sheep that had no
Brains at all, is a mere Fable, which Kerckringius ought not to have believed;
because no Creature of all those that bring forth living Creatures, can live
without a Brain, and the sooner the Heart and Brain are formed in such
Creatures at the beginning of the formation, the sooner and the more all the
other parts of the Body increase; as also all the Actions as well Natural as
Animal: So that these operations prove nothing of any operations performed
without the assistance of the Brain. But as to the Seats of the Animal
Functions, and after what manner they operate, there lies the main Question
undetermined.

And these Mists a certain Observation in the Brain of an Ox still renders more
obscure, which Bauschius transcribes out of James de Negroponte; how that the
Bendictine Monks having a Design to fat an Ox at Padua, put him up; but
observing that the Ox did not grow fat, though he eat greedily, they killed
him, with a resolution to enquire into the Cause of his continued Leanness; to
which purpose the Ox was cut up by Sebastian Scarabeccio, Anatomy Professor at
Padua; When, says he, we came to the Brain, we found it altogether like a
Stone; which all the standers by wondering at, some thought it might have been
congealed by some extremity of Col^: and therefore laying the Head in a Platter
before the Fire, they powered hot Water upon it, and boyld it for some time;
then taking it from the Fire again, they found the Brain harder than before, so
that they could not get it out of the Skull. Having told this Story, he
proposes two Doubts; If the Brain, says he, be the original of all the Animal
Functions, of Motion and Sense, and this is supposed to be petrified, how was
it capable of admitting any Faculty to impart Motion, Sense and Appetite to the
Ox? Or since this Ox had an Appetite to eat, how came he not to grow fat? Not
less miraculous was that Brain which was seen in a Swedish Ox, described by
Bartholine, which was wholly turned into a Stone, bored through with many
holes; and now preserved in a Farm belonging to the Count of Oxenstern, where
that Ox was killed. Truly such observations more deeply considered, command us
to suspend our Judgments in determining the Seats of the Animal Faculties, and
their manner of operating, till other things more certain are discovered, to
render the truth of these things more evident.

XXVII. The Brain is the most The Pr^minency of the Brain.
Noble Bowel, which together with the Heart, rules and governs the whole Body,
as its Actions plainly demonstrate. For it is the only Organ by which, and in
which the Animal Spirits are made, without which, besides that Life cannot
subsist, no Animal Actions are performed which flow themselves out of this
Fountain. Whence it is manifest, that the Wounds which it receives must be very
dangerous; for which reason Hippocrates truly pronounced all Wounds penetrating
into its Ventricls to be mortal; nay, the least Wounds which it receives, are
to be accounted dangerous and mortal. For though monstrous things, as Avrrhoes
calls them, have happened in the Cure of Wounds in the Brain, and some have
with great difficulty escaped, that have had a considerable portion of the
Meninxes and the Substance of the Brain taken from them, yet a slight Wound of
the Meninxes and Brain uses to be the Death of the greatest part, and it rarely
happens that any one so wounded escapes.

XXVIII. By the way we are to take Snakes taken out of the Brain.
notice of what Pliny writes of Snakes that have bred in the putrified Brains
of Men. Of which we have an Example cited by Plutarch, in the Life of
Cleomenes, who was crucified by Ptolomy, about whose Head in a few days after,
a huge Serpent twi^'d her self in folds; which the Doctors affirmed to have
br^d out of the putrified Marrow of the Brain, and related it as wonderful to
be admired at by all men. Thus Rolfinch tells us a Story fron Gerard the
Divine, of a certain Nobleman, whose Body being dug up again a Month after
it had been buried, two great Serpents were found creeping out of the putrified
Corners of his Eyes. Certainly Nature seems by this Generation of Serpents out
of Human Carcasses, to show the Author of all our Calamities, and of our swift
Corruption.

CHAP. VI. Of the Brawny Body; the light Enclosure, the three Ventricles, the
Choroid Fold, the Fornix, the Buttocks, the Testicles, and the Pineal Kernel.
IN the Demonstration of the Parts of the Brain, some begin from the upper part
of the Brain, some from the lower; the one following the Ancient, the others
the Modern way of Dissection. For our parts, we shall first proceed according
to the Ancient and most familiar way, and after that briefly according to the
Modern way.

I. The Brain being a little separated The Brawny Body.
at the upper part, where it is divided by the interceding Scythe, more below,
beneath the Division appears the Brawny Body, or Corpus Callosum; called also
Psalloides: Which Anatomists do commonly alledg to be a Portion of the Brain
harder than the rest of the Substance. Nor is it any peculiar Body added to the
Brain, but only a Connection of both sides of the Brain, or rather a
Continuation of the Substance. In this Body Willis affirms, That he has
observed certain oblique Plaits or Furrows which he describes in his Tables.
These Strings or Fibers Malpigius has also observed by the help of his
Microscope; and says, they are so apparent in the brains of Fish, that if they
be held up against the Light, they resemble an Ivory Comb; and also that there
may be seen bloody Vessels running between them.

II. The inferior part of the Brawny The Lucid Septum.
Body constitutes the Lucid Enclosure, or Looking-Glass, and the Fornix, next
to which, on the upper side lie the two upper Ventricles.

III. Above, two remarkable Veins Veins.
rest upon the Brawny Body, one of each side, which open into the fourth
Hollowness. Into these the Blood of most part of the small Vessels of the thin
Meninx is emptied, to be again conveyed through them into the said Sinus or
Hollowness.

Franciscus de le boe Sylvius describes another Orifice observed by himself in
the Lucid Enclosure. The Brawny Body, says he, where it begins to grow thin,
toward the Lucid Enclosure, we have observed, and there we found about a year
since that the Enclosure it self has a narrow gaping sometimes divided into two
parts, to our great Admiration.

IV. There are also several Cells to Ventricles.
be observed in the Brain, closing together one with another. For though the
Cavities contained in this noble Bowel are continuous, nevertheless because at
first sight, this Continuity seems carried on through narrower passages, hence
the Anatomists divide those Cavities into four Ventricles or Hollownesses; of
which three are seated in the Brain, the fourth is common to the Cerebel and
the extended Marrow. But all on the inside are faced with a most thin Membrane,
to which Erastus, not without reason, allows an obscure Sense of Feeling.

V. The Brain being taken away as The two upper Ventricles.
far as the Brawny Body, presently appear the two Upper Ventricles, vulgarly
called the Foremost, by others, the Lateral; of which the one is the Right, and
the other the Left.

They resemble in some manner a Crescent Moon, and about the middle where they
meet, they are distinguished one from the other with a white Interstitium, from
the Substance it self of the Brain, and transparent being held to the Light;
hence called the Septum Lucidum, and by others, the Looking-Glass. And this by
the observation of Malpigius, is furnished with straight Fibers extended in
length from the fore to the hinder Parts.

These Ventricles are alike both for Use and in Form; much larger and longer
than the rest, overcast with a most thin Membrane, wherewith the inner parts of
the other two are invested. At the upper part* from a beginning somewhat broad
and obtuse, they grow somewhat narrow toward the third Ventricle, and of each
side, with a Channel sufficiently wide, descend into the Papillary Processes,
by which way they discharge the Phlegm therein collected, through the Ethmoidean
Bone into the Nostrils and Mouth. This Passage in the Brain of a Calf, will
admit a Goose Quill; but in Men, is much narrower. These Passages the several
Modern Anatomists never observed, and some have assumed to themselves the
Discovery thereof; yet are they at large described by Galen, in his Treatise of
the Use of the Parts.

At the hinder part which unfolds it self more circularly, and bends like a
Scyth, they are carried downward to the bottom of the Brain, and end near the
original of the Optic Nerves. In which place they are both entered by a Branch
of the Carotid Artery, which forms the Choroid Fold.

VI. At the lower and hinder part The Fornix.
of these Ventricles, where they wind back to the former Parts, in the middle
of the Brain underneath the Callous Body, and common to both Parts of the
Brain, appear the Fornix or Arch, gibbous without, but hollow within,
constituted by a most white marrowy Substance of the Brain, furnished with
arched Fibers toward the sides, and overcast with a most thin Membrane. It is
also called TESTUDO or the Tortoise; for that like a vaulted Roof or an Arch in
a Building, it seems to sustain the burden and weight of the Brain resting upon
it. Of which more when we come to treat of the Optic Nerves.

From all the hindermost Thighs to the Arteries, in all the middlemost space,
it is not fastened to the Brain, but remains free. The hinder Thighs
Hippocrates calls Pedes Hippocampi. Riolanus, guided by Aranteus, believes
these Thighs to be Branches of the optic Nerves, turned upwards, and that the
optic Spirits issue from thence as from a Fountain: hence, that they meet
toward the fore-parts, to unite the visible Species's within the Brain.

VII. In these two upper Ventricles, The Choroid Fold.
the Choroid Fold is to be met with, a wonderful and elegant Piece of Work,
formed out of a most thin and diminutive Membrane, produced from the Pia Matter,
several small Kernels, and small Branches of little Vessels variously
complicated together. Which little Branches come from the Twigs of the Carotid
Artery, with which others think the small Branches of the Cervical Artery to be
intermixed. With these small Arteries twice or thrice we observed an apparent
little Vein to run along all the whole Length of the Fold, and to pour forth
its Blood into the third Ventricle into the Vein always in that place running
through the middle of the Fold, and emptying it self into the fourth
Hollowness; and so to be continuous with it. Bauhinus and several others,
contrary to all Reason and Sight, will have the Branch of the fourth Hollowness
intermixed. Riolanus asserts it to consist of Veins only, without any Arteries;
as on the other side, he believes the wonderful Net to consist only of
Arteries; though both the one and the other are for the most part constituted
of Arteries, and have very few Veins, insomuch that for that very reason some
questioned whether there were any Veins at all.

VIII. This Fold arises from the Its Rise and Progress.
lowermost hinder part of these Ventricles, each of which parts a Branch of the
Carotid Artery enters, which afterward constitutes the wonderful Net, near the
Spittle-Kernel, and wrapped about with a tender Membrane, ascends upward into
these Ventricles; where being divided into innumerable Branches, it forms this
Fold expanded through the said Ventricles. Which when it has reached the
foremost Tuberosities of the Ventricles on both sides, round about the foremost
Thigh of the Arch, or Fornix, passes into the third Ventricle latent
underneath, to the sides of which Ventricle it is every way fastened, as also to
the Substance of the Fornix it self, resting upon that Ventricle, with little
Branches, which it sends forth into the Marrowy Substance of the Brain. The
Fastening and Ingress of these little Branches is presently seen, when the
Fornix is lightly raised up and turned back, and so the third Ventricle is
discovered.

IX. Through this Fold the Arterious Its Use.
Blood is conveyed for making of Animal Spirits, out of which through small
diminutive Kernels hardly conspicuous and scattered among the little Arteries
of the Fold, the more serous part, not fit for the making of Spirits, is
separated, sucked out and collected together in the Ventricles, not as an
unprofitable Excrement, but as a useful Humor, and there to be prepared for a
necessary Use, which is threefold.

1. By its Coolness, to temper the boiling Heat of the Blood passing along the
Fold; for the Fold swims upon it; and so to prepare it for the making of Animal
Spirits. 2. By flowing to the Glandules of the Tonsils and Mouth, to moisten
the Larynx and Gullet. 3. That in the Mouth, in which together with the Liquor
flowing through the Spitly Channels, it begets the Spittle, and in the Stomach
it may be mixed with the chewed Nourishment, and help their Concoction by a
peculiar Fermentation, In the same manner as the Lympha flowing to the
Chyle-bearing Channels, prepares the Chylus after a specific manner, that so
coming to the Heart, it may be the more eas^ly dilated therein, and converted
into Blood.
X. But when by reason of the coldness Slime or Snot.
of the Brain, or some other Weakness, that Liquor is not sufficiently
prepared, then becoming more crude and viscous, it is gathered together in the
Ventricle in greater abundance, and from thence not only flows more copiously
to the Parts aforesaid; but many times the greater part of it, not able to fall
down to the Iaws through the ordinary narrow Channels, a great quantity of it
descends through other Passages to the Nose and Mouth, and thence as a
superfluous Excrement, vulgarly called Phlegm, or Snot, is evacuated at the
Mouth and Nostrils.

And that this is the true Use of the Pituitous Humor, many Reasons demonstrate.

1. For that in an extraordinary heat, the Head being very hot and dry, and
consequently this Liquor being much wasted, and but little of it falling down
to the Mouth and Tonsils, it causes a great drought of the Jaws and Mouth, and
thence Thirst; which also happens for the same reason, in Fevers and other hot
Distempers. 2. For that upon longing after any pleasing Food that a man sees,
this Liquor, together with the Spitly Humor flowing through the
Spittle-Vessels, flows no less from the Brain through the widened Passages, to
the Mouth and Tongue, than the Animal Spirits, that are determined and sent by
the Mind to the Parts that require Motion. 3. Because that in Persons of a
hotter and drier Temper, in whom the serous and flegmatic part of the Blood
does not so copiously abound, and the said Liquor is collected in a lesser
quantity in the Ventricles, and is better concocted, and the thinner part much
more dissipated, there are none or very few Excrements evacuated from the Nose
and Palate, neither do they spit so much, but they are more thirsty. 4. Because
that in moister Natures a great Quantity of this Liquor is collected in the
Ventricles of the Brain, and hence a greater quantity of Spittle flows into the
Kernels of the Jaws and Mouth, and the Spittlechannels, and frequently more
crude to the Mouth and Stomach; ^ay, sometimes in so great a quantity as in a
Day and a Night to fill wh^e (...) full, if the c^ld and moist Temper of the
Brain send the Humor down in great Quantity; and sometimes descending in
greater Quantity to the Stomach, it so relaxes and debilitates by its quantity,
its Coldness and its Moisture, that it vitiates the fermentaceous Humors
growing there; and by that means, takes away the Patient's Stomach, and hinders
Concoction. 5. Because that for want of Spittle, the Act of Swallowing is
rendered difficult, and the Concoction of the Stomach is ill performed; as is
apparent in many that are troubled with Fevers. The Progress of the superfluous
Blood from the Fold.

XI. After this serous Humor being separated from the Arterious Blood of the
Fold, and that a sufficient quantity of that Arterious Blood is transmitted
into the Brain and Marrow, for the making of Animal Spirits, that Blood which
remains over and above (...) the Fold, flows to the Vein, sometimes single,
sometimes double in the Ventricle, running between the middle of the Fold,
above the Pineal Kernel, and through that is carried to the great Hollowness of
the Scythe. This Vein, Galen affirms to be derived from no other Vein, because
there is no ^ion or Conjunction of it with any other Vein to be observed.
However Bauhinus believes it to be a Branch of the great Hollowness. Which
Mistake is sufficiently refell'd by what we have said in the Fourth Chapter.

XII. From what has been said, we Rolfinch's Mistake concerning the Cause of a
Catarrh.
are to take notice of the Grand Mistake of Rolfinch, who in a long Discourse
seeking for a new Cause of Catarrhs, never before found out, and rejecting the
Opinions of all others, though too inconsiderately, concludes, that the Carotid
Arteries are the Fountains of all Catarrhs. For, he says, that they discharge
their flegmatic Humors partly into the wonderful Net, and that from thence
these Excrements ascend higher into the Choroid Fold and the Ventricles of the
Brain, from whence they flow down to the Pituary Kernel, and there are
insensibly wasted* Moreover, that the said flegmatic Humors are partly purged
forth through the outermost Branch of the inner Propagation into all the spungy
parts of the Nostrils, Mouth, Jaws and Palate, and are thence discharged as
altogether unprofitable. Which they are faulty either in Quantity* Quality,
Manner, Time or Place of Excretion, then Catarrhs are thereby bred. But the
Learned Gentleman did not consider how easily those flegmatic Humors stop up
the narrow Passages of the slender Net and Fold, and what terrible Diseases
thence arise, as, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Carus's, etc. to which men would be
most frequently obnoxious, if that Proposition were true. Nor does he take
notice that the Arteries equally convey the Blood to all Parts without any
Choice; nor do they particulatly convey the Choleric parts to the Liver, the
Melancholy to the Spleen, or the Flegmatic to the Head, and discharge those
Humors into those Bowels; which nevertheless he will have to be so done;
whereas there is not in the Arteries any power of separating, any judgment to
make choice; nor can those Bowels do it by any particular virtue of Attraction;
but that the various alteration of one and the same Blood, and the separation
of the smallest Particles is ordered according to the diversity of the Kernels,
conformation and diversity of the parts into which it flows. He alleges many
Arguments for the proof of his Opinion; but so contrary to Reason and
Experience, that they are not worth a Refutation.

XIII. Moreover, the Arch being The third Ventricle.
turned backward, the Third or Middle Ventricle, which is the Concourse or
Meeting of the two uppermost or foremost, as it were formed in the Center of
the Marrow of the Brain. Wherein are several things to be considered.

1. Two Passages: The first of which with an eminent Process, which Veslingius
calls the Womb, is carried downward to the Funnel, and pituitary Kernel,
through which the Flegmatic Excrements of the Brain are vulgarly said to be
evacuated, but erroneously. The other, which is called the Arse, or the hole of
the Arse, passes to the fourth Ventricle, and is nothing else, than a hole
formed by the conjunction and closure of little fibrous Mountains, and two
Buttocks and Testicles. This Channel being wrapped about with a slender Membrane,
Sylvius calls by the name of Alveus. 2. Two remarkable little long Mountains,
prominent upwards, consisting of a Substance composed of several little Strings
or Fibers, and therefore called by some Corpora striata. These constitute the
foremost upper part of the oblong Marrow conjoined with the Brain and Pith
(which is not observed by some, who think them to be parts of the Brain, and
not the Marrow) but of a peculiar Substance, and as it were imposed upon the
Marrow, yet united and continuous with it, clothed with an extraordinary white
Membrane, but fibrous within, less white, and more porous than the rest of the
Marrow. This Part seems only to be serviceable to the Sight, as from whence the
Optic Nerves proceed; whence Galen calls the said Monticles Thalamos Nervorum
Opticorum, or the Nuptial Chambers of the Optic Nerves (where by Thalami, some
think, though erroneously, that they are the two hinder Legs of the Arch;) and
Riolanus reproves Bauhinus, for asserting, that all the Nerves within the
Cranium, arise from the Spinal Marrow; whereas the Optic Nerves are wound about
their own Chambers. By which Words, he plainly denotes, that these Monticles
consist of a Substance altogether different from the rest of the Marrow, and
that they are serviceable only to the Eyes. In the mean time, he does ill to
reprove Bauhinus, for saying, that all the Nerves arose out of the Pith, in
regard the Chambers of the Optic Nerves are the upper part of the Pith, and
consequently the Optic Nerves proceed from the Pith, which Riolanus does not
seem to have taken any notice of.
XIV. 3. Four Protuberancies, of The Buttocks.
which the uppermost, or foremost and largest, from their Resemblance, are
called the Buttocks, or Nates; between which and the fibrous Protuberances,
there is a conspicuous Chink, by Columbus called the Womb, containing the hole
of the Arse.

XV. The lowermost and least, are The Testicles.
called the Testicles, and are as it were two flat Prominencies growing and
continuous underneath to the Buttocks. But that same Difference between the
bigness of the Buttocks and Testicles, is more remarkable in Brutes than in
Men, in whom these four Protuberancies are seldom of an equal Magnitude.

Now these four Protuberancies, together with the Fibrous Protuberancies
imposed upon them, are the beginnings of the long Marrow, continuous below with
the Brain, above and upon the sides overspread with a slender Membrane from the
Pia Matter; having a Substance compacted of innumerable slender Fibers, as is
seen by the Microscope.

As to the Fibrous Protuberancies, this is to be observed, that though they be
covered with an extraordinary white Membrane, yet they consist of peculiar
Substance within, stringy, fibrous, less white than the rest of the Pith, so
that they seem to constitute some peculiar part, as it were united to the long
Pith, at the beginning in the uppermost part; and continuous with the Pith of
the Brain. Now the Use of these two Protuberancies, is to be serviceable to the
most noble Sense, which is Sight; because that the Visual Nerves only, and no
other proceed from them.

XVI. 4. The Kernel seated between The Pineal Kernel.
the Stones and the Arse, near the Hole of the Arse, which leads toward the
Fourth Ventricle, called the Pineal Kernel, because it somewhat resembles a
Pineapple, fashioned like a Top: By others called the Yard of the Brain. This
Kernel is but small in Men; but much larger in Sheep and Calves.

It consists of a Substance somewhat hard, which nevertheless suddenly flags,
and being melted in stale Carcasses of Men, seldom appears. It is covered with
a slender Membrane of a Ashcolour.

It is oblong, looking upward, or rather forward with its Point, but with its
bottom resting upon the Substance of the Brain.

Above it is covered with the Choroid Fold, and the Vein there running through
the middle of the Fold, to which it is fastened, that in Man it is easily
pulled off with them, because it sticks so little to the Substance of the
Brain, that Bauhinus will not allow it to stick to it at all; though it appear
in Brutes more manifestly to be united to the Brain.

Sylvius allows it also certain little nervous Strings; Wharton also writes,
that it is entered by two Nerves, on each side one, arising from the beginning
of the Spinal Pith, but very small. But it would be a difficult thing to show
these Nerves; neither will any man easily perceive any Nerves in that place.
Yet this, upon more diligent inspection, I have observed, that the Choroid-Fold
in the third Ventricle, sends forth every way several Branches of small
Arteries, like small white diminutive Fibers, into the incumbent Cavities of
the Arch, the Buttocks and Stones, and the Substance of the stringy
Protuberancies, and of the Pineal Kernel, so that the Fold adheres every way to
the said Parts, by means of these little sibrous Branches, and pour sorth into
the said Substance the Arterious Blood prepared therein, and in some measure
cleared from the flegmatic Serum. Which little Branches, not so duly considered
by Sylvius and Wharton, their Inadvertency occasioned their Mistake, and so
they took them for Nerves, because of their whitish color, as do also the
small Arteries of other Parts. Neither is there any Blood to be seen in them,
because only the thinnest and most vaporous part of the Blood flows swiftly
through them, neither does it stay long in them, the more thick Particles
flowing through the Vein that is mixed with the Fold.

XVII. In this Kernel, says Sylvius, Sand and Gravel in the Kernel.
he has several times sound Sand and a little small round Stone, about the
bigness of the fourth part of a Pea. Reyner de Graeff also writes of Stones
found in this Kernel by himself: We believe, says he, that Stones are generated
in all parts of the Body, more especially in the Pineal Kernel, because that we
have above twenty times found Stones therein upon the Dissection of Bodies as
well wasted by a lingering Disease, as by violent Sickness; which however
happens more frequently in France than in Holland. Certainly these Stones
should very much obstruct those Functions which are attributed to the Pineal
Kernel; yet the Discoverers of those Stones did never observe that the Persons
in whose Pineal Kernels Stones were found, were ever disturbed in their Animal
Operations.

XVIII. Various are the Opinions The Use of this Kernel.
concerning the Use of this Kernel. Some think it ordained for the strengthening
the Choroid-Fold. Others with Galen, ascribe to it the Use of a Valve, to close
the Hole of the Buttocks. Others shut up the Soul in those Streights, as in a
Box, and believe it placed there, as in the Center of the Brain, where it
collects the Ideas of the five Sensories, apprehends and discerns them, and
from that place sends forth the Animal Spirits to the determined parts through
these certain Nerves. Which last Opinion many at this day stiffly oppose, and
others as stiffly defend. Cartesius grants indeed that the Soul is joined to the
whole body; but says, that it exercises its Functions more particularly and
immediately in this Glandule, than in other Parts. Regius will have it to be
the common Sensory, and that the Soul exists in that and in no other part of
the Body. Thus also de la Forge asserts it to be the principal Seat of the
Soul, and the real Organ of Imagination and common Sense, and that the breeding
of Stones in it, is no obstruction to it in its Operations; no, though it be
all Stone, provided there be Pores wide enough for the passage of the Spirits.
He adds, that though the Kernel should be wanting, and only the void place left
for the Arteries of the choroid Fold to empty themselves; yet that place would
be a sufficient Seat for the Soul, the Imagination and common Sense. Certainly
with the same Reason he might have said, that though the Heart were wanting,
yet if its place were left for the large Vessels to exonerate themselves, it
would be a sufficient Fountain for the support of all the vital Actions; that
is to say, that in absence of the agent Organ, the place of the Organ would
suffice to perform the Actions of the Organ. But for my part, I must
ingenuously confess that these (...) are more subtle than Subtility it (...).
On the other side, W^arton as vainly conceives, that it only at tracts the
excrementitious Moisture from the upper Thighs of the beginning of the Spinal
Marrow. And thus the Use of this Kernel is still undetermined.

XIX. 5. The Choroid Fold, which The Choroid Fold.
descending from the upper Ventricles in this middlemost, is expanded through it
with a much broader and thicker Contexture than in the former, and has a Vein
sometimes straight, and sometimes double interwoven in the middle, and running
as far as the large Bay of the Scythe, into which the small Arteries exonerate
the remainder of the Blood which is to be carried to the Hollowness. Now this
Fold, sends ^orth into the Arch the fibrous Protuberancies, the Testicles and
Buttocks, several small Branches like diminutive Fibers; by means of which it
is joined to them every way; and it wraps and enfolds the Pineal Glandule in
such a manner that it cannot be seen, unless the Fold be broken and taken off.

Malpigius, together with M^bius, believes, that the Ventricles were formed by
Nature, for no Use, but only by Accident; but how erroneous this Opinion is,
sufficiently appears by what has already been said. For the service of the
three Ventricles of the Brain is very necessary to afford a loose and ample
passage to the Choroid Fold, and defend it from compressure; as also to receive
and collect the serous and flegmatic Humors separated by the small Kernels out
of the inner Substance of the Brain, and especially out of the Vessels of the
Fold.

CHAP. VII. Of the Cerebel, the Fourth Ventricle and the long Pith or Marrow.
I. IN the hinder and lowermost part The Cerebel.
of the Skull, that is between the large Hollownesses of the Bone of the hinder
part of the Head, lies the Cerebellum, by the Greeks call d (...), and (...),
containing the second part of the Brain, as it were a little and peculiar
Brain, because it is much less than the Brain; and being covered with both the
Meninxes, is separated from it, and on both side united to the long Pith for a
little space, and continuous with it; but in the middlemost lower Seat it is
joined to the Spinal Marrow upon the hinder part, by the intervening of the
thin Meninx; and lest the Fourth Ventricle should gape there, it is wrapped about
with the thin Meninx expanded as far as the Buttocks.

II. The Form of it is somewhat Its (...).
broad, and something flat upon both the Lateral parts, representing the Figure
of a broader sort of Globe.

III. The Bulk of it is much bigger Its (...)
in Men than in Brutes.

IV. The Substance of it differs not Its Substance.
much from the Substance of the Brain, only that it seems not to be so soft,
but much firmer.

V. It is divided into innumerable (...) (...).
small thin Plates, representing the Leaves and Boughs of Trees, and clothed
with the thin Membrane interwoven with several Capillary Branches of the
cervical Arteries, and of which the inward and middle part are of a white, the
external Compass of a darker Color. Through those little Arteries the Blood
flows to it in great quantity; the remaining part of which after nourishment,
runs into the lateral Hollownesses.

VI. It has two Processes, called The Vermicular Processes.
the Worm-like Processes, which consist of many transverse, and as it were
twisted Particles joined together with a thin Membrane, like Worms that lie in
rotten Wood. Of these the foremost prominent into the fourth Ventricle, adjoyns
to the Buttocks and Stones; the hindermost is not altogether so prominent, but
vanishes with a point into the Substance of the Cerebel. Some also think that
these Processes are distended and contracted in the elevation and compression
of the Cerebel.

VII. About the hinder part of the Varolius's Bridge.
Trunk of the long Marrow, is to be seen Varolius's Bridge, which consists of
two, and sometimes three gibbous Processes on both sides, protuberating from
the Cerebel to the Circumference of the fourth Ventricle; of which, they that
are seated near the Worm-like Process are larger, the rest lesser.

VIII. The Cerebel has no Cavities, The Cistern,
but only a wide Hollowness in the middle, yet not very deep; which by some is
called the Cistern; and this constitutes the higher part of the fourth
Ventricle.

The Substance of the Cerebel differs little or nothing from that of the Brain,
and is clothed in the same manner with Membranes and a Shell, and also has
deep Windings and Meanders, overcast with the thin Meninx to the lowest Depths,
and furnished with Network Folds of small Arteries and Veins, whence the
Office and Use of the Brain and Cerebel is thought to be the same.

Willis therefore observing no certainty in ascribing this Office to the
Cerebel, has found out another, which he thinks to be more true and genuine.
And thus, he ^ays, that the Cerebel, which he takes to be a peculiar Bowel, is
a peculiar Fountain and Magazine of certain Animal Spirits designed for
peculiar Uses; and distinct from the Brain. The Office of the Brain he assigns
to be, to afford and supply those Animal Spirits wherewith the Imagination,
(...) (...), Discourse and other supreme (...) of the Animal Function are
performed; and by which all the voluntary Motions are brought to pass. But that
the Duty of the Cerebel seems to be to procreate Animal Spirits apart, and
different from those generated in the Brain; and to send them to some
particular Nerves; by which unvoluntary Actions, as Pulsation of the Heart,
Protrusion of the Chylus, Concoction of the Nourishment, and many others, which
unknown to us, and without our consent, are transacted. This new Fiction he
endeavors to confirm by many Arguments, which being examined, are not strong
enough to establish his Opinion. However, I deem his Diligence to be highly
praiseworthy; for having undertaken to illustrate so obscure a Mystery with a
new and ingenious Invention. For which Fracassatus greatly admires him, and
believes there by the hard Questions about natural Motions which are done with
the privity of the Brain, are excellently well resolved, and that thereby many
hidden things, whose Causes and Reasons the Nature and Propriety of the Parts
challenged to her self, may be unfolded; provided the Hypothesis be true, which
is supposed, of the truth of the difference between the Spirits of the Brain
and the Cerebel, and their various influx into the several Nerves: But the
incertainty of this Hypothesis appears from hence; for that Birds and several
other Creatures have no Cerebel, and yet have the same motion of the Heart, the
same Respiration and thrusting forward of the Chylus, etc. Lastly, he adds,
that if peculiar Spirits serving to unvoluntary Motions, were generated in the
Brain, they cannot possibly pass from thence into the Nerves of the sixth pair,
arising out of the long Pith much below the Cerebel: which nevertheless afford
Animal Spirits to several parts of the Breast and Abdomen, to accomplish the
said motions. He might have added, that though it should be granted, that the
said Spirits of the Cerebel should flow through the Nerves of the sixth pair,
how then should it be possible for the Spirits of the Brain serving to
voluntary Motions, to flow through the same Nerves; which Motions however are
performed in the Muscles of the Hyois, the Larynx, the Jaws and several other
Muscles, by the help of the Spirits flowing through these Nerves.

IX. The Arabians, by reason that the Where the Seat of the Memory.
Cerebel is somewhat more hard and dry than the Brain, have made it the Seat of
the Memory, and hence, as they say, it comes to pass that the hinder part of
the Head being hurt, the Memory becomes prejudiced. Whom the Observation of
Benevenius seems to favor; who relates the Story of a Thief, who being taken
and punished, never remembered what he had done before: In which Thief, after
his death, they found the hinder part of his Head so short, that it could
hardly contain the least portion of his Cerebel. But whether this Opinion of
the Arabians be true or no, may be judged by what has been said already
concerning the Seats of the principal Faculties.

As to the Parts of the Cerebel, Andrew Its Parts.
Laurentius and Riolan believe, that the fore part shuts and opens the Entrance
into the fourth Ventricle, like a Valve. But in regard that of its self, like
the Brain, it is void of proper motion, it seems hardly capable of that
Function; and therefore the Varolian Bridge is thought to close the extreme
Circles of the Cerebel, and to defend the noble Ventricle like a Bulwark.

XI. The lower part of the Cerebel The fourth Ventricle.
being raised up, the hinder part, or the fourth Ventricle discloses it self
less than the rest. Which is formed out of the Trunks of the Spinal Marrow,
descending from the Cerebel, and the third Ventricle of the Brain, and somewhat
distant one from another, before they are all together united; because the
higher and lesser part of it is made by the Bosom of the Cerebel, overcast with
a slender Membrane; but the lower and bigger part seems to be as it were
in-laid into the long Pith, having a hollowness resembling a Pen, where it is
shaped for writing, and Calamus Scriptorius.
therefore called Calamus Scriptorius.

Arantius calls this Ventricle the Cis^ern. Herophilus calls it the most
principal and noble Ventricle, and affirms that the Animal Spirits prepared in
the upper Ventricles, obtain there their chief Perfection, and thence flow
through the Pores into the Marrow and Nerves. But in regard these Spirits are
neither made nor contained in the upper Ventricles, it is apparent that the
Function of generating and perfecting Animal Spirits, belongs as little to this
Ventricle as to the other three, especially seeing that neither the Matter out
of which those Spirits are generated, nor the Spirits made in the other
Ventricles, and to be perfected farther in this, can be supplied to this fourth
Ventricle.

XII. The long Marrow, which The long Marrow.
falling down without the Cranium, to distinguish it from the Marrow of the
Bones, properly so called, is called the Spinal Marrow, and is the harder part
of the Brain and Cerebel, close and white, consisting partly within the
Cranium, about the length of four fingers Breadth, and partly without in the
Pipe of the Bones of the Spine, extended to the end of the Os Sacrum.

XIII. Though it be improperly called The difference between this and the
Marrow of the Bones.
Marrow from a kind of resemblance which it has, yet it differs in many things
from the real Marrow of the Bones.

1. In Substance; as being neither so fat nor so moist as this, which is like
to Fat, and subject to run, will melt with the Fire, and takes Fire like Oil,
whereas the other will neither melt with Fire, nor flame out. 2. In Color; the
one being whiter than the other. 3. In the Coverings; the one having two
Membranes and the Bones to enclose it, whereas this is clothed with no
Membranes, and is contained only in the Cavities and Porosities of the Bones.
4. In the Use; for that the one does not nourish the Bones, as the other does;
but stretches out the Nerves which are the Channels of the Spirits, to the
Parts; whereas the other has no Nerves that derive themselves from it. And
therefore, for distinction's sake, the one is called (...), or Spinal; by
others, (...), or Dorsal; by others, (...); by others, (...), as descending
through the Neck; Back and Loins, and filling the whole Spine. Upon these
Considerations, the great Hippocrates distinguishes the Spinal Marrow from the
Marrow of the Bones. For, says he, the Marrow which is called the Dorsal
Marrow, descends from the Brain; but has not in its self much of Fat, or
glutinous, as neither has the Brain, and therefore neither is the name of
Marrow proper for it; for it is not like the other Marrow contained in the
Bones, which has Tunicles also, which the other has not. And Galen treading the
Footsteps of Hippocrates, affirms that the Spinal Marrow is not rightly and
properly called Marrow. But all this Dispute is saved by the English, who call
it Pith.
XIV. It is moved also according to Its Moti^n.
the motion of the Brain, ^ot of it self; but by the motion of the Arteries,
which keeps time with the motion of the Brain, but is weaker, in regard that
part is stronger, and neither so soft nor moist.

XV. The Substance of it is fibrous, Its Substance.
as may be seen by the help of a Microscope, compacted as it were with
innumerable long strings, softer above; but when it has reached the middle of
the Breast, somewhat harder by degrees But whether those little Bodies, as well
of the Brain as of the Pith, be hollow or no, and so transmit any Spirits through
their Cavities, has been diligently examined by the Physicians of this Age; but
nothing has been concluded on but only by Conjectures, by reason of the
weakness of our Sight and difficulty of Demonstration.

XVI. In the dissected Substance Its Vessels.
innumerable Bloody Drops appear up and down, in like manner as in the
dissected Brain; but the Blood-bearing Vessels passing through the Substance it
self, are so very minute, that they can hardly be discerned by the Eye.

The Original also of these little Vessels, by reason of their subtility, is no
less obscure. But in this quick-sighted Age, by more quick-sighted Anatomists,
this has been observed, that much about that place where the Trunk of the Aorta
is dispersed into the Subclavials, a vertebral Artery is sent forth through the
holes wrought through the transverse Processes of the Cervical Vertebers, and
that from thence two little Branches proceed to the Spinal Pith; and that from
thence, downward among the several knots of the Vertebers from the descending
Trunk of the Aorta, where it rests upon the Spine, immediately two Arteries of
each side one, run along to the said Pith. Which two Arteries of each of the
sides, meeting together, and intermixing one among another, form a wonderful
piece of Network in the Meninxes, that they also clasp one another like a
Chain of Rings; and so hold each other with a winding course, by and by they
are seen to send certain Capillary Branches toward the inner parts of the Pith,
as Willis observes. Which last is manifest* from the little bloody Spots
conspicuous in a dissected Substance. From the Conjunction of these little
Arteries on both sides, above the middle fissure of the Pith, is formed a more
conspicuous Artery, running the whole length of the Pith; also two other
Arteries of each side one, common alike, but less creep into the sides of the
same Pith.

The Veins that carry back the blood remaining after Nutrition, from the Pith,
and its Coverings toward the Heart, arising from scarce visible Originals, by
degrees join together, and form a Fold like the arterious Fold, and mixed with
it. From this Fold the Blood carried farther, flows into two larger Veins,
which Willis calls the lesser Hollownesses; of which one of each side is
extended within the Cavity of the Bone as far as the Os Sacrum. Out of these
the Blood is yet poured into a larger Vein (which Willis calls the large
Hollowness) running all along the whole length of the Spine, and receiving the
Blood of both lateral Veins, as into a common Receptacle, and through the lateral
holes of the Vertebers, conveying it to the next Veins, that is to say, the
Azygos and the Vertebral Veins, ascending through the Neck, carries it from
those to the hollow Vein; in like manner as in the Head the larger Bosom of the
hard Meninx runs out above the Division of the Brain, and receives the Blood of
surrounding Vessels to be delivered up to the Jugular Veins.

From this Pith all the Nerves of the whole Body derive their Original; neither
do any proceed from any other part, either Brain, Cerebel, or whatever it be.

However, the Pith is not a part separated from the Brain, but a production of
the same and the Cerebel, from whence, like a Stalk it springs with four Roots:
For before or rather above it springs from two protuberancies of the third
Ventricle, by which it is chiefly fastened to the Brain; behind or rather
before, from the Buttocks and Stones, by means of which it more adheres to the
Cerebel.

Now as I call this Pith a production of the Brain, others have designed it out
by other Appellations; for Ruffus affirms it to be no peculiar body of the
Brain, but the purging of the Brain. Theophilus calls it the Brain drawn out in
length; and so does also Peter Borellus* Others have named it the Apophysis;
others the Process of the Brain; because it extends it self from the Brain as
from a thick Root or Trunk, and obtains continuous Fibers with it.

Yet Protagoras and Philotinus of old, seemed to be of a contrary Opinion; who
as Lindan reports, affirmed this Pith to be no production of the Brain; but
that the Brain was the redundancy of the Spinal Pith. Whose Footsteps
Bartholine treading, affirms likewise, that the Pith is not extended from the
Brain, but that the Brain rather proceeds from the Pith; from whence, as from
its Root it rises and shoots forth, and that it is a certain process of this
Pith; deducing his Argument from certain Fishes, the Pith of whose Head and
Tail is of a vast bigness, but their Brains very small in quantity. To
Bartholine's Opinion Malpigius subscribes, and extending it farther, writes,
that all the Fibers disperc'd through the Brain and Cerebel, proceed from the
Trunk of the Spinal Pith contained within the Skull, as from an extraordinary
collection of Fibers; in like manner as in Cabbages the Fibers of the Root
breaking forth, are dispersed through the Leaves, which being wound and folded
about, form the Head, by accident furnished with a certain hollowness within,
like a Ventricle; and hence it is, that he will allow the Ventricles to be of
no use, as being made hollow by accident. Then whether the same Fibers in
number, which are rooted in the Brain, be extended into the Spinal Pith, and
there being closely united, make a more solid Trunk, or whether the Pith be a
part proceeding from the Brain, the same Malpigius examins, and adds, that
being taught by the dissection of some Fish, he thinks it probable that the
prolonged Fibers of the Spinal Pith, the Brain and Cerebel are the same in
number; and thence he believes that the Brain is an Appendix of the Spinal
Pith; or else that the Trunk of Nerves contained in the Spine, propagates the
Roots crookedly crawling through the Brain and Cerebel, in the surrounding
Ash-colored rind or shell; but that the Branches proceeding from the Head are
dispersed through the whole Body. This is also the Judgment of Fracassatus;
which he proves from hence; for that if you take a Chicken but newly formed in
the Egg, when it is but just covered with its Film or Cawl, and prick it with a
small Needle, it presently contracts, though at that time nothing possess the
Seat of the brain but the Lympha^, not yet fixed into brains, and thence he
infers, that the Brain and Cerebel are Appendixes of the Spinal Pith. But he
considerately weighs what we have said already, l. 1. c. 29. will find that
neither the Brain owes its original to the Pith, nor the Pith to the Brain,
seeing that all the parts are delineated together in the first formation, and
are the immediate Works of Nature, which depend in such a manner one upon
another, that the one can neither act or live without the other. If any one
aver, that the Fibers ascend from the Pith into the Brain, with the same
privilege I may say, that they descend from the Brain into the Pith; neither
is it any argument against me, that the brain is not sufficiently hardened at
the beginning; for that then neither is the Pith sufficiently coagulated, but
appears like a moist Slime. Besides the perception of the Senses proceeds from
the brain, as being the beginning of all the nervous Fibers, and not in the
Pith; for it is not the wound of the pith, but the wound of the brain that
hinders and obstructs the Perception. Nor does the Argument brought from a
Chicken prove any thing to the contrary: For if at the first formation of the
Chicken, the Film contract it self upon the pricking of the Needle, that is
rather a sign that then the brain, which is the beginning of all sensation, and
without which no sensation can be, was no less formed than the Pith.

XVII. The Shape of the Pith is The Coverings.
various; nor is it the same in all Creatures, nevertheless in Men it is oblong
and almost round. Vesalius, Laurentius, Picolhomini and Spigelius assert, that
it is larger and thicker at the beginning, and thinner toward the end; and so
describes it in his Table affixed: Which is deservedly found fault with by
Fallopius, who excellently well observes, that about the lower Vertebers of the
Neck, and the first of the Thorax, where the great Nerves extend themselves to
the Arms, as also in the Lo^ns, where large Nerves run out to the Thighs, it is
fuller and thicker than in the upper, middle or lower parts; but that in all
the rest of the parts it is every where for the most part, of an equal
thickness, unless it be the end that lies hid in the Os Sacrum.

XVIII. From the seventh Verteher (...) Division.
of the Breast to the lower parts, it is separated as it were into several
small strings, being the Productions of the Nerves in the pith of a newly
deceased Body dipp^d in Water, and stirred about therein so conspicuous, so
that toward the end that same vast quantity of little Strings seems in some
manner to represent the Figure of a Horses Tail. Which Riolanus, who did not
understand that the whole constitution of the Pith was fibrous, asserts to have
been so created by God, lest the Pith of the Back being soft and juicy, as it
is observed in the Neck and Back, should be bruised and broken by the continual
mo^ion of the Loins. The said divarication of the Pith toward the end into
small Ropes or Strings, the learned Tulpius questions; For, says he, near the
Os Sacrum, we have examined very diligently, but never could find those hairy
strings, which Andrew Laurentius describes in his Tables, though otherwise a most
credible Writer; We met indeed in that place with Nerves more loose than in
other places, but yet compact, and so closely united, that no hot Water would
separate their twisted Body, as that other asserts; unless he meant by Strings
those Nerves into which the extreme part of this Spinal Marrow is evidently
distracted.

But ocular view opposes and resolves this Doubt; by which it manifestly
appears, that the lower part of the Pith, especially that which is contained in
the Loins and Os Sacrum, being beaten and sti^r'd in the Water, will separate
into several strings. Now the Reason why Tulpius did not observe that
dissolution, might be, because he let the Pith lie in the Water, but never
stirred and shook it sufficiently.

XIX. The Pith within the Skull Its Cavity.
has a Hollowness like a Pen shaped for writing, constituting the lower part of
the fourth Ventricle, and so far, to the midst of its thickness it is
manifestly divided into the Right and Left part, in the same manner as the
Brain is divided in the upper part: And hence the Palsy sometimes in the
Right, sometimes in the Left side. But this Division in the outside of the
Cran^um, in the Cavity of the Spine, is not conspicuous to the Eyes, because of
the exterior Tunicle or hard Meninx, which enfolds it round about, for which
Reason the whole Pith being viewed without, seems round and simple, without any
division to the end of the Os Sacrum; though if that Tunicle be taken away,
there is in reality such a division found by the intervening thin Film, and may
be showed by neat and curious Dissection; and not only by Dissection, but by
the blowing in of Wind the same division may be discovered. Thus Bartholine,
after a tedious Examination, by putting a Pipe into the Hollowness ^bove the
separation, easily brought the Wind to the extreme parts, so that the whole
Body of the Pith, where the Division ran along, seemed to be raised up.

But this Division descends no farther than about half way of the Substance:
Nor is there any other manifest Discovery to be found in any part of the Pith.

XX. It is lapt about with two The Coverings.
Membranes; of which the first, that enfolds it immediately, arises from the
Pia Matter, which being sprinkled with innumerable small Arteries entering the
Substance of the Pith, washes and nourishes it with Vital Blood, the remaining
part of which Blood, intermixed with little Arteries, suck up and convey back
to the heart. The other Membrane sticking to the first by the means of small
tender Fibers, proceeds from the thick Meninx. Gerard Blasius observes a third
between these two, which as resembling a Spider's Web, he calls the
Arachnoides, and alleges that it sticks to the thin Meninx, and may be easily
separated from it either with a Bodkin or by blowing. About these Tunicles is
wrapped a strong and nervous Membrane by a strong Ligament, that binds the
fore-parts of the Vertebers, which perserves the Pith of the Spine from damage
in the bending and extension of the Back. Over this a thick and viscous Humor
spreads it self, to moisten and smooth it, that it may be more easy to prevent
pain in motion upon its being over-dry. With which Humor all the Joints are
moistened for their more easy Motion. Lindan and Blasius erroneously number
this Membrane with the containing parts of the Pith, in regard it rather serves
to bind the Vertebers withinside, than to enfold the Pith.

Besides the forementioned Coverings, the Pith is also included within a Bony
Sheath, for its better preservation, the upper part of which is covered with
the Skull.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Mamillary Processes, the Pituary Kernel, the Funnel, the
wonderful Net, and the Nerves proceeding from the Pith within the Skull.
See Table 12, and 13.

HAving gone thus far in Demonstration, the Brain is to be raised up in the
forepart, that the Parts which lie underneath may be more easily seen.

I. Among the Parts that lie hid The Mamillary Processes.
under the Bulk of the Brain, the first that occur to the Eye are the Mamillary
or Papillary Processes, so called from their Figure, which is round at the end
like a Teat.

These were not reckoned by the Ancients among the Nerves, by reason of the
softness of their Substance, and because they never exceed the thick Meninx and
the Cavity of the Skull, neither have productions like other Nerves, and
therefore erroneously by most Modern Anatomists added to the Number of the
Nerves, and said to proceed from the Pith, when ocular View evinces the
contrary.

II. These Processes are two in number; Their Number.
white, soft, long, round at the end, hollow within; in men thinner and less,
but bigger in Calves, Sheep and other Brutes.

III. Being propagated from the Their Original.
globous Pith, and the foremost Ventricles (for Willis errs in saying they rise
from the Thighs of the long Marrow, and clad with the thin Meninx) they are
carried between the Brain, the Os Sphoenois, and the Bone of the Forehead, to
the Hollowness of the Sieve-like Bone, envelopp'd with the thick Meninx, into
which they insinuate themselves, the Bony Process, called the Cocks-comb,
intervening between and distinguishing them one from another.

IV. The thick Meninx investing Little Pipes.
these Hollownesses of the Sieve-like Bone, is not only bored through with many
little Holes, but also with many little Pipes extended through the Holes of the
Sieve-like Bone, and so opens into the Spungy Flesh of the Nostrils adhering to
the Spungy Bones, and through those little Pipes transmits the Phlegm out of the
Ventricles of the Brain, and brings it into the said Spungy Flesh and Spungy
Bones of the Nostrils, adhering to the Ventricles above, and full of the said
Spungy Flesh. Which is the Reason that something may flow down from the Brain,
but nothing can ascend back from the Nostrils; for that if any thing do ascend
upward, it stops there; partly by reason of the contrary situation of the Pores
of the fungous Flesh, and partly from the winding of the slender Pipes about
the Extremities.

These Pipes are easily discovered in the Head of an Ox or a Calf, if the Bones
of the upper part of the Nostrils be so taken away, that their whole Cavity may
appear; for then those little Pipes are manifestly to be seen pendulous through
the holes of the Ethmoides-Bone and extending themselves into the Spungy Flesh
of the Nostrils.

V. From each of these Processes The Channels for the Phlegm.
there passes a Channel from the upper Ventricles, all their full length,
running out to the Ethmoides-Bone, so large in the Brain of an Ox, Calf or
Sheep, as to admit a Goose-Quill. But in a dead man so very narrow as hardly it
will admit the point of a Bodkin; and therefore not to be seen but in Bodies
newly deceased; for if the Carcasses be kept for any time, the Substance of
these Processes grows so lank, that the said Channel is never to be found;
which is the Reason that these Channels are by many Modern Anatomists overseen
and not observed. And among that Number is Vesalius, who affirms, that no Phlegm
falls down through those Processes, and that there is no Passage within them,
neither can be by reason of their slenderness. To his Authority Riolanus also
subscribing, avers that the flegmatic Filth does not distill through the
Mamillary Process and the Holes of the Sieve-like Bones; for that it would
infect the pure Air which is required in those parts. Upon the same Foundations
Rolfinch asserts, that he never could find any Cavity in these Processes;
because perhaps he never examined other than stale and long kept Carcasses. But
let us hear what Fallopius says concerning these Processes. It is hard, says
he, to observe these Channels in Men, because they are too slender and
diminutively small; but in Brutes, as Oxen, Goats, Sheep, and the like, it is
easy to see, that these Processes arise from the foremost Ventricles, and that
a manifest Hole reaches. They have a Passage from the Hole to the Colaterium or
Sieve-like Bone, which Passage is bigger or less according to the proportion of
the Process: For in the Process of an Ox it is very large; in a Man so narrow,
that unless it be in a Carcass newly deceased it is hardly to be discovered.
Which perhaps is the Reason that these Processes have been so little known to
several Anatomists.

VI. This innermost Cavity of the Their Coats.
Processes is very white, and envelop'd with a thin Film, common and continuous
with that which overspreads the upper Ventricles withinside. It is seldom
empty, but for the most part full of a slimy and limpid Juice.

VII. It is the Opinion of Sneider and The Use of them.
other Anatomists, that these Papillary Processes are the real Nerves proper to
the Sense of Smelling; but Galen assigns them a double Use; first, to serve for
the Smell; and partly for evacuation of the Flegmatic Excrements out of the
Ventricles of the Brain. As to their first Use, Avicen, Hali, Fucksius,
Bauhinus, Epigelius, Casser and several others subscribe to his Opinion,
affirming these Processes. But as to their evacuating Function, few of them
make any mention of it, though indeed it be their primary and only Office.

VIII. For that they are no Odoratory Not Odoratory Nerves.
Nerves, there are many Reasons to prove.

1. They have no Resemblance with the Nerves. 2. They have a large Cavity,
which is not to be found in any Nerves. 3. They do not rise from the Pith,
which is the Original of all the Nerves. 4. They do not proceed from the thick
Meninx and the Cranium, nor send forth any nervous strings into the Membranes
of the Nostrils, which is the Seat of Smelling; but only empty Phlegm through
the little Holes of the Ethmois-Bone into the spungy Bones of the Nostrils.
Besides, a Nervous Organ full of Excrements, would be improper for that Use; as
it happens also in all other Nerves, whose Office is prejudiced by the Moisture
and Obstruction of Phlegm. But in these Channels Flegmatic Humors are always
stagnant, either in a greater or lesser Quantity; and that also in Dogs, which
are Creatures endu'd with a most exquisite sense of Smelling, and yet receive
not any impediment in their Smell from thence* Neither in Man is the Sense of
Smelling prejudiced by a moderate Quantity of Phlegm sticking in these parts;
but if so great a Quantity be gathered together in the spungy part of the
Nostrils, so as to make it swell like a Sponge, by which the Nerves of the
Nostrils and Membranes are compressed, and free Respiration hindered, then the
Smell is diminished and hindered, as is known to happen in a Pose.
Manifest it is therefore that these Processes are no Odoratory Nerves, but
only Channels through which the Flegmatic Excrements flow from the foremost
Ventricles of the Brain; which slip out at their Extremities through the
Porosities of the thick Meninx, and the Sieve-like and spungy Bones, to the
Nostrils and Mouth; which Porosities are so small, that the Phlegm more rarely
flows out of it self, only when it is very thin; but for the most part is
squeezed out through the compressure of the Brain; which is done, lest the cold
Air breathed in, should enter the Cavities of the Brain, and so that most noble
Bowel be overmuch refrigerated. To which purpose the ruddy spungy pieces of
Flesh are so constituted, that they give a passage, it is true, to these
flegmatic Excrements, but permit no ingress of the ascending Air to the
Sievelike Bone; because upon breathing in the Air, by reason of their softness,
they fall down and shut, and hence they allow no passage for the Odour-bearing
Vapor to the Papillary Processes; but exclude and drive it out. From hence it
is manifest how greatly Rolfinch is mistaken, who writes that the Air breathed
in, partly enters the Ventricles of the Brain through the Papillary Processes,
and partly through the sides of it reaches the thin Membrane; neither of which
can be, seeing that the spungy Flesh of the Nostrils hinders the entrance of
any Air to the Papillary Processes.

Therefore the flegmatic Humors collected in the Ventricles of the Brain, are
evacuated through these Processes; which, when they have passed, a good part
descends to the Jaws and their Glandules, to moisten the Jaws, Larynx and
Gullet, and to afford plenty of Spittle for the better concoction and passage
of the Meat in swallowing. But that which remains of these flegmatic Humors and
is most superfluous, flows toward the Nostrils and Palate, partly to moisten
the inside of the Mouth and Chaps, and partly to mix a sermentaceous quality
with the Meat when chewed, and partly for the remainder to be evacuated forth.
These Vapors upon the too much refrigeration of the Head, are collected many
times more crude and copious, in regard the Vapors ascending from the inferior
parts, for want of sufficient heat, are not dissipated nor sufficiantly
conco^ed; but being condensed, turn unto slimy S^ot, which when by reason of
its viscosity and redundancy, it cannot pass through the straight passages of
the Sieve-like Bones, and the spungy Porosities of the upper part of the inside
of the Nostrils, cannot be either suddenly or conveniently enough evacuated,
occasion an Obstruction in those Passages, which is called Gravedo or the Pose,
which the immission of Errhines, by their incision and attenuation of the
Humors diminish, and Sternutories evacuate; when the Membranes o^ the Brain,
the Membranes of the interior Nostrils being twing'd by their Acrimony* and
irritated by Sympathy, strongly and forcibly contract themselves, and so by
compressing the Brain, squeeze out the flegmatic Humor contained in the Brain
through the obstructed Passages, by a kind of violence.

IX. After these Processes, you presently Nerves within the Cranium.
come to the Nerves, which proceed all from the Pith, some while it is yet
included in the Brain, and other while when it is fallen down out of it.

X. Of the first Primary Nerves, according The seven Pairs.
to Galen, there are reckoned seven Pairs, or Yoaklings together. Which Number
the more Modern have augmented to eight, nine and ten, or more Pairs; reckoning
in not only the Larger and Primary Nerves, but also all the Little Nerves,
which Galen takes only for the Strings of the Larger, and dividing them into
Pairs.

These seven Pairs are usually comprehended in these Verses;

Optica prima, Oculos movet altera, tertia g^stat;
Quartaque, quinta audit; Vaga sexta est, septima Lingua.
But because these Pairs proceeding out of the Pith, before it falls out of the
Cranium, use to be shown, after the Demonstration of the Brain, we shall
observe the same Method in this Chapter, leaving the rest of the Nerves
proceeding from the Pith of the Back to another Place.

XI. The Papillary Processes being The first Pair.
removed, presently comes in sight the first pair of Nerves, called the Optic
Optic.
Pair; conveying Animal Spirits conducing to the Faculty of seeing, to the Eye,
and reverberating back the Beams of Visible things to the common Sensory; which
is the chiefest among all the Pairs, but softer and more porous than the rest.
This Pair is said to rise more behind, from the beginning of the Pith, where
the two Thighs of the Arch are stretched forth. But if its production be more
diligently examined, beginning from the Eyes themselves, it will appear, that
that pair takes its original from the stringy protuberances seated in the third
Ventricle; for it moves forward from the Eyes to mutual conjunction; hence
being separated again, it runs directly to the stringy Protuberances; nay it
grows and cleaves on both sides to their sides, and putting off its inward
enfolding Tunicle upon the inner side, next toward their substance, is
immediately united with them, and so intermixed with their Substance, that
Reason seems to persuade us that it has its own Fibers continuous with their
Fibers. And so it proceeds all along the outside of these Protuberances, to the
Hole of the Arse, in which place the outward Face of both the Optic Nerves
concurs in the middle of those Protuberances, and turns back again upwards, and
so jointly ascends as far as the top of those Protuberances; and there again
they seem to be turned backward again, and spread forth, and so form an Arch;
which Riolanus observes, though he sets not forth their whole Course so
exactly. The Optic Nerves in the middle way are joined above the Saddle of the
Sphoenoides-Bone; which Conjunction Bauhinus, Mercatus, Sennertus and many
others believe to be not only a bare Touching, but an absolute Confusion of
Substances together, that there may be a more easy passage of the Spirits from
one Eye to the other, not only to augment the Sight in sound people, but also
in those that have but one Eye, whose single Eye requires to equal the Sight of
two. Which Opinion Baptista Porta defends with several plausible Reasons.
Others believe these Nerves not to be confounded together, but to cut each
other in the form of a Cross, so that the Right Nerve runs to the Left Eye, and
the Left to the Right; but this Sentence no Demonstration confirms. Riolanus
tells us, that these Nerves are joined only by bare Contaction, by means of a
little Swath or small Channel cast between in the form of an H. For my part, I
rather think that without any Band put between, these Nerves at their Meeting
grow to their Membranes firmly and mutually: Which not only ocular View seems
to teach us, but it is that also which has been confirmed by several
Observations of Anatomists. For Vesalius, Aquapondens and Valpenda write, that
they have sometimes observed these Nerves separated through their whole Course,
but commonly united to the Membranes, when they meet. And Lindan transcribes a
pertinent History to this Matter out of Cesalpinus. Once, at a Dissection, one
of the Visory Nerves, says he, was found lank and fallen, the other full; but
the Sight was weak in that Eye to which the extenuated Nerve was carried; for
the Party was wounded in his Head near that part; but the extenuated Nerve did
not proceed to the opposite part, but was turned back to it. This was seen at
Pisa, in the Year 1590. from whence all the Spectators inferred, that the
Visory Nerves did not cross one another, but meet and return back to the same
place.

Vesalius also tells us of a Woman that was hanged, who had lost her right Eye
from her youth; in which Carcass the right Nerve was seen to be thinner all the
length of its Course and redder than the left.

Now such Observations as these, wholly destroy all these Opinions of
intersection and intermixture of the Substance.

After these Nerves are separated from their Conjunction, prepared on both
sides through the Hole of the Wedgeresembling-Bone, the one runs forward to the
right, the other to the left Eye, and enters the very Center in Men, but in
Brutes the more lateral part.

XII. This Pair within the Skull, is Their Coats.
overlaid only with a thin Membrane or Film, but coming forth of the Skull, it
assumes a thick Membrane also from the Holes of the Bones through which it
passes, to the very Eyes; out of which Membranes and the middle Marrowy
Substance, spread in order together about the bulbous part of the Eye, are
formed the three Coats or Tunicles of the Eye.

Galen, following the Opinion of Heorphilus, affirms, that the Optic Nerves are
hollow, and that they have a manifest hole; and Plempius prescribes the manner
of Discovery. But I must ingenuoussy confess, that I never observed this
Hollowness yet; though I have made use of Plempius's Method; nor could Carpus,
Vesalius, Fallopius, Columbus, Valverda, Aquapendens, nor several other most
excellent Anatomists. For their Substance seems to be thick and close, which
though like that of other Nerves, it be constituted of several strings by the
Benefit of a Membrane growing together, as Coiter well observes; yet is it in
this different from other Nerves, that it is somewhat porous in the middle, and
seems to contain something of a Marrowy Substance in those Pores. For in a
Carcass newly deceased and full of Juice, if dissected athwart, the Optic Nerve
be pressed with the Fingers, there will come forth a little conspicuous
Moisture; but it is a difficult thing for any man to imagine any such
conspicuous Cavity as Galen speaks of. See more of this, l. 8. c. 1.

XIII. Rolfinch advances something The Course or Substance of the Strings
new concerning the Course of those Threads. For he writes, that the Threads in
other Nerves run forth with a direct Course all the length of the Nerves, but
in the Optics are crookedly twisted one with another. He adds, that he read
with admiration in Eukachius, and found it to be so in the Optic, that it was
folded like a thin Matron's Kercher, into innumerable wrinkles, distributed in
the same order, and bound about with a Tunicle enclosing those Pleights, and
that the whole might be unfolded into a large Membrane. Something ^like this
Malpigius saw and describes in the Sword-Fish; but he adds, that he could not
discover those Foldings in the Optic neither of an Ox, a Goat, or a Hog, though
slightly boiled, for the more distinct discerning them by his Microscope; but
as it were a bundle of little Twigs, which being squeezed with a round orifice,
ejected the soft Substance of the Brain, and cloth with their proper Tunicle
derived from the Pia Matter, carry along with them certain bloody Vessels, and
that out of these, if the Optic were squeezed in a new killed Creature, drops
of Blood would burst forth from the Spaces of those Bodies; but that the said
Threads are as it were bundl'd up together by the hard and thin Meninx
enveloping the whole Nerve. Fracassatus believes, that the said Threads of the
Optics which he calls Fibers, arise by continuation, as from Roots, from the
small Fibers of the Brain, and only differ in this one thing, that their
Originals are to be derived from the smallest, and consequently the weakest
beginnings. This he not improbably conjectures, though by reason of the
extraordinary slenderness of the small Fibers of the Brain, and the weakness of
our Sight, that which Reason seems to dictate, cannot be discerned. As to those
complications of the Threads of which Rolfinch seems to write in general, with
out any distinction of Creatures, as if they were in all Animals, I believe
it is a thing to be denied, that they are to be discerned in all Creatures,
since that besides my self, many others never observed them either in Man,
Sheep or Oxen; and for that the Optic, like all the other Nerves in the said
Animals are composed of straight Threads. If by chance it be otherwise in some
Fish, it may be so; and Malpigius's diligence has cleared that Point; but from
thence no general Rule can be deduced.

XIV. This Pair being taken away, The Pituitary Kernel.
the Pituitary Kernel comes in sight, so called from its Use, which is to
receive the flegmatic Humors collected in the third or middle Ventricle, and to
send them down to the Iaws and Palate through the neighboring Holes. Or which
our modern Anatomists conceive to be the better Opinion through the Veiny or
perhaps Lymphatic Vessels, to pour them not into the Jaws and Palate, but into
other Veins, and there to mix them with the Veiny Blood; in like manner as it
happens in most other Kernels, whose collected Humors are sucked up and carried
off through peculiar Lymphatic and Salival, or other Vessels, and remix'd with
the sanguineous Mass. And so this Kernel called the Pituitary Kernel, is so
called from this Function assigned it, which whether it be its true Function or
no, we shall afterward enquire.

XV. It borrows small slender Arteries Its Vessels.
from the Carotides, and sends little Veins to the Iugulars. The Insertion of
the Arteries appears by the injection of Ink into the Carotis; for then the
exterior part of the Kernel being furnished with several small Vessels, will be
died of a black color. And because the Liquor continually flowing into it
through the small Arteries, cannot all be contained nor spent within it,
therefore the superfluous part is again evacuated through other passages, and
as is now adays thought flows down through little Veins to the Jugulars. Besides
these Blood-bearing Vessels, Wharton assigns to this Kernel, Nerves from the
Net-resembling Fold; of which nevertheless there does not seem to be any need
at all in this Kernel.

XVI. It is seated under the Meninxes, Its Situation.
in the Cavity of the Spoenoides-Bone, which is generally called the
Horses-Saddle; as representing in some measure the figure of a Saddle; for it
is depressed, above somewhat concave; below gibbous and almost foursquare.

XVII. The Substance of it is harder Its Substance.
and more compacted than that of other Glandules; and next it is overcast with
a thin Film proceeding from the Funnel, expanded round about it, which a
portion of the hard Meninx covers, by which this Kernel is fastened to the
Saddle, not only in Men, but in Hogs, Calves and Oxen. Which Connection however
in other Creatures is not alike close and firm; for in Cats, Conies and Dogs it
is so loose, that upon removing the Funnel, it often comes away with it. Its
Divison.


XVIII. The Bulk of the Substance in Men and Calves seems to be united and
individual; but in Cats and Dogs it seems to be composed of two easily
separable and distinct Kernels.

XIX. With this Kernel not only Its Bigness.
Men, but all perfect Creatures are furnished; but the proportion of its
quantity varies according to the Bulk of the Creature. For many times it is
Serum can by no means flow out of it* sideways or if it should flow out,
whither should it pass? For there is no Part near to which it can safely
descend without an extreme prejudice to the Part. If you will say, that the Phlegm
not so large in larger Creatures as in lesser. And where it is largest, there
most Branches of the Carotid Arteries enter into it, and the wonderful Net is
very large, as in Oxen and Sheep. Where it is less, there fewer Arteries
approach it, and the Net is thin and narrow, as in Men and Horses; and hence it
seems probable, that either through the greater quantity of Arteries, or
through the greater necessity of its Use, that in some Creatures it is bigger,
and for contrary Cause less.

XX. Into this Kernel the Choana or Infundibulum or Funnel terminates; so
called from its resemblance: first is an orbicular Cavity with a wide Orifice
(therefore by some called Pelvis or the Basin) beginning from the middle hole
of the third Ventricle, and ending with a long and narrow channel inserted into
the Pituitary Kernel.

It is formed out of the Pia Matter, where it enfolds the Basis of the Brain,
and is of a dark color, and uses to be found full of Phlegm; which it was
thought to transmit to the Kernel.

XXI. Round about the Pituitary Kernel at the sides* of the Saddle is spread
the wonderful Net; by others called the Net-resembling Fold, so called from its
artificial and admirable Network Contexture.

It is chiefly constituted by the Carotid Arteries, ascending the sides of the
Neck to the Head, and through the Gapings of the Cranium, entering the Cranium
near the optic Nerves; with which at the lower part some few Branches are mixed
from the Cervicals; for both the Carotides meeting together at the bottom of
the Brain near the Saddle of the Sphoenoides, are wonderfully interwoven with
Branches together with some few Branches of the Cervicals, form this Fold.

Wolaeus thinks that some Branches of the Jugular Veins are intermixed with
this Fold, which carry back the superfluous Blood; denied by Rolfinch, who will
not allow it to consist of any thing but Arteries. Reason supports Walaeus; but
Ocular View backs Rolfinch, in regard no notable Veins can be discerned to be
interwoven with the Arteries, and these so few, that they are not to be
compared in number with the Arteries,

This Fold is manifestly to be seen in Calves and many other brute Creatures,
and shows in them as it were a contexture of many Nets woven together, but so
joined together in a continued Series, that they cannot be separated: But in
Man it is slender and obscurely discerned, so that oftentimes it seems to be
missing; which was the Reason that Vesalius, Fucksius, Ialverda, Carpus,
Ingraffius and Wepfer asserted that it was not to be found in Man. Nevertheless
Varolius, Picolhomini, Massa, Sylvius, Riolanus and others allow this Fold to
be really in Man, and tell us the way how to discover it. For my part, I have
frequently found it in newly deceased Bodies, full of Blood, and not emaciated
with long Sickness, but very slender, and in nothing so conspicuous as in a
Calf or a Sheep.

XXII. The Use of this Net is to stop the impetuous influx of the Blood of the
Brain, and to break the Current of it by these innumerable Windings and
Turnings. Which Influx being more impetuous in Brutes that look downwards, than
in Man that walks with his Head upright, there this Net is more useful to them
than to men.

From this Net the Branches of the Carotid Artery ascending yet farther, enter
the upper Ventricles at the lower hindermost part, and form in them the Choroid
Fold.

XXIII. Now to return from the wonderful Net to the Pituitary Kernel, which
seems to be framed for the sake of this Net, we have already told you the
common Opinions of the Use of it; but whether true or no, we shall now enquire.
And I think one Argument may do the Work; for if it receive the Phlegm
continually flowing through the Funnel from the third Ventricle of the Brain,
of necessity it must discharge it again through other Passages and to send it
to other parts; but there are no other passages through which, nor no other
parts that evacuation can be made, ergo, etc. The Major is unquestionably true:
The Minor is proved, because the Horses Saddle consists of a solid and thick
Bone, no where bored through or pervious. The Kernel also it self is covered
with a hard Meninx or Membrane, and firmly fastened to the Saddle, which
Membrane no where lies open, but only in that place where the Funnel approaches
to the Kernel; so that the Flegmatic may be evacuated out of the Bony Saddle or
hard Meninx, that is to assert that a Camel may pass through the eye of a Needle
For if we were talking of the most subtle Spirits, something might be allowed;
but that this visible and thick Liquor should pass through invisible pores, is
beyond all Belief. As to the Veins and Lymphatic Vessels sucking up that
Flegmatic Serum, and pouring it into the larger veins, there was never any
Anatomist yet so quick-sighted as to demonstrate any such Conveyance of a
Vessel. And therefore of necessity that Opinion must fall to the ground. Now
then we must find out another more probable use of this Kernel; which is not to
receive the Phlegm falling out of the middle Ventricle of the Brain, but rather
to separate a part of the Flegmatic Serum from the Arteries of the wonderful
Net, and transmit it to the middle Ventricle through the Funnel that lies above
it, that so ascending to the superior Ventricles, it may flow through the
Papillary Processes to the Nostrils and Roof of the Mouth. It is well known
that the Choroid Fold has several small Kernels intermixed between the
divarications of the little Arteries, which we grant to be appointed to drain
out the serous Phlegm from the Blood of their Vessels, and then to empty it into
the Cavities of the Ventricles. But the wonderful Net, which consists of many
more little Arteries, has none of these small Kernels to drain out the Serum;
yet because the Arterious Blood was to be there prepared for the making of
Spirits, and freed from some part of the serous Phlegm, the Chief Creator
instead of those small Kernels, has allowed it one large Kernel in the middle
of it, that is to say, in the Cavity of the Bone of the Horses Saddle, and in
such a place where the separated Liquor may conveniently be discharged into the
Ventricles of the Brain, and so be emptied through the common passages which
are the Papillary Processes. Then that certain Arteries enter the Kernel, as it
were to discharge something into it, is apparent from the Experiment of
Injection recited. Nor let any man think the ascent of the Humor to the middle
Ventricle seated above the Kernel to be difficult; for the Brain by its
alternate heaving and falling, by degrees gently draws upward whatever Humors
are contained within the Cranium, through the Passages appointed for every one,
and among the rest of the Humors, the Flegmatic Serum flowing out of the said
Kernel into the Funnel; and hence it is, that the Funnel below continually
receiving as much as it empties into the Ventricle above, is never empty, but
is always found full of Flegmatic Serum. And that this is the true Office of
this Kernel, is apparent from hence, that it is lesser or bigger as the
necessity of its Use requires; bigger in those Creatures that have a larger
wonderful Net, and to which more little Arteries come; lesser in those that
have but a small Net, and where fewer Arteries encompass and enter the Kernel,
which afford a less quantity of Flegmatic Serum.

XXIV. After the Demonstration The second Pair moving the Eyes.
of these, the second Pair of Nerves comes in view, which lies next to the
first Pair, but much less and harder.

This rising near the first at the innermost part of the Pith, where it begins
is united, and by and by separated, is carried on both sides through the second
Hole of the Spoenois-Bone, and assigns Branches to the Muscles of the upper
Eyelid and Eye. Moreover, Fallopius observes, that some certain slender Fibers
of this Pair, accompanying the Visory Pair, are disseminated into the exterior
Membranes of the Eye.

XXV. The third Pair adjoining The Third Pair.
to the foregoing Pair, arises from the side of the beginning of the Pith, with
a small Nerve (erroneously thought to be the Root of the second Pair, with
which it has no communion or conjunction) and thence is carried under the
bottom of the Brain directly forward, and being alone, perforates the thick
Meninx on both sides, and then joined to the second, and proceeding forth with
it through the common Hole, it enters the Path leading to the Eye, where it is
dispersed into four little Branches. The first of these is carried through the
Fat of the Eye, and comes to the Fifth or Troclear Muscle, the Skin of the
Forehead and the upper Eyelid. The Second, through the proper Hole bored
through the Bone of the Jaw, and proceeds to the Lip and its Muscles, and some
Muscles of the Nose. The Third, partly through the Hole of the upper Jaw seated
under the Path of the Eye; partly passing through the Holes of the
Wedg-resembling Bone, is dispersed through the Tunicles clothing the Cavity of
the Nostrils, and the spungy Flesh, conferring the Sense of Smelling to them,
and stretches out a little Branch to the Muscle contracting the Wing of the
Nose. The Fourth is inserted into the inner part of the Temporal Muscle; whence
it comes to pass that the Forehead, Eyes and outward part of the Nose contract
themselves by consent upon any ungrateful Smell: But no part of this Pair comes
to the Tongue, or to its Tunicles, so that it is a wonder that the ancient
Physicians and some of their modern Admirers should think this Pair to be
serviceable to the Taste; which it neither is nor can be, but only conduces to
the Smell, as not entering the Tunicles of the Tongue, but of the Nostrils;
which was the Sense of Galen; with whom Vesalius agrees, when he writes, that
the inner Tunicle of the Nostrils is formed by the foresaid third little Branch
of this Pair. And therefore I think the old Verses that ascribe the Tasting
Faculty to the third Pair, should be thus mended;

Optica prima, oculos movet altera, tertia odorat;
Quarta est quae gustat; quinta audit; sed vaga sexta;
Septima laxatas Linguae moderatur habenas.
Veslingius adds a little Nerve to this Third Pair, which rising from the
bottom of the Brain and entering the Path of the Eye, is carried to its
Trochlear Muscle; but this seems rather to be the first Branch of the second
Muscle already described.

XXVI. The Fourth Pair follows, The fourth Pair serving to the Taste.
which is Bartholine's Fifth; and thought to be the thicker Root of the Third
Conjugation.

This, with the foregoing Pair, arising from the sides of the Pith, but a
little more to the forepart, sends forth first of all a small Branch to the
Cavity of the Ears, which obliquely enters the Tympanum. Then on both sides it
descends through the third hole of the Wedge-resembling Bone; and then after it
has dispersed its Branches to the Muscles of the Temples, the Face, the Cheeks,
the Skin of the Face, the Teeth of the upper Jaw and the Gums, is carried to
the inner hole of the lower Jaw, and affords little Branches to the Roots of
the lower Teeth, and then passing out at the outward hole of the same Jaw,
seated below, it is dispersed into the lower Lip and the Skin of it. The
remarkable Branch of this Pair that remains, passing through the Muscles that
lie hid in the Mouth, is dispersed into the sides of the Tongue and through its
Tunicle.

To this fourth Pair there join two slender and hard Pairs, though generally
excluded out of the number by reason of their slenderness; of which the first;
which others think to be the slender Root of the Fourth Couple, has its
Original next to the former Pair, issuing out with it through the common hole,
yet not united, is carried to the Palate, and conduces to the Sense of Tasting.
The latter rises a little before the Fifth Pair, whence by many it is said to
be the Root of the Fifth Pair, from the middle of the Pith, and passing over
the third pair, and issues out through the common hole together with the second
and third pair, and wastes it self into the Muscle that draws the Eye on one
side.

XXVII. Next follows the Fifth The fifth Pair serving to the Hearing.
Pair, called (...), or Auditorium, conducing to the Sense of Hearing.

This rises from the lateral parts of the Pith, to which the Bridges of the
Cerebel are opposite, next to the sides of the former, a little lower. Coming
of each side to the Stony Bone, it is divided into two Branches; of which the
greater and softer enters the proper Channel of the Stony Bone, or the first
hole of the Bone of the Temples, and provides for the Organ of Hearing. The
lesser, which is the harder, is carried downward, and sliding through the Hole,
called the Blind Hole by the Ancients, without the Skull, between the
Teat-resembling process and the Stytoides Appendix, dispences little Branches
to the Temporal Muscle, as also to the Muscles of the Jaw and Larynx, to the
Chaps and Skin of the outward Ear. Rolfinch however affirms, that he has not
always found that distribution to the Larynx always constant and ordinary;
neither does Vesalius seem willing to admit it. Riolanus observes that the same
Nerve issuing out of the Cranium, not only provides for the aforesaid Muscles,
but also sends some little Branches into the Nostrils and Cheeks, and from
thence the greatest part of it is carried to the Roots of the Teeth, the Larynx
and the Tongue. Nevertheless he adds, Hence it is that deafish people are
somewhat hoarse, and that a violent and close stopping of the Ears stops great
Fluxes of Blood. Hence the Teeth are set on edge with grating sounds, and that
naturally dumb People are deaf, and deaf People subject to pant; that People
that dig in their Ears very hard, cough; and that the Ears of Peripneumonics
are always moist; all which things happen by reason of the Communication of the
Nerves of the Fifth Pair with these Parts.

This brief Description of the fifth Pair is obvious in Demonstrations; but
they who endeavor to deliver a more exquisite Description of it, and its
farther Distribution through the Organs of Hearing, do not all agree one with
another; neither in Dissections do the Distributions of the Nerves occur alike
in all Bodies, Nature sporting and varying as well in these as in several other
parts of the Body.

Eustachius, concerning this Matter thus writes; The Fifth Pair of the Nerves
of the Brain does not consist of two Nerves as others believe: but has two
unequal stalks, on each side, of which the biggest is neatly hollowed to the
full length like a Semicircle, and kindly embraces the less; and so being both
joined together, proceed obliquely to the foremost and exterior part, as far
off the extreme part of the Hollowness, bored through in the Stone-like Bone
for their sakes; where the lesser stalk separating from the bigger, finds a
little hole prepared for it, and enters it, and with a wonderful winding course
shoots forth without the Skull. The bigger stalk seems to be divided into three
portions little distant one from the other, of which the principal is Caps, a
little hole pervious into the Cochlear-Bone; but whether it cover it like a
Pot-lid, or pierce any deeper, and be twined about within the Snaky Curles of
that Bone, I could not well examine, because of the difficulty of handling those
Parts.

Fallopius explains the same thing somewhat otherwise. The first Pair, says he,
assists the Hearing, consisting of two Nerves; the one, than which there is no
Nerve more soft except the Visory, designed to the Sense of Hearing; the other,
which is also assigned to the fifth Pair, because it arises from the same place
with the softer, and reaches together with the same to the Stone-like Bone; but
indeed it is a distinct Nerve, and harder than the former, and equally as hard
as the rest of the Nerves which form ihe rest of the Pairs; nor will any Reason
allow it to be a part of the soft one. The other portion of the fifth Pair,
which is soft and by me called the Hearing-Nerve, coming together with the hard
one to the extremity of that Den by the means of certain very narrow middle
holes, is distributed into two Cavities; of which the one is by me called the
Labyrinth; the other, the Spoon, or Spoon-like Portion; neither does it proceed
any farther, or send any Nerve from its self to the exterior Parts. And Coiter
testifies, that he has often found it, as Fallopius describes it.

Vesalius differing from Fallopius, thus answers, That Difference by thee
observed in the hard and soft Original of the fifth Pair, or of its being
carried to its proper hole, I have not as yet discovered: For there is no
nearer way whereby the foremost Portion of the Nerve of the fifth Pair can be
carried or distributed to the beginning of the Den, which I compare to the
Chamber of a Mine. And though you describe the hard Portion of the fifth Pair,
as if it were of no Use to the Organ of Hearing; yet you must take notice that
it produces a stalk that runs through the hole, beculiar to the vaulted Den.
Besides, when I observe the Hole admitting the fifth Pair, and see that there
is a passage to be met with in the foremost Seat of it, which ends at length, I
cannot understand, how you, while you divide the fifth Pair into soft and hard,
and assert the hard Portion to be slenderest, and seated behind the other, can
expect it should enter the said Passage without some kind of crossing and
running athwart, which would prove the course and situation of your hard
Portion above and soft one below: For to my sight, the former and not the
hinder part seems to enter the said Passage, which ceases in the Blind Hole
under the Ear toward the hinder parts.

Here Vesalius describes an exact Distribution of the fifth Pair of the Nerves,
though it be a difficult thing to demonstrate it so exactly in a dead Body,
especially for those that are overhasty in Dissection; so that it is only a
Labor to be performed by sharpsighted, dextrous and patient Anatomists.

XXVIII. The Sixth Pair, which The Vagous Pair.
provides for many Parts in the middle and lower Belly, and thence called the
Vagous or Wandering Pair, arises a little below the fifth Pair, covered over
with strong Membranes, by reason of its longer Course, and connex'd to the
neighboring Parts.

At the Beginning it is composed of several little Nerves and Fibers, which
Fibers are presently so united and covered over with the same Membrane, that
they seem to constitute one Nerve.

Between these little Nerves collected together by this Union, in each of the
vagous Nerves there is one, which arises not from the Pith within the Cranium,
but from the Pith of the Neck (for which Discovery we are beholden to Willis)
from which place along the sides of the Pith, into which it is never all the
way inserted, but only fastened by thin Fibers, it ascends upward toward the
Head, and increases in Bulk; hence carried to the inside of the Cranium, it is
fastened to the Fibers of the fifth Pair, and with those issues forth at the
same hole, so that you would think they grew together into one Trunk.

After their Egress, being again separated from the Trunk of the vagous Nerve,
it reflects back and afterward imparts certain little Branches to the Muscles
of the Neck and Shoulders, descends to the Scapular Muscle, and in that is
almost all consumed; pouring Animal Spirits into it for the motion of the Arms
in Men, the Fore-feet in Beasts, tho Wings in Fowl and the Fins in Fish; for in
these Creatures also has Willis observed Productions of the said Nerve. And
therefore because the Motions of the Arm require strong Muscles, it is
requisite that it should arise from the Pith within and not without the Brain.

This vagous Pair being composed of the said little Nerves concurring together,
issues out of the Cranium through the third hole common with the hinder part of
the Head to the Bone of the Temples (through which also passes the bigger
Branch of the inner Jugular Vein) and not far from its Egress sends little
Branches to the Muscles of the Neck and the Cowl-resembling Muscle. From hence
in Man it associates to its self a Branch of the intercostal Nerve, and sends
forth another remarkable Branch to the Larynx, which runs forward to the Throat
and the exterior Muscles of the Larynx, and running under the Shield-resembling
Muscle, proceeds to the point of the Turn-again Nerve, and is united to it. At
this place where the Intercostal is joined to it, and the other sent forth
toward the Larynx, the stalk of the vagous Nerve is exalted into a long Tumor,
and constitutes the Nervous Fold, called the Contorted Fold, and by Fallopius,
Corpus Olivare; which Fold is also found in the Intercostal adjoining,
constituted by its concourse with the Nerve of the last Pair within the
Cranium. Both these Folds are discovered when the Carotid Arteries are laid
open on both sides between the Muscles of the Neck; for then by tracking them,
they are presently to be seen about the insertion of the lower Jaw. Besides
this Fold, Willis has observed another lesser Fold, seated a little distance
from it, which is formed out of a small Twig of the foresaid Fold, wound about
the Pneumonic Artery, and with the Branch descending from the Trunk of the
right vagous Pair, as also with another Nerve designed for the hinder Region of
the Heart; and from this Fold he farther observes little Nerves to be sent to
the right side of the forepart of the Heart. The Turn-again Nerves*


XXIX. After it has formed these Folds, the Trunk of the vagous Pair descending
between the Carotis and the Iugular to the side of the Rough Artery, above the
Throat is divided on both sides into the inward and outward Branch.

Both the outward Branches presently after their separation provide for the
Breast, proceeding from the Sternon and the Clavicle, and then there issue
forth from it the Nerves called Vocal; because they constitute the Instrument
of Speech, and the cutting off the one, renders a man half dumb, the cutting
off of both renders him perfectly dumb. The said Vocal Nerves are also called
the Turn-again Nerves? by the Greeks (...), because they first descend and then
ascend, the right being wound about the right Subclavial Artery, about the
Trunk of the Great Artery, where it bows it self toward its Descent, that so
they may run back to the Muscles of the Larynx, into whose Head, looking
downwards, they enter with numerous Branches.

Now why the Nerves were not sent from above or out of the Neck into the
Muscles of the Larynx, but are forced to turn upward again, Galen makes a long
examination, but resolves nothing; but the true Reason is this; for that the
Muscles of the Larynx cause the Voice and move the Air in measure as it goes
out of the Lungs, therefore there is a necessity that their Head should be
turned downward and their Tail upward. For to the end there may be a Modulation
of the Air going out of the Lungs, the Supremities of the Larynx ought to be
contracted from above toward the lower parts, to resist the egress of the Air
at pleasure; yet not so as to be quite shut. Now in regard all the Muscles draw
the parts sticking to their Tails, toward their Beginnings or Heads, therefore
ought the Heads of the Muscles of the Larynx be lowermost; and when the Nerves
are to be inserted in them, of necessity they must ascend from the lower parts
to these Heads; but if the Heads of these Muscles were placed above, and the
Nerves fixed in them from above, then by the contraction of these Muscles and
expiration happening at the same time, an absolute closure of the Larynx would
follow, and consequently suffocation of the Person. Now if any body ask me, why
the Muscles of the Larynx from the second Pair rather run back, which may be
brought from the next Nerves of the Spinal Pith? Galen answers them, that the
Arteries and other parts which are to be more violently moved, require harder
Nerves, as are those which proceed from the Pith lying hid within the Cranium;
but that to those which are not so violently to be moved, softer Nerves are
sufficient; such as are those that proceed from the Pith without the Cranium,
among which the sixth pair is one, whose Turnagain Branches come to the Muscles
of the Larynx, which are to be gently moved.

The Turn-again Nerves being thus constituted, this pair descends by and by
under the Throat, and at the bottom of the Heart toward the Spine, constitutes
a certain Fold of Nerves, which some call the Cardiac Fold; from whence
Branches are distributed to the Pleura, to the Tunicle of the Lungs, the
Pericranium, the Heart, the Gullet and several other parts within the Thorax.

Fallopius making an exact Description of this Fold, This Nervous Fold, says
he, derives its Original from the five Stocks of the Nerves, which although
they are sometimes only four, yet for the most part they are found to be five.
The first of these is that which rises from the sinister Branch of the sixth
pair, a little below the Rise of the Turn-again Nerves and afterward
reflecting to the sinister Arterial Vein, ascends into the said Nervous Fold.
The second and third Stock is in the same left side, and rises from that Fold
which I have called the Fold of the sixth pair in the Neck, seated near the
Olive Body. From this Fold in the left side two little Nerves arise, which
descending to the bottom of the Heart, are distributed through the said Fold.
The fourth Stock and sinister too, is that which is said by others to rise from
the Turn-again Nerve of that side; which descending with the third and second,
is dispersed into the said Fold. The fifth and last Stock, seated in the right
side, has a twofold beginning; from the right Fold of the sixth pair, which
runs directly to the Heart; and likewise from the Cardiac Fold it self; but
these Cardiac Branches from the intercostal Nerve, as also the Cervical Fold
from which they proceed, are peculiar to Man, there being no such thing in
Beasts.

From these last Words it is apparent, that Willis describes the Cardiac Fold
somewhat after another manner than Fallopius; only the chiefest difference
consists in the diversity of the Names of the Nerves.

XXX. The Intercostal Trunk from The intercostal Fold.
the Cervical Fold, admits the Cervical Artery, and so descending into the
Breast, admits three or four Branches from the Vertebral Nerves next above, and
with them makes another remarkable Fold in Men; for it is otherwise in Beasts.
This Fold Willis calls the Intercostal and Thoracic.

XXXI. Moreover the Intercostal The Mesenteric Folds.
Trunk descending through the Cavity of the Breast, extends a Branch from it
self all along the lower and hollow part of both sides; then three separate
Branches descend to the Os Sacrum, which being themselves here and there united
with other Nerves, and again separated from them, make several other Mesenteric
Folds, which Willis reckons up to be seven in all. But lest a too particular
Description of each of these should breed Confusion, we shall only insist upon
three of those Branches. The first of these is carried to the Cawl, the bottom
of the Stomach, the Tunicle of the Liver and Spleen, the Substance it self of
the Spleen and the Colon-Gut; which as it is thought, occasions hoarsness after
a tedious Cholic. The second tends to the Spleen, which exagitating the Stomach
by consent, in Nephritic Pains, causes Vomiting. The third and largest proceeds
to the Mesentery, the Guts, the Bladder and of the Womb. Why the Bowels have
their Nerves from the 6th. Pair.


XXXII. Now why the Bowels receive their Nerves from the sixth Pair, and not
from the Vertebral Pith, Bauhinus explains out of Galen; because that not
having any voluntary motion, they do not require the harder Nerves proceeding
from the Spinal Pith; but lest they should be altogether void of Sense and some
slight Motion, and lest they should be destitute of Animal Spirits necessary
for Nourishment, they require only the softer Nerves, such as proceed from the
Pith while it is yet in the Brain.

XXXIII. The seventh Pair, moving The 7th. Pair, moving the Tongue.
the Tongue, much harder than the rest, arises with various Heads soon united
in the hinder part of the Head from the Pith, ready to fall into the Spine, and
through an oblique and proper Hole bored through in the hinder part of the
Head, issues forth of the Cranium, and for Preservation sake, is tied to the
sixth Pair with very strong Membranes, but not intermixed; then again being
separated, the greatest part of it goes to the Tongue, to all whose Muscles it
imparts Branches for Motion; but the lesser portion of it proceeds to the
Muscles of the Hyois and Larynx, and those which rise from the Stytoides
Appendix.

Some think the Substance and Composition Whether these nervs differ from
others in substance and composition.
of the said Nerves within the Brain proceeding from the Pith, to be quite
different from that of other Nerves, when ocular Inspection teaches us, that
they consist in the same manner as other Nerves, of several strings bound
together with a strong Membrane, and as it were united into one, and differ
nothing from other Nerves, but only that they are softer.

CHAP. IX. Of the order to be observed in showing the Parts of the Brain in the
foresaid Dissection, and of another manner of Dissection.
I. ACcording to the Method of dissection already mentioned, the thick and thin
Meninx are first of all to be demonstrated, with the four Hollownesses of the
hard Meninx, the division of the Brain, the Scythe or Falx interposed between;
with the Fence continuous to it, which separates the Cerebel from the Brain; as
also the Brawny Body that lies under it. Th^nce the upper parts of the Brain
being taken away, the two upper Ventricles are to be shown, the Lucid Fence,
the Choroid Fold, the Channel of the Phlegm to the Nostrils and the Fornix. Then
the third Ventricle, and in that, the Choroid Fold, the middle Hole reaching to
the Funnel, the pleighted little Hillocks, with the Hole of the Anus reaching
to the fourth Ventricle, the Vein that runs through the Fold, discharging it
self through the fourth Hollowness into the wide Hollowness; also the Pineal
Kernal, the Buttocks and Stones. Afterward the Cerebel with its Membranes and
Processes, and that being taken away, the fourth Ventricle and the long Pith.
Lastly, the Brain being raised up before, shows the Mamillary Process, the
wonderful Net, the Spitly Kernel, the Funnel, with the pair of Nerves,
proceeding from the Pith within the Skull.

II. If any one have a desire to observe another Method of Demonstration, it
may be done after this manner; First, Show the Meninxes above, the Division of
the Brain, the Scythe, together with the Hollownesses, and the Brawny Body.
Then the Brain being raised up before, show the Mamillary Processes, the Optic
Nerves, the Nerves that move the Eyes, the wonderful Net, and the Spitly
Kernel. Then the Brain being raised up on the side, the other Pairs of the
Nerves are to be shown; and with the same labor, the Brain, together with the
Cerebel and long Pith, is to be taken out of the Skull and turned. Then the
remaining part of the Demonstration is to be completed from the lower part.
And first the Pith being raised up, the fourth Ventricle is to be shown, and
then the Cerebel with its Processes. After that, the wonderful Net with the
Funnel, and so dissecting down to the Funnel, the third or middle Ventricle is
to be shown; where you are to search for the furrowed Hillocks, the Buttocks,
the Stones, the Pineal Kernel, the Hole of the Anus, and the Fold of the
Arteries; from hence you must proceed to the two upper Ventricles, where you
must seek out the Choroid Fold, together with the Lucid Fence and the Channels
conveying the Phlegm and Spittle to the Papillary Processes.

However, observe by the way, that this Method of Dissection is performed with
better success in the Brains of Sheep and Calves than of Men, by reason of its
extraordinary Bulk: For unless it be very new, all the Parts fall, by reason of
their Flaccidity; so that nothing can be conveniently demonstrated.

Another Method of dissecting the Brain, but very laborious, the Invention of
Constantine Varolius, which Bauhinus describes, l. 3. Theat. Anat. c. 28. And
another Method between both, of Francis Silvius, described by Bartholine, l. 3.
Anat. Reformat. c. 6. to which I refer the Reader.

CHAP. X. Of the Function of the Brain.
AFter Demonstration of the Brain and all its Parts, it remains that we speak
in brief concerning the Office or Function, Actions and Use of so considerable
a Bowel.

I. From the Soundness of the Brain, it is confessd by all, that the Soundness
of all the Animal Actions proceed; it being granted that those Organs in the
Body, by which those Actions are to be performed, be well constituted; though
let them be never so well disposed, no Animal Action can be duly and rightly
performed if the Brain be amiss.

II. Now because the Animal Actions are or may be performed not only by the
Brain alone, but also by the Rational Soul; hence many are persuaded that the
Seat of the Soul is to be assigned to that Part from whence the Animal Actions
proceed; that is to say, the Brain in general, according to the Arabians and
Moschio, or, as others believe, some particular part of it. Thus Hierophilus
seats it at the bottom; Xenophon in the top of the Head; Erasistratus in the
Membranes. From which Opinions however many of the Modern Philosophers vary,
who assign for its Seat the smallest Particle of the Brain in the third or
middle Ventricle, that is to say, the Pineal Kernel; wherein they endeavor by
many probable Arguments and Conjectures to prove the Residence of the Soul and
the Actions of common Sense to be performed. This last Opinion much displeases
others, and more especially seems very hard to many Divines, who cannot
apprehend, neither will suffer themselves to be persuaded, that so small and
narrow a Domicile ought to be thought sufficient for an incorporeal Soul,
infused by God, and governing all the Animal Actions of the whole Body, and yet
be able to perceive all those things which are done in the extreme parts in the
least space of a moment, even in the very point of time they are acted.
Moreover, they do not believe the Seat of the Rational Soul to be so small in
Man; and yet in Brutes, which are destitute of that Soul, to be three times as
big. Furthermore, they cannot apprehend why the Seat of the Soul should not be
ascribed as well to the Heart, as to the Brain; seeing that all the Motions of
the Animal Spirits and the Brain it self proceed from the Heart; which when it
ceases to beat, all the Animal Actions fail, as it happens in a Syncope, and in
Wounds of the Ventricles of the Heart. Concerning this Matter, in our Age sharp
and furious have been the Contests on both sides, as if they were contending
for the safety of their Country, and daily most terrible Paper-Disputes arise,
eager indeed and vehement, but vain and frivolous; by which the Minds of young
People are more disturbed than taught. But setting aside these unprofitable
Contests, let us enquire into the more sensible Action of the Brain it self.

III. Aristotle teaches us, that the Office of The Office of the Brain.
the Brain is to temper the heat of the Heart. Which Opinion, though most
reject, Spigelius nevertheless endeavors to assert it for Rational. Galen
attributes to the Brain the Office of generating and making Animal Spirits.
With whom most of the Modern Philosophers agree: For this is most certain, that
the Animal Actions are not at the first hand performed by the Brain it self,
but by the Animal Spirits made in the Brain, by means of which the Soul in well
disposed Organs executes its Actions, and so the Brain is the Instrument which
generates those Spirits.

These Spirits Zabarel, Argenterius, Helmont, Deusingius and some others, as
well Physicians as Philosophers, confound with the vital Spirits; and affirm
that they differ from them not in Specie, but only in certain Accidents; and
therefore it is that Spigelius says, Not that there is here a certain mutation
of the vital Spirits, which destroys their whole nature, but only a certain
alteration of the Temperament* E^t agrees with Spigelius, and supports his
Opinion with these three Arguments.

1. The Birth both feels and is moved in the Womb without the aid of any Animal
Spirit, in regard that no Maternal Nerve runs to the Birth. 2. A most subtle
Spirit cannot be made in a cold Brain and full of mucous Filth; for Cold
stupifies the Spiri^s, and hinders their Actions. 3. The Nerves themselves
derive their Life and Hea^ from the Arteries, which are conspicuously diffused
through them.
To these Arguments others add one more; that the most subtle Spirits never
descend to the lower parts; but always tend upwards and exhale; and hence
although there should be allowed any Animal Spirits to be so subtle, they would
never descend into the Nerves, but would always fly upwards through the Pores.

But though these things seem specious enough at a distance, yet they neither
prove nor confirm the said Sentence.

To the First I answer, That the Birth in the Womb is neither moved with an
Animal Motion, nor feels, until the first delineaments of the Brains and Nerves
are arrived and increased to such a Bulk, Firmness and Perfection, that the
Brain may be able to generate Animal Spirits sufficient, and that those Spirits
may be conveniently conveyed to the sensitive and moving parts; and because it
requires some Months to attain that perfection, therefore the Birth does not
move it self, until the Woman have gone out half her time; that is, about the
fourth Month and a half. For what Spirits are generated before that time, are
very few and weak; and the rest of the Parts themselves of the Body unapt for
Motion or Sense. Nor does the Motion of the Birth proceed, nor is it performed
by the Spirits or Maternal Nerves running to it; of which there are none that
enter the Birth, but by the Spirits and Nerves generated in it self.

To the Second, I say, that there is no considerable Magnitude required for the
making of Animal Spirits, but rather a Mediocrity of Heat, such as is
sufficient in the Brain, though it be much less than in the other parts. And
there is a necessity for that lesser Heat, which they call Cold, to assuage the
Heat of the Arterious Blood, and in some measure to thicken its Volatile
sulphurous Spirits, that so the Animal Spirit may separate it self more pure
from the salt Particles, and may flow into the Nerves, no longer beset with
superfluity of viscous Vapors. Moreover, it is to be understood that although
the Brain be said to be colder than other parts, yet that it is not absolutely
cold, only that the Temper of it is less hot than of many other parts; and that
the proper confirmation of it is such as is most fit for the generation of
Spirits. Lastly, the natural Temper of the Brain inclining to Cold, is not such
as stupifies the Spirits, nor renders them unap^ to perform their Actions in
the Parts; but its preternatural cold Temper excluding the Blood and natural
Heat by a too close constriction of the Pores, is the cause that for want of
convenient Matter, few Spirits are generated therein, and that those already
generated with great difficulty, and in small quantity flow through the
straightened Pores and Nerves. Which is the Reason that then the Actions fail by
degrees; not because the Actions are stupify'd, as is vulgarly believed; but
because very few are generated and flow into the parts. For the Spirits endure
no Stupefaction; for Drowsiness is nothing else but a rest of the Actions in
the Sensory Organs, by reason of the scarcity of the Animal Spirits. To the
Third, I answer, that although the Brain and Nerves are nourished with
Arterious Blood, it does not thence follow, that the Animal Spirits generated
in the Brain, are nothing different from the Blood and Vital Spirits generated
in the Heart, and carried through the Arteries, for the nourishment of the
Parts* for this is as much as if a man should say, The Stomach is nourished by
the Arterious Blood generated out of the Chylus, therefore the Chylus concocted
therein, is nothing different from the Blood. Or thus, The Heart changes the
Chylus into Blood, therefore the Blood which is generated therein, is nothing
different from the Chylus. Or thus; The Bread is turned into Chylus, and the
Chylus into Blood; therefore the bread differs nothing either from the Chylus
or the Blood.

To the Last I say, That the Animal Spirits would easily exhale out of the
Brain and Pith, unless they were there withheld in their cool Workhouse,
which hinders their sudden Exhalation, and would flow into the Nerves which are
of a firmer Substance; and thus all Chemical Spirits are best kept close in
cool Vessels and hindered from exhaling. Moreover, that they would not descend
into the Nerves, unless being squeezed out of the Brain and Pith by the
alternate dilatation and falling of the Brain, the hinder parts pressing the
fore-parts, as one Wave drives forward another, is apparent from hence, for
that the motion of the Brain ceasing through a Syncope, or depression of the
Cranium, etc. no more Spirits flow into the Nerves, but all the parts fall
without Motion. Thus in an Organ we see that the thin Air, which would never of
it self descend violently downward into the Pipes, by the falling of the
dilated Bellows, is easily forced into them. Upon this Subject read more in
Sennertus's Institutes, l. 1. c. 6. and his Prax. Med. p. 2. c. 33. where he
refutes and destroys the foresaid Argument with most convincing Reasons.

This Opinion therefore being altogether rejected, we must hold it for certain
and unquestionable, with the consent of the greater part of the Philosophers,
that there are Animal Spirits, bred indeed out of the Vital, but actually very
much differing from them, as the Bread differs from the Chylus, the Chylus from
the Blood, and the Blood from the Substance of the Parts; for as the Chylus,
coming into the heart, loses its first Constitution, and assumes a quite
different, which has nothing of similitude with the former, and so is turned
into Blood; so the most subtle part of the Vital Blood assumes in the Brain a
new and altogether different Species, together with a new and altogether
different strength and efficacy. Here, if any one will object, that the same
Spirits were before in the Blood, so far as they are afterward produced out of
the Blood, and cannot be produced out of the Blood unless they were in it
before; I will not contend with him, if he mean that the Matter of these
Spirits was in it before: For those Animal Spirits, such as they are made in
the Brain, are not actually contained in the blood; but the Matter out of which
they are to be made is contained therein. In the same manner the spirituous
Blood is not contained in the Meat and Nourishment; but the Matter out of which
such Blood is generated by the concoctions of the Bowels. Or as the Herb or the
Tree is not contained in the Earth, but the Matter out of which the Herb or the
Tree is to spring and be raised up by the heat of the Sun. Or, as the Vessel is
not contained in the Clay, but the Matter out of which the Vessel is to be
made; which is so different from the Vessel, that a Child would account him a
Fool that should call the formless Clay a Vessel.

IV. But now it is the unanimous The Action of the Brain.
Opinion of all Physicians, that it is the proper Office of the Brain to
generate the Animal Spirits; and that those Spirits flow through the Nerves out
of that Workhouse wherein they are generated into the Parts, and may be sent
forth every way in greater plenty by the Soul, with a certain determination, as
Assistants and Conveyers of the Powers which she diffuses from her self. But in
what part of the Brain these Spirits are generated, is greatly disputed; and
what they are, is altogether unknown; and therefore they both require a larger
Discourse.

V. Peter Laurembergius believed Whether generated in the Cavities of the Falx.
these Animal Spirits to be generated in the Hollownesses of the Falx. From
whose Opinion Daniel Sennertus does not differ much. But this Opinion proceeds
from their not knowing the Use of the Sinus's or Hollownesses of the Falx, and
therefore they are easily refuted by what we have already said concerning those
Hollownesses, c. 4.

Andreas Laurentius, Riolanus, Lud. Mercator and many others, with whom Regius
also consents, believe these Spirits to be generated in the Cavities of the
Ventricles, out of the hottest Arterious Blood exhaling from the Choroidal Fold
(with which some think the Air to be intermixed by inspiration) and that they
are forced out of these Ventricles through invisible Pores into the Nerves, and
so through them flow to the rest of the Parts. Some, according to the Opinion
of the Arabians, affirm, that they are generated not in all the Ventricles, but
only in the fourth Ventricle; which for that reason, they call the most
principal. Both these Opinions Galen also professed, as also Hippocrates and
Plato. But both Reason and Experience evince this Opinion concerning the Cavity
of the Ventricles. For if the Vital Spirits should exhale out of the Choroidal
Fold into the Cavities of the Ventricles, there to be turned into Animal
Spirits, I would fain know, how the Animal Spirits already generated out of
those Vital Spirits shall enter into the Nerves, which have no continuity with
the Ventricles? Shall the Vital Spirits, which exhaled out of the Fold, being
become Animal again, breath into the Nerves which lie at a distance from the
Nerves? Or can the Soul dispose at pleasure of the Spirits generated and
contained here and there beyond the Bounds of its Jurisdiction, that is to say,
in the Ventricles? Besides, if the place be considered, it will be found no way
proper for the generation of the Animal Spirits. For in the Ventricles are
gathered together snotty Excrements, which are found therein, sometimes in
greater, sometimes in lesser quantity, as well in those that are sound, as
those that are sickly. Thus it would come to pass, that these thin and most
impure Spirits would be generated without the Vessels in the Cavities of these
Ventricles, among the most impure and cold Excrements of the Brain, and thence,
notwithstanding their being thickened by the cold Excrements, must flow out
again together with the thicker Excrements through most narrow and almost
invisible Pores, rather into the Nerves far enough seated from the Ventricles,
then through the broad and open Channels of the Papillary Processes and the
Sieve-like Bone; which how absurd it is, there is no body but may easily
perceive. Besides, in the watery Disease of the Head, called Hydrocephalus, in
which many times there is a great quantity of serous Humor collected in the
Ventricles, sometimes several pounds; as also in an Apostem of the Brain, at
what time the purulent Matter is poured forth into these Vessels, I say in
these cases, neither could these Spirits be generated, nor the Animal Actions
proceed; of which the contrary is manifest from Experience: For in a Patient
that I dissected in March 1653. whose distended Ventricles containd above half
a pound of thick stinking green Pus, from the large Apostem of the upper part
of the Brain, penetrating as far as the upper Ventricles, I observed that all
the time of his Sickness for seven Weeks together, he was no way disturbed in
his Intellects, nor deprived of Motion till the time of his Death. Besides,
that if they did not flow through the already mentioned Vessels evacuating the
Phlegm, yet would those Spirits fly out at the Wounds of the Ventricles, and for
want of them the Person would be deprived of all Animal Action. Yet Galen tells
us a Story of a young Man, who at Smyrna in Ionia, received a Wound in one of
the upper Ventricles, yet lived for all that. I my self here in Utrecht, in the
Year 1648. inspected the Body of a young Nobleman of Over-Yssel, a Student in
the Law, who died of a wound in his Head, in whom the Cranium being first
opened, it was first found that the Sword had entered the bigger or innermost
Corner of one Eye, without any harm to the Eye it self, and had pene^rated
through the upper right Ventricles, and lighting upon the upper part of the
Cranium on the inside toward the top of the Lambdoidal Suture, had almost
pierced that also; yet this young Gentleman was deprived of none of his Animal
Actions (a certain Sign that the Spirits had not flowed out of the Ventricle
through the broad Wound) but sound in Mind, Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, and well
moving all his Parts, walking and judiciously discoursing with his Companions
that came to see him, upon any Discourse, lived ten days, and then being seized
with a violent Fever, died in two days. Thus Lindan makes mention of a certain
Patient that was wounded, whose Surgeon for fourteen days together before his
Death, put in a Probe as far as the Ventricle of his Brain, whither the Wound
had reached, without any feeling. Yet he further adds, that the same Person
walked every day about the City, unless it were the last four days, at the end
of which he died. In these Cases, certainly the most subtle Spirits had either
flowed out of their own accord, or had been expelled out of the Ventricles by
the alternate dilatation and compression of the Brain, and so the person must
have died deprived of his Animal Actions, if the place of their Generation had
been in the Ventricles. From all which Examples the weak Supports of the said
Opinion are sufficiently evident; though Webfer refutes the same Opinion more
clearly by other Reasons, l. de Apoplexia.

VI. Cartesius differs not very Whether generated in the Pineal Kernel.
much from the said Opinion, who teaches us, that these Spirits are not
generated in the Ventricles, but says, that they are separated in the Pineal
Kernel, by the narrow Passages of the little Arteries of the Choroid Fold, and
from thence infused into the Ventricles, and no other way differ from the Vital
Spirits, only that they are the thinest Parts separated from them, and only
called by another Name. To which he adds, that there is no probability that the
separation of these Spirits is performed in the Pineal Kernel, as well by
reason of the smalness of the Kernel, as the vast quantity of Animal Spirits,
which can never be so swiftly strained through so diminutive a particle.
Besides that this Kernel being obstructed and compressed, yet it is found that
these Spirits are generated in great quantity; as was apparent in the forecited
persons, in whose Ventricles the Pus and Serum that was collected in great
quantity, could not but compress the Kernel and obstruct it in its Office; as
is also apparent in such Men in whom you shall find Sand and Stones oppressing
more than half the Kernel. As to that which follows, where Cartesius says, that
these Spirits are collected in the Ventricles, that is already refuted; as also
that other, that they differ nothing from the Vital Spirits, but only in their
separation.

VII. Many others believe, that the Whether generated in the Choroid Fold.
Animal Spirits are elaborated in the Choroid Fold, and that the Vital Blood in
its passage through the Fold, is altered into these Spirits by a singular
propriety of the Brain. Which Opinion, as the Liver, many embrace at this day,
and I was of the same mind once, though now I have good reason to think the
contrary. For upon more mature consideration, three Arguments utterly subvert
it.

First, Because the Blood contained in that Fold, is altogether ruddy, neither
is it observed to undergo any alteration therein, neither at any time, whatever
part of the Fold you inspect, is it of any other color than red and
Bloodcolour; whereas the Animal Spirits are pellucid and invisible by reason of
their extraordinary subtility. Secondly, Because the Fold is not continuous
with any of the Nerves, and therefore no Spirits can be transfused out of it
into the Nerves. 3ly. Because the Blood flows into the Pithy Substance of the
Brain out of the Fold, partly through innumerable diminutive branches, partly
by the order of circulation, flows to the Vein that runs between the middle
Fold above the Kernel, and thence is carried to the inferior Hollownesses of
the hard Meninx or Scythe, and from them to the Jugular Veins. Through which
Passages the Animal Spirits also, if any were made in the Fold, would flow
forth together with the Blood, nor would any reach to the Nerves which are
seated without the Fold, and no way continuous to them.
VIII. Francis de le Boe Sylvius suspects Whether generated in the exterior
Arteries.
them to be elaborated in the Arteries running forth all along the Superficies
of the Brain and Cerebel, which he thinks to be distributed through the
Superficies for that public, and not for any private Use, and that out of those
Arteries they penetrate into the Cortex of the Brain and Cerebel, and thence
into the middle whitish Substance, and in this Passage are freed from its
watery part that sticks most closely to it.

But this Opinion is overthrown by these three Arguments.

1. Because that in the Arteries of the Head there is no other Humor contained
than in other Arteries, that is to say, Blood; and those Arteries are only
assisting Parts conveying the Blood, not altering it into Animal Spirits, or
making any other Humor or Spirit out of it. 2. Because the innumerable bloody
Specks which every way occur to the Sight in the dissected Substance, teach us,
that not the Animal Spirits, but the arterious blood it self is thrust forward
as well through the Ash-colored Cortex of the Brain, as through the whitish
Substance out of the Arteries; which bloody Specks would not appear, if that
blood were only changed into invisible Animal Spirits in the said Arteries. 3.
Because the several remarkable Mutations of Humors require some particular
Bowel to make that alteration; as appears in the Stomach, which turns the
Nourishment into Chylus; in the Heart, which changes the Chylus into Blood; in
the Liver, which alters the blood into a choleric Ferment, and therefore we
must certainly conclude, that the making of Animal Spirits out of Blood cannot
be performed in the Arteries, which only carry the Matter out of which they are
to be generated; but that of necessity it must be performed in that most noble
Bowel the Brain, and not in the Arteries encompassing the Brain and Cerebel,
but in the Substance it self.
IX. Thus also Galen, and with Whether generated in the Substance it self of
the Brain.
him Bauhinus and Sennertus, Hoffman, Emilius, Parisanus and Plempius
believethem to be elaborated in the Substance it self of the Brain. Whose
Opinion we are also willing to embrace, as being that of which the Truth
appears from hence, because the arterious blood is driven from all Parts in
greater quantity to the Substance of the brain, than is requisite for the
nourishment of it. For on the outside Thousands of little branches of Arteries
empty a great quantity of blood, partly into the Ash-colored Cortex enfolding
the brain, in whose little Kernels apt Particles are separated for the
Generation of Spirits from those that are unapt, and sucked up by the
extremities of the little Fibers of the brain extended into the Cortex, partly
enter the Substance of the brain it self. Moreover, on the inside also in the
third Ventricle that there are infinite slender branches inserted from the
Choroid Fold, into the white Pithy Substance, and which stick and cling to it,
will easily appear to those who have prudently examined that Ventricle, and
gently lifted up the Fornix or Arch; for then they may perceive innumerable
little branches of the Choroid Fold sticking to, and entering the Substance of
the Fornix, the furrowed Monticles, the Stones and Buttocks, and pouring into
the Pores of it the thinner blood freed by the little Kernels of the Fold from
a great part of its viscous Serum, which in the dissection of the Substance is
seen to start as well out of the invisible Vessels as out of the Pores.
Moreover, it is requisite that the Animal Spirits should be generated in that
part out of which they may most conveniently either flow or be thrust forward
into the Nerves. But such a part is the Substance of the brain and pith, which
as being altogether fibrous and continuous with the Nerves, has also Pory
Fibers continuous with them, into which, by the compression of the brain, which
follows its dilatation, those Spirits may commodiously be squeezed forward.
Lastly, the Soul makes use of the Ministry of these Spirits, and therefore they
ought to be generated and contained in that part where the Soul resides. But
the Soul does not reside in empty Cavities or Ventricles in the midst of
excrementitious Filth, but in solid living Parts. Therefore as it resides in
the Substance of other Parts, so likewise in that of the brain, where it lays
the foundations of the Animal Spirits, which from thence it sends every way at
her own pleasure through the Nerves.

X. This Opinion two great Difficulties Two Objections.
seem to oppose.

1. Because the Apoplexy, and other heavy Drowsinesses proceed, according to
the Judgment of most eminent Physicians from a stoppage of the Animal Spirits,
which hinders their Influx out of the Ventricles of the Brain into the Pith, by
reason of some obstruction of the beginning of the Pith, or its compression
happening through some other Cause. Which Obstruction or Compression would not
be the Cause of the Apoplexy or that same Lethargic Drowsiness, if the Spirits
were not generated in the Ventricles or the Choroid Fold, but in the Substance
of the Brain it self. 2. Because the Disposal of the Spirits determinated by
the Mind, would not be completed in the Substance of the Brain it self, but in
the common Sensory, which is seated in the Brain it self. This the Catalepsis
plainly shows us, wherein the Spirits flow in great quantity into the Nerves,
but no new determination of them follows, because of the Obstruction of the
common Sensory.
XI. The first Difficulty is easily The Cause of the Motion of the Brain.
removed, if the Cause of the Motion of the Brain be more narrowly pried into.
In the Fifth Chapter we have at large informed you, that the Brain is moved by
the perpetual and first Mover of our Body, that is to say, the Heart; and that
the Heart dilates the whole Brain by forcing through the Arteries the
Spirituous Blood into its Substance, which upon the cessation of that Impulse,
presently falls again, and so by compression forces the Spirits contained in it
further into the Nerves.

XII. Now, if through any Cause, The Reason of the Apoplexy.
as Obstruction or Compression, etc. the Arteries happen to be streighten'd,
through which the Blood is pushed forward and flows into the Brain, by which
means the free access of the Blood forced through the Arteries to the Brain, is
foreslow'd or obstructed, then there is a great diminution of the Matter proper
for the generation of Spirits, and the motion of the Brain is very small;
whence happens not only a generation of very few Spirits, and a weaker Impulse
of them into the Nerves. Now in regard that few Spirits, and those weakly
impuls'd, are not sufficient to perform the Actions of the Sensory Organs,
whose Actions are also performed by the continual and sufficing motion of the
Spirits, of necessity there follows a deep Drowsiness or Rest of the Animal
Actions, which Drowsiness is either more or less, as the streightness of the
Arteries is either more or less. But if those Arteries through which the Blood
flows toward the inner parts of the Brain, that is to say, the Arteries of the
wonderful Net and the Choroid Fold, nay, the Carotid Arteries themselves be of
a sudden strongly compressed and obstructed by the sudden falling of thick
Phlegm collected in the Brain, upon them, or the depression of the Skull and
Brain, presently the Motion of the Blood toward the Brain is obstructed; and
hence also the generation of the Animal Spirits, and their motion and impulse
into and through the Nerves is obstructed, which is the Cause of the Apoplexy.
Which Physicians hitherto have absurdly affirmed to happen from the obstruction
or streightning of the beginning of the Nerves, when it altogether proceeds
from the obstruction or compression of the Arteries. Which Hippocrates most
clearly teaches us, where he asserts the Cause of the Apoplexy to be the
standing of the Blood, more especially in the Arteries of the Neck, that is to
say, the Carotides, and others derived from thence, such as those which compose
the wonderful Net and Choroid Fold: Seeing that thereby the Motion and Action
of the Spirits is destroyed; which Mo^ion being obstructed, the body must of
necessity rest. Let us hear the most acute Fernelius, who confirms this Matter
most elegantly by Experiments and Reasons.

Seeing upon a time, says he, a lusty sane man fall to the ground upon a
desperate Blow upon the Left Eye, and presently deprived of Sense and Motion,
together with a difficulty of Breathing and Snoaring, and other strong Symptoms
of an Apoplexy, and that he could neither be preserved by Blood-letting, nor
any other way, but that he died within twelve hours, I thought it worth my
while to search into the Cause of his Death. To that purpose, having dissected
and opened his Brain, and finding no Contusion of the Bone or Meninxes, or
Substance of the Brain, but only that the inner Veins of the Eye were broken by
the violence of the Contusion, I observed that from thence about two Spoonfuls
of Blood had lighted upon the Basis of the Brain, which being clotted together,
had bound up those Arteries which form the Net-like Contexture, and which being
thence propagated into the Ventricles of the Brain constitute the other Choroid
Fold. But the Ventricles of the Brain were altogether untouched without any
Damage. Being thus far satisfied, I thought good to dissect another, who died
without any external Cause to be seen; in whom there was found a thick and
viscous Humor resting upon the Net like contexture, the Ventricles of the Brain
being neither filled nor obstructed. Hence reasoning with my Self, I judged it
consentaneous to Reason, that the Apoplexy was generated in the Arteries either
obstructed or compressed; for that then the Brain received no Spirits from the
Heart, through the adjoining Arteries; which occasioned an absolute necessity
of its Motion and Sense. And a certain Person observing these things, as I
suppose, affirmed, that the Apoplexy was caused by the intercepting the
Passages that are common to the Heart and Brain.

Thus if the Cause of the Disease of all Apoplectics were more diligently
inquired into, it would be found to proceed not from the compression or
obstruction of the beginning of the Nerves in the third or middle Ventricle,
but solely from the compression or streightning of the Arteries tending to the
Brain; even then when the Apoplexy is caused by a rammassment of serous Matter
collected in the substance of the Brain it self, or between the Meninxes. Which
Webfer affirms that he has found to be true by experience upon several
Diffections. Who erroneous however, conjectures this to happen by reason of the
denied entrance of the Animal Spirits, when it is manifest that the stoppage of
the Arteries is the cause of it; for seeing that in an Aposteme of the Brain
the Orifices of the nerves are not closed by the quantity of Serum or Pus
collected in the ventricles, much less will it happen through any far slighter
Collection. Again, that it does not happen through any Phlegm that fills the
Vessels of a sudden, occular view teaches us in the Dissections of Apoplectics;
in whose Ventricles never so great a quantity of Phlegm is to be found in the
Ventricles; and moreover, because the Apoplexy is caused by the sole
compression of the little Arteries of the wonderful Net without any detriment
to the Brain, much less to the Ventricles, as appears by the foresaid Relations
of Fernelius, and the Story of Webfer, of the Woman that was hanged, and yet
came again to her self. In which Particular Martian also agrees with us.

I find, says he, three Differences of the Apoplexy, according to the Doctrine
of Hippocrates. Of which though there be various preceding Causes, yet in
reality they are all the same, as consisting in the standing of the Blood, by
which means all Motion and Action of the Spirits are taken away. For as the
same Author observes, when the Blood is not moved, it is impossible but that
the Motion of the Body must cease. Therefore when the Blood is deprived of
Motion, not only the Motion of the Spirits is intercepted, which is caused by
the Blood; but at the same time and together, the generation of the Animal
Spirits, which is performed in the Brain, is vitiated and interrupted for want
of Matter, the Veins or Arteries being intercepted; for it is well known that
the Animal Spirits are generated out of the Vital.

As to that Cause of the Apoplexy, which Malpigius and Fracassatus propound,
when they allege this Distemper to proceed from the stoppage of the straining
through of the Serum growing in the Cortex of the Brain; this Opinion, if
rightly explained, will agree with the former already laid down: For if the
concrescible Serum, as they call it, that is to say, if the Saltish Particles
of the Blood, being stopped in the Cortex of the Brain, through the depression
of the Cranium, stuffing up of Phlegm, or any other Cause, cannot be separated
by straining through, then also is the ingress of the Vital Spirits or
Arterious blood into the brain, put to a stop; and thence for want of Matter
for generation of the Spirits, and defect of the Cause that pushes them forward
when generated, any farther Generation ceases, as also the pushing forward of
the Animal Spirits into the Nerves, and thence the Apoplexy or any other
Lethargic Drowsiness, though the Passage of the same Spirits out of the brain
it self into the Nerves, may be free at the same time.

XIII. As to the second Difficulty, The second Objection answered.
there is a great difference between the Generation of Animal Spirits, of which
we here discourse, and their Determination; and the Place wherein or from
whence the Determination is made. For because the Mind determines from the
common Sensory, the Spirits adhering to the Substance of the brain, this does
not hinder but that those Spirits may be generated in the Substance of the
brain, and thence be determined by the superior Command and Power of the Mind
to these or those Parts: Nor is it consequential from hence, that the Spirits
should be generated in that place from whence the Determination of the Mind
sends them away at pleasure. A Prince, sitting in his Throne, appoints his
Subjects to these or these Offices or Places; but thence it does not follow,
that the commanded Subjects should be born in the King's Palace, or reside in
his Throne; for that the Beams of his Command extend themselves to the utmost
Limits of his Empire.

He therefore that shall to the purpose explain the manner how the Appointment
of the Spirits is transacted by the Soul, will light a fair Flambeau for the
discovery of greater Mysteries. In the mean while this second Objectson makes
nothing against our Opinion; and therefore as most probable, we conclude, that
the Animal Spirits are generated in the Substance of the brain it self.

CHAP. XI. Of the Animal Spirits.
IN the foregoing Chapter it has been declared, that the Office or Action of
the Brain is to generate Animal Spirits; and that they are elaborated in the
Substance of the Brain it self: now it remains that we enquire of what sort and
what those Noble Spirits are; and how they are generated.

However, by the way observe, that when we discourse of Spirits, as here, and
l. 2. c. 12. we do not speak of certain incorporeal Spirits, or of the general
Spirit of the whole World, by which the Platonics allege that all things have
their Being, but of a certain most subtle Vapor which is produced out of
Sulphur and Salt by the Concoctions of the Bowels, and varies, according to the
variety of the Matter out of which it is extracted, and the various manner of
extraction, which endow it with different Qualities.

I. The Animal Spirits are invisible The Definition of Spirits.
Vapors, most thin and volatile, chiefly elaborated out of the Salt Particles
of the Blood, and some few Sulphury, chiefly volatile, and that in the Brain,
serving partly for the Natural, partly for the Animal Actions.

As for those that deny that any Animal Spirits are to be allowed specifically
different from the Vital, as Huffman, Deusingius and several others endeavor
to uphold, we think it an Opinion not worth refuting, and therefore to be
rejected; seeing that the one is compounded of Salt and many Sulphury Spirits
dilated together and exactly mixed in the Heart: the other consists of very few
Sulphury, but chiefly Salt Spirits, and differ not in respect of their
Substance only and Composition, but also in their Use; and are made in a
peculiar bowel, the brain, every way different from the Heart. Lastly, seeing
also that from them the Animal Actions proceed, very much different from the
Natural; as the Fancy, the Imagination, Ratiocination, the Memory, Judgment,
Feeling, Seeing, Motion of the Muscles, etc. and that from their being
vitiated, peculiar Affections and Diseases arise; as is apparent in Vertigo's,
Apoplexies, Nightmares, Madness, Frenzy, Convulsions, and other Accidents
proceeding from their depraved Motion, too copious influx or deficiency; the
like to which cannot proceed from the defects of the Animal Spirits. All which
is clearly made out by Galen, l. de Placit. Hipp. and Plat. c. 6. as also l. 7.
c. 3. de usu Partium.

As to the Matter out of which these The Opinion of Glisson concerning the
Matter.
Spirits are generated, Glisson and Charlton have endeavored to introduce
lately something of Novelty; who both maintain these Spirits to be generated of
some portion of the Chylus, which is sucked up by the Nerves, out of which
partly these Spirits produced, partly some Juice, rawer than the Blood is
generated, which flows through the Nerves to the nourishment of all the
Spermatic Parts. But this absurd Opinion we have already refuted, l. 1. c. 16.
And Deusingius also destroys it in a large Discourse, l. de Nutritii Succi novo
Comment. The most ancient and truest Opinion is, that they are generated out of
the arterious blood; but after what manner they are generated, has never
hitherto been certainly described.

Cartesius, with whom most at this The Opinion of Cartesius.
day agree, discourses thus concerning this Matter. It is to be considered,
says he, that all the more vivacious and subtle parts of the Blood, which the
heat rarifies in the Heart, immediately and in great quantity enter the
Cavities; and therefore they rather muster thither than to any other part,
because that all the Blood which goes out of the Blood through the great
Artery, directs its course in a direct Line to that part; and when it cannot
all enter, because the Passages are very narrow, the more agitated and subtle
parts of it pass through alone, while the rest diffuse themselves through all
the parts of the Body. Now these most subtle parts of the Blood compound the
Animal Spirits; neither do they to that end want any other alteration in the
Brain, only that there they are separated from the other less subtle parts of
the Blood. For those which I call here Spirits are nothing but Bodies, and have
no other Propriety, only that they are most subtle Bodies, and are moved with
an extraordinary celerity,

By these Words it appears, that Cartesius did not differ much from the Opinion
of those who believe the Animal Spirits nothing distinct in Specie from the
Vital, which is already refuted. And this he openly seems to signify, l. 2. de
hom. Artic. 10. Where he speaks thus; That portion of Blood, says he, which
rises up as high as the Brain, not only helps the nourishment and pre servation
of the Substance of the Brain, but also in the first place generates therein a
subtle Vapor, or rather active and pure Flame, which we call the Animal
Spirits. A little after he adds. And thus the more subtle Particles of the
Arterious Blood^ without any preparation or mutation, other than that by which
they are separated from the thicker Particles, and are agitated with that
vehement celerity which the heat of the Heart has endu'd them with, lose the
form of Blood, and come under the name of Animal Spirits.

Moreover, he asserts a certain wonderful Separation of the thinner parts of
the Blood from the thicker, whereas the arterious Blood, altogether such as it
is, is equally thrust forward through the Arteries upward and downward, neither
is there any reason why the more subtle parts should be more specially carried
upward toward the Head, and the thicker flow to the rest of the Body. As to the
narrowness of the passages, that proves nothing; for the Carotid and Cervical
Arteries are wide and large enough; so that the thicker blood mixed together
with the more spirituous, may as well flow through them as the other Arteries.
Neither does the directness of the passage to such a separation of the most
subtle particles from the thicker, make any thing to the purpose; for the blood
being violently thrust forward out of the Heart, rushes forth where it finds
way given, without any separation of the particles. For the Spirits are not
separated from it by degrees, as the Spirits of Wine or any other Liquor
containing Spirits, in a Chemical Distillation, where by the force of the Fire
the Spirits are dissolved by degrees without any other impetuous compulsion,
and ascend directly upward, and if any such be allowed them, fly away through
any direct narrow passages, the watery parts flowing out at the lateral
passages. But here is a rapid propulsion of the whole dissolved sanguineous
mass into the great Artery, and all its wide, narrow, straight, crooked, upper
and lower productions, and that so swift and sudden, that in that small moment
of time that the Heart makes that propulsion, so sudden and rapid a separation
of the thinner from the thicker, can neither be done nor taught by reason, nor
apprehended by Imagination. If the blood attenuated and rendered vaporous in
the Ventricles of the Heart, did ascend upwards into the Arteries of its own
accord without any impulse, then perchance by reason of its slow progress some
such thing might be imagined by us; but in regard that the Heart by a sudden
contraction impetuously and rapidly expels, as it were, in the twinkling of an
eye whatever is in its Ventricles, such a separation can never be made. Thus if
any one with a Syringe shall force red Wine boiling hot into a Tube crooked
toward the sides, and bored through at the upper part with three or four Holes,
it will fly forth equally such as it is, at all the holes at the top or sides,
whether crooked, wide or narrow, nor will the violence of the force, or
shortness of the time allow any separation of the thicker parts from the
thinner, much less a particular passage of the thinner through the uppermost
direct little holes without the thicker. And so it is with the blood forced out
of the Heart. Besides, the quickest Eye in the world could never observe any
difference either in thickness or thinness between the blood ascending upward
to the Head through the wide and direct passages, or the blood descending
downward through the crooked and broad passages: For that which is taken out of
any Animal from the Carotid, differs not a tittle from that which descends out
of the Aorta, or is drawn out of the Iliac Vein by a small Prick; as neither
the returning remainder of the blood which descends through the Jugular Veins,
differs any thing from that which ascends through the Basilic Vein of the Arm,
or the Iliac Veins of the Thighs, unless it pass through any diseased part, but
is altogether equal. And yet there would be some difference to be observed if
the Doctrine of Cartesius were true. Lastly, says the most acute Philosoper,
the more subtle parts of the blood, compounding these Spirits, want no other
alteration but the separation of the most thin parts from the less thin; yet in
the mean time he never lets us know what those most thin parts are. 2. Nor how
the Brain orders that separation from the rest of the parts of the blood. 3.
Nor wherefore, nor how they are moved.

As to the first I have spoken in the definition, that is to say, that all the
most subtle parts of the blood, but chiefly the volatile Salt parts conduce to
the making of these Spirits; of which we shall now more at large discourse, as
also of their separation and motion.

IV. The Matter therefore out of The Matter out of which the Animal Spirits are
generated.
which these Spirits are generated is the arterious Blood (consisting of a
Salt, Sulphurous and Serous Juice) of which not equally all the Parts or
Particles, but chiefly the Salt, which by a peculiar quality of the Kernels of
the Cortex of the Brain are for the greatest part dissolved and separated from
the sulphury Particles; and being deprived of their Serosity, are rendered most
thin and altogether volatile, so that they are able with ease to penetrate
through the diminutive Fibers of the pithy Brain.

V. Vesalius, Laurentius, Columbus, Whether Air concurs with the Matter.
Sennertus, Plempius, Fracassarius and many others, are of Opinion, that
besides the blood, Air necessarily concurs as the Matter e qua, or out of
which, to the generation of these Spirits, and that by its transpiration
through the Sieve-like breathing holes of the Ethmoid Bone, it penetrates into
the Ventricles of the Brain. Which was formerly also the Opinion of
Erasistratus and Galen: But that it is far distant from Truth, we find partly,
for that those things which have been said concerning the situation of the
spungy Bones, and the spungy Flesh stopping the upper part of the Nostrils,
partly what has been said concerning the place of the Generation of the Animal
Spirits, plainly demonstrate that the inspired Air cannot penetrate into the
Ventricles of the Brain; and then again, that the Animal Spirits are not
generated in those Ventricles. Moreover, the Animal Spirits are always
generated out of the same and like Matter of which, if inspired Air were a
necessary part, they could never be generated without inspired Air. But on the
other side, they are generated in those persons, who being troubled with the
Pose, have their Nostrils obstructed with so great a quantity of Phlegm, that by
respiration no Air can pass through them. They are also generated in the Birth
while it lies shut up in the Womb infolded in its own Membranes, at what time
the Birth does not breath, nor can receive in any Air. They are also generated
in Fish, which though they do not breath in the Air, yet abound with these
Spirits, as appears by their seeing, feeling and nimble motion. Lastly, they
are generated in Birds before they are hatched, while they are enclosed within
the shell, and cannot receive in any Air. From all which it is easily
concluded, that inspired Air does not concur to constitute the Matter out of
which these Spirits are made.

VI. Now the Blood is forced in The separation of the Spirituous salt part.
great quantity through the Carotid and Cervical Arteries, not only into the
Membranes of the Head, but into Substance it self of the Brain, Cerebel and
Pith; and in its Passage first through the Cortex, thence through the Pithy
Substance, the more subtle salt Particles therein are separated for the most
part from the sulphury or oily and serous. Particles; of which again the
thicker Particles serve to the nourishment of the Bowel it self; but the
thinner are still more volatiliz'd, and for the greatest part being freed from
the sulphury, are changed into a most subtle Spirit called Animal, which flows
out of the Fibers of the Brain and Cerebel into the Nerves, and through them to
the rest of the Parts of the Body. The separation of the salt part from the
sulphury.


VII. But after what manner, or by what force that separation and thsir
attenuation and volatilization is performed, cannot easily be explained, but
seems to be peculiar to the Substance it self of the Brain and Kernels of the
Cortex, as being a Substance which is chiefly formed out of such a salt Matter,
with which some few oily Particles being mixed, make up the somewhat fatty
constitution thereof; and hence through the conformity of that like Matter, it
has an affinity with that other saltish Matter, and easily imbibes it, after it
has quitted the rest of the sulphury and serous Matter, and alters it within
its little Fibers to greater perfection. Thus Fracassarius writes that the
Cortex of the Brain is more salt and softer than the Marrow; because the Cortex
consists more of melted Salt, but the Pith of Salt strained through the Cortex,
and consequently less serous, and thence more firmly concreted, which he says
he has often experimented, and adds an experimental Observation not improbable.

Now this Separation happens first in the Cortex, as into whose innumerable
diminutive Kernels, through infinite blood-bearing Vessels the blood is
plentifully infused, out of which in those Kernels there is made a separation
of the salter and most spirituous part, which flows into the diminutive Fibers
of the Brain inserted at the lower part into the several Kernels, and so in the
pithy Substance of the lower part of the Brain composed of those little Fibers,
is brought to the last persection, the remaining portion of the blood returning
to the Heart through the little Veins. For as it is the Office of all the
Kernels to separate some humor from the blood, so the same thing comes to pass
in these Kernels of the Cortex. And as in the Sweetbread the subacid humor is
separated, the bilious humor in the Liver by virtue of its little Kernels and
Bunches; the serous humor in the Kidneys, the Lymphatic in the Kernels of many
other parts, or any other humor according to the various constitution of the
Kernels and the Parts themselves; so likewise in the Kernels of the Cortex of
the Brain endu'd with a property peculiar to themselves, there is a peculiar,
most spirituous saltish invisible humor separated from the blood, which growing
more spirituous in the little Fibers of the pithy Brain, has gained the Name of
Animal Spirit, as being that which obeys the Soul in most of its Actions.

VIII. Now that in the separation Affinity of Particles.
of any Liquor, the Affinity of the Particles is of extraordinary prevalency,
appears from hence, for that in the nourishment of all the other Parts
whatever, the same thing is observed; as for example, that such Particles of
the blood as have the greatest affinity to the Parts, adhere to them, and are
assimilated into their Substance, whereas the rest are separated from them and
forced farther. As in other things also we find those things mix most easily
which have most Affinity. Thus if Oil and Water be mixed together, and one end
of a long woollen Cloth dipped in Water be put into the said Mixture, the other
end hanging forth without the Pot, all the Water in the Pot will drip out of
the Pot all the length of the Cloth, but the Oil will remain in the Pot. Which
Affinity our new modern Philosophy, not without reason, attributes to the
agreement of the small Particles and the Pores. As for example, if the smallest
Particles to be received be round, and the receiving Pores be round, then are
those easily received by these, because of their Affinity. Also if the Pores
and Particles are triangular or any other way alike agreeable; but if the Pores
are round, but the Particles to be received triangular or quadrangular, then
would the one with difficulty receive the other, nor would there be any
Affinity. And thus it is in the Brain; for the Salt or Saltish Particles of the
blood by reason of the Affinity of the Substance and the convenience of the
Pores, are easily sucked in by the Kernels of the Cortex, and therein are
separated from the rest, as it were by a fermentaceous Motion; and being
separated, are easily imbibed by the little Fibers of the Pithy Substance, of
which this Substance is chiefly constituted, and are more subtiliz'd; but the
sulphurous not so easily. And therefore only a very small and thin part of the
sulphury Particles, having the least Oyliness, is mixed with the Animal
Spirits, but the rest together with the serous Particles, partly goes into
Excrement, which is then collected in the hollownesses of the Ventricles, or is
dissipated in Vapor through the Pores; partly together with the remaining
blood being thrust forward to the extreme parts of the Brain, is there sucked
up by the Orifices of the smallest Veins, and so circulated farther. However,
this is to be observed by the way, that in that same passage not all the salt
Particles are separated in the Kernels of the Cortex, and imbibed by the Brain;
for so there would happen a dissolution of the Composition of the blood, but
only the more fluid and volatile; but that the thicker remain mixed with the
blood, and are circulated with it; in the same manner as in the Kidneys, not
the whole Serum is separated from the Mass of the blood, only the thinner part
which has most affinity with the Pores of the Kidney-Kernels, the rest
continues mixed with the blood, and is carried with it to the hollow Vein.

IX. By what has been said, we understand The separation of the Spirituous from
the thick part.
how the salt Particles of the Blood are separated in the Brain from the
sulphury and serous. But because their most subtle and most volatile parts only
are proper for the generation of Animal Spirits, the other thicker Particles
serving partly to the nourishment of the Brain, partly going into Exerement,
now we are to see how the separation of the most spirituous and volatile
Particles from the thicker is performed. This is done after the same manner as
happens in distillation of Wine, when the Orifice of the Alembic is exactly
closed with a large Sponge: For the Chemists, to the end they may extract and
separate more powerful Spirits, or more clarified and purged from its Phlegm,
out of the Wine which is to be distilled, put a Sponge to the Alembic; for so
through the intricate passages of the Sponge the Spirits only are wheeled and
contorted, while the more impure and thicker are not able to pass through; and
so those Parts which are not cleans'd from their Dregs, but are very watery,
are separated and set aside, while the more subtle Spirits go forth and through
the Beak of the Alembic fall into the Receptacle. In like manner, in the Cortex
of the Brain, the separated salt volatile Parts of the blood are sucked up by
the diminutive Fibers which are endowed with most obscure narrow Cavities.
Through which narrow Passages while those Spirits are wriggl'd and contorted,
whatever are lesser purified and thicker, and more and more cast away and
thrown off, as the other are exalted into an incorporeal tenuity, and flow into
the Pith, as into the next Beak of the Alembic, and thence into the Nerves, as
being the lesser Beaks derived from the greatest; while in the mean time the
thicker Salt less volatile Particles of the blood serve for the nourishment of
the Bowel it self; but the rest which are yet more fixed remaining in the
mixture of the sanguineous Mass, flow back to the blood-bearing Vessels through
the wider Pores, and are sent back for Circulation. Now this expulsion of the
Spirits out of the small pory Fibers of the Brain and Pith to the Nerves, is
forced by one and the same Cause, that is to say, the alternate falling of the
Brain after dilatation, by which, as by a certain compression, the Spirits and
Humors which are in the Brain, are excited to flow forth.

And thus by the Cortex of the Brain and the Medullary Substance the Salt is
separated from the Sulphury and Sero^s, the pure from the impure, the subtle
from the thick, and that Subtility by the proper force already demonstrated of
the said Substance, proceeding from the volatile Salt which abounds in it, is
exalted to the height of volatility. And hence also flowing out of the
Substance and little Fibers of the Brain and Pith, it ought not to be contained
in loose Vessels hollowed like a Pipe; for out of such it would easily fly
away; but in such firm and more solid Receptacles or Channels, in which there
are the smallest and most invisible Pores, and such Channels are the Nerves, as
through which they may pass freely to their height of volatility and tenuity.

X. However we are to take notice, The diversity of Spirits in thinness and
thickness.
that although the Animal Spirits are made after this manner out of the said
Matter, nevertheless they are not exalted to an equal degree of Volatility in
all men. For in some they are thinner and more active, in others thicker and of
a slower Motion, according to the vulgar Phrase, either purer or impurer*
because the salt particles of the blood out of which they are generated, are in
some more, in others less visible. And the Brain it self in some is impregnated
with a more copious, in others, with a lesser quantity of volatile Spirit; and
being hotter in some, volatizes the Spirits more; being colder in others,
thickens and fixes them more. And therefore in Melancholy Spirits and such as
continually feed upon thick, hard, salt and raw Food, and whose Concoctions are
for that reason worse, thicker and less spirituous Humors are generated; and
among the rest the salt ones are less volatiliz'd; whence the Animal Spirits
are thicker and less active; as in Country people, and poor people, and such as
inhabit the cold polar Regions, and use such a sort of Diet for want of a
thinner; who are therefore slower to all manner of Animal Actions, and of dull
Wits. Whereas on the other side, they who live in hotter Regions, abounding
with plenty of all sorts of wholesome Diet, and seldom feed upon salt or smoked
Meats, but accustom themselves to a thinner and more wholesome sort of Diet, and
consequently are served by their Bowels with better Concoctions, their Humors
and Spirits are thinner and more volatile, and their Bodies and Wits more
nimble and active. Aristotle indeed says, that Melancholy People are ingenious;
but this is not to be understood of such as are altogether melancholy, and
together with a thicker blood have thicker Spirits; but of such as incline to
Melancholy, and consequently whose Spirits are neither too thin and volatile
(for such are too movable and inconstant) nor too thick (for they are stupid)
but in a middle temper between both. And therefore such People are neither too
quick nor too redious in the transaction of Business, but prudently weigh and
judge of things before they proceed to Execution.

XI. Perhaps it may seem strange The Passage through the Pores of the Nerves.
to some People, that the salt Particles should be made so subtle and
spirituous, as to be able to pass freely through the invisible Pores of the
Nerves. But they will cease to wonder, when they observe in Chemistry the
extraordinary Subtility and Volatility of Volatile Salt; and how swiftly the
Spirits of Salt will pass through the invisible Pores of the earthen Vessels.
Nay, if they only consider how common Salt without any mixture of Water or
Moisture being dissolved into Pickle, will penetrate through the thick sides of
wooden Vessels, and sweat through Stone Pots overcast both within and without
with a Glassie Crust, as we find in those Vessels where we salt our Beef, or
keep our pickled Fish. If then fixed Salt only melted, passes through the Pores
of the Vessels, how much more easily will the most subtle Spirit of volatile
Salt pierce through the Pores of the Nerves?

XII. Here some will object, That Why these Spirits do (...) corrode by reason
of their Acrimony.
Salts and Acids are sharp and corroding, so that if the Animal Spirits were
generated out of the salt Particles of the Blood, and consequently participated
of any Saltness they would corrode all Parts whatever by reason of their
Acrimony, which would occasion Pains and many Inconveniencos. I answer, That it
is certain that the Animal Spirits are indu'd with some slight Acrimony, but
not so much as to occasion any sensible molestation; because that exceeding
Acrimony which is in fixed Salt, by reason of the sharp pungent Particles
conjoined with it, becomes mild in that volatile and vaporous Spirit, because
the small sharp Particles being dissolved, are more remote one from another,
and their Force is broken by the intervening Air or some steamy Vapor. For
example, if any one go into a Cellar, and draw in the Air that is all
intermixed with a most subtle exhaling Spirit, or if he snuff up into his
Nostrils the spirituous Vapor of Wine heated at the Fire, yet shall he not feel
the least grievance, nor perceive any Acrimony, which he would do if he snuft
up into his Nostrils the Spirit it self fixed in the Liquor. So in our great
Salt-Works, where the Sea Salt is boiled and depurated, the exhaling Vapors
being impregnated with the volatile Salt, if they be taken in at the Mouth or
Nostrils, little or no Salt-Savour shall be perceived therein, whenas the fixed
Salt is most sharp. And this comes to pass, because the Forces which are
conjoined in the fixed and thick Body, and for that Reason are very powerful,
in the dissolved and vaporous Body are separated, and thereby rendered weak and
of no strength. And this is the Cause why the Animal Spirits do not corrode,
because that being dissolved into a most subtle Vapor, they have not so much
Acrimony in them as can be troublelom to any Part. To this we add, that they
have a most thin and subtle serous Vapor, together with so much sulphury Spirit
joined with them for a Vehicle, which does not a little weaken and temper the
Acrimony. Moreover, the Parts themselves through which they pass, and into
which they flow, partake of some other Moisture, which also much weakens and
diminishes their Acrimony.

XIII. From what has been said, it The Difference between the Animal and Vital
Spirits.
is sussiciently apparent that the generation of the Animal Spirits is not
Animal, but merely Natural, and that they differ not only in some Accidents or
Qualities, but in their whole Kind from the Vital. For in these the sulphury
Juice mixed with the salt, is far more prevalent; in those there is very little
sulphury or any other Juice apt to take Fire. These are extracted out of the
Chylus and veiny Blood; those only out of the salt part of the arterious blood.
These flow visible through the large Arteries and Veins; those invisible
through the invisible Pores of the Nerves. Over those the Soul has no power,
over these it has.

And therefore there is a vast difference between the Animal and Vital Spirits.
But now the Question is, whether the Animal Spirits themselves do not differ
one from another, in Substance, in Manner and Place of Generation and in Use?
Whether some are not generated out of the Blood, others out of the Lympha or
some other Matter? Also, whether some are not generated in the foremost, others
in the middle, others in the hindmost Ventricle? Or, as Willis lately tells us,
whether some are not made in the Substance of the Brain, others of the Cerebel?
Lastly, whether some peculiar and differing from the rest, do not cause the
Sight, others the Feeling, others the Hearing, others the arbitrary Motion, and
others the spontaneous Motion? I answer, That the Animal Spirits are not
generated out of a different Matter, nor in various Parts (for we take the
Brain and Cerebel for one part) neither do they differ one from another, but
are all of the same Nature, Composition and Condition; but that the diversity
of their Operations arises from the diversity of the nature and condition of
the Parts into which they flow; as those which flow into the parts adapted for
feeling, as the Membrane and Skin, those cause the Feeling; those that flow
into the Eye, cause the Sight; those that flow into the Ear, cause the Hearing;
those that flow into the Muscles, Fibers and other Parts, ordained for Motion,
cause Motion; though they be the same and no way different; as every Instrument
is adapted to this or that proper Action. In the same manner as the Beams of
the Sun, which though they be always the same, and proceed from one Sun,
neither confer any other Light, or other Strength, or any other thing to any
other Things, yet produce most different effects according to the difference of
the Constitutions of the things into which they flow. For here they produce
Barley, there Trees, in another place Stones, here Worms or Fish, sometimes
Insects or other things. Here they extinguish Life, there they are the cause of
it; here they soften, there they harden.

As to the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nerves, see the foregoing
Chapter.

XIV. To these Animal Spirits hitherto The twofold Use of these Spirits.
no other Use was attributed, only that they are serviceable to the Animal
Actions, that is to say, the principal Faculties, the Senses and the Animal
Motions; which is not to be denied: but besides this, there seems to be another
natural Use to be assigned them, which is, that they conduce in a high measure
to the nourishment of the Parts, especially the spermatical. This is chiefly
apparent from hence, because that as the blood continually flows out of the
Heart through the Arteries, so likewise these Animal Spirits continually flow
from the Brain through the Nerves to the Parts, and that naturally, without the
determination or appointment of the Soul, even when the Mind makes no
appointment at all, as in Sleep and in soporiferous Diseases.

But although besides this natural Motion perpetually proceeding, they are
frequently moved by another determinated Motion proceeding from the Mind; yet
that detracts nothing from the continual natural Motion, but that these Spirits
by virtue of that, may be serviceable to the Action of Nutrition, as they are
thereby serviceable to the Animal Actions. For the blood when the Body is at
rest, is forced out of the Heart through the Arteries by a settled continual
Motion to the nourishment of the Parts; shall it therefore when by reason of
any extraordinary Exercises or heating of the Body, it is ten times swifter and
more rapidly moved and forced out, be no longer proper for the nourishment of
the Parts? Certainly no man of Reason will say, that that same second rapid
Motion despoyls the blood of its nutritive Quality. And so likewise the more
rapid determinative motion of the Spirits, often altering the first continual
Motion, cannot be said to deprive them of their Quality necessary to the
Assistance of Nutrition.

XV. But some will say, How can the Objection.
Work of Nutrition equally proceed in the Parts, when sometimes more, sometimes
fewer Animal Spirits flow into these or those Parts? For it seems that those
into which fewer Spirits flow, should be less, those into which more Spirits
pass, should be more nourished. I answer, that the same thing befalls these
Spirits as befalls the blood, which though it be more rapidly and in greater
quantity thrust forward into the Parts upon extraordinary Exercises and Heats
of the Body, yet does it not nourish them ever a jot the more, pushed on by its
ordinary continual Motion, in regard that rapid Motion of it is caused by the
great Heat; by Motion and Heat the blood becomes more thin and subtle, and the
Pores of the Parts more loose; so that the blood may not be able to stick so
close to the Parts, but that a great quantity of it may be dissipated. So also
these Spirits, when they are frequently determined in greater quantity to these
or those parts, endue them indeed with a firmer solidity, but no larger
augmentation; because the chiefest part of them, by reason of their tenuity, is
dissipated; and what is not serviceable for nourishment, or is not dissipated,
that, being poured forth according to custom, into the Substance of the Parts,
and being somewhat thickened, enters the extremity of the Veins, together with
the remainder of the Blood, and is mixed and circulated together with it, and
carried to the heart. Of which Circulation Rolfincius and Deusingius take
notice.

XVI. Now we are to take notice What these Spirits contribute to nourishment.
what these Spirits afford or contribute to Nourishment. It has been said, l.
2. c. 12. that the blood consists of a sulphury, salt and serous Juice, and
that it is forced forward every way for the nourishment of the Parts. Therefore
in its Mass there are two sorts of Substances, serving to the nourishment of
the Parts, Sulphur and Salt. Mercury is a third, for the most part unprofitable
indeed for nourishment, but altogether necessary for the conjunction, mixture,
and as a Vehicle of the former.

But of the two former, some serve for the nourishment of the fleshy and fat
parts; others to the nourishment of the Spermatic parts. The fleshy and fat
parts are chiefly nourished by the sulphury particles of the blood, which serve
to endue them with an Oily softness and something of sweetness. Nevertheless
there are some salt particles, to render the parts more firm and solid. But
when that in those parts the sulphury particles predominate above the salt,
then are they softer and fatter; where less prevalent, more fleshy and firm.
The Spermatic parts are nourished by the salt particles of the blood, which
render them more solid and hard: yet have some sulphury particles mixed with
them; according to whose lesser or greater proportion and dissolution, some
parts are softer, as the Membranes, Veins and Arteries; others harder, as the
Bones and Gristles.

XVII. But to the end this nourishment The progress of Nutrition.
may be carried on without any ob struction, there is of necessity required
some kind of separation of the salt particles from the sulphury, that the one
may the better be enabled to adhere to the Spermatic, the other to the Fleshy
and Fat Particles, and be assimilated to them.

This Separation is caused by the Animal Spirit; which by its influx, which as
it were coagulating by a slight kind of effervescency and peculiar (...), the
salt particles, separates them from the sulphury, to the end they may be
affixed to the spermatic parts, and by the means of the heat and a small
sulphurous Vapor, be assimilated to them; and as the spermatic parts are more
or less dry or moist, and more or less of the sulphury particles are mixed with
them, so the salter particles of the blood are more or less hardened in them.
Thus they become altogether dry and hard in the Bones, but softer in the
Membranes and Fibers, etc. These salter particles being thus moderately
separated out of the remaining more sulphury Mass of the blood, that which is
proper goes to the nourishment of the fleshy and fat parts. So that the Animal
Spirits supply the place of a subacid Rennet or Coagulum, which is extracted
out of Salt and salt things.

For that such a sour Ferment or Coagulum causes the separation of salt and
sulphury particles is most evidently apparent in Chemistry. For if you mingle
Spirit of Wine, wherein there is ten times a greater proportion of sulphury
than salt particles, with Spirit or Water of Tartar, which consists of Salt
Tartarous particles thinly dissolved and melted, the Mixture will be exact;
into which Mixture if you pour in never so little Spirit of acid Salt or
Vitriol, there will be presently an Effervescency, by which the salt particles
will be separated from the sulphury and watery, and being coagulated, they will
fix and precipitate to the bottom.

Thus also, by the mixture of Animal Spirits, which are endu'd with a gentle
subacidish quality, the salt particles of the blood flowing into the parts, are
in a moderate quantity gently separated from the rest, and are somewhat fixed
and coagulated with the Spirit it self and by that means are agglutinated,
grown to, and plainly assimilated with the spermatic parts; but those which are
less salt, and more sulphury, adhere to the fleshy and fat parts, and are
united with them. But those particles which are for the most part deprived of
Spirits, and less proper for nourishment, flow back through the Veins together
with the remaining part of the blood, to be impregnated with a new
^ermentaceous Humor, proceeding from the Liver and Spleen, and to be
spiritualized anew in the Heart, either with new Chylus, or alone without it.

But if such a separation of salt and sulphury particles from the Animal
Spirits flowing through the Nerves, be required in the Parts for the carrying
on of the nourishment, the Question will be, how far this Affair shall be
carried on in such parts into which there are no Nerves inserted, as in the
Bones and the like? As also in those which admit but very few Nerves, and yet
in respect of their Largeness and their Use, require much nourishment. I
answer, that there are no parts to which Nerves do not reach, only to some more
and larger, to others fewer and less, as some require a greater, others a less
proportion of Animal Spirits for the Duties of Sense and Motion, and also
Nourishment; which is the Reason that in some there is a greater, in others a
lesser separation of the salt from the sulphury particles. The Bones, because
they are nourished chiefly by the Salt and Tartarous Spirits of the Blood, want
many Animal Spirits, to cause a strong separation of the salt particles from
the sulphury, and therefore they are all invelopp'd with a Periostium, into
which these Spirits flow in great quantity through the Nerves, and from thence
penetrating into the Pores of the Nerves, efficaciously perform their Office;
and though no manifest Nerves seem to enter the Bones, yet that they enter into
some, is apparent by the Teeth; and it is probable that they enter many other
Bones, though so small, as not to be discerned by the Eye. And such Bones into
which they do not enter, there the Periostium receiving the Spirits from the
Nerves, supplies the Office of the Nerves. But where there is neither Nerve nor
Periositum, they have their just magnitude from the beginning, conjoined with a
peculiar hardness, and afterward neither wear nor increase, as the little
Bones of the Ears, as the Mallet, the Anvil and the Stirrup. The Heart which is
fleshy, because it requires not so great a quantity of Salt for its
nourishment, nor is to be moved by a voluntary Motion, and because it makes and
contains within it self a sharper sort of Spirits, needs very few Animal
Spirits, and therefore is furnished with very slender Branches of little
Nerves. The Liver and Lungs, because they are furnished with fermentaceous and
sour Juices from other parts in sufficient quantity, the one from the Heart,
the other from the Spleen, receive very small Nerves dispersed chiefly through
the involving Membrane, and hardly entering the Paren^hyma or body of the Bowel.
The Spleen admits a greater number of Nerves and Animal Spirits; for that
making the Matter of the Ferment out of the Arterious Blood, the acid salt
particles of the blood are to be more strongly separated therein from the
sulphury. And thus it is in the rest of the Parts; among which, the more solid
always require more, the softer fewer Animal Spirits; and of the softer, those
that are watered with more Animal Spirits, are harder than other softer parts,
as we shall make out when we treat of the Muscles.

Now that such a kind of Quality is most necessary in the Animal Spirits to
promote the Nutrition of the Parts, sundry Arguments demonstrate.

1. Because those Parts which are exercised most and oftenest by the voluntary
animal motion, and into which, to cause that motion, of a necessity a greater
proportion of Spirits flows, than into such Parts as are less exercised;
because I say those Parts, for the better separation and coagulation of the
salt particles of the blood from the sulphury, are nourished with a more solid
Nourishment, and consequently become much more hard and strong than other parts
which are exercised less, and into which those Spirits for that reason are not
so copiously determined, but only flow into them according to their ordinary
course. This we find in most men, whose right Arm and Hand is much stronger
than the left, because of custom the one is ten times more made use of than the
other, as being the Instrument of most of our Actions; for which reason a
greater proportion of Spirits is determined to the one than to the other; in
which, because there is not so plentiful a mixture of Animal Spirits, there is
not so great a separation and fixation of the salt and sulphury Spirits; and
consequently less firm Nourishment, though sometimes the Bulk and Thickness may
seem greater. But that which is opposed, in regard that by reason of the less
coagulating Effervescency, it is less freed from the sulphury Spirits, it
becomes soft, pappy and fat, and affords less strength to the Member. 2.
Because in such persons that walk much and frequently, their Thighs are much
firmer and stronger, than in such who being given to Laziness, seldom walk, and
yet their Thighs are fatter, more fleshy, softer and thicker. And then again,
those that walk much are much stronger in their Thighs than in any other parts
of their Body, which they exercise less, and therefore they are fit for walking
and running, but not for any other Labor. 3. Because for the same reason it
is, that Women and lazy people are fat and soft, but weak; because there is no
other than only the ordinary influx of Animal Spirits into the Parts; and hence
a greater quantity of the sulphury particles of the blood mixed with salt, and
less separated from them, are appos'd together with the Salt, which renders the
Nourishment less firm. 4. Because that in Paralytic Persons, in whom very few
Spirits or none at all flow into the Members that suffer, first the suffering
parts for some time are languid and somewhat swelling with an Impostume-like
Tumor, and at length grow lean and withered, though much blood is forced to
them through the Arteries. 5. Because that such as use immoderate Venery waste
away, by reason of the great consumption and waste of Animal Spirits, which for
that cause flowing in a lesser quantity to the nourishment of the Parts,
Nutrition is obstructed, and thence follows a leanness and wasting of the whole
body. 6. Because in an ill temper of the Brain and upon several Diseases an
Atrophy follows, either because of the consumption of these Spirits, or because
few are generated, or those that are generated are vicious.

Thus Malpigius frequently observes, that such as have received any Wound in
the Brain, at length die of a Consumption.

7. Because such an Atrophy caused by the ill temper of the Brain and Spirits,
has been often cured by Remedies applied to the Head alone; by which the Animal
Spirits being restored to their former Sanity, Nutrition has had its usual
Course. 8. Because upon the cutting of any Nerve, that Part to which the Nerve
was carried, shall consume and perish for want of Animal Spirits. Of which
Riolanus gives us an elegant Example. Nicephorus Gregorius, says he, saw a
young Boy once, that being shot with an Arrow into the Neck, the Arrow had cut
the Nerve; upon which the contrary Foot was seized with a Numness, and the
Disease remained incurable: and though the other Foot grew as the Boy grew, the
other Leg retained its first exility and Shortness, hanging loose and useless.
Upon which many that understood not the Causes and Reasons of things, were
strangely amazed how it came to pass, that the Hand which was much nearer the
Wound was altogether insensible of the Heart, when the Foot so far distant, was
so deeply affected with it.
But by reason Anatomy was not so well understood in that Age, the cause of
that Accident was not so well discerned by the Physicians of that time, which
was certainly this, because the Arrow had not struck the Nerve after its
separation from the Pith, and its starting out through the Side-holes of the
Spiny Fistula; for there is no Nerve that slides through the Vertebers of the
Neck, which descends to the Thigh and Foot, but penetrating within the Spiny
Fistula, had cut the Nervy Strings in the Pith it self which descends to the
Loins and the holy Bone, and thence to the Foot, and for that reason the influx
of Spirits into the Foot, failing, the Foot dried up and ceased its growth.

So that which way soever we consider the Matter, it will appear that the
Animal Spirits necessarily concur to the Office of Nutrition. And moreover,
that in the Spleen they separate the Matter of Ferment out of the arterious
Blood, necessary for the preparation of the Blood and the Chylus.

These things Glisson and Wharton seem in some measure to have smelt out, and
Lambert Vel^hussus treading their Footsteps. Only in this they were deceived,
that besides the Animal Spirits, they thought there flowed through the Nerves
some other sort of Nutritive Juice, which of it self nourished the Spermatic
Parts. Which Error proceeded from that whitish Juice resembling the White of an
Egg, which when the Nerves are hurt, is often gathered together in the Nerves
or about them, vulgarly called Aqua Articularis. Which Humor however, doesnot
distill from the Nerves when hurt; for such a slimy Juice could never pass
through the invisible Pores, but is a Humor that usually set^les about the
Joints to render them (...) and slippery, which upon a too copious mixture with
the Animal Spirits flowing out of the endamag'd Nerves, grows thick and
coagulated, many times to the Consistence of the White of an Egg. Which loss of
Spirits causes a debility and Atrophy in the Part.

I thought good to insert this paradoxical Opinion of mine into these
Anatomical Exercises in few words; upon which others may comment more at large,
because that from this foundation the Use and Nature of many other parts may be
gathered. There remain two things more to be unfolded. First, Whether the
Animal Spirits are the next Instrument of the Soul; concerning which thing
Plempius accurately discourses l. 2. Fund. Med. sect. 4. c. 1. The next, How
these Spirits being generated in the Brain, and flowing with a continual and
natural Motion to perfect the Nourishment of the parts, are moved by the Mind
by another designing Motion, and are sent sometimes in a larger, sometimes in a
lesser proportion to sundry parts. But these things which chiefly concern the
Actions of the Soul, seem not to be the proper Subject of our Discourse,
wherein we have designed to write not of the Soul, but only of the Body of Man;
and therefore as for those that are covetous of Satisfaction in this
particular, I think fit to send them to the Philosophers, who have on purpose
set forth whole Treatises of the Soul and its Actions; which however I advise
to be read with great Judgment, since not a few of them have feigned many and
wonderful idle Dreams in that particular.

CHAP. XII. Of the Face.
IN the foregoing Chapters we have endeavored to display what is to be found
in the Hairy Part of the Head; now we come to the smooth Part, which is called
the Countenance, or Vultus, a Voluntatis judicio, from the Judgment of the
Will, because it discovers the Will. It is also called Facies, by the Greeks
(...), because it distinguishes Men from Brutes, and shows that there is a
Celestial Spirit contained in them.

For if we more seriously consider the structure of the Face, its singular
Beauty and Splendour, we cannot but discern something that is wonderful and
divine therein. Whence Aristotle very well observes, that the whole man is
comprehended in his Face as in the Compendium of a little Picture.

For the Wisdom of the supreme Architect more than sufficiently appears in the
several parts of human Body; yet both the Beauty of the Face alone, and its
wonderful agreement with the Soul, draws the Elegancy and Dignity of all the
rest of the Parts as it were into a Compendium, and seems to show therein the
Affections of all the rest of the Parts as in a Looking-glass. For from thence
we gather not only the Marks and Symptoms of Health, Diseases and approaching
Death, but also make shrewd Conjectures of the Ingenuity, Dispositions and
Manners of Men. For as in the Cheeks Bashfulness and Terror, in the Eyes Anger,
Joy, Sadness, Hatred, and chiefly Love display themselves; in the Forehead,
Gravity and Humility; in the Eyebrows, Pride; in the Chin, Majesty; so by the
Nose, Sagacity or Stupidity; by the Motion of the Face, Wisdom or Folly,
Honesty or Knavery, Civility or Rusticity, Reverence or Contempt, good or ill
Will; by the Color we discover the Temperaments of the whole Body. Moreover,
by the Face we distinguish of Sex, Age, Life, and Birth. Therefore it is the
most certain Image of the Mind, and a clear Mirror reflecting back those things
which lie concealed, wherein both the external and internal Senses discover
themselves, and all the Motions and Perturbations of the internal Faculties are
displayed.

I. The Face consists of Parts containing The Parts of the Face.
and Parts contained.

The containing Parts are common or proper.

The common are the Cuticle, the Skin, which is here very thin; the Fat, of
which there is none either in the Eyebrows or Nose, and very little in the
Lips and Region of the Chaps, where it is so interwoven with Muscles, that it
cannot be separated from the Parts annexed to it. The Fleshy Pannicle, which
below the Eyes is so thin, that Riolanus thought it to be altogether wanting in
that Part. In the Forehead it is much more fleshy, and sticks so close to the
Skin, that it can hardly be separated from it; and is also ruddy in that Part,
because of the frontal Muscles interwoven with it.

The proper Parts are Muscles, Bones, Gristles, and other Parts to be described
in their due Places.

The Face is divided into the upper and lower Part.

The upper Part from the Hair to the Eyebrows, is called Frons, the Forehead;
and in this part in a Body entire is referred to the Face, whereas in a
Skeleton it belongs to the Skull.

The lower Part extended from the Eyebrows to the extremity of the Chin,
contains the Eyes, the Nose, the Cheeks, and other Parts especially to be
described, and in Men, round about the Mouth is adorned with a Beard.

II. Frons, the Forehead, is so The Forehead.
called a ferendo, because it carries the Signs of Gravity, Sadness, Mirth,
Morosity, etc. The Greeks call it (...), as much as to say, (...). the Part
above the Eyes.

III. The Shin of this Part is moveable, The Muscles of the forehead.
because it is furnished with two large Muscles, which Riolan calls the fleshy
musculous Membrane; on each side one* rising from the Scalp, near the Coronal
Sut^re, and sticking closely to it, which at the sides are knit to the Temple
Muscles, and above are somewhat distinguished in the middle, but below so
closely joined together, that they seem one Muscle. They terminate at the
Eyebrows, which they lift up, and contract the Flesh which sticks close to
them, into Folds and Wrinkles. (...) writes, that he observed in a Person that
had a large Nose, an Appendix of these Muscles extended even to the Gristles of
the Nose.

These Wrinkles Physiognomist^ observe, and take from thence the Signs of the
Nature and Fortune of Men, and often foretell Wonders concerning future Events
that shall happen to them. And the better to persuade the credulous of the
certainty of their Predictions, distinguish the Wrinkles into straight and
transverse; and of these they make seven in number, consecrated to the seven
Planets; all which they confess do not appear in all men, but that some are
wanting in some People; only that they are for the most part conspicuous, which
are appropriated to Mercury, V^nus and Jupiter, especially if the Eye-brow be
lifted up, which happens to those that are under d^ep Meditation; or that the
Skin of the Forehead be contracted, as when men are angry, which causes a
corrugation both of the straight and transverse Wrinkles. But how frivolous and
uncertain these Predictions are, besides daily Experience, what we have
discoursed at large concerning the Influences of the Planets, I. de Peste,
plainly demonstrate.

The said Frontal Muscles derive little Nerves from the Branch of the third
Pair, proceeding from the hole of the Orbit of the Eye. They are furnished with
little Arteries from the external Carotides; and send forth little Vei^s to the
Jugulars.

They have straight Fibers, by which they draw the Skin straight up, not
transverse or oblique, as Columbus and Aquapendens assert contrary to ocular
Demonstration and Reason.

IV. Here by the way we must observe Muscles of the hinder part of the Head.
without the Face, that two Muscles very slender, seldom remarkable, are to be
found in the hinder part of the Head, which being short, thin and broad, arise
from the transverse line of the hinder part of the Head, in which the Muscles
moving the Head end; and being furnished with straight Fibers ascending
upwards, terminate in a broad Tendon, and touch the Muscles of the Ears at the
sides. By these Fibers, which belong to those more remarkable Muscles, the Skin
of the Head is drawn toward the hinder parts, which John Schenckius testifies
of himself, and Columbus of his Master.

Under the Forehead are contained the Domicils of the four Senses, Seeing,
Hearing, Smelling and Tasting. The fifth Sense of Feeling, has no particular
habitation in the Face, but is dispersed over the whole Body.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Eyes in general.
THE Eyes in Latin, Oculi; in Greek, (...) and (...), are the Organs of Sight,
formed and consisting of several similar Parts for the sake of seeing.

These, like the Stars and Luminaries of our Bodies, are placed by the Supreme
Creator in the upper part of our Body, that as Sentinels from a high
Watchtower, they may be able to discover fortuitous Accidents, what to avoid
and what to entertain, and through the admirable Construction, Elegancy and
variety of visible Objects, to evince us of the Omnipotency of the invisible
God. For they are the Tapers of the Bodies, which like the Sun, give light to
Man: For as the shining Sun illuminates the wide World, but withdrawing his
Beams, is the cause of Darkness; so the Eyes being perfect and open, illustrate
the Microcosm, and display the wonderful Works of God; but being blinded,
involve the little World in darkness, and compel miserable Man to live
perpetually as in an obscure Prison in perpetual Darkness; for that being
deprived of those Windows, he is also deprived of all Light, his first and
chiefest Pleasure.

Now if the Structure of the Eye be but more narrowly considered, certainly
there is no man living, whom the immense Wisdom of the Supreme God will not
ravish into Admiration and Amazement, who in the framing these Organs, was so
much the more exquisite in his Workmanship, by how much the Sight excels all
the rest of the Senses in Excellency and Dignity.

I. The Eyes are in number two; The Number.
partly for the greater perfection of the Sight; partly that if the one should
happen to be hurt, the other might supply the Office and Duty common to both.
In Man they are distant but a small space the one from the other, in Brutes
their distance one from the other is far greater.

II. If you look upon the Ball it The Figure.
self, their Figure is round and spherical, to render them the more apt for
Motion, and more fit to receive the visible Rays. But if you consider the Eyes
together with their Muscles annexed to the hinder part, then their shape is
somewhat oblong, like the Root of a Tulip.

III. Their Color in Men is somewhat Their Color.
various; in some bluish, in others yellowish, in others black; which Variety
is most conspicuous about the Apple of the Eye in the Rainbow, and proceeds
from the color of the Uveous Coat. In the Kindom of China, by the report of
Travelers, the Inhabitants have black Eyes; but in Tartary, green. In Brutes
of the same kind there is not observed so great a Variety. The Causes of these
Colors are at large set down by Aristotle, Simon Portius and Montaltus, to
whom I refer the Reader.

IV. The Bigness of the Eye in The Bigness.
Men is but indifferent, not in all Men exactly equal; yet such as suffices to
receive the Rays of visible Things. However that small difference in the
Bigness, does not a little contribute to the greater or less perfection and
strength of the Sight. For large and Goggle Eyes are much duller of sight than
those which are less, and more retired within the Head, the reason of which is
to be seen among the Optic Writers.

V. There is a wonderful Sympathy Their Consent.
and Agreement of the Eyes one between the other, by reason of the Optic Nerves
adhering to them in the middle at the top of the Pith; as also by reason of the
moving Nerves arising from one and the same Original. And hence if the one be
afflicted by any external Accidents, the other languishes immediately, and the
one can hardly be preserved from the detriment of the other.

VI. They have a certain Light in The Light of the Eye.
themselves which accompanies their first Formation; less in Man, who is
chiefly employed in the daytime; greater in those Creatures that prey in the
Night; as Dormice, Owls and Cats, whose glittering Eyes dispel the Darkness
round about them. And Laurentius Bauschius reports upon his own View, that he
has seen the Eyes of Lions so brightly shining after Death, that you might
discover the bottom of the Choroid through the hole of the Uveous Coat, as it
were of a Gold-colour.

Now because there is a great confluence of Animal Spirits to the Eyes, hence
they manifestly discover the Signs of Health or Sickness. In a healthy Person a
proper and convenient conflux of these Spirits renders them full, glittering
and lively. But in persons that are sick, the smaller quantity of those Spirits
flowing into the Eyes, makes them look fallen, sad, troubled and obscure; till
at the last endeavors of fading Nature, at length the dazzled and broken Sight
foretells the utter Ruin both of Strength and Life.

VII. That these Spirits being endu'd Whether diseased Eyes be contagious
with evil Qualities, and darting from the Eyes, defile Looking-Glasses, and by
contagion infect others with an Ophthalmy, formerly Aristotle, Galen,
Alexander, and many modern eminent Physicians have erroneously believed. For
the Animal Spirits generated in the Brain are not all equally good; and if
those which flow to the Eyes were endu'd with bad Qualities, also those which
flow to other parts, would partake of the same bad Qualities, and would badly
affect other parts likewise, and obstruct their Performances; for there is no
reason that worse should flow to the Eyes, and better to other parts:
nevertheless in most Ophthalmics, no other parts are endamag'd unless the Eyes.
Besides, there can be no such emission of Spirits from the eyes at a distance,
as to defile a Looking-Glass, or infect the eyes of another person at a
distance. And therefore the defilement of the Looking-Glass proceeds not from
the contaminated Spirits issuing from the Eyes, but from the corrupt Vapors
proceeding from the Mouth, or some other external Cause. Thus Blear-eyedness
caused by looking upon Blear Eyes, whether at a near or farther distance, is to
be attributed, not to the emission of contaminated Spirits from the Eyes, but
to the conturbation of the Spirits of the other Person, caused by the abhorred
Spectacle of Blear-Eyedness; as being that by which the Spirits are not only
moved disorderly; but also the Pores being dilated by the unwonted Influx of
Spirits more than usual, the Blood and Humors are hastened away in greater
quantity to those Parts upon which the thoughts of the Mind are most intent,
that is to say, the Eyes. In the same manner as when a Person sees another
vomiting, many times his Abhorrency and Squeamishness is such, that he is
thereby provoked to vomit; or else beholding with horror and terror the
outrageous Motions of Epileptics in their Convulsions, falls himself into an
Epilepsie; of which there are several Examples among the Physicians; neither of
which can be ascribed to Contagion, but to the disorderly Motion of the
Spirits, by which the vicious Humors are also hurried to the Parts intently
thought upon; especially in such persons where such Humors were already
collected and prepared in the Body, as the Milky Juice has been brought to the
empty Breasts of Women and sometimes of Men by Conceit; according to what we
have said, l. 2. c. 2. But in regard this horrible Impression of abominating
Conceit is not alike in all People, nor troubles all People actually; besides
that, it does not happen to such Persons where these sharp and vicious Humors
are collected in their Bodies, hence it falls out that the Eyes of some are
affected with the sight of Blear-Ey'dness, when others are nothing concerned at
a nearer distance, and why some vomit to see another vomit, others are nothing
moved.

VIII. Some observing these Difficulties No Inquinations issue from the Eyes.
concerning the Spirits, and yet willing obstinately to defend Contagion in
Lippitude, seek another Evasion, and affirm that this Contagion does not
consist in the Spirits so much as in certain thin Exhalations and contagious
Impurities issuing from the Eyes of a Blear-eyed Person; as the Pestilence is
got by contagious Contaminations; and so by reason of this sort of Contagion
Lippitude has been known to be epidemic, as they report; and further, that
Mirrors have been altogether contaminated and corrupted by the very Looks of
some who have had those Vapors issuing from the Eyes very malignant; insomuch
that Hoffman tells a Story of a florid young Virgin, who during the time of her
Flowers, so infected the Glass where she dressed her self, that the Quicksilver
dropped off from behind. But these People do not consider, that very few
Exhalations can issue from the Eye, which is a colder Part; that besides its
conjunctive Coat, is covered with another hard and thick Coat, able to shoot
themselves three, much less twenty paces; at which distance Lippitude has
sometimes been contracted at the sight of a Blear-eyed Person; for if there
should be such a continual Emission, though of the most thin Vapors from the
Eye, certainly they would be totally dried up in a few hours time, nor would
that Moisture which is afforded hy the small and almost invisible Arteries,
suffice to supply so great an Inanition. Moreover, if any one troubled with a
deformed Lippitude, should enter into any spacious Court, and another beholding
him at a distance, should presently grow blear eyed (as we have known it
sometimes happen) shall that come by Contagion? Then must the Patient have sent
the Contagion before him; else it is not likely that the Contagion should
spread it self from his Eyes through all the Court in a moment of Time. Several
People have contracted Ophthalmies from looking upon blear-eyed persons, even
in the open Air and against a strong Wind; and yet no Man can well believe,
that such a subtle Contagion should be carried against the force of the Wind.
But in the Pestilence it is quite otherwise, where a great quantity of
contagious Exhalations are generated out of the moist, hot and porous parts of
the Body, also out of certain contaminated and copious Humors contained in the
Body it self; from which by reason of the extreme Heat and Moisture Exhalations
are raised in great quantity; and by reason of that great quantity, and the
force of the great Heat that makes a strong Expulsion, there is no body but will
grant that they may be carried to a great distance. As to Epidemic Ophthalmies;
they generally spread themselves, by reason of the common Cause proceeding from
the Air or Diet, but not by reason of any Contagion issuing from the Eyes; or
if contracted by looking upon the Person affected, it proceeds from the
conturbation of the Spirits aforesaid. So that if ever any Looking-Glasses were
defiled and spoiled by any contaminations issuing from the Eyes, cre^at Iudaeus
Apella, for I will not. Neither does the Story of Hoffman prove it; for it is
beyond all Belief, that a hard and polished Looking-Glass, which neither Oil of
Vitriol nor Aqua fortis can penetrate, should be corrupted and spoiled by a few
Exhalations proceeding from the Eyes of a Virgin; nay, that those Exhalations
should so penetrate the Pores of the Glass, that the Quicksilver should fall
off from the Backside, when those Glasses will not admit the most subtle and
sharp Spirits to pass through their sides. Perhaps that Looking-Glass might be
corrupted by the great quantity of viscous and foul Vapors exhaling from the
Mouth of the Virgin and the rest of her Body; which contamination also might
have been easily wiped out with a Clout; so that the Quicksilver did not fall
off for that reason. Rather it is most likely, that Hoffman being
over-credulous, was deceived by the prattling Gossips that told him the Story
and showed him the Looking-Glass, which was not spoiled by that Cause, but by
the Moisture of the Wall, against which the Glass had hung long; only it
happened that the Quicksilver fell off at the time that the Virgin looked in it.

By way of Corollary, I shall add one thing: If any Contagion issued from the
Eyes of blear-eyed Men, it would be no less catching in the Dark than in the
Light, as it happens in the Pestilence and Itch; but let any one lie with an
Ophthalmic person, sleep and converse with him all Night not knowing him to be
so, his Eyes shall never come to any hurt thereby, though he shall presently
catch the Distemper by conversing and seeing him by the Light. Which is a
certain Sign that it does not proceed from any Contagion, but from the
Conturbation aforesaid.

A certain German Student going into a Brothel-house about Night, and asking
for a Whore, was carried, as she made him believe, to a very fair Bedfellow,
without a Candle in the Dark, pretending that she would by no means be known,
because she was another man's Wife; with whom he lay all that Night and several
other Nights afterward; which not sufficing, he would often boast among his
Companions what a lovely Mistress he had got to himself. His Associates,
understanding that he was gone one Night to the same Bawdy House, in the middle
of the Night came a great Cluster of them together, and whether the Bawd would
or no, lighting up several Candles, went up in search of their Fellow-Student,
and broke open the Chamber Door. He, seeing his Companions entered, skipp'd out
of the Bed, and put on his Clothes; and soon after the Wench was dragged out of
her Bed to the Light; at what time they found her to be an ugly blear-eyed
Jade, and thereupon jeered their Companion, who had never seen her before by
the Light, almost to Death, for bragging as he had done of the Beauty of his
unknown Harlot. On the other side, the poor Scholar who was ignorant of that
Deformity in her before, after he had looked more accurately upon the Strumpet
by the Candlelight, became so troubled and disturbed through his aversion to
the Deformity of the Spectacle which he beheld, that he was suddenly taken with
a desperate Ophthalmy, of which he could hardly be cured in a Month's time.
Whence it is apparent, that the young Man contracted that Blear-Ey'dness
through the Conturbation of his Spirits only, and not by Contagion; which
otherwise he had caught by lying with the deformed Beast so many Nights before.

IX. In the Eyes there are two sorts Two sorts of parts of the eyes.
of Parts to be considered; some that contain, others that constitute and form
them.

The containing Parts are various. The Pits of the Eyes called Orbits, the Eye
lids, with the Brows both lower and uppermost, the Caruncles in the Corners*
and the Kernels.

The constituting Parts are the Fat, the Vessels, the Muscles, the Tunicles and
Humors.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Parts containing the Eyes.
See Table 14.

I. AMong the Domicils of the The Orbits
Eyes, which are allowed 'em for Security and Convenience, two great Cavities
are first to be considered, which are vulgarly called Orbits, hollowed on both
sides the Nostrils under the Forehead in the Bones of the Cranium, wherein the
Supreme Architect would have the Eyes to be contained, that in these Bony Seats
they might reside more safe from all external Injuries. Which Bones either
hanging over or placed under the Eyes, the Greeks call (...) and (...), as much
as to say, Sub-ocular.

II. The Figure of the Orbits is The Figure and Largeness.
round and somewhat oblong; the Largeness but moderate, no more than sufficient
for the Eyes with their Kernels, Fat and Muscles to be contained therein, and
moved with freedom.

III. They are clothed withinside The Coats.
with the Pericranium, which Riolanus denies, contrary to Ocular Testimony, to
which the Fat and Beginnings of the Muscles closely adhere.

IV. In each there are three Holes; Their holes
two behind, and those the biggest; and one upon the side, which is less. The
innermost of those behind affords a passage to the Optic Nerve. The outermost
placed at the side of it, is an oblong Fissure, through which the moving Nerves
with the Arteries and Veins proceeds to the Eye. The Lateral Hole, which is
less, is seated in the inward Angle. This under the Sieve-like Bone, is bored
through to the inner parts of the Nostrils, and sends forth Tears; therefore
vulgarly called the Weeping-Hole. Concerning this Hole Spigelius makes this
Observation, that it is bigger in Women, who are apt to shed Tears, than in
Men, and in such as are not subject to weep.

Now that the Tears may not flow continually through these Weeping-Holes, the
Supreme Architect has placed on each side a soft and kernelly Caruncle
furnished with small sanguineous Vessels and Nerves almost invisible, as also
with two small little Vessels carrying the Lympha, proceeding from the inner
part of the Glandulous Flesh, and insensibly pouring forth Liquor continually
to moisten the Eyes. This Glandulous Flesh covers the weeping-hole; hence by
some called the Lachrymal Caruncle, and so prevents the continual Efflux of the
internal Liquor; till pressed by its over-abounding quantity, it gives way a
little, and so affords a Passage to the Liquor, which is the Tears. This
Caruncle being overmuch contracted by the cold Air, or eaten away, or
exulcerated by some sharp Humor, it happens that the said Hole is not exactly
shut; whence happens a continual and unvoluntary emission of Tears.

At length, between the Ball of the Eve, covered with the Eye lids, and the
lower Region of the Eyebrows and the upper Region of the Cheeks, two
semilunary Cavities come to be considered; of which the uppermost by the Greeks
is called (...), by the Latins, Oculi Cavum, or the Hollow of the Eye. Both
these Cavities, upon much watching and Ophthalmic Distempers, but more
especially in a Flegmatic Cachexy and the Dropsy, are wont to swell, and to
look somewhat black and blew. Which Color if it be pale and remarkably A Sign
of the French Disease. The Eyelids.
shining, is a certain Sign of the French Disease.

V. The Eyes contained within these Orbits or strong Dens, for their better
preservation are covered with the Eyelids, as with Curtains, to keep out Dust,
troublesome Smoke and Vapors, as also the Excess of Light and the Injuries of
the Air, and is moistened, wiped and cleans'd by the Corneous Tunicle to render
the Sight more bright and clear.

They consist withoutside of a thick Skin, under which there is no Fat;
withinside they are invelopp'd with a thin and slender Pericranium, to
facilitate their Motion. Between these Parts runs a Fleshy Membrane, which is
here very thin.

VI. They receive very small Branches The Vessels
of Arteries from the Carotides, and send forth diminutive Veins to the
Iugulars, and are furnished with little Nerves from the second Pair.

In each Eye there are Two; one lower and lesser, whose Motion is slower in
Man; this in Birds is bigger than the uppermost; and in most seems to be moved
for the most part alone.

VII. The other, which is uppermost, Muscles.
is indu'd with a most swift Motion, which it derives from two Muscles. Of
which the first, which is straight, seated in the upper Region of the Orbit,
rising with a slender and gristly beginning within the Chamber of the Eye,
above and close by the Elevator of the Eye about the Hole of the Optic Nerve,
is extended with a broad and subtle Tendon to the brim of the Eyelid, and
raising it up, opens the Eye. The other, called the Orbicular Muscle, is seated
between the Fleshy Membrane, and that which is drawn forth from the
Pericranium. This by most Anatomists is described as one Muscle, orbicularly
encompassing the Eye; which about the breadth of a finger, arises in the larger
Angle or Corner, at the Root of the Nose, and thence proceeds under the lower
Eyelid, and runs back with orbicular Fibers through the outer Canthos, and
returns above the upper Eyelids to the same place of the inner Canthus, where
it ends, and by contraction shuts the Eyelids. But Spegelius and Riolanus more
truly aver, that this orbicular Muscle is not single but double; because that
in Persons that are full of Muscles, two slender semicircular Muscles are
commonly observed; of which the uppermost and largest is seated in the upper
Eye-brow, and rising with an acute beginning out of the inner Corner of the
Eye, and that part of the Eye brow next the Nose, and so carried transversly on
to the outermost Corner, and inserted into it, takes up all that space which
lies between the Eye-brow and the extreme part of the Gristle out of which the
Hairs grow: The lower and lesser, arising from the side of the Nose with an
acute be inning, and carried athwart through the lower Eyelid, and somewhat
ascending to the outer Corner, is inserted into the upper Eyelid with a broad
end. And thus both these Muscles have their distinct Insertions and Beginnings,
though their circular Fibers touch one another, and stick so close together, so
that upon a slight view, they seem to be but one Muscle; though it be apparent
that they are two, not only by accurate separation and demonstration, but also
from hence, that each of them receive distinct Nerves from distinct places,
that is to say, the uppermost, a little Nerve from the moving Nerve that breaks
forth through the Hole of the upper Orbit. The lowermost, another little Nerve
from that Nerve which extends it self through the Hole of the lower part of the
Orbit. The same also appears from hence, that Physicians have observed in the
Cynic Convulsion of the Face, that the lower Eyelid has remained immovable,
and as it were drawn downward, while in the mean time the upper has moved
naturally; which could never be if both Eyelids were moved by one Muscle.

VIII. To these Muscles aforesaid, The Ciliar Muscle.
some add a Ciliar Muscle; which girdling the Hairs of the Eyebrows, assists
in the exquisite joining of them together. But this Muscle is not easily
demonstrated by any Man; for which reason many deservedly question whether
there be any such Muscle or no?

IX. As to the Motion of the Eyebrows, What is (...) Motion.
there is some Dispute between Aristotle and Galen, while the one affirms their
Motion to be natural, the other voluntary. But Aristotle erred out of his
Ignorance of those Muscles: the other knowing the Muscles, rightly ascribes a
voluntary Motion to them.

Julius Casserius, observing that the Muscles of the Eyelids are extremely
slender, yet though so slender, that they are not wearied by continual Motion,
grants that the Motion of the Eyelids is voluntary, but somewhat different
from the common voluntary Motion, as if he thought that they were partly moved
by a voluntary Motion; or that their Motion was composed of natural and animal.
But had he seriously considered the lightness of of the weight of the Eyelids,
he would have been convinced that those thin Muscles were sufficient to perform
their voluntary Motion.

X. Julius Casserius takes also these Observations Observations taken from the
Eyebrows.
from the Eyelids: for Example, that such as have their uper Eyelid elevated,
are proud and fierce; but that such as have it depressed, shutting almost half
the Eye, so that they seem to look down upon the Ground, are humble and mild.
But Hippocrates takes a very bad Prognostic from Eyelids, ill joined in Sleep.
Consider, says he, what is to be seen in the Eye in time of Sleep; for if any
thing of the White appear, the Eyelids being not closs'd (if it do not happen
from looseness, or the drinking of some Potion, or that the Patient were not
wont to sleep so) it is an ill Sign, and deadly.

XI. The Eyelids open from two Angles, Canthi.
which are vulgarly called Canthi, which the Greeks call (...) Of these two,
the outward Corner is less, to which there also joins a remarkable Kernel
within the Orbit of the Eye, which they call the Kernel without a Name, which
is seated in the upper Region of that Corner, thicker above, thinner* below,
and as it were neatly distinguished into certain Lobes, and sending forth small
Lymphatic Vessels between those Lobes, which running forward within the inner
Tunicle of the Eyelids, pierce it through with small Holes, at a small
distance from the Hairs. These little Vessels Nicholas Stenonis first
discovered in the Head of a Sheep and Calf; and it is probable that it is so in
the Eyes of a Man, though not discernable to the Eye, by reason of their
Exiguity. He also tells us the way how to find out those Vessels. The Mouth of
those Rivers, says he, are easily discovered, if you extend never so little
the whole Eyelid in the outermost Corner. For then about half a Thumbs breadth
from the outward Limbus, you shall meet with three in the Angle it self, four
below, and six, sometimes seven above, through which a Bristle being thrust in
without Dissection, you shall easily find a Passage into the Kernel it self.
The last year discovered these Vessels to me, when holding to the Light of a
Candle the Eyelid of a Sheep, after I had plucked out the Eye out of the
Orbit, to s^e whether it were transparent or no; at what time the shining
Rivulets of the Lympha The inner Canthus.
clearly betrayed themselves.

XII. The innermost Canthus is bigger (particularly called by the Greeks (...),
and by Hesychius (...) a Fountain, as seeming to be the Fountain from whence
the Tears issue) in which the Glandulous Caruncle aforesaid, lies upon the
Lacrymal Hole. Which being corroded away by the Acrimony of sharp Humors, then
the Eye weeps without any constrait; which is the cause of that Distemper which
the Physicians call the Lachrymal Fistula, the Greeks (...)

In the Eye of an Ox, besides this Caruncle, there is to be found a certain
brawny hard Particle, smooth toward the Eye, on the outward part somewhat
rough, affording a more easy Motion to the Membrane, by which the Eye twinkles.

XIII. Little soft Gristles lace the The Cilia*
Extremities of the Eyelids, which the Greeks call (...), the Latins Cilia,
for the more ready Expansion and exact Closure of the Eyelids. Of which, the
uppermost is much broader than the lower. The Lachrymal Points.


XIV. Within these Grisly Limbus's, about the larger Corner two small Holes are
obvious in each Eye, called the Lachrymal Points, admitting a Hoggs Bristle
within the Membranes of the Eyelids, more conspicuous in Oxen, and other large
Animals than in Men. These close together into one Channel near the Lachrymal
Hole, which running forth toward the Foreparts, opens with a manifest Hole
about the Extremity of the Nostrils, through which that thin Liquor distills,
especially in cold Weather, when Men drop at the Nose before they are aware.
And sometimes through these Lachrymal Points, some small quantity of the
Lymphatic Liquor, squeezed out of the Kernels, flows forth like Tears without
any compulsion, which gave them the Name of Lachrymal Holes, though they are
not really the Fountains of the Tears.

In the Extremities of the Eyelids, under the upper, is inserted a row of
straight Hairs, turning somewhat upward; by Hippocrates called (...) which
Casserius and others call particularly Cilia, which grow to a certain length,
set thin by Natures Law, which they never exceed. They are always also black,
and never grow gray, like the rest of the Hairs of the Body; nor do they ever
shed but in virulent Distempers of the Part, as the Elephantiasis, or the Pox.
Yet Aristotle affirms, that they fall off from Men that are extremely addicted
to Venery.

These keep off from the Eyes little Bodies flying in the Air, and render the
Sight more perfect, by slightly darkening the Eye; for that if they be wanting
through any Distemper, or other Cause, the Eye never discerns so exactly at a
distance: but if by any Accident they are turned toward the inside of the Eye,
they become cruelly troublesome and hinder the Sight.

In Oxen, besides the Eyelids, there is yet another Membrane under the
Eyelids, which both Men and most Animals want, which is governed by a peculiar
voluntary Motion. For it is drawn with a double String to the opposite Corner,
the one lying hid above, the other below, which arises from a certain Muscle
placed in the outer Corner; which Muscle, by Fallopius, is taken for part of
that which draws the whole Eye to the outward Parts. By the benefit of this
Muscle Oxen twinkle, and can shut their Eyes, the Eyelid being still open,
when they lear, least any thing should fall into the Eye.

XV. For more security, above, The Eyebrows. ^
upon the Confines of the Forehead and Eyes, the Eyebrows are placed, hanging
over like a Bow, with a thicker Skin, and rough, with the Hair lying pressed
down toward the outward Parts, to receive Sweat, Dust and other things that
fall from the Head, least they should slip into the Eyes.

These Eyebrows, by the Greeks called (...), Ruffus. calls the hairy
Extremities of the Forehead, and that part of them which looks toward the
Nose, is called (...), the Head of the Eyebrows; the other regarding the
Temples (...), the Tail of the Eyebrows. The middle space between both
Eyebrows, in Greek (...), by the Latins, because it is smooth and void of
Hair, is called Glabella: Though sometimes that part be also hairy; the
Eyebrows meeting together at the Extremity of the Nose, which Aristotle
observes to be the Sight of a Person (...), austere and morose, and such a Man
is therefore by him called (...).

CHAP. XV. Of the Tears.
I. HAving made mention in the former Chapter, of the Passages through which
the Hairs flow, in regard the Tears themselves, together with their true
Fountain, have been but obscurely hitherto described by the Philosophers; we
thought it would not be time ill spent, by making a short Digression to insert
into these Anatomical Exercises a more exact Discourse concerning them, that
whence those serous Drops distill, and what they are, may be the better
understood.

As to the original Causes and matter of Tears, Opinions are very various.

II. Empedocles, as Galen testifies, imagined that Tears were generated out of
attenuated and melted Blood. But in regard that many men can weep of a sudden,
and when they please, it is not probable that the Blood can be so suddenly
melted.

III. John Baptista Scortias, will have Tears to be generated in the Corner of
the Eye, from the Animal Spirits, which being composed by the Apprehension of
something sad, is melted, and distills into Tears. Of the same Opinion Iacobus
Tappias seems to be, who writes, that as Urine and Sweat are Excrements of the
veiny and arterious Blood, so Tears are the Excrement of the nervous Blood,
that is to say, the Animal Spirits. But in regard that only invisible Animal
Spirits, and no visible serous Humors can pass through the narrow Pores of the
Nerves; seeing also that Tears flow out at times of great Joy and Laughter,
when there is no sense of any Saddess; lastly, seeing that so great a quantity
of Tears, as in a short time issues forth in extraordinary Grief, would destroy
the whole Frame of Man, If so vast a quantity of Animal Spirits should be
wasted in their supply; it is apparent that Opinion can no way be defended, as
being far from Truth.

IV. Georgius Nyssenus and Moletius thought Tears to be generated out of many
Vapors carried to the Head through some Conturbation of the Bowels, and there
condensed into Water by the coldness of the Brain, which is afterward expelled
forth as an unprofitable Excrement. Neither does Coringius seem to differ much
from their Opinion. But in regard that many shed Tears in great abundance, upon
the sight of a sad Accident, no Conturbation of the Bowels preceding. Nay,
seeing that many times Tears proceed from riding against the cold Air, or by
looking and gazing suddenly upon the Sun, without any Conturbation of the Mind
or Bowels; seeing that others weep when they please, and that Vapors cannot so
suddenly ascend to the Head, and be condensed so soon, and in so great a
quantity, seeing that the Heart being troubled and possessed with extraordinary
Grief, together with the Brain and other Bowels, and yet the Person grieved
never sheds any Tears; seeing that Tears flow as well in Joy as Sadness, but
the Vapors cannot be carried to the Head in the same equal manner and quantity,
nor with the same swiftness in these contrary Affections of the Mind, it is
plain that this cannot be the Original of Tears.

Aristotle alleges Tears to be a certain Sweat or Vapor: But what sort of
Sweat, and where generated, Cartesius more at large explains. For, says he,
That their Original may be the better understood, it is to be observed, that
though many Vapors continually exhale from all Parts of our Body, yet there is
part, out of which more issue forth than out of the Eyes, by reason of the
Bigness of the Optic Nerves, and the multitude of the small Arteries, through
which they come thither.

VI. But these things are to be examined a little more strictly; Cartesius
says, there is no part out of which the Vapors issue forth in more abundance
than out of the Eyes. But it is possible that more Vapors should issue forth
from those parts which are enclosed and enfolded, besides other Membranes with
a scherotic hard and thick Tunicle, and so compact and void of Pores, that
there is not the like in the whole Body; I say, Is it possible that more Vapors
should issue forth from this than from any other parts, among which there are a
thousand ten times hotter, moister and more Porous? Is it because of the
largeness of the Optic Nerves that there is such a Conflux of Vapors to the
Eyes, and yet the Sight no way darkened thereby, nor the Ingress of the Animal
Spirits no way obstructed? Whatever flows through their larger innermost
Porosities, must be deposited in the innermost Cavity of the Ball between the
Humors, and so of necessity the Balls of the Eyes could not choose but swell,
and the Sight be very much endamaged. As to the multitude of diminutive
Arteries, that is not observed to be more numerous in the Eyes than in many
other parts, for few small Arteries run to the Eyes, and those so slender, that
they are scarce to be discerned; so that so great a quantity of serous Humors
cannot be poured forth out of those invisible Vessels, to moisten a whole
Napkin with Tears in the space of one hour. If any one ask why that Vapor does
not always and continually flow and beget Tears, Cartesius answers, That the
Vapors of the Body are only charged and condensed into Water, when they are
less stirred than is usual, though they are not so copious; or when they are
more copious, so that they be not excessively agitated.

VII. Now let this most famous Person tell me, where is the less motion of the
Vapors, or the greater quantity; whether in the Man that sheds them for Joy or
for Sorrow. If he says, that in Sorrow their Motion is less, I will aver that
in Joy there is not a greater quantity; because these Affections in the
shortest Interval then befall the same Man, whereas in Gladness, at the same
time, it ought to be occasioned by a greater quantity; for he himself tells us
it cannot be done by the greater Motion, which happens in Gladness. If on the
other side, he affirms that there is a less quantity of them in Sadness, I will
assure him that the Motion is greater in Gladness, which according to the Words
of Cartesius, obstructs the shedding of Tears; nevertheless in the mean time,
there is not a greater abundance of Vapors to be so suddenly increased in the
same Person, and yet that very same Person, in a short interval of time, sheds
Tears during both these contrary Affections of the Mind, and therefore not from
the Causes already related. These Difficulties Cartesius espying afar off,
chooses rather to add other Causes of this Accident. Moreover, says he* I
cannot observe any more than two Causes, why the Vapors that proceed from the
Eyes should be changed into Tears. The first, when the Figure of the Pores,
through which they pass, is altered, by some Accident, etc. The other is
Sadness, succeeded by Love and Joy, etc.

VIII. Shall there be then the same Figure of the Pores in these same contrary
Affections, Sorrow, Love, and Joy? I may add in Laughter also, swift Riding, or
when Dust, or any other thing falls into the Eyes; also in Infants, grown
People, or aged Persons? Or would Cartesius rather distinguish between the next
Causes, that the certain Figure of the Pores should be one thing, Sadness
another, Love another? These things are very repugnant one to another; for
thus, one next Cause of Tears is divided into several, and those contrary to
each other. He that more attentively weighs these things, shall find that the
most acute Cartesius, in his Discourse of Tears, as well as other Men, was in a
great Doubt, and very far from the Mark. Which however was no Fault in the
chief Philosopher of our Age, seeing there is no Man so perspicuous that may
not ert in some things.

IX. From the aforesaid Opinion, Aquapendens and Casserius very much differ,
who affirm Tears to be a thin Excrement of the Eyes themselves, generated out
of the remainder of the proper Concoction, gathered together in the Fat and
little Kernels. With these Septalius agrees, writing, that Tears are a serous
Humor diligently generated in the Eyes, and collected together in their four
Kernels. But neither do the Eyes discharge such a quantity of Excrement, nor
generate so much serous Humor. Neither can so large a quantity be gathered
together in small diminutive Kernels, not able to contain above eight or ten
Drops, nor in a small quantity of Fat, which by reason of its oyliness will not
imbibe any Serum, so as to moisten whole Handkerchiefs with Tears. Neither can
such a quantity be collected without a visible Tumor and Inconvenience to the
Sight, in the small Kernels and Fat before mentioned: whereas before the
shedding of the Tears, there is no swelling of the Kernels or Fat to be
perceived. Besides, there is no reason why that Excrement should be generated
in Grief and sudden Sorrow so speedily, or such a quantity be collected
together, to burst forth into Tears.

X. Some few were of Opinion, that Tears were a Portion of the Potulent Humors
contained in the Brain and Veins of the Eyes, and more especially in the Veins
of the Corners of each Eye, which bursts forth upon the Compression or Dilation
of those Veins, occasioned by much Joy or Sorrow. But the narrowness and small
number of those Veins hereby discernable, contradict this Opinion, together
with the vast quantity of the Lachrimal Humors, which cannot be collected to
that Abundance in those diminutive Vessels, and flow forth in so large a
quantity; nor can it be so suddenly transmitted to them, nor pass through them.
Add to this, that the little Veins of the Eyes, take in at their Extremities
the superfluous bloody Humors, and carry them to the Jugulars, but pour none
out from themselves, because there is no passage for that potulent Matter to
come to the Eye.

XI. Nor do they differ much from the foregoing Opinion, who believes the Tears
to be nothing else but the Serum which is separated from the Blood, which is
carried to the Head, when the Pores are so disposed by a certain Motion of the
Spirits, that it may be able to burst forth. But they neither tell us what that
Disposition is, nor that same certain Motion of the Spirits; which two things,
in regard they are so extremely different and multi-cacious, and cannot be
naturally the same, as well in Constriction as Dilatati^n, in Sadness as in
Joy, in which contrary Accidents, however Tears must flow from one and the same
next Cause, and not from diverse and contrary, there is nothing remains that
can desend that Opinion.

XII. At this day many ascribe the Flux of Tears only to the Lymphatic Vessels
carried to the Eyes. Yet never any Person that I know of has hitherto
demonstrated that manner of Lachrymation, nor those Vessels themselves; besides
Nicholas Stenonis, that most accurate Describer of Kernels, who lately going
about to explain that Opinion more at large, not without reason, affirms them
to be a Serous sort of Liquor, chiefly separated from the Arterious Blood, but
as to the manner and place of Separation, his Opinion is quite different from
what any body has hitherto propounded. For he believes that the Blood is
carried through the Arteries into the Glandules of the Eyes, and that the
Superfluity of it is sucked up by the Veins. But that the Veins, if they be
squeezed together by any Cause, do not perform that Office sufficiently, and
then by reason of the long stay of the abounding Blood in the Glandules, the
Serum is separated from it in greater quantity, and flows in the form of Tears
through the Lymphatic Vessels proceeding from the Kernels. Then he believes the
Veins to be compressed by the swelling of the Glandules, caused by a more
copious Influx of Animal Spirits, which creeping into the Glandules through the
diminutive Nerves, at the disposal of the Mind, as in Grief, Anger, Joy,
Sadness, flow sometimes more, sometimes fewer into the Kernels, more than after
a various manner, and streighten them more or less. To this cause he refers
those Tears that are shed contrary to Inclination, as also those which proceed
from Fumes and sharp Vapors, or break forth upon any violent motion of the
Body; and farther, believes his Opinion to be mainly confirmed by the bursting
forth of bloody Tears, which are sometimes observed. Certainly this new Opinion
is propounded very speciously, but in the mean time it does not sufficiently
discover the Fountain of Tears. For if we compare the great quantity of Tears
so swiftly bursting forth with the diminutive Blood-bearing Vessels of those
Kernels, presently this Opinion will fall to the Ground at the very Threshold.
For how few, and how small are those little Arteries which are carried to the
Kernels of the Eyes? The most of them are invisible. Therefore, though in the
time of Sadness, all the Veins of those Kernels which would carry back the
Blood, should be altogether obstructed, and all their little Arteries opened by
a Solution of the Continuum, and out of these, not only the Serous Part of the
Blood, but all the Blood that was contained ther^in and carried through them
should burst forth, they would not be able to pour forth the hundredth part of
such a quantity of Liquor in a whole hour, as often in great Sadness is wept
out in Tears in the space of one single quarter of an hour. If it be answered,
that in the time of Sadness the Blood is carried in greater quantity to the
Eyes, and that the said Kernels swell and are more compressed, and the Veins
straightened, Reason will teach us the contrary. For in Sadness the Pulse of the
Heart and Arteries is little and contracted, and the exterior Parts wax cold;
because the Heart sends from it self much less Blood into any of the Arteries,
much less into those of the Head. Neither is there any reason why in Sadness it
should be carried in greater quantity, and more serous to the Kernels of the
Eyes than to any other Parts. Moreover, the little Arteries of those small
Kernels, are too few and too narrow for so great a quantity of Blood and Serum
to pass through them in so short a time, as is so swiftly wept out in Tears.
Lastly, there is nothing to cause those little Kernels more to swell or be
compressed in time of Grief, than at other times.

For as to those Animal Spirits, which as Nicholas Stenonis asserts, How forth
at the Disposal of the Mind. Sometimes more, sometimes fewer, as in Grief,
Anger, Joy, etc. and move the Kernels after a various manner, we grant that
they enter the Kernels in a small quantity, through those diminutive, few, and
for the most part, invisible Nerves, moderately to separate the saltish
symphatic Liquor from the Arterious Blood, and pour it forth through the small
Vessels described in the foregoing Chapter, for the necessary moistning and
smoothing of the Eyes; but not in so great a quantity as to move the Eyes, and
cause them so swiftly to swell, or to compress them, and so to squeeze out such
a quantity of Tears. For by the Influx of those Animal Spirits, hardly any
other Parts are moved, at the disposal of the Mind, then the Muscles, and such
parts as are moved by the Muscles. Add to this, that in Sadness the Animal
Spirits flow in lesser quantity than is usual, to any parts whatsoever, which
is the reason that the Joints often tremble, and the Sight of the Eyes is
darkened. For the Heart contracting it self, and beating but weakly, as in
Sadness, little Blood is sent to the Brain to increase their Generation, and
withal, the Motion of the Brain it self being thereby weakened, it sends forth
fewer Animal Spirits to the rest of the Parts. Lastly, though we should grant
what that Famous Gentleman asserts, his Opinion is not thereby confirmed, but
quite overturned. For thence it follows, that the more copi^ us those Animal
Spirits are that flow into those Kernels, so much the more would be their
Swelling and the Compression of the Veins, and thence a greater Effussion of
Tears; but in Joy, the said Spirits flow in great plenty to the Parts, and yet
in Joys, Tears are very rarely shed, or if they do burst forth, it is but in a
very small quantity. Contrary to this, in Sadness, fewer Animal Spirits flow
into the Parts, whence there must a be less Swelling and Pressure, and yet
Tears burst forth in greater quantity. Lastly, if it be objected that the
Salival Liquor may be separated in sufficient quantity, out of the Arteries
through the Kernels, and therefore the Lachrymal Juice. I answer, that the
Parotides and Kernels of the Jaws are remarkably large and very numerous, and
furnished with many and more remarkable Arteries, so that a more plentiful
separation may more easily be made through them, then through the slender and
incomparably fewer Glandules of the Eyes, endued with few and almost invisible
little Arteries. He therefore that more considerately weighs these things, will
easily observe, that the Opinion of Nicholas Stenonis does not contain the true
Cause of Tears, and that unwilling Tears can never be deduced from it; nor
those which are occasioned by swift Running, Smoke and Dust, etc. nor bloody
Tears, which proceed rather from some Corrosion of the little Arteries and
Veins, which by reason of the narrowness of the Vessels. can burst forth but in
small quantity.

XIII. Thus have many Men strangly mistaken the Fountain of this same Lympha,
and while they endeavored to discover it, have filled much Paper with
Conjectures. Now let us try whether we can contribute any Light to a thing that
lies veiled under so much Obscurity.

Which before we undertake to perform, we think it necessary to distinguish
between the Lachrymal Humors and that same Lymphatic Humor which is poured
forth out of the Glandules through the Diminutive Lymphatic Vessels for the
moistning of the Eyes and smoothing of the Parts. For this is the difference
between them, 1. This is more lympid and thinner than the other. 2. This flows
out of the Lymphatic Vessels of the Glandules, the other from the Ventricles of
the Brain. 3. This is neither so sharp nor so salt as Tears are found to be,
both by the Taste and their Corrosion. 4. There is but a small quantity of this,
nor does the quantity of it offend the Eyes, as Tears does, which bursting
forth in great quantity, many times very much prejudice the Eyes. 5. This does
not corrode at all, but is grateful to the Eyes, whereas many times Tears
corrode the Cheeks, and many times consume the Glandulous Lachrymal Caruncles
themselves, seated in the Corners of the Eyes, which being eaten quite away
with their little Vessels, the Flux of Tears would cease or stop, if the
forementioned Opinion of Stenonis were true, whereas on the Contrary, the Flux
is then more unvoluntary, and in greater quantity not to be stopped.

XIV. This Distinction thus premised, we come to speak of the Tears themselves,
beginning with their Definition.

Tears are the more thin and serous Particles of the Flegmatic Humors Collected
in the Brain, flowing from the innermost Parts of the Eyes.

The Causes of the Expulsion of those Serous Particles through the Lachrymal
Holes are five.

1. The Plenty of Flegmatic Serous Humors collected in the Brain. 2. Their
sudden Colloquation, or violent Agitation. 3. The Contraction of the Brain and
its Membranes. 4. The insufficient Covering of the Lachrymal Hole by the
Glandulous Caruncle. 5. The Obstruction of the Spungy Bones in the Nostrils.
And of these Causes, for the most part, two or three concur; and therefore we
must particularly explain how those Tears burst forth in diverse cases.

XV. In Sadness, the Membranes Tears in Sadness.
of the Brain, together with the Brain it self, are contracted, and hence the
Serous Humors of the Arterious Blood, which gain something of Viscosity from
the Humid and Viscous Bowel, are pressed forth out of the Kernels of the Cortex
and the Substance of the Brain it self, and Pituitous Kernel, and the small
Glandules interwoven with the Choroid Fold, into the Ventricles, and out of
them through the Papillary Processes, and the Narrownesses of the five
representing Bones, into the spongy Parts of the inside of the Nostrils; which
not being able to pass through them, by reason of their quantity and
viscousness, the more thin and serous Particles burst forth through the narrow
lateral Lachrymal Holes into the larger Corners of the Eyes, and washing the
Bodies of the Eyes, and breaking forth, make Tears. But the thicker and more
viscous Particles, causing an Obstruction in the Spungy Bones of the upper
Parts of the Nostrils, are evacuated by degrees, as well through the Nostrils
as through the Palate. And the less that Obstruction of the Nostrils grows, the
less becomes the Flux of Tears; for that being removed, the thinner and more
serous Humors descend directly to the Palate and Nostrils, neither is there any
necessity, that then they should be pressed forth through the Lachrymal Holes, by
reason of the Passage being stopped, so that then the Flux of Tears ceases, till
by reason of new plenty of descending Humors, a new Obstruction happens.

XVI. By reason of the same Obstruction In the Murr and Sneezing.
Tears frequently burst forth in the Murr, and sometimes upon violent Sneezing.

XVII. There is the same reason In Laughter.
for Tears that break forth in violent Laughter: for from that alternate
Contraction of the Muscles of the Head, as also of the Brain and its Membranes,
the aforesaid serous Humors burst forth in great quantity out of the Brain and
Kernels aforesaid into the Ventricles, and out of them into the Mamillary
Processes; which Humors flow down to the Nostrils and Palate, and by reaof
their thicker Particles, cause an Obstruction in the fungous part of the
Nostrils. Which is the reason that then the thinner and more serous Particles,
their free Descent being stopped, bursting forth through the Lachrymal Holes,
flow from the Eyes, and that so much the more easily, by how much those Holes
are so much the less exactly shut by the Glandulous Caruncles that lie over
them. Hence it comes to pass, that according to the closer or looser shutting
up of those Holes, and the more or less plenty of Flegmy Humors abounding in
the Brain; some People shed Tears when they laugh, and others not; and because
that Concussion of the Body, or alternate Contraction does not last long, hence
it comes to pass, that People do not shed many Tears when they laugh.

There is the same reason why young and stout Men, who are not easily disturbed
with Grief, nor have their Brain contracted, besides that, the Glandulous
Caruncle that covers both Lachrymal Holes is stronger and larger, seldom or
never weep. On the other side, Old People, Infants and Children, easily shed
Tears, because that in the one, the Glandulous Caruncle is drier, more unequal,
and more contracted; in the other softer and less firm, and so weakly covering
the Lachrymal Hole, that it gives way to the least violence of the Internal
Serous Humors, and so procures an immediate Passage for the said Lachrymal
Humors. To which we may add another Humor, that both the one and the other are
subject to Grief, that arises from Irksomness, Love, or Anger; by reason
whereof the Brain contracting its self with its Membranes, presses forth the
petuitous and serous Humors, and expels them through the Sieve-representing
Bones. Cartesius alleges another Cause of this Matter, but not so true, for he
ascribes the whole thing to the plenty of Blood, from whence several Vapors are
carried to the Eyes. But this Opinion has been sufficiently refuted already.

Now to tell you how it comes to pass, that some weep upon vehement Motion, or
the riding of swift Race-Horses, of this there are three Causes. 1. Because the
Glandulous Kernels being moved from their Places by the violent Motion, do not
exactly cover the Lachrymal Holes. 2. Because those Caruncles are contracted by
the troublesome Reverberation of the cold Air. 3. Because those pituitous
Humors through violent Agitation flow easily from the Head, and descend in a
greater quantity than usually through the Sieve-like narrow Passages. And the
same thing also happens when the Glandulous Caruncles of each Canthus being
contracted by the greater Cold of the Air alone, especially if sudden, the
Lachrymal Holes are not well covered, and therefore give a free Passage to the
Tears.

XVIII. Onions, Mustard, Errhines, Onyons Mustard, etc.
and Sternutories provoke Tears, by reason that through their attenuating and
cutting Acrimony, the Humors in the Head are properly attenuated, and rendered
more fluid. Properly the Brain, with its Membranes, contracts it self, by
reason of the troublesome Vellication that twinges the Eyes and Nostrils; and
by that means presses forth and expels the pituitous Humors contained therein,
which glide the more easily through the Lachrymal Holes, because the annate
Tunicle of the Eye, and the Glandulous Caruncles that cover the Holes, being
twing'd by the same Acrimony, are also contracted, and so give free passage to
the descending Humors.

XIX. Dust, Straws, Smoke, etc. From Pain in the Eye.
that pain the Eye, are also the Cause of shedding. Tears; because that upon
the twinging of the Conjunctive Tunicle, which is the most sensible, the
Glandulous Lachrymal Kernel adjoining to it is contracted in both Eyes, but
chiefly in that which is most afflicted, and so the Hole is uncovered. Also the
Brain with its Membranes is contracted, by reason of that same sad Sensation,
and by means of that same Contraction pressing forth the serous and pituitous
Humors contained in its self and its Ventricles, expels them through the
Mamillary Processes toward the Sive-like Bone and the Nostrils; of which, the
thicker Particles flow forth through the Nostrils, the thinner and more fluid
through the Lachrvmal Holes.

XX. Now to tell you why Tears Whenee the great quantity of Tears.
continue so plentiful in Grief, so that many People weep for several days
together; that happens for this reason, for that* the Brain being contracted
with Sadness, is refrigerated, and cannot duly perform its Work of Concoction,
so that a great quantity of serous Humors are separated in this Glandulous
Bowel from the Blood, which is carried thither for its Nourishment, and many
crude Humors are also generated at the same time, which are continually pressed
forth by that Contraction, and expelled out of the Ventricles toward the
Nostrils. But when the Mind refrains from thinking of the sad Accident, and the
Contraction hereupon relaxes, that Effussion of Tears ceases; but upon the
return of sad Thoughts, the Tears burst forth again, by reason of the same
pressing and squeezing as before. But because so large and moist a Bowel has
humid Nourishment in great quantity, hence it is certain, that many and moist
Excrements cannot but be generated therein, of which there is a long and most
plentiful Increase, as in Catarrs and the Pose; as we found in a Woman
dissected by Us in the Year 1663. who had long lived in a great deal of Grief
and Sorrow, and had a thousand times complained of a Heaviness in her Head, and
was very apt to weep and shed Tears in abundance, whose Brain was so moist,
that a viscous Serum distilled out of the Substance of it, squeezed by our
Hand, as out of a Sponge dipped in Water, besides that, the Ventricles were
also sufficiently filled with it. To this we may add, that the Vapors carried
from the lower Parts of the Body to the Head, and so wont to be expelled
through the Pores of the Body, when it comes to pass that the Pores are
straightened by that Refrigeration and Contraction of the Brain and its
Membranes, cannot be expelled, but being thickened, are squeezed toward the
Nostrils, together with the rest of the Humors which greatly increases the
quantity of Tears.

By reason of the same bad Concoction of the Brain, it comes to pass that many
times the Tears are salt and sharp, and corrode the Cheeks, and for the same
reason it is that sharp and salt Catarrhs happen, which by their Acrimony
corrode the Teeth, and exulcerate the Chaps and other Parts, because that by
reason of their Crudity the salt Particles are more fixed, and not sufficiently
dissolved, nor exactly mixed with the rest of the serous Particles.

Which being so, four Doubts remain to be unfolded.

1. How it comes to pass that People in sorrow receive great ease from weeping,
and that they find themselves almost choked through sorrow of Mind, and are
oppressed with Heaviness in their Heads, upon the shedding of Tears are very
much relieved? The reason is, because that in heavy Sorrow, the Brain is many
times so contracted, that the Evacuatory Passages are straightened, so that
neither the pituitous and serous Humors can flow out, nor the Arterious Blood
conveniently flow in, whence it appears that fewer Spirits are generated
therein, and fewer Animal Spirits consequently flow out from thence to the rest
of the Parts. Through the scarcity of which, the detention of the Excrements
with all in the Brain, several inconveniences happen to Persons in those
doleful Conditions; their Heads grow heavy, their Ratiocination and Judgment
grow benumbed, most parts tremble, the Sight grows dim, the Respiration becomes
slow, with deep Sighs and profound Sobs, difficulty of Swallowing, and the
Orifices of the Heart are straightened, so that they can neither, expel nor
receive the Blood; hence an extreme Anxiety, which with all the other
Inconveniences diminishes again, and the sorrowful are extremely eased, when
the Evacuatory Vessels being loosned, the serous and pituitous Humors flow
through the Eyes, like Tears in great quantity, from the Brain, and also are
evacuated through the Nostrils, Palate and Mouth, which consequently gives a
freer access of Arterious Blood to the Brain, a more plentiful Generation of
Animal Spirits, and a larger Influx into the Parts.

XXI. 2. How it comes to pass Why Men in great Sadness cannot weep?
that in extraordinary Sadness a Man cannot weep, yet perceives the foresaid
Anxiety with Heaviness of the Head; but after he is somewhat come to himself,
he pours forth Tears in great quantity with Relief. Thus Historians tell us of
Psammenitus, who wept and beat his Head at the Death of his Friend, but when he
saw his Children lead to Execution, beheld the Spectacle without shedding a
Tear. Hence the ancient Proverb, Light Sorrows talk and weep, vast Sorrows
stupifie. The cause of this is no other than the extreme Contraction of the
Brain; for in an extraordinary Consternation, a Man is as it were astonished,
and the Brain as it were stupefied, is every way more strangely contracted,
which causes the Humors to be coagulated and thickened to stop and settle
therein. However, this extraordinary Contraction, when the grieved Person
recollects and comes to himself, and begins to bear his Grief with more
Patience, is very much diminished, so that the serous and pituitous Humors are
more liberally expelled out of the Brain, to the Relief of the Person, and
Tears burst forth more plentifully through the Evacuatory Passages,
overstreightned before, and now again opened and loosened. And hence it is
apparent, wherefore upon the giving of Wine freely to those that are in Sorrow,
the Tears that before stopped, in a short time will burst forth in great
quantity: Because Wine refreshes the Heart and the Brain, increases Courage,
and mitigates Sadness, whence that extraordinary Contraction of the Brain is
somewhat diminished, and the Evacuatory Passages are again let loose.

3. Why those that weep, weep in a shrill Tone, those that laugh, make a deep
Noise. This is a Question propounded by Aristotle, and the reason is, because
that at the time when Men are weeping and sad, their Vocal Organs are
straightened and extended: but when People laugh, those Organs are more extended
and loose, and most certain it is, that the Air causes a shriller Sound in
narrow than in wide Pipes. Now the Vocal Organs are straightened by the Cold;
the Orifices of the Heart being contracted in great Grief, and consequently
little Blood and Heat is communicated from thence to the Parts, which causes
the whole Body to shake with Cold.

XXII. 4. Why Man among all other Wherefore only Man weeps?
Creatures, chiefly sheds Tears? Because he of all Creatures being endued with
reason, is only sensible, with great attention of Mind, of Sorrow, Mourning,
Grief, etc. which is the reason that he alone suffers those Contractions of the
Brain, and Pressings forth of the Humors. As for the Crocodiles, Hearts, and if
there be any other Beasts that may be said to weep, they shed very few Tears,
and they chiefly seem to flow forth, partly by reason of the great quantity of
serous Humors abounding in the Head, partly by reason of the uncovering of the
Lachrymal Hole, the Contraction of the Caruncle of the bigger Canthus, caused
by the cold Air, or some other Cause, which are two Causes sometimes of Tears,
also in Men, without any Agitation of the Mind or Fault in the Organ.

As to the end of Tears, Philosophers generally allege it to be on purpose to
declare the Affections of the Mind, and to exonerate the Brain of its
superfluous Moisture.

And thus we hope we have described the true Original of Tears, confirmed not
by Reason only, but Experience.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Vessels and Muscles of the Eye.
THE Eyes which are the Organs The Arteries.
of Sight, consist of three Parts; of which, some serve for Nourishment, as the
Arteries and Veins; others to cause and facilitate Motion, as Muscles, Fat,
Kernels and Lymphatic Vessels; others contribute to the Sight it self, as Optic
Nerves, Tunicles and Humors.

I. The Arteries which carry the Vital Blood to the Nourishment of the Eyes,
Muscles, Kernels and Fat, are properly external, from the External Branch of
the Carotis; partly internal, from the inner Branch of the same Carotis, which
constitutes the Nett-Resembling Fold.

II. In like manner there are also Veins.
External Veins, so visible in the White of the Eye, which run forth to the
External Branch of the Iugular, as internal accompanying the Optic Nerve,
running along to the Inner Branch of the same Iugular Artery.

Of the Kernels and Lymphatic Vessels has already been spoken, Chap. 14.

III. The Eyes of Men are moved Muscles.
every way by the Assistance of six Muscles, surrounding the Eyes below the
Cavity of the Orbit. Of these, the four greater being straight, cause a
straight Motion, upward, downward and sideway. The two much the lesser, cause
an oblique Motion. Between all which, there is interlay'd a sufficient quantity
of Fat to facilitate the Motion; as also to moisten, warm and smooth the Eye.

IV. All these arise with an accute Their Original.
beginning from the deepest part of the Orbit, near the Hole through which the
Optic Nerve enters the Orbit, to the Membrane of which they adhere, and end in
a most slender Tendon, sticking to the Horny Tunicle; in which all the Tendons
being joined together in a Circle, make a kind of a Tendonny Tunicle, vulgarly
called the Innominate, which is joined The Innominate Tunicle.
to the Eye like a broader Circle, only it does not encompass it.

V. The first of the Right Muscles, The upper Muscle.
which is the uppermost and thickest, raises the Eye; which being a Motion
usual among haughty People, is thence called the Proud Muscle.

VI. The second, which is lesser The Humble Muscle.
and opposite to the first, from its lower or more humble Seat where it is
placed, is called the Humble.

VII. The third, which stands in The Bibitory Muscle.
the inner Corner, brings the Eye inward toward the Nose; which because it is
familiar with those that drink, while they look in the Glass, is called the
Bibitory Muscle.

VIII. The fourth, which moves The Indignabund.
the Eye toward the outer Parts to the little Corner, is called the
Indignabund, because it expresses the lateral Aspect of disdainful and scornful
People.

IX. The first of the Oblique Muscles, The first Oblique Muscle.
which is slender, round and short, seated in a lower Place, and in the Extreme
Part of the lower Orbit, that is to say; at the joining of the first Bone of
the Iaw, with the fourth Bone, ascends toward the outer Corner of the Eyelid,
and there embracing the Eye transversly, with a short Tendon toward the upper
Parts meets the Tendon of the other Eye, and moving the Eye downward, turns it
and brings it to the outer Corner.

X. The other of the Oblique Muscles, The second Oblique Muscle.
which is thinner, longer, and seated above, rising from the common Beginning,
together with the third of the straight Muscles, is carried directly to the
inner Corner of the Eye, where passing the Grisly Winding with a slender Body
(hence called the Trochlear Muscle) proceeds with an Oblique turning through
the upper Parts of the Eye, and terminates near the End of the Oblique Tendon
of the lower Muscle.

XI. Now the Trochlear Gristle The Trochlear.
is a perforated Gristle, hanging forward to the Bone of the upper Iaw, near
the inner Corner of the Eye; the first finding out of which Spigelius
attributes to Fallopius, but Riolanus ascribs to Rondeletius.

These two Oblique Muscles, because of the secret Allurements of Lovers
Glances, are called Amatorious; but from their rolling Motion, Circumactors.

XII. In Brutes, that feed with A seventh Muscle in Brutes.
their Heads toward the Earth, besides these six Muscles, there is also a
seventh, which is sometimes observed to be divided into two, but rarely into
three Muscles. This being short and fleshy, encompasses the Eye, and is
inserted into the hinder part of the Horny Tunicle, and sustains the looking
down continually upon the Ground, and draws it back when its own weight carries
it farther out.

XIII. The Muscles are endued with The Nerves
a moving Power by the little Branches of the second Pair of Nerves, which are
chiefly inserted into the straight Muscles. For the innermost Oblique Muscle
receives a little Branch from the fifth Pair; the outermost Oblique receives a
little Branch from the slender Pair that stands next before the Fifth.

XIV. Here arises a Question, when Why the Eyes move together?
each Eye has distinct and proper Muscles, why they do not move with various
Motions, but are always moved together with the same Motion? Aristotle ascribes
the Cause to the Coition of the Optic Nerves, and Galen and Avicen seem to be
of the same Opinion. But in regard the Optic Nerves are only visory, and
contribute nothing to Motion, nor enter the Muscles, they cannot be the cause
of this thing. Besides, Anatomists have now found it out, that this Conjunction
of the Optics is wanting in several men, and yet the motion of their Eyes,
while they lived, was the same as in other men, so equal always, that the Sight
of both was always directed to one Point. Andrew Laurentius says, that such an
equal Motion is requisite for the perfection of the Sense; and so he only
proposes the end of the Motion, but does not explain the Cause. Others alledg
that this equal Motion proceeds from hence, that the moving Nerves are moved
together at their beginning. But it appears from this Conjunction, that the
Spirits indeed may flow to the Muscles of each Eye, however it is not manifest,
why the Spirits flow more especially in greater quantity into these or those
Muscles of the Eyes, and not into the same, external and internal of both Eyes.
For Example's sake, suppose a Man would look for something upon his Right-Side,
presently the Spirits are determined toward the external Muscle of the
Right-Eye, and the internal Muscle of the Left-eye, and so the Sight is turned
to one Point through the two various Muscles of each Eye. But if the Union of
the Beginning of the Nerves of the second Pair should any way contribute to
this, in regard of that Union, it would be requisite that the Spirits should
flow at the same time into the same Muscles of both Eyes, as well external as
Internal, and so by virtue of that Motion, both Eyes would look several ways
upon several things, and not up on the same.

And therefore the true Reason proceeds from the Mind; for when the Mind
intends to behold any thing; one Eye is not to be turned to this, another to
that thing, for so there would happen a Confusion of the Rays and Perception in
common Sense; but both Eyes are of necessity to be turned toward the same
thing; and hence the Spirits are always determined to those Muscles that can
draw both the Eyes toward the same Object, but not to such Muscles as draw each
Eye several ways. Because the Mind always intends to behold one Object apart;
and though it may often intend to behold several things, yet it observes a
certain Order, and beholds one thing after another, which may be done with a
speedy Motion, if the Objects are so near and large that they may be easily
perceived. But if the Object be remote and small, then both Eyes must of
necessity be longer fixed upon the Object, and a greater quantity of Rays are
requisite to flow into the Eyes, for the better Perception of what the Mind is
intent to behold.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Bulb of the Eye.
THE Bulb of the Eye consists of Membranes and Humors.

The Membranes are either common or proper.

The Common Membranes are twofold, Adnate and Innominate.

I. The first next the Bone, or The Adnate Tunicle.
White Adnate, by the Greeks called (...), because it adheres to other
Membranes of the Eyes, by Galen and Hippocrates called, the White of the Eye,
is a thin Expansion of the Pericranium above the Sclerotic, as far as the
Circle of the Iris, joining the Eye to the Orbit and inner Bones, whence it is
called the Conjunctive. It is endued with an exquisite Sense of Feeling, being
sprinkled with many diminutive Arteries and Veins. Through which little
Arteries, when there is a greater Afflux of hotter Blood, then a Reflux through
the diminutive Veins, then happens an Ophthalmy, of which The reason of an
Ophthalmy. The Innominate Tunicle.
Distemper, this Membrane is the Seat.

II. The other, by Columbus called the Innominate, is nothing else than a thin
Expansion of the Tendons of the Muscles concurring to the Corneous Tunicle,
produced to the very Circumference of the Iris, to which it adheres, like a
small broad Ring, which causes the White of the Adnate Tunicle to look more
bright. Bauhi^, Riolan^s, and Casserius will not allow this Tunicle to be
numbered among the Tunicles, but rather among the Muscles of whose Tendons it
consists. However Galea makes mention of it among the Tunicles of the Eye, but
gives it no Name, and therefore perhaps by Columbus called the Nameless or
In^ominate.

III. Besides these two common ^ (...) (...) (...) and Oxen.
Membranes, in an Ox there is another Membrane, which is the outermost of all,
not sticking close to the Eye, but endued with Motion and a Muscle. By means of
which, Cows and Oxen close and twinkle with their l^es, ^et their Eyelids
remain open all the while.

IV. The Proper Membranes or Proper Membranes.
Tunicles are three, of which, the first and outermost is said to proceed from
the Dura Matter, and expands it self Scl^rotic.
about the Bulb of the Eye. It is called the Scl^rotic from its hardness;
though Fallopius will not allow the former, believing it to differ very much
from the Dura Matter, both in substance and thickness. The Sclerotic en^olds the
whole Eye, and is thick, hard, tough, equal, opacous behind, before transparent
like a bright Horn, and polished, whence it had the Name of the Horny Tunicle.
Which Name however many times is given to the whole Sclerotic, by reason of its
horny thickness and hardness: Though it be thick and hard, yet it is generally
thought to be single; though Bau^inus will have it to consist of several Rinds,
or four, as it were thin Plates, and affirms that from hence it was that Avicen
alleged it to be four fold. But this same Quadruplicity is more easily to be
conceived and imagined from the thickness and hardness of it then to be
demonstrated.

V. The second and middle Tunicle, The Choroides.
which is much thinner than the former, arising from a thin Film, and sprinkled
with several diminitive Vessels, because it enfolds the Humors, of the Eye, as
the Chorion does the Birth, is called Choroides; only the forepart of it, where
it is thicker and doubled, and perforated in the middle for the Transmission of
the Rays, is called Ragoides, or Uveous, from the Color of a Grape, which Name
is also given to the whole Tunicle.

VI. This on the inside is endued with The Colors of it.
several Colors; nevertheless in Man it is usually more obscure, in Cows and
other Creatures that see in the Night, of a bright Green, or else Brown or
Yellow. Hence Aquapendens believes that those Creatures only see in the Night,
whose innermost Color of the Uveous Tunicle is very bright, which if it happen
in a Man, he shall also see in the Night; as it was natural for Tiberius Caesar
to do.

The outermost part which touches the Horny Tunicle, is overshadowed with a
kind of dark Color, which dies the Fingers of those that touch it of a black
Hew. It is endued with this black Color, chiefly necessary for the Perfection
of Sight, in the first delineation of the Parts, and hence it comes to pass,
that in a new shaped Embrio, it shows it self through the Filmy Coverings of
the Eyelids, and the Sclerotic Tunicle it self. In this same blackish Color
of this Tunicle, the Rays and Species of things visible are stopped, as in a
Looking-Glass, which to that end is overlaid behind with Quicksilver, that they
may not pass any farther, but that being reverberated, they may be the better
offered to the common Sensory, and represented to the Mind.

VII. Some Portion of this transparent The Iris.
through the Corneous Tunicle, carries a mixture of Colors, and hence, as
representing the Rainbow, is called Iris, in some blacker, in some blewer, in
others greener, in others browner, which Colors are not only to be observed in
individual Persons, but in whole Nations, as the black Color is most usual
among the Ethiopians and Chinese, the Green among the Tartars, the Bluish
among the Belgians and Northern People, the Dusky among the Italians and
neighboring Nations.

The Circumference of this Portion is firmly fastened to the hard Tunicle,
Riolanus writes, that it may be separated circularly with the Edg of a Penknif,
and that this same Crown of the Uveous Tunicle is to be found altogether
separated in the Eye of a Cow, when parboyl'd, and therefore he believes it to
be a Membrane distinct from the Uveous Tunicle; having peculiar Fibers, and a
proper Motion in the Dilation and Contraction of the Sight of the Eye. However
at this day the said Portion is by Anatomists, generally taken for the
Continuous Part of the Uveous Tunicle it self.

VIII. Now the Uveous Tunicle is The Apple of the Eye.
perferated in the middle Part before, in men with a round hole, in Brutes with
an Oblong or Oval hole which the Latins call Pupilla, the Greeks (...), Ruffus
(...) and Hippocrates (...), by means of which the Rays of Visible things,
being received by the Chrystalline Humors lying upon that hole, enter the Eye.

This hole is sometimes dilated, sometimes contracted, as the Animal Spirits
flow into the Eye in a greater or lesser quantity. Here Aquapendens and
Sennertus are under a great mistake, who believe this dilatation and
contraction to proceed from a stronger o^ weaker Light. Certainly Light it self
introduces nothing into the Eye for the Expansion or Contraction of it, but it
is the cause that more or fewer Spirits flow into the Eye: so that by their in
flux the Apple of the Eye, becomes sometimes wider and sometimes narrower,
according to which diversity we see better or worse: for a moderate contraction
causes a quicker sight, a dilatation too wide causes a weaker sight: for that
in the one the Spirits are more collected together, and the visible Rays are
more easily gathered to a point; in this not so well.

IX. From the Circumference of the The Ciliar Ligament.
Nervous Tunicle, in the forepart where it rests upon the Chrystaline humor,
arises a Ligament, called the Ciliar Ligament, which consists of thin strings
or ^ibres, like diminutive black Lines (which are like the hairs of the
Eyebrows) running forth from this Circumference toward the prominent
Crystaline humor, girding it about and fastening it to the Uveous Tunicle.
Veslingius and Cartesius not without some probability affirm that by the
Assistance of this Ligament, the Contraction and Dilatation of the hole in the
Uveous Tunicle is performed, frequently as the Man pleases himself; and
moreover that it causes a gentle Motion of the Crystalline humor it self,
toward the fore and hinder Parts, as the necessity of sight variously requires.
Though others ascribe this Dilatation and Contraction to the small slender
Fibers or Strings dispierc'd through the Net resembling Tunicle, as into which
they say that the Animal spirits flow in greater or lesser quantity, according
to the various qualities of the Objects, and by that means more or less dilate
the sight of the Eye.

X. The Third Membrane or The Retina.
Tunicle because it resembles a Casting-Net, is therefore called Retina, or
Retiform'd, by the Greeks (...), from Embracing or Ensolding.

The Substance of it is so^t and slimy, wherein as well certain slender, small
Strings, or diminutive little Vessels, deriving themselves from the Choroid
Fold and the wonderful Net, are manifestly to be discovered conveighing Blood
for the nourishment of it. Which nevertheless Platerus does not seem to have
observed, nor Riolanus to have seen.

This Tunicle called the Net-form'd is commonly delivered to be the Expansion
of the inner narrower substance of the Optic Nerve, or Brain, about the
Vitreous humor, as far as the clear Ligament. But in regard the substance of
this Tunicle has little or no resemblance to the pithy substance of the Brain,
seeing it receives small Bloodbearing-Vessels, which are manifestly conspicuous
to the sight, which are not to be found in the substance of the Brain, it does
not seem to be any Expansion of the Medullary substance of the Brain, but
rather a certain peculiar part, constituting the primary part of the Organ of
sight, wherein the Colors of visible Rays are depainted, and thence by means of
the Optic Nerve and Spirits communicated to the Mind, and so perceived: as we
find such another peculiar substance under the Membrane of the Nostrils and
Tongue, which constitutes the primary part of the Organs of Smelling and Taste.

XI. Besides these three proper Tunicles necessary to the whole Eye there are
two other which particularly enfold the Chrystalline and Vitreous humor.

XI. The Humors belonging to the The Humors of the Eye.
Eye are threefold, the Watery, Glassy and Chrystaline, distinct from one
another, all transparent and all void of Color. Partly to prevent the visible
Rays from stopping in them; partly that the Rays of visible things colored,
being altered by no color of the Eye, may be able to pass to the Net-form'd
Tunicle, to be thence offered to the common Sensory such as they are. For in
regard the judgment of colors must be made in the Brain by the Eye, of
necessity those parts of it that receive and transmit the Ra^s of things
colored, must be void of all color.

XII. The Watery Humor, thin, pellucid, The Watery (...).
void of all color, moderately copious and fluid, washes the foremost space
between the Corneous Tunicle, and the seat of the Chrystaline Humor having no
proper Tunicle belonging to it, but is comprehended between the Horny and
Grape-like Tunicle before the Apple of the Eye. By some this Humor is called,
(...), or Albugoneius, though irroneously, there being no resembance between
the White of an Egg and this Humor, nor any such Viscosity; but a thin and
fluid Liquor.

XIII. Here arises a doubt, whether The hea^ of i^.
it possess the forepart of the Eye, and be only placed against the Chrystaline
humor, or whether it be spread about the Vitreous humor.

Riolanus believes it not only to be contained in the forepart, but to be
spread about the Vitreous humor, because that if the Corney and Uveous Tunicle
be opened in the hinder part, there will flow forth a watery humor through the
wound. Plempius reproves Riolanus, and says he has found the contrary by
experience, as having perforated the hinder part of the ball of the Eye with a
Needle, and yet no watery Humor issued forth. And thence concludes that it was
the vitreous Humors which Riolanus saw distilling forth by reason of some prick
in the vitrious Tunicle. But it may be replied to Plempius that that Experience
little makes for the proof of his Opinion, for that upon the drawing forth of
the Needle most certain it is, that the little hole made in the corneous
Tunicle will suck it self to a closure so suddenly that no Liquor can issue
forth; as we find in the couching of Cataracts; for that the Needle being drawn
out again, no water distills from that small wound, by reason the wound
presently sucks it self close again. But if we examine this difference more
exactly we shall find, that the watery Humor contained about the Apple of the
Eye is different from that which flows from the hinder part of the sight, and
that this is not only the thinner but also is contained and fixed before the
sight, not running any farther, toward the hinder parts of the Eye; but that
the hindermost Liquor is clammy and thicker than the other, and that it is
nothing else but a certain watery Juice, separated from the Vitreous Humor, the
proper Vitreous Tunicle being hurt, and grown thin for want of Spirits, or
admission of the colder Air; for if you hold the Vitreous Humor in your Hand in
the Air never so short a while, a kind of a clammy Liquor will distill from it
in ^low drops.

XIV. Some question whether this Whether a Part of the Body?
Humor be a part of the Body? as Laurentius and Mercatus, and they that account
Blood to be a part of the Body. These Casserius and Plempius oppose, and that
not without reason, for that not being circumscribed within its own Limits, nor
united in continuity to the Body, but many times in Wounds of the Eyes being
wholly lost, is restored again, therefore it seems not proper to be reckoned
among the animated Parts. Now that it is restored when lost, appears cut of
Galen, who relates the Example of a Boy, who was so pricked in the Sight of the
Eye with a Penknife, that all the Watery Humor was let out of his Eye.
Nevertheless, in a short time after, so soon as the Watery Humor was again
recruited and collected together, the Boy recovered his Sight: and Hildan also
relates two more Examples of the same Nature.

XV. This difficulty others observing, Whether an Excrement?
rather choose to assert, that it was an Excrement of the Crystallan Humor; for
which reason it came to pass, that being evacuated and lost, it was frequently
restored again. But this Argument convinces them, that all Excrements of the
Body daily increase anew, and therefore of necessity they must have ways and
means, by which they be again evacuated, whereas there are no ways for the
Evacuation of this Humor. If therefore this Humor being evacuated, could be
regenerated in a very short space, there ought to be manifest Passages allowed,
through which the redundancy of it may be again evacuated; for they say, that
being evacuated by the pricking of the Eye in a Chicken, it will renew again
within the space of fifteen days. But no Man ever found out those Passages in
the Horny Tunicle, nor ever can find them out if there be none, therefore this
Humor, by its continual increase, must distend the Eye to an immense
proportion, at least in aged Persons, it must of necessity be very copious, by
reason of the Collection of many years; but in Infants very little would be
found, whereas Experience tells us quite the contrary in both. Therefore we
must conclude that this Humor is no part of the Body; not so much as an
Excrement, but a certain Liquor ordained for the Perfection of the Sight, no
less than the Blood for Nourishment, and generated out of the most lympid
Particles of the Blood, and that as the Blood is no part of the Body, not so
much as an Excrement, but a Humor necessary for Nourishment, and the support of
Life, so the watery Humor of the Eye is neither an enlivened Part of the Body,
nor any Excrement, but a Liquor to maintain the Eye, and perhaps ordained for
the Nourishment of the Crystalline and Vitreous Humor.

XVI. The use of this Humor is to The use of the watery Humor.
water and make slippery, and perhaps to nourish the other two thicker Humors,
together with the Uvious and Net-like Tunicle, and to distend the horny Tunicle
to prevent its growing wrinkel'd and opacous, to darken the too much Splendour
of the Light, and dilate the visible Rays. But if it recede from its Purity,
and become thicker, then the Sight of the Eye becomes dull. If there be any
thicker Particles that swim within it, then Gnats, Flys, Straws, Spiders Webbs
and the like, seem to pester the Sight, and to hang always before the Eyes. If
those thicker Particles so meet and stick together, as to generate a Film, that
covers the Hole of the Apple of the Eye, then the Sight is lost, by reason that
the Entrance of the visible Rays into the Chrystalline Humor is prevented, The
beginning of which Defect, is by the Greeks called (...), by the Latins
Suffusio, and when it is come to a Head Cataracta.

XVII. The Vitreous Humor, like The Vitreous Humor.
melted Glass, much more fluid than the watery Humor, and much softer than the
Chrystalline, and in quantity exceeding the Watery three times, the Chrystalline
four or five times, possesses the whole hinder Part of the Eye.

In the hinder part, where it joins to the Net-form'd Tunicle, it is round, in
the former part, though plain and flat, yet somewhat hollow in the middle where
it receives the Chrystalline Humor. It is surrounded with a most thin pellucid
Tunicle, called the Vitreous, by The Vitreous Tunicle.
which it is separated from the other two Humors.

XVIII. The use of it is to dilate the Its use.
Rays of visible things received from the Chrystalline, and being so dilated to
represent them to the Net-form'd Tunicle. Others, who believe the Sight to be
in the Optic Nerve, affirm the use of it to be to this purpose, that the Rays
being refracted in it, after they have passed the Chrystalline Humor, may come
together in one Point, to the end the Image may be represented to the Sight.

XIX. The Crystalline Humor, by The Crystalline Humor.
the Greeks called (...) from its clear Transparency, as also Glacialis,
resembling the clearest Icicle that may be, is more solid and bright than the
other two Humors, generated out of the most transparent and purest part of the
Seed.

Before it possesses the Hole of the Uveous Tunicle, behind it is received into
a Hollowness framed in the Vitreous Humor, and sticks close to it. In the
forepart it is a little more flat, behind a little more round, though this
Figure seems often to vary according to the various Affections of the Eye.

XX. This Humor is surrounded or The Cobweb Tuni cle.
enclosed with its own proper Tunicle, extremely thin and transparent,
therefore called Chrystalloidaea, and from the form of its Contexture, the
Cobweb Tunicle. By means of this Tunicle it is separated from the other Humors;
to which also, in the hollowness of the vicious Humor, the vicious Tunicle
sticks very close, but yet is distinct from it. Riolanus will not allow of this
Tunicle, not so much as in the forepart, as being that which he believes to be
very finely polished, by reason of the thickness of the Crystalline. But the
Sight it self evinces this Error: For it is plain, that that same Tunicle,
though very slender, may be in some measure separated, and that that being
endamag'd, the exterior part of the Humor it self does but very little trickle
forth. Thus says Julius Casserius, in these Words, Nay, I have shown this
Tunicle visibly separated from the Crystalline Humor it self.

XXI. The Rays of visible things The use of the Crystalline Humor.
being dilated in the Watery Humor, are first received by this Crystalline
Humor, and hence pass thro^gh the Vitreous Humor to the Net-form'd Tunicle, and
so are presented to the Common Sensory. Therefore in co^deration of the first
Reception or Collection, the Crystalline Humor is the first Instrument of
Sight; but in consideration of Perception, the Net formed Tunicle, as being
that by means whereof the Rays received, are offered to the common Sensory
where they are perceived. In the mean time all the Conjunction of all the Parts
of the Eye is so close and so necessary, to the end that one may not act
without the other, while the Defect of the meanest part, even of the aqueous
Humor, puts a stop to the primary Operation of the whole Organ.

XXII. Here arises another Doubt, Whether Parts of the Body?
whether the Crystalline or Watery Humor are Parts of the Body? As for the
Crystalline, we must conclude, that it is really a Part of the Body, because it
is enfolded in its proper Cob-web-Tunicle, perfects the Act of Seeing, together
with the other Parts, lives, is nourished, is generated in the Womb, has its
proper Circumscription, is a Body adhering to the whole, and filling it
together with other Parts, conjoined by common Life, and ordained to its
Function and Use. And if its Substance be more narrowly considered, it is not
truly a Humor, though vulgarly so called, but a Body sufficiently firm and
solid; which being boiled in Fish, may be divided into little Fibers, and is
much more firm than Fat, the Brain, or the Marrow. Hence Galen deservedly
reckons it among the Parts of the Body, and those the similar Parts too,
because it is divided into Parts like to its self; as also the Organic Parts,
because it is ordained to perfect the Act of Seeing, and to that end has a
certain determined and sensible Formation.

The same Question concerning the Vitreous Humor is resolved by the same
Reasons. And though some affirm the Crystalline Humor to be nourished by this
Vitreous Humor, that however is improperly said; perhaps, because there are
some who think it prepares Nourishment for the other; though indeed it no more
nourishes the Crystalline Humor, than the Heart nourishes the Arm: besides,
that there is no need of so bright and large a part for the Nourishment of the
Crystalline Humor; neither is it less proper for it to be nourished by the
Blood, then the Nerves, Marrow, Brain, or any other Whether these Humors are
sensible?
whitish parts of the Body.

XXIII. Julius Casserius of Placentia, was the first that brought another
Question upon the Stage concerning these Humors, Whether they are endued with
the Sense of feeling? As for himself, he allows them a most exact Sense of
feeling. For my part, I allow this Sense to their Membranes, but not to the
substance of the Humors it self, in regard that the Membrane alone is the Organ
of Feeling. In like manner as the Teeth and Bones, whose proper Substance,
though it be destitute of the Sense of Feeling, yet the Periostium's are
sensible, and so they are allowed the Sense of Feeling.

Now the Animal Spirits contribute the Power of Seeing to the Eye, being framed
of all these Parts; which Spirits flow into it in great quantity through the
Optic Nerve. But they flow into it sometime in greater, sometimes in lesser
quantity; and hence it is that the Eyes swell sometimes more, sometimes less,
sometimes are more quick sighted, and sometimes less. Thus they are more Tumid
in young Persons, Plethoric, People that are angry, and given to drink. They
are less turgid in aged Folks, such as are given to Venereal Exercises, those
that are Sad, or emaciated for want of Food. They are also said to be more
turgid in Virgins then those that have known Man. But though a moderate
Swelling of the Eye caused by the Spirits, renders the Sight more quick, yet it
does not follow, that upon every Swelling of the Eye, the Sight should be more
quick; for we find the contrary in People intoxicated with Drink, whose Sight
is but dull, by reason of the turbulent and disorderly Influx of the Spirits.

XXIV. The Action of the Eye is The Action of the Eye.
manifest and known to all Men to be Seeing.

XXV. Now this Seeing is a Definition of Sight.
Sense, whereby from the various Motion of the visible Rays, collected in the
Crystalline and Glassie Humors, and striking upon the Net-form'd-Tunicle,
Colors are perceived with their light Situation, Distance, Magnitude, Figure
and Number.

As to the Manner, Medium and Object of Sight, and many other things thereto
belonging, those Philosophers are to be consulted, who have made it their
business to write altogether upon that Subject, and therefore to avoid
unnecessary Prolixity, are here omitted; since they cannot with a sufficient
Accurateness be briefly run over, but require a whole Treaties of themselves,
such a one, as among others. Descartes has written, Lib. dioptric. and Lib. de
Hom. artic. 18, 19, 20. as also Julius Casserius, de Org. Visus; and Plempius
in his Ophthalmographia.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Organs of Hearing, and Hearing it self.
I. AS the Eyes, the Beholder of the wonderful Works of the Supreme Deity, and
the Discoverers of what is to be desired or avoided, are placed in the upper
part of the Body, so for the understanding of Wisdom and The Organ of Hearing.
all sorts of Knowledge, the Organs of Hearing are placed on each side not far
from them, in Latin Aures, by the Greek (...) and (...), to give us notice of
imminent Good or Evil, which cannot be discerned by the Eye, either in the
Dark, or through the Interposition of thicker Bodies, or the distance of the
Place; seated in a high part of the Body, the more easily to receive, the
Twirlings and Circulations of the Air, in Motion diffuss'd through the upper
Parts of the wide Concavity.

II. The Supreme Architect created Their Number.
two, perhaps, that if any Defect should befall the one, the other might supply
its Office; or else be placed one on each side of the Temples, for the better
distinguishing of Sounds on the Right or Left Side of the Body. The outward
Part expanded like a winnow, which is not primary, but an assisting Organ of
Hearing; first, collecting and receiving Sounds, is by the Greeks properly
called (...), by the Latins Auris, the upper parts of which are called Wings,
by the Greeks (...), but the lower and soft Lobe of the lower Auricle, retains
the ancient Name of Lobus still.

III. The Ears of Men are but small, Their Magnitude and Figure.
semicircular and neatly framed and fashioned with various Protuberances and
Concavities, in which the sound being received together with the Air, it does
not presently slip out again, but stops a little, and is somewhat broken, to
the end that thence it may the (...) directly, and with less Violence, enter
the inner most Caverns of the Ear. Insomuch, that they who are deprived of this
part by any unfortunate Wound, hear much less distinctly, and with more
confusion, receiving the Sounds of Words like the Murmuring of a Stream. Hence
it is that they who are Deafish clap the Hollow of their Hands to receive a
louder Sound of the Air in Motion, for the greater benefit of their Hearing.

IV. Of these Protuberances, the outermost, by reason of its winding and
turning Figure is called Helix, and the Helix. Anthelix.
other opposite to it Anthelex; that which looks toward the Temples, because it
is hairy in some People like a Tragus.
Goats Beard, is called Tragus, or Hircus, and the Part opposite to it, to
which the lower Auricle is appendent, is called Antitragus, which is also hairy
in some Antitragus.
People.

V. The innermost of the Cavities, Alvearium.
which is as it were the Porch of the Auditory Passage it self, by reason of
the yellow Excrement therein contracted, is by some called Alvearium; the
outermost, which is the bigger from its winding and turning Concha, by the
Concha.
Greeks (...); the third, which is comprehended between the Helix, and
Anthelix, has hitherto no peculiar Name allowed it.

VI. From the Shape and Bigness of Indications.
the outward Ear, the Ancients have drawn several Observations. Aristotle and
Galen makes Ears of a moderate bigness, and arrected to be a Sign of the best
sort of Men. Polemon, Loxus, Adamantius, and Albert asserts, that Quadrangular
and Simicircular Ears of a moderate Magnitude declare a Man Stout, Honest and
of great Parts. Large Ears denote Sotrishness, Imprudence, and Talkativeness,
but a great Memory, and moreover they presage a long Life, as Rases and Pliny
relate out of Aristotle. Very small Ears testify a Fool, a Person of ill
Condition, thievish and Libidinous, as Aristotle, Galen, and Polemon relate.
Short and extended Ears, as in Dogs, as also short and compressed, both are
Signs of Folly, according to Polemon, Adamantius, and Albert out of Loxus. Long
and narrow Ears show a Man envious and wicked, according to Polemon, Albert,
and Conciliator. Ears over-round, and not well hollowed, betoken a Man
Indocible; but when hollowed exactly, a Person docible, as the same Authors
testify. When the inferior Lobe of the Ear is joined to the Flesh of the
Jaw Bone, it signifies a vain Fool, by the Testimony of Avicen.

VII. The Ear consists of various The Parts of the Ear.
Parts, of which some are common, others proper.

The common Parts are the Cuticle, a very thin Skin, and a nervous Membrane
under it, and a little Fat in the Inferior Lobe.

The proper Parts are a Gristle, Muscles and Vessels.

VIII. The Gristle constituting the The Gristle.
upper and larger Part of the Ear, to keep the Ear expanded and open, sticks
fast to the Stony-bone, by means of a strong Ligament arising from the
Pericranium.

For this reason, in Men it is almost immovable, and there are few Men can move
their Ears at Pleasure; though Schenkius brings some few Examples out of
others, which Motion is performed by the benefit of four Muscles, only
Casserius talks of six, which are very slender, and being hardly conspicuous,
rest upon this Gristle, which Galen, by reason of their extraordinary
slenderness calls the Lineaments of the Muscles.

IX.

The first of these Muscles common The Muscles.
to the Ear and both Lips, drawing the Ear downward to the side, is implanted
in the Root of it under the Lobe, and is part of the slender foursquare Muscle
moving the Cheeks and Skin of the Face. The second lying upon the Temple
Muscle, and moving the Ear upward and forward, descends near the beginning of
the Muscle of the Front, and being made narrower by degrees, is inserted into
the upper part of the Ear. The third raising the Ear, though very little toward
the hinder Parts, rises above the Mamillary Process, with a narrow beginning
from the hinder part of the Head, and then becoming broader, sometimes with
two, sometimes with three Tendons, enters the Root of the hinder Gristle. The
Fourth, being of the same use with the former, and proceeding with a broad
Original from the Mamillary Process, vanishes into a Tendon, of which there are
some that make three Insertions into the Root of the Gristle.
In Cows, Horses, and several other Brutes, these Muscles are large, and
frequently more, which is the reason those Creatures move their Ears very
strongly, and are able, by that means, to shake of Flies and whatever else
proves troublesome to those Parts.

X. The Vessels belonging to the The Vessels.
Ear are threefold.

1. Little Arteries from the Carotides, of which, one that is bigger than the
rest creeping through the Tragus and Anthelix, and ascending the upper part of
the Iaw, affords vital Blood to each of the Teeth, with which sharp Humors
sometimes flowing down, are the cause of most cruel Pains in the Teeth, which
we have seen wonderfully cured by an actual Cautery to this shooting forth of
the Arteries in the Anthelix; which is observed by Bauhinus. And Riolanus
reports, that he saw a Person at Paris, who got a great deal of Money by this
way of Cure, as we observed another, who practiced the same Cure in Gelderland.
2. Very small diminutive Veins that run from the Ear to the Jugulars. 3. Two
little Nerves, that creep from the second Pair of the Pith of the Neck along
the sides, and hinder Region of the Ear; to which is joined a small Branch from
the harder Portion of the fifth Pair, proceeding through the Blind-hole.
XI. Without side there stands adjoining The Parotid Glands.
to the Ears, various little Kernels, thick and remarkable, called Parotides,
not only behind the Ears, but also under the Ears, and upon each side. Between
these, two of a considerable bigness, resting almost one upon another. Of
which, the lesser, by Sylvius and Stenonis is called Conglobata; the larger,
composed of many glandulous Fragments, is called Conglomerata, and both
manifestly demonstrated by Stenonis in the Head of a Calf. These Kernels
support the ascending Vessels, and because they receive the serous Humors,
separated from the Arterious Blood, and send them down through certain
lymphatic and salival Vessels, and sometimes heap together a great quantity of
flegmatic Filth; hence they are vulgarly called the Emunctories of the Brain.
Besides these, in the Space below the lower Jaw, there are several other
Kernels, wherein several Distempers breed, which however are not described
under the Name of Parotides, but by Wharton are called Iugulars. Of these there
is a great number, but all very small. Nor are they seated only in the Neck,
but descend to the Thorax from the Pen-resembling Process, along the lower Seat
of the Jaw, by the sides of the Thyroides, between the Spine and the Pectoral
Vessels, and are so far conspicuous in new born Infants, but scarce visible in
Persons of mature Age. Of these Steno discourses very accurately in his
Anatomic Observations.

XII. The inner Part of the Organ The inner Organ of Hearing.
of hearing is contained in the Process of the Bone of the Temples; partly for
the safer Defense, to prevent the Injuries of accidental Violence, by reason of
the hardness of the Place; partly, for the better preservation of the Sound,
for which, this place is most proper, by reason of its hardness and dryness.

In this lower part there are several things that occur to be considered; that
is to say, several Cavities, of which four are called by peculiar Names, The
Auditory Passage, the Tympanum or Drum, the Labyrinth, and the Cochlea; also
the Membrane of the Tympanum, two Muscles, four little Bones, the Air
contained, and the Vessels.

XIII. The Auditory Passage is said The Auditory Passage.
to be that same Den, which beginning from the Shell of the extreme part of the
Ear, tends toward the inner Parts, and is clothed with a slender Skin and
Pericranium to the very Brinks of the Tympanum.

It ascends somewhat upward with a winding Course, partly to prevent any thing
from crouding from without into the Air, and to hinder these things which are
slipped in, or gathered together, withinside, from being carried easily downward.
Partly, that the more vehement Impulse of the moved Air may be somewhat broken,
and so strike the Tympanum with less sorce.

XIV. In this Passage some yellow Ear-wax.
choleric, bitter, thick, viscous Humors happen to be gathered together,
resembling the softer sort of Wax, by the Ancients called Cerumina, and by the
Greeks (...), from the Color of which resembling Wax, the Passage is called
the Bee-hive, or The Beehive.
Alveare, and by the Greeks (...).

XV. Withinside, toward the end of The Membrane of the Drum.
the Auditory Passage, a certain nervous Membrane, orbicular and pellucid, is
observed; as to its Situation, obliquely looking downward, like the inner
Covering of the Ear, which by reason of the little Nerves that it receives, and
which proceed under it, feels most exactly, and is thin and very dry, to the
end it may sound the better, yet somewhat thick and sufficiently f^rm, to the
end it may not easily suffer damage from the Air crouding in.

XVI. This Membrane is by Hippocrates called the Pellicle or little Skin of the
Auditory Passage; by Aristotle the Meninx; by Galen, the Covering; but by the
Neoterics, by reason of the Cavity under it, the Membrane of the Tympanum.

XVII. Julius Casserius believes this Its Rise.
Membrane arises from the Pericranium; others ascribe its Original to the Pia,
others the Dura Matter, others to the little nervous Pair of the fifth
Conjugation expanded; Bauhinus thinks it consists of its own proper Substance,
different from other Membranes, and therefore that it derives its Original from
no other, but is generated out of the Seed in the first formation of the Parts.
Or if it must be said to proceed from any other part, that then it ought to be
deduced from the Periosteum, to which in the Head of an Infant it is seen to
stick very close. For which reason, it seems to Veslingius to be a certain
Expansion of the Periostium, who likewise reports the same to be sometimes
observed double, and to be frequently covered with a little Crust from the
Excrements condensed about it.

XVIII. It adheres to the Orbit or surrow Its Connection.
of the bony Ring; that lies under it, though in the upper Region of the
auditory passage, there be a broader connection, whence it happens to be
somewhat bowed in the middle, to the end the sound may be the better and more
perfectly received in that kind of Concavity.

XIX. But to the end it may more The String.
loudly resound, there is stretched over the back of a certain strike like the
strings that goes cross a Drum. This the Anatomists generally report to be
transversly annexed to it. But Julius Casserius has well observed, that this
same string is neither annexed to it, ^or extended under all of it, but
scarcely under a Third Part.

XX. Anatomists are at variance Its (...).
about the Nature of this string; Bauhinus thinks it to be either a Nerve or a
Ligament, or else a mixture of both. Eustachius says it is a little Nerve from
both the small branches of the fourth Pair. Vesalius affirms it to be a
Nervous Body. Volcherus Coiter agrees with Bauhinus; with Vesalius accords
Fallopius and Casserius; from whom Rolfincius seems not to vary.

XXI. It is indu'd with two slender It Is Muscles.
little Muscles, for the motion of the small Bones. Or as Riolanus will rather
have it, to limit the bending backward and forward of the Membrane of the
Tympanum. Which motion is manefestly perceived, when the Ears are erected to
hearken more attentively after any thing.

Of these, one which is external, arising with a broader beginning from the
upper and more inward Cavity of the Auditory Passage, and by degrees becoming
more contracted, and contiguous with a most slender Tendon to the Membrane of
the Tympanum, is carried as far as the little Hammer, extending the Membrane
together with the Hammer upward and outward. The way to find this out
Eustachius describes in these words. Cut the Stony-bone in that place, where it
is marked with a Line that penetrates not very deep, and rises somewhat more
toward the slenderer seat of the Bone of the Temples next the Inner Part, and
open the Scale of it, which having done, presently the Muscle will show it
self; which though it be the least of all, for its construction gives place to
none. It arises from a Substance like to Ligaments, where the Wedg-like-bone is
joined with the Bone of the Temples: thence passing beyond the Flesh, it
becomes by degrees somewhat broader as far as the middle; but then growing
narrower it produces a most slender Tendon, which is inserted into the larger
Apophysis of the Hammer, over against the lesser Apophysis of the same.

The other Muscle is internal, seated in the Stony-bone, and rising about the
Conjunction of the Stony-process with the Wedg-like-bone, proceeds sometimes
with a single, sometimes with a double Tendon to the little Hammer, and higher
then one Process of it, is inserted into the other Neck of it, obliquely
drawing forward the Head of the Hammer, and bringing it from the Anvil to the
inner Parts.

These two Muscles then chiefly draw the Membrane with the little Bones upward
and downward when we desire to excite these Parts to hear a thing more
distinctly.

XXII. This Membrane being moved The use of the Membrane.
and stirred by things sonorous moves the Air included within, which is the
Internal Medium of hearing, without the motion of which there can be no
Hearing. Which Membrane, if either from the Birth it were so, or by any
distemper become thicker, or be covered with the slime of Excrements, so that
it cannot be commodiously moved, causes thickness of hearing, or if it be
immovable from the Birth, causes incurable deafness.

XXIII. The foresaid Membrane being The Tympanum or * Drum.
taken away, that large Cavity lies open, which the Modern Anatomists call the
Tympanum or Drum, whose inner superficies is unequal with several small risings
and cavitys.

XXIV. In this four small, hard, The four little Bones
thick, little Bones offer themselves to our Consideration. The Hammer, the
Anvil, the Stirrup, and the Orbicular Bone, which though they are destitute of
Membranes and Periosteums, yet about the Extremities where they are joined
together, to strenghthen the Knots, they are bound about* with a slender
Ligament proceeding from that Ligament, which is extended thwart the Tympanum,
like the Cats Guts under the bottom of a Drum; whence it obtained the Name of a
String or Thread.

These little Bones were unknown to By whom discovered.
the Ancients, the two first being discovered by Iacobus Carpus, the third by
Ingrassias, Eustachius and Columbus; and the fourth by Franciscus Sylvius.

Concerning these, this farther has been observed by Anatomists, worthy notice;
that in all Ages they differ nothing in situation or bigness, not less in new
born Infants than in grown People. Only the hearing is not so quick in
Children, by reason of the extraordinary moisture of the rest of the Parts of
the Organ: perhaps also, for that although the little Bones have attained their
just Magnitude, yet they are less solid and hard in Infants, and somewhat
spungy and marrowy, as Collumbus and Casserius witness them then to be.

XXV. The first little Bone, which The Hammer.
either from some resemblance of the shape or else from it is use they call the
Hammer, is rivitted with a little round head into the Cavity of the Anvil with
a looser Ligament, and thence is tap'd into the Neck. But in its farther
progress it sticks close like a Tail reversed, to the Membrane of the Tympanum
beyond the middle of it, and about the middle it is furnished with two
Processes: the one a short one, to which the Tendon of the inner Muscle is
fastn'd: the other longer but thinner, which rests upon the Orbit of the
Tympanum, and is tied to the Tendon of the inner Muscle of the Ear.

XXVI. The second little Bone, The Anvil.
from the use of it called the Anvil, and resembling one of the Grinding Teeth
with two Roots, lies under the Hammer, and receives the head of it toward the
upper part of it with a smoth Cavity, in the lower part it has two Processes:
one a short one resting upon the hinder Cavity of the Tympanum. The other
longer, bound to the small head of the Stirrup with a Ligament somewhat broad,
but strong.

XXVII. The other little Bone called The Stirrup.
the Stirrup from its resemblance, and answering to an Oval window both for
shape and compass rests upon the Cochlea, to which it is fastened throughout the
whole Compass with a slender and loose Ligament, so that it cannot be forced
within the hollowness, nor raised up or brought forth without violence. In the
upper part it is unequal like a Bow, the two minute Legs of which, being
somewhat writhed, are inserted into the Transverse Basis. But upon the Top of
the Vertex stands a Minute little Head plain and round, where it is fastened to
the Apophysis of the Anvil, with a Ligament somewhat Broad.

XXVIII. The fourth little Bone is very The Orbicular Bone.
small and round; and thence called the Orbicular Bone; This is fastened with a
slender Ligament, to the Stirrup, at the side, where it is joined to the Anvil.
Lindan calls it Cochlear, and allows it three Processes.

XXIX. Below toward the foreparts, The passage from the Tympanum to the Iaws.
appears a round passage from the Tympanum to the Palate, which being carried
down, between the two Muscles of the Iaws, partly is inserted into the thick
Tunicle of the Palate, near the Root of the Uvala, where the Mouth of the upper
Palate ends; partly enters the Cavity of the Nostril of its own side, with a
large and grisly end, covered with the slimy Tunicle of the Nostrils, like a
kind of a Doorkeeper; or as Riolanus believes, with the Ligamental Membrane
enfolding the Tonsilla. Through this the preternatural moisture collected in
the Tympanum, flows to the Palate, and the sound raised in the the mouth in
some measure enters the Ear. For which reason, men that are thick of Hearing,
opening their Mouths and holding their breath, hear better. Aquapendens
testifies that he has frequently observed, especially in Children, the Inner
Cavity filled with a great quantity of slime.

Fallopius and Laurentius hold that there is a little Skin or valve added to
this passage more inwardly, looking toward the Palate and the Nostrils, and
hindering the assent of vapors from the Palate and Nostrils to the Windings of
the Ears; though Riolanus denis there is any such thing to be found. But this
by reason of it is extreme smallness and tenderness by better being discerned by
Fallopius and Laurentius upon the score of Reason, than seen by Riolanus, for
reason teaches us that there must be some Obstruction to the assent of Vapors
in that Channel, to prevent the Organ of hearing from being fully'd by them:
but whether it be a valve or not, I dare not assert. The muscous Tunicle of the
Nostrils, and the Inner soft Tunicle of the Palate seem to be sufficient for
that Office: for that it affords an easy Exit to the humors descending from
the Ear, but to those ascending from the Jaws or Nostrils, it gives no
entrance, because it falls and is wrinkl'd into folds.

XXX. If at any time crude excrementitious An Observation.
humors chance to stop in this Cavity of the Tympanum, the said Channel being
obstructed by their clamminess, and be gathered together in too great a
Quantity, as happens sometimes in great Colds of the Head, the hearing is
endamag'd, and extreme pain ensues by reason of the extention of the Membrane
of the Tunicle, which is often asswag'd by a violent snuffing the Air up the
Nostrils, and frequent hawking: the Channel toward the Ears and Palate by that
means being somewhat opened, and the humors latent within, drawn away by a kind
of sucking. Sometimes also those Humors are attenuated by the application of
discussive Topics, or only by the proper heat of the adjacent Parts, and are
reduced into vapors and wind, whence tingling and noises in the Ears, and so
are easily expelled out of the said Channel. But if they have tarried there
over long, they break forth after they have burst the inner Tunicle, enfolding
the Auditory Passage within side, to the great Ease of the Party in pain, and
for many days together flow from the said Rupture, till the Channel be free
from the obstructing humors, which done, they return to that way. But in
distempers of the Ears, this Channel is well to be observed by the Physician;
for that the thick humors are successfully drawn out of it by Masticatories,
and sometimes forced out by sneezing Powders, which not only Reason but
Experience tells us.

XXXI. In the middle of the Cavity of The Holes.
the Tympanum are two holes, of the bigger and uppermost of which, seated about
the middlemost Part, and shut up by the Basis of the Stirrup; from its oval
Figure, is called the Oval Window, and at the The Oval-Window.
hinder part opens it self into the Labyrinth with a remarkable broadness. The
other hole which is less, lower and round, is called the round Window. This The
Round Window.
always remains open, neither is it covered by any other Body, and is divided
into two Channels, parted by a Bony Scale, of which the one together with the
little Oval Window runs toward the Cochlea, the other toward the Labyrinth.

XXXII. The Labyrinth is a Cavity The Labyrinth.
much less than the Tympanum, by reason of the bony hollowed Semicircles,
covered with a thin Membrane circularly returning into the same Cavity, was by
Fallopius first of all called the Labyrinth; though Platerus calls it the Mine.
Into this Cavity the little Oval Window opens it self; besides which, it has
three other Holes makes it pervious; the one of which opens it self into the
end of the turning of the broader Cochlea, through the rest, which are so very
small, that they will hardly admit a small Hair, the diminutive little Fibers
of the Hearing-Nerve to the inner enfolding Membrane.

XXXIII. The Cochlea, so called The Cochlea.
from its resemblance to the Periwincle Shell, less than the Labyrinth. Yet is
it a remarkable Cavity, concocted sometimes twice, and sometimes three or four
times, like a Periwincle-shell, and covered with a most slender Film, into
which, as in the former, through three or four little Holes, little diminutive
Fibers of the Nerve of the fifth Pair, make their Entrance.

This Cavity by Fallopius, is called the Blind-cavity, because it has no
Termination. Yet Casserius says, that from thence there is a Channel extended
into the Passage of the Auditory Nerve. Of which Riolanus and Rolfinch takes
notice, of which two, the one questions whether the Choleric Excrement of the
Brain do not empty it self through that Passage into the Ear.

These Hollownesses, Labyrinth and Periwincle, says Riolanus, are infolded
neither with any small Membrane, nor so much as any Periosteum; however the
Mouths of those Holes are open, to render them the more sonorous. But in regard
that bare Bones cannot be sensible of any Sound, there is a necessity for that
little Membrane that deceives it self from the Expansion of the Nerve which
enfolds it, and by means of which, the Motion of the Air is felt. Which
diminutive Membrane, Fallopius has observed to be most slender and soft.
Whether it be an expanded Nerve, or any thing else, it matters not, says he,
but it is very probable, that this little Nerve derives its Original from the
Branches of the Nerves.

Moreover, the same Riolanus writes, that these Cavities in new born Infants
are very narrow, and that the Labyrinth is not to be discerned as in Persons of
mature Age. On the other side, Veslingius writes, that the Tympanum, the
Labyrinth and the Periwincle in new born Infants, observing the Simmetry of
Proportion, want nothing of their Perfection, for the greater Expedition of
hearing in a Creature born for all manner of Instruction. But in the
determination of this Controversy, we must thus far hold with Riolanus; for
though the three little Bones, the Hammer, Anvil and Stirrup are duly
proportioned from the Birth, yet the Labyrinth is not so perfectly hollowed in
Infants as in grown People, the Cavity of it being very small.

XXXIV. In these hidden Cavities, The Innate-Air.
is contained a pure and subtle Air, which many are of Opinion is generated out
of the Seed, and enters the Ear as soon as the Child is near the Birth, and
therefore call it the Coin-gendered Air. But in regard the Restoration of the
Spermatic Parts is a very difficult thing, and for that this Air is continually
dissipated by the heat of the adjacent Parts, and therefore stands in need of
continual Restoration, and whereas this Air has no continuous Coherence with
any of the solid Parts, as the Spermatic Parts all cohere one with another, it
can never be said that this Air is detained in that Part as any Spermatic Part,
or that it is generated out of the Seed, or put in before the Birth. And
therefore some think it di^lers nothing from the external Air, only that it is
more pure and thinner. Then what if we should suppose it to be the Animal
Spirit poured forth into the Nerve through the said Cavities; for it is aereal,
pure and subtle, like that Spirit; There is the same reason for the Generation,
Preservation and Restoration of both, both are successively generated and
dissipated, the Spirit failing, the hearing grows dull, as being the internal
Medium of hearing, without which, nothing can be heard. Nevertheless, there are
some who affirm this Air not to be the Medium, but the primary Instrument of
Hearing But this is far from Truth, for that the primary Instrument must of
necessity be a living Part of the Body; seeing all Actions are perfected by the
Help of Living Bodies. Therefore, because this Air is not enlivened, nor can be
numbered among the Parts of the Body, with which it has no continuous Adhe^ence,
it cannot be called the primary Instrument, but only the Medium of Hearing; and
that as there is no Seeing without Air, so there is no Hearing without it.

XXXV. There are several small Ve^ls.
Arteries and little Veins which are distributed through the inner Organ of
Hearing, for the Nourishment of the Parts proceeding from the inner, and
foremost Branches of the Carotis, and Jugular Vein, of which, sundry Branches
creep through the hidden parts of those Cavities.

XXXVI. To procure Feeling, there Nerve^.
are also Nerves. The softer Portion of the Nerve of the fifth Pair, being
carried into the hinder Passage of the Stony-Bone, proceeds to the Periwinkle
and the Circles of the Labyrinth, to perfect the Office of Hearing. Moreover,
there comes a Branch from the fourth Conjugation of Nerves, which is extended
into the Tympanum, from which it receives the Sense of Feeling, and the Muscles
the Power to move it.

XXXVII. The use of all these Parts Use.
is to perfect the Hearing.

XXXVIII. Hearing is a Sense, The Definition.
whereby from the various tremulous Motion of the ambient Air, striking the
Drum of the Ear, and together moving the internal Air with the little Fibers of
the Auditory Nerve, communicated to the Common Sensory, Sounds are understood.

XXXIX. It is a Question among Whether Hearing be an Action?
some, whether Hearing be an Action or a Passion? The more numerous Party
believes it to be a Passion. Whom Julius Casserius opposing, affirms it to be
an Action. But in regard there are two things necessary to perfect the Hearing,
Reception of the Object, and understanding the Object received, in respect both
of the one and the other, we believe Hearing to be both an Action and a
Passion. For the Reception of audible Objects is a real Passion; but the
judging of them is an Animal Action.

XL. The Object of Hearing is So^*
Sound, which is nothing else but a Quality arising from Air or Water,
repercussed and broken by a sudden and vehement Concussion, and moving the
Auditory Nerve, by the means of the implanted Air.

XLI. To the Generation of Sound, The Generation of Sound.
two things are necessary, a Medium, and something vehemently to stir the
Medium. The Medium must be fluid, either Air or Water, for Fishes also Hear;
but no solid Body can be the Medium of Hearing. The vehement stirring Medium is
twofold; either a Solid or Fluid Body. Solid, when two solid Bodies, by
vehement Percussion, crowd up the Air or Water together, swiftly condense,
rapidly drive it forward and break it. I say vehemently and swiftly, for Bodies
that join slowly and by degrees, do not break the Air or Water so forcibly, as
to bege^ a Sound. Fluid, when fluid things, stirred with a rapid Motion, being
forcibly and strongly condensed, strike one against the other, and are broken,
and so may be said to be both the efficient Sound, as the Medium. Such a
sonorous Motion of the Air we may observe in Whistling, Thunder, and Shooting
off of Guns, of Water, in great Showers and Rivers falling from Mountains.

XLII. There are sundry differences Differences of Sound.
of Sound, of which, these are the chief, Shrill, Deep, Direct, Reflex, as in
an Echo, natural, violent; from solid or fluid things; as also caused by
things Animate or Inanimate.

The diversity and loudness of Sounds are distinguished by the four little
Bones adjoining to the Tympanum. For as the Membrane of the Tympanum is thrust
forward toward the Hammer, the Hammer upon the Anvil, the Anvil upon the
Stirrup, by the Impulse of the external Sonorous Air, more or less violent,
Smooth or Rough, so upon the wider or narrower opening of the Oval-Window, by
the Stirrup and Orbicular Bone, there happens a freer or narrower Passage of
the Air included within into the Labyrinth and Periwinkle; in which Windings
and Turnings, it is variously broken, which causes the several sorts of Sounds,
and those according to various Impulses of the External Air, sometimes shrill,
sometimes full, sometimes harsh, sometimes sweet: The Idea of every one of
which Sort, is carried to the Common Sensory, by the Acustic Nerve, enfolding
those Cavities with its Expansion, and so represented to the Mind.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Organ of Smelling, and Smelling it self.
THE Organ of Smelling is the Nose, placed in the upper Part The Organ of
smelling.
of the Body, the better to receive the Invisible Fumes and Vapors, and to
conveigh their Qualities through the Odoratory Nerves, inserted in the inner
Tunicle to the common Sensory, and represent them to the Judgment of the Mind,
though some Men may be able to judge of things to be desired or avoided, which
are not to be perceived either by the Sight or Hearing.

The upper Bone, part of it is immovable, the lower Gristle, part moveable.
The Ridg is called (...), or the Back; the Top (...), or the Strainer, because
that there the Snivel is strained forth through the Sive-like Bones. The
Extremity is called Orbiculus, the lower lateral Parts the Wings, the two
larger lower Holes, Nares or the Nostrils; the Partition of the two Holes,
Columna, or the Pillar.

II. The Nose is a protuberant Part The Description of the Nose.
of the Face, serving for the Sense of Smelling, and in Respiration affording
Passage to the Air, and letting down the Excrements of the Brain, flowing
through the Sive-like Bones.

The Shape and Bigness are well Figure and Bigness.
known, yet there is some variety in both, in respect of thickness, thinness,
length and flatness, etc. But the better shaped it is, the more it conduces to
the Beauty of the Face; wherefore it is vulgarly called the Sun of the Face;
for that as the Sun gives Beauty to the Macrocosm, so the Nose, especially if
it be a red one, illuminates the Face.

The Nose consists of a Cuticle, a Skin, Gristles, Muscles, Membranes and
Vessels.

III. The Skin is much thinner and Its Skin.
harder than in any other Part of the Face, under which there lies no Fat. And
hence it adheres so firmly to the Gristles and Muscles, that it cannot be
parted without mangling. But under the middle Partition, it is much thicker and
more spungy, and is hairy within side, to prevent the drawing in of Gnats,
Feathers, and such other Inconveniences to the Brain, in the Act of
Respiration. Hence this Skin reflex'd within side, passes into a Membrane,
which clothes the minor Parts of the Nose; to which, in the upper part of the
Nose, some part of the hard Meninx passing through the Ethmoids Bone, is
conjoined, as Casserius, with many others believe, in regard that Membrane
feels more exquisitely at the upper part of the Nostril, than at the Entrance.

IV. The upper and immovable Bones.
Part of the Nose is supported by Bones, and those either proper, that is to
say, two external lateral ones, and one withinside in the middle, which divides
the Nose into two parts, or else common; of all which, see more, Lib. 9. c. 7.
etc.

V. In these upper bony Caverns of Spungy Bones.
the Nostrils on each side, there is yet another certain bony spungy Substance
to be seen, pendulous from the upper part of the Sive-like Bone, and adhering
to the sides of the Nose, within filled with ruddy and spungy Flesh, which
being endamaged and growing too big, are the cause of the Polipus.

VI. These spungy Substances possess The Use of the spongy Bones.
the upper Cavity, to the end they may be able to stop and alter the cold Air
breathed in, and prevent its ascent to the Sive-like Bone. As also to retard
the continual and sudden Flux of the Snivel descending, which would else be
much more troublesome than it is. Lastly, in some measure to help the Voice,
for they that have lost these Bones by Exulceration, or if they be too much
swelled, or lengthened by the Polypus, these People all snuffle in the Nose;
for that the Sonorous Air ascending through the Holes of the Nostrils, either
lights upon the Inequalities of the exulcerated Bones, or upon their
extraordinary Protuberances, and so by the altered Motion of the Air going
forth, the Voice also is altered and vitiated.

VII. In the French Distemper, these Filling of the Nose.
spungy Parts are frequently corroded by the malignant and sharp Humors
sticking thereto, and to come away by blowing the Nose, with bloody and slimy
Matter; and hence their Malignity spreading it self, to the next tender middle
and lateral Bones, which being also eaten away, drop out by degrees, and so the
Nose falls, and sometimes the Corrosion gaining Ground, lays the whole Nose
level, to the great Deformity of many a good Face.

VIII. Five Gristles constitute the Gristles.
lower moveable Part, of which, the two uppermost stick to the Bones of the
Nose, in the lower part, where they are more broad and rugged, and thence being
twisted together, bend toward the top of the Nose, and the farther they are
carried, so much the softer they grow, and in the extreme part of the Nose,
terminate, as it were in a Grisly Ligament. The third, in the middle, between
these two, is a grisly Partition, which hangs forward from the Bony Partition,
and grows in length close to the two foresaid Gristles, in the forepart, in the
inner Region. The fourth and fifth are two inferior lateral Gristles, joined to
the two upper Gristles with a Membranous Ligament; of which, one of each side
sticks to the lower part of the Nose; and because they stand like Wings on each
side the Nostrils, and move with a voluntary Motion, upward, downward, inward
and outward, by the ancient Anatomists were called the Wings of the Nostrils.

IX. Their Motion is performed by Muscles.
the assistance of eight Muscles, into every one of which, two Wings are
inserted.

The first, from the upper part of the Nose, near the Lachrymal Hole, arises
with an acute and fleshy Beginning, descending to the sides of it in a
Triangular Form, is expanded over the Wing that lies under it, and divides it
by raising it upward. The Second, carried down from the upper Bone near to the
Jaw, proceeds forward, partly into the Wing of the Nose outward, partly into
the upper Seat of the Wing that lies underneath, and so moves both parts
upward. The Third, which is very small, rising near the Root of the Wing, and
carried athwart above the Wing, is inserted into the Corner of the Wing, and
dilates it, as Veslingius well observes, though others say it contracts it. The
Fourth, like the former in bigness, and opposite to it, lies hid under the
Tunicle of the Nostrils in the inner part. This rising from the Extremity of
the Bone of the Nose, is expanded into the Wing, and draws it together. This is
much less than all the rest, and is hardly to be discerned, but in such as have
very large Noses, in whom all these Muscles are much thicker and more
apparently to be seen.
Besides these Muscles, Bartholinus writes, that he has found a fleshy thin
Muscle, extended in a straight Line from the frontal Muscle, with a broader
Basis, and by and by terminating more narrow about the Gristle of the Nose.

X. Withinside, by the Benefit of The Nostrils.
the foresaid Partition, the Nose is divided into two Holes, or Hollownesses,
which they call the Nostrils.

Each of these, about the middle of the Nose, is divided into two parts; of
which, one ascends upward to the spungy Bone, the other descends above the
Palate to the Chaps, through which, all Errhines snuft up into the Nostrils
descend to the Mouth and Chaps, and the Snot flows out sometimes through the
Nostrils, and the slimy Excrements of the Brain descending through the Spungy
Bones, by the more vehement Attraction of the Air through the Nostrils, are
brought down to the Palate, and spit out, or being swallowed, descend to the
Stomach.

XI. The inner large Space of the The inner Membrane
Nostrils is lined with a thin Membrane, which is said to rise from the thick
Meninx, through the holes of the Sivelike-bones; or as Riolanus will have it,
through the little holes of the Palate, and is said to be common to the Tunicle
of the Palate, Tongue, Larynx and Gullet.

This Membrane, where it adheres to the Sive-like-bones, is bored through with
little holes for the Passage of the Excrements of the Brain.

XII. Under the Membrane lies hid a certain piece of flesh thin, soft, and as
it were composed of several little Teats, which is hard to be discerned in Men,
but somewhat more easily found in Calves and Cows, though not without some
difficulty. The little Teats of this piece of flesh in the fore part are less,
but toward the hinder parts bunch out much bigger, and are observed by few
Anatomists, being by some taken for small Kernels.

XIII. For the nourishment of the Vessels conveighing Blood.
Nose, there are allotted to it Arteries from the Carotides; Veins also run out
from it to the External Iugulars.

XIV. Nicholas Stenonis, besides these Lymphatics.
Blood-bea^ing-Vessels in Sheep and Dogs has frequently observed in each
Nostril a Lymphatic Vessel, arising afar off from the Kernels seated under the
Tunicle of the Nostrils above the Region of the Genders, then joining together
into one Channel, which runs downward almost to the extreme Parts of the
Nostrils, and exonerates its self in the hollowness conspicuous between the
Grisly protuberancy of the Wings. He is also of opinion that Flegmatic humors
flow from the Nostrils through the hole which is made through the Palate into
the Mouth from the foremost Parts of the Nostrils; which to me does not seem
very probable.

XV. To endue it with Feeling, and Nerves.
to give it motion, one Nerve of each side runs along from the fourth pair
through the common hole to the larger corner of the Eye, and so proceeds to the
inner Tunicle of the Nose, and the Teat-resembling-Flesh, into which it powrs
forth the Animal Spirits to perfect the Sense of Smelling, and thence runs on
farther to the Muscles of the same.

XVI. Smelling is a Sense, by The definition of Smelling.
which things that have any Scent being carried to the Nostrils are understood
by a Specific motion of the odoratory Organ.

Here three things are to be considered; the Object, the Organ it self, and the
manner of Sensation.

XVII. The Object of Smelling is Scent.
Scent, which is a certain Spirituous Vapor exhaling into the Nostrils from the
Thing endu'd with scent, and moving the odoratory Organ this or that way.

XVIII. Senertus labors to prove that Whether Smells are Substances*
Smells are no Substances, nor real Qualities, but only Species's of them. But
in answer to Senertus we say, that no Qualities or Species's can subsist
without any Body, and therefore none can be allowed; nay there are no Odorable
Species's impressed upon no Corporeal substance that can be conceived in the
Imagination. This in the Sight is notorious; where the visible Species's are
certain Modifications of the Air, depainted therein by things visible and
imprinted therein, which without the Air are nothing; for Species's without
Substance cannot subsist, and therefore are nothing. Thus in Smells the
odorative qualities necessarily are inherent in some Substances, and because
they cannot subsist without 'em, hence they are properly called Smells, because
they are Substances endued with odorable qualities.

Philosophers commonly constitute The efficient Cause of Smells.
Scent in dry predominating above moist. However we are to understand, that
there is no Scent without Moisture, nay that it is generated out of Moisture,
attenuated and raised by Heat. I say by Heat, because Heat is the efficient
Cause which acts upon the subject containing Smell or Scent in Potentia; and by
raising therein Fumes that are endu'd with Scent, excites Smell, out of Power
into Act: And therefore Bodies endu'd with Scent smell when they are cha^'d;
but growing cold they send forth no Scent, for Scent is not in act unless it
exhale forth: which it cannot do nor be sent forth; while the astringent Cold
binds up the Pores of the Substance containing the Scent.

Here it will perhaps be objected, that Scent is something subsisting of it
self, and therefore Moisture and Heat cannot be the Cause of it. I answer that
Scent or Odor is an accident subsisting in the Subject, and Latent therein,
nor able to breath out of it, unless both in and with some part of its subject
accompanying it; for without the Subject it is a moist vapor which cannot be
raised, unless by Heat: and hence both Moisture and Heat of necessity concur,
the first as the Subject without which it cannot be, and be perceived, the
other as the agent Cause without which it cannot be excited into Act. But here
some one may say, that according to this Opinion, Odor of it self will prove to
be nothing, and so there will be no knowledge of Odor, since there can be no
knowledge of a Nonentity. We grant that Odor separately considered, is
nothing, neither does it fall under Sense; but when we consider it in and with
Fume, it peirces the Sense and falls under knowledge; so far as the Accident by
the Subject, and the Subject by the Accident in a mutual Order come to be
perceptible. Here again some one will oppose me and urge, if Odor actually
exist only in Fumes, how comes the Fish in the Water to be sensible of Odors,
where there are no Fumes? I answer: 1. It may be questioned whether Fish are
sensible of Odors, and whether they approach or avoid things, that carry an
Odor, but are not rather lead by a grateful or unpleasing quality, perceived by
Savor, Sight or Feeling from other qualities diffused into the Water from
things that carry a Scent. 2. But grant they are sensible of Odors, there is no
doubt but that in the Water it self, some Fumes may be raised by a subtle
Ethereal matter, penetrating the Water some way or other, and by its Motion
causing a Heat in it: in which Fume Odorous qualities may be excited from Power
into Act, and so the Fish may be made sensible of Odor, if they are sensible of
Odors as they are Odors.

XX. There are several sorts and Difference of Odors.
differences of Odors, some are sharp, some sweet, some acid, some odoriferous,
others stinking, some grateful, others loathsome, and many Odors are applied to
the difference of Savors. Moreover Smells some are simple and natural, some by
nature are in the Bodies. Others are Compounded and Artificial, such as the
Perfumers make for Luxury and Delight: Others are preternatural which arise
from Corruption and Putrefaction.

XXI. The Organ of Smelling is the The Organ of Smelling
Nose. Which being constituted of many and various parts, which since they
cannot all officiate that particular function, it is a great question, in what
part of the Nose the Smelling faculty has it is seat.

That it is not in the Blood-conveighing or Lymphatic-Vessels, nor in the Bones
or Grisles is confessed by all.

XXII. Some are of Opinion, that Whether by the Nerves.
the Sense of Smelling proceeds from some certain Nerves peculiar and of
another Nature, inserted into the Nose, and some Specific Animal Spirits
flowing through those Nerves. But they did not observe, that all the Nerves of
the whole Body both in their Composition and Construction, hardly dif^er in any
thing else, but that some are bigger, others less; some longer, some shorter,
some thicker, some thinner, some softer and some harder, but that let them be
what they will, their Office is the same; as being the Passages through which
the Animal Spirits are conveyed. Moreover they did not consider that those
Spirits, carried through whatsoever Nerves, are no way different, but of the
same substance and nature, through whatsoever Nerves, and to whatsoever places
or parts they are conveyed. Lastly, They did not observe, that the diversity
of Operations, which are performed by their assistance, does not proceed from
the diversity of them, or the Nerves that conveigh them, but from the diversity
of the Parts into which they flow. Thus in the Eye they are the cause of sight,
in the Muscles of motion, in the Flesh they cause the sense of Feeling.
Therefore as they are the cause of Smelling in the Nostrils, there must be also
in the Nostrils some specific Parts, in which by the means of those Spirits,
not only the feeling, but the smell of sweet, stinking, rosy Camphory, is
perceived and distinguished.

XXIII. Formerly Galen, and after him Whether by the Papillary Process.
most Anatomists and Philosophers concluded that the Papillary Processes are
the true Odoratory Nerves, and the immediate Organs of Smelling. But we have
already refuted that Opinion Chap. 8. where we have shown that those Process
sare no Nerves, but Channels serving for the Evacuation of Excrements.
Vallesius also opposes and confutes this Opinion. But Sneider and Rolfinch,
finding no reason why the smelling Sense should lie in the Papillary Processes,
add to their assistance Nerves derived from the third Pair to the Nostrils. But
from what has been said it is apparent that the Sense of Smelling does not lie
in any particular Nerves, but in some certain specific Parts, into which the
Nerves infuse their Animal Spirits. Which cannot be the Papillary Processes,
which neither carry Spirits, nor admit those Nerves into their Body.

XXIV. Others were of opinion that Whether in the Membranes.
the Sense of Smelling lies in the Membrane over-spreading the Inner part of
the Nostrils, and ascribe to it a Specific Constitution above other Membranes,
by reason of which it distinguishes Odors. But in regard that Membranes are the
Organs of Feeling, not of Smelling, and that Feeling contributes to the
perfection of the Organ of Smelling, which being deprived of Feeling can never
smell, as the Eye deprived of Feeling can never See; and for that it is one
thing to feel, another thing to distinguish the Odor of Roses, Musk, Amber,
etc. another thing to feel rough, smooth, hard, hot, cold, etc. it is apparent
that a Membrane which is the Organ of Feeling can never be an adequate Organ of
Smelling. Nor is the Jugdment of some Persons to be valued, who say, that the
Membrane which over-spreads the Nostrils is of another Temper and Constitution
then the rest of the Membranes. For if this were true, which is first to be
proved, for then it might be endu'd with a more quick or dull Sense of Feeling,
nevertheless it could never distinguish or judge of Odors. Lastly if this were
the Smelling Membrane, being of the same common Substance with the Membrane of
the Palate, Mouth, Tongue, etc. why does it not preserve the same quality of
Smelling in those Parts, which they ascribe to it in the Nostrils? Casserius
thus describes the Specific Constitution of this Membrane. The inner
Superficies of the Nostrils is overspread with a Membrane rising from the Dura
Matter, much different from the Nature and Temper of the other Membranes. But
notwithstanding this Specific Constitution, he does not seat the Sense of
Smelling in it, but a faculty of judging more distinctly of the first
Qualities, heat, cold, and before they come to the Brain: for he says the Sense
of Smelling lies in the Mamillary Processes.

XXV. After all to add our own The true Organ of Smelling.
Opinion, we believe the true and immediate Organ of Smelling to be that thin
Teat-resembling-flesh, seated under the inner Tunicle of the Nostrils, to which
there is no other that is like it in the whole Body, besides that the ends of
the Odoratory Nerves enter the little Teats, of which it is composed, in the
manner as the immediate Organs of Taste are those little Duggs which are seated
under the Membrane of the Tongue; and the immoderate Organ of Sight is the
Net-like-Tunicle. Not that I believe the Objects of each are perceived in these
Organs, but that the motion or alteration induced into the particular Organs by
their own proper Objects, by means of the Nerves and Spirits are concerned in
the Brain and judged by the Mind.

XXVI. Aristotle makes the Medium The Medium of Smelling.
of Smelling to be the Air and Water, with whom most Philosophers agree. But
Casserius dissents, and endeavors to prove that Water cannot be the Medium of
Smelling, giving many reasons to uphold his Opinion. But if it be true that
Fish smell, as Aristotle affirms, without doubt Casserius's Opinion falls to
the Ground: but if that may be questioned, it may be also doubted whether Water
be the Medium of Smelling.

For though Odoriferous qualities may be infused into water, and so the water
be made Odoriferous, yet the Smell is not perceived but by means of the Air,
while the fumes of that Water being raised into the Air, strike the Odoratory
Organs by means of that Air. For if the scented Water should be drawn up into
the Nostrils, without the intervening Air, the scent of it would not be
perceived. Therefore it is plain that in Creatures that breath, the Air is the
Medium of Smelling, and that without that Medium no scent could be perceived.
Whether among Fish the Water be the like Medium, and whether Creatures that do
breath in Air be endu'd with Smell, we leave to Aristotle to prove.

Now the Sense of Smelling or the preception and distinguishing of Smells is
thus performed.

XXVII. The Air being inpregnated The manner of Smelling:
with Odors or a Spirituous exhalation of things that have a Scent, is received
by the Nose like a certain Chimney, but is not perceived by the Smell, unless
it be drawn toward the inner Parts by Inspiration. For without breathing in the
Air, scarce any Smell is perceived by the Nostrils, though the Odors themselves
be clapped near to the Nostrils. Therefore this motion of In-breathing is
requisite; as being that by which partly the Pores of the inner Membrane of the
Nostrils are opened; partly the odorous vapors and exhalations, according to
the more or less violent Motion, more easily passing through those Pores,
strike more forcibly upon those Teat-like pretuberances of the Dug-like flesh,
and alter them after some specific manner. According to which diversity of
alteration, being communicated to the common Sensory by the little fibers of
the Nerves of the third Pair inserted into them, the Species of the Smell is
formed, and distinguished by the Mind, and hence the stronger the in-breathing
is, the better the Scent is perceived. Which is the reason that they who would
take the pleasure of any grateful smell, snuff up the Air with more vehemence
into the Nostrils. And they that would avoid an ill smell, stop their Noses and
forbear breathing. Casserius endeavors to prove that respiration signifies
nothing to the Sense of Smelling; but because it is contrary to Experience, we
forbear to refute him, so much the rather, because that the Experiment of
Gualter Needham utterly overthrows his Opinion. For he cuting the rough Artery
of a Dog in the Throat turned the same outward, so that the wound being cured,
he could neither breath through the Mouth or Nostrils, but only through that
opening in the Throat: by which means the Dog could neither Bark nor Smell the
most nauseous Scents that were held to his Nose.

XXVIII. Hence it is apparent that Smelling is only in breathing Creatures.
no Creatures can smell that do not breath. Thomas Bauhinus supposes the
contrary: because they fly the smell of Brimstone, Gunpowder, etc. But he
never considered, that many Insects breath, though we cannot perceive it. And
such Animals avoid ungrateful Odors because offensive, and covet others because
delightful, as we see Flys and Wasps covet dead Carcases, and other small
Insects whose respiration is not perceptible, guided by their smell, swarm so
far and near to the Scent of Corruption. Moreover he did not observe that those
Insects that do not breath are likewise destitute of the Organs not only of
Respiration but of Smelling, without which smells can never be perceived: and
therefore they do not fly the smell for the smells sake, but by reason of some
offensive quality which burning Brimston, and other strong smells diffuse into
the Air, which corrode or otherwise torment the Bodies of those Animals.

Now why one smell is grateful, another Why a Scent is grateful or ungrateful.
displeasing, or why one smell is pleasing to one, and abominated by another;
see what we have written c. 24. following.

CHAP. XX. Of the Lips, Mouth, and the other Parts of the Face in general.
THE Parts of the Face expanded The Chee^s.
under the Eyes, between the Nose, Ears and Chin, by the ancients were called
Genae, (...), because Hair grows upon them. These Genae or Cheeks, are divided
into the upper and lower Part.

II. The upper Part under the Eyes The Apple of the face.
gently rising and ruddy between the Nose and the Ears is by Hyppocrates called
(...), the Circle of of the Face, and (...), or the Apple of the Face, in Latin
Malum or Pomum faciei, from the resemblance it has to Apples both for Color
and form. Hence Pliny calls it the Seat of Modesty, because People ashamed
generally blush in that Part.

III. The lower and broader, because The Bucca.
it swells upon retention of the Breath is called Bucca. In this Part when some
People laugh, there appears a Dimple, in others a large Furrow, which Martial
calls Gellasinum, or Laughter from the Greek word (...). The Cavity in the
Upper Lip, under the Partition of the Nostrils is called (...). But the rising
part on each side the Cavity is called (...), or the Mustachio's.

IV. The Brims of the Mouth are The Lips.
called Labra or Labia, the Lips. Some Grammarians distinguish Labra from
Labia, signifying by Labra Lips of moderate size, by Labia Lips of an
unreasonable bigness. But this is nothing at all to Anatomists.

V. There are two Lips, the clift Pro labiae.
between which closes up the Mouth. The extram prominent Parts of these are
called (...) or Prolabia, and the Ruddy parts where they close together, are
called (...). But the Part which under the lower Lip extends it self till it
end in a kind of blunt Point, is called Mentum or the Chin, and the Mentum or
the Chin.
sleshy Prominency below the Chin, by the Ancients was called Buccula, by Us
the Double Chin. The Hairs first appearing about this place is called Lan^go,
by Us Down; in Persons of more Maturity Barba, or the Beard.

VI. The Lips consists of a soft and The Substance of the Lips.
spungy Substance, where the Skin is so exactly mixed with Muscles, that it may
be thought to be either a Muscly-Skin, or a skinny-Muscle. Now this Flesh is
outwardly covered by that same Skin, inwardly by the Membrane continuous to the
Mouth, Gullet and Ventricle.

VII. The Branchings forth of the The Vessels.
Nerves contribute an exquisite Sense of Feeling to the Lips. And the Arteries
dispersed from the Neighboring Places between the Skin and the fleshy
Membrane, afford the nutritive Blood, to which the Lips are beholding for their
splendid and rosy Color, the certain sign of Beauty and Health, with the
Arteries are intermixed little Veins, conveighing the superfluous Blood to the
next Veins.

VIII. Lips were given to Men, as The Use.
well for the Convenience of Eating and Drinking, as for the Formation of the
Voice, the Retention of Spittle, the Closing of the Mouth, and defending it
from External Injuries, as also for Ornaments Sake; for which reason, in Men
they are covered with a Beard. And because there was a necessity, that for the
Performance of the said Offices they should be endued with a voluntary Motion,
therefore they are also furnished with several Muscles, of which, more in the
next Chapter.

IX. The Mouth, by the Greeks The Mouth
called (...), is sometimes taken only for that same Cleft between the Lips,
sometimes for the whole Cavity, conspicuous as far as the Chaps.

It is placed in an upper Region, that is in the middle of the Face under the
Nose, to the end that whatever it receives, may not only be distinguished by
the Taste, but by the Smell, and what is swallowed may more easily descend into
the Stomach.

The Parts of it some constitute the Mouth it self, others are contained in the
Cavity of it.

The Mouth it self consists partly of bony Parts, as the lower and upper Jaw,
together with the Teeth; partly, of the fleshy Parts, as the Lips, the Muscles
of the Lips, Cheeks, and lower Jaw.

The whole inner Concavity of the Mouth is overspread with a Tunicle; which in
the Hollowness within the Teeth is thicker, and full of Wrinkles in the Palate;
without the Teeth, in the Gums and Lips much thinner, and it is continuous to
the Tunicle of the Throat and Ventricle, though in the Tongue and Palate, the
Constitution of it is peculiar and different from other Tunicles.

X. The primary Use of it is, that The Use.
the Nourishment being received into it, as into a Funnel, may be there chewed
and prepared, so as to descend without interruption through the Gullet into the
Stomach, there to be the more easily digested.

The secundary Use of it is to afford a Passage in Respiration to the Air
passing to the Lungs, and Evacuation of the Excrements of the Head, Lungs and
Stomach, by hawking, spitting and vomiting; also to assist the Sound of the
Voice.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Muscles of the Cheeks, Lips and lower Iaw.
THE Muscles of the Cheeks and Lips, are either common to both Parts, or proper
only to the Lips.

I. The Common Muscles are four, Common Muscles.
two of each side; the first lying hid under the Skin of the Neck, from the
Shape is called the Square Muscle, being thin and membranous, sticking very
close to the Skin, so that the Ancients never distinguished it from the Skin.
Thus also Vestingius calls it the Membrane lying under the Fat, and here
furnished with a Contexture of fleshy Fibers.

It rises with a broad beginning about The square Muscle.
the Clavicles, Shoulders, and hinder part of the Neck, and with oblique
Fibers, is inserted into the Chin, Lips and Root of the Nose, which Parts it
obliquely draws downward, and because it most coheres with the Chin, therefore
it is thought to contribute much to the opening of the Mouth. Sometimes it
proceeds to the Root of the Ear, and where such an Insertion happens, those
Persons can move their Ears by the Benefit of this Muscle.

It receives several Branches of Nerves from the Nerves of the Neck. Therefore
upon the Convulsion and Tension of this Nerve, the Cynic Cramp is occasioned,
which Riolanus rather attributes to the Convulsion of the Buccinator.

The Fibers of it ought to be exactly known to all Chyrurgeons, as Bauhinus
rightly admonishes; because of Incisions frequently required to be made in
those Parts, for some, ignorant of the course of these Fibers, and dividing
them with a large transverse Section, have drawn the Chaps sometimes one way,
sometimes another.

II. The second Muscle that constitutes The Buccinator.
the Chap, and is therefore called the Buccinator, lies under the foresaid
Square Muscle, and takes up the whole Seat of the Chaps. This is round like a
Circle, and rising almost from the whole length of the upper Jaw, is inserted
into the Length of the lower Jaw at the Root of the Gums; or rather circulates
from the upper Gums of one Jaw, into the upper Gums of the other. For it is
thin and Membranous, interwoven with various Fibers, so closely growing to the
Tunicle, that overspreads the inner Parts of the Mouth, that it cannot be
separated from it without tearing.

The use of this Muscle is not only to move the Chaps with the Lips, but to
streighten them, and to force again to the Teeth, the Meat oftentimes sliping
from the Mouth into the Cheeks, for the more exact chewing of it, as also to
cause Inflation, as the Chaps by their Constriction send forth with more or
less force, the Air flowing from the Lungs, through the Lips more or less open.
The Variety of all which Motitions toward the lower, upper, outer or inner
Parts, proceeds from the manifold Variety of the Fibers, wherewith it is
interwoven.

In the Center of this Muscle, is to be found a strong Ligament, as Placentius
reports, which growing outward, and creeping through the Mouth of the Gums,
ends in a small slender Muscle, directly opposite to the Chap, which Ligament
however Riolanus will not allow of.

III. Of Muscles proper only to the Muscles proper to the Lips.
Lips, there are five Pair, and one orbicular Muscle.

The First Pair, rising with a broad and fleshie Original from the upper Jaw,
where it causes the Cavity of the Cheeks, and furnished with several Fibers, is
carried obliquely downward to the foremost Parts, and inserted on both sides
into the side of the upper Lip, and moves it upward and outward. The Second
Pair, rising with a fleshie, but slender and thin Original, and wrapped about
with much Fat, is inserted into the Bridle, where the Lips meet, and assist the
Motion of the Former. The Third Pair, by Riolanus called the Zugomatic, fleshie
and round, rising outward from the Jugal Process, and obliquely descending
along the Cheeks, terminates in the Confines of both Cheeks, which it draws
away to the Sides upwards. The Fourth Pair, arising with a fleshie and broad
Original from the lower part of the lower Jaw, at the Sides of the Chin, is
inserted into the middle of the lower Lip, and moves it downward and outward.
The Fifth Pair, rising with a fleshy and broad beginning from the sides of the
lower Jaw in a lower place, and sometimes extended to the middle of the Chin,
proceeds upward, and narrowing himself by degrees, is obliquely inserted into
the lower Lip near the end, and draws it obliquely downward and outward.
The Orbicular Muscle, called also the Constrictor, which is common to both
Lips, is that which constitutes the proper Figure and soft Substance of the
Lips, and forms both Lips in the Circuit of the Mouth, and encompassing the
whole Mouth like a Sphincter, and drawing the Lips mutually to its self, purses
up the Mouth with orbicular Fibers, and sticks close to the Cherry Flesh. Now
all the Muscles of the Lips are intermixed alike, with Fibers cutting
themselves like a St. Andrews Cross; whence proceeds various and sundry Motions
of the Lips.

IV. The Muscles of the lower Iaw, The Muscles of the lower Iaw.
for the other is immovable, causing a strong Motion in the chewing of Food,
are called Masticatory, Molary or Grinders, and Mansory or Eaters; of which
there are reckoned five Pair.

V. The First Pair, being the strongest The Temple Muscle.
and bigest, are called Crotaphytes or Temple Muscle; rising with a fleshy
beginning, about the Bone of the hinder part of the Head and Temples, is
covered with the Pericranium. The Fibers of this, the farther they remove from
the Middle, the more obliquely they are carried toward their Tendon; and hence
the more it descends, the narrower and thicker it is; and at length embraces
the acute Process of the lower Jaw with a short and strong Tendon, and strongly
elevates it together with the Jaw. It receives three Nerves of each side, one
from the Third, another from the Fourth, and a third from the Fifth Pair; by
reason of which, this Muscle being bruised or wounded, great danger of
Convulsion and Death ensues, especially if the Wound happen about the lower or
nervous part.

VI. The Second, called the Digastric, The Digastric.
or double Bellied, because that being hollowed in the Middle, it seems to have
two Bellies, rises near the Mammy-form Process, and about the middle where it
is bowed correspondent to the winding of the lower Jaw, it is narrowed into a
tendonous Body; and thence becoming fleshy again, it is fastened more withinside
to the fore and middle part of the Chin, and by drawing the Jaw downward, opens
the Mouth; the too extraordinary falling of which Jaw, is also prevented by the
Ligament annexed.

VII. The Third Pair, which is lateral, The First Mansory.
called the First Mansory, or Eating Pair, and proceeding partly with a fleshy,
partly with a nervous Original, from the upper Jaw, and the Jugal Bone is
joined with a broad and strong Connection to the lower Jaw, and through the
Diversity of the Fibers, moves it forward, backward and sideways, and as it
were, turns it round.

VIII. The Fourth Pair, called the The second Mansory.
other Mansory and Pterygoides, or Wing-like, and the Internal Wing-like, which
is thick and short, is produced nervous from the inner Wing-like Processes of
the Sphoenoides Bone, and becoming fleshy, large and thicker, is carried with a
broad and strong Tendon to the lower and hinder part of the inner side of the
lower Jaw, which by drawing upward, assists the Action of the Temple-Muscle;
also it brings the Jaw backward when turned outward.

IX. The Fifth Pair, Pterygoides, or The external Winglike.
External Wing-like, and seated in the lower Cavity of the Bones of the
Temples, proceeds with a double Original, partly nervous, partly fleshy from
the Sphoenoides and external Wing-like Process, and after a short Course is
inserted into the Neck of the lower Jaw, and the inner Seat of its Head, and
moves and brings the Face forward.

Besides the foresaid Muscles, the Pair of square Muscles is properly referred
to the Muscles of the lower Jaw, drawing the Jaw downward, which we have
already described among the Muscles common to the Chaps and Lips.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Gums, Palate, Uvula and Chaps.
I. THE Parts contained in the The Gums.
Hollow of the Mouth are various, among which, first occur two Gums, consisting
of a sort of Flesh somewhat hard and immovable, encompassing the Teeth like a
Breastwork, and fixing them in their like Trenches. Hence the Gum is called by
the Greeks (...) from (...), to include or involve, as being that which wraps
up and enfolds the Teeth. Hence also a Swelling in the Gums is by the
Physicians called (...).

II. The Palate, which is as it The Palate
were fortified with Teeth, by the Greeks called (...) and (...), as it were
the Heaven of the Mouth, is the upper part of the Mouth, slightly concave like
an Arch, hence called Testudo Oris, or the Tortois-shell of the Mouth, formed
in the Sphoenoides- Bone, and extended from the Chaps to the Teeth. It consists
of Bones and a peculiar glandulous Flesh, or of small Kernels conglomerated
together, and a thick Tunicle, furnished with many small diminutive Holes,
sending forth the Spitly Liquor from the Glandulous Substance of the Palate, in
some places full of wrinkles, continuous with the Tunicle that covers the other
parts of the Mouth, whence it is vulgarly said to be common to the Throat and
Ventricle, though it has a peculiar Constitution different from other Tunicles,
in respect of which, it perfects the Sense of Taste, together with the Tongue,
and to that purpose is furnished with Nerves from the fourth Pair.

The use of the Palate is to perfect Its Use:
the Sense of Tasting, with the Assistance of the Tongue; as also to break the
Voice and render it more perfect; whence it comes to pass, that those People
who have this part eaten away by some unhappy Ulcer, taste but imperfectly, and
speak with a hoarse and ungrateful Voice.

III. The Uvula, by others called The Uvula
Uva, Gurgulio, Columna, Columella, and Gargareon, is a little ruddy piece of
Flesh, spungy, somewhat long, broad above, and obtusely acute below, hanging
forward like a Grape from the middle of the Palate near the Passages of the
Nostrils into the Mouth. This Bauhinus and some other Anatomists think to be
nothing else but the twice doubled Membrane, covering the inner Parts of the
Mouth.

It is overspread with a very soft and loose little Skin, and swells and grows
longer upon Flegmatic Defluxions, which Distemper is called the Falling of the
Uvula.

To this Riolanus and Veslingius attribute two Pairs of Muscles, the Internal
and External, by which it hangs, and obtains a slight Motion. But that their
Opinion is only conjecture; the Sight it self informs us, it being a most
difficult thing to show any such Muscle in that Part; and for that the Uvula
does not want them to hang by, nor for voluntary Motion, which is never
observed in that Part.

Moreover Riolanus following Aretaeus ascribes to the Uvula two broad
Ligaments, not unlike the expanded Wings of Bats, called by the Arabians
Galsamach. But these, like the foresaid Muscles, are proved rather by
conjecture than demonstration, unless they take the hinder membranous part of
the Palate, from whence the Uvula hangs for Ligaments.

IV. The use of it is manifold. Its Use.


1. To break in some measure the force of the cold Air breathed in, from
rushing in too suddenly upon the Lungs, to their great damage. 2. To prevent,
least the Humors descending through the upper Parts of the Palate, should fall
directly in too great a quantity into the Larynx; but that only when the Uvula
is forced back by swallowing, that then they should be turned toward the Gullet
and fall into it. 3. To hinder the Drink from running back into the Nostrils.
4. It contributes also something to the Tone of the Voice, though Fallopius and
others deny it: For though the Modulation of the Voice be ordered in the
Larynx, yet the wider or narrower Exit of that modulated Voice, contributes
very much to the Tone of it. Which is apparent from hence, that if a Man sing
with his Spectacles upon his Nose, the Voice will be another thing, then when
he sings with Nostrils open. So also if the Uvula by missing the Voice grows
harsh and ungrateful, as is apparent in such as have had their Uvulas eaten
away by Ulcers. 5. Fallopius believes the primary use of it is to moisten the
Epiglottis and the Larynx, by distilling upon them some certain lympid Liquor.
V. The Chaps are improperly taken The (...).
for the whole Gaping of the Mouth; properly they denote the hinder most and
lower space, where the Extremities of the Tongue and rough Artery, and the
Holes of the Nostrils descending through the hinder Parts of the Palate, meet
together, which is conspicuous upon opening the Mouth and depressing the
Tongue, and by the Greeks is called (...), by Galen also (...), and by
Hippocrates, (...), by a Metaphor from the Narrowness; because an Isthmus
properly signifies a narrow Tract of Land between two Seas: and so the Uvula in
the Chaps, like a Neck of Land hangs in the middle gaping of the Chaps; however
they do not call the Uvula the Isthmus, but the gaping of the Chaps it self;
whereas the Name ought to belong to the Uvula.

Nicholas Stenonis has observed in a Calves Head under the Tunicle, a little
piece of Flesh composed of glandulous Bunches, full of L^mphatic Vessels.

VI. The use of the Chaps, is to The Use.
transmit and swallow those things which are taken in at the Mouth, which is
performed oy three Pair of Muscles, common to the Pharynx with the Gullet, and
described in the Description of the Gullet,

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Hyoides-Bone.
BEfore we enter upon the Description of the Tongue, we are to say something of
the Hyoides-Bone, which is laid under it as a Prop, for the firmer Structure of
the Tongue, and to facilitate its Motion.

I. The Hyoides-Bone consists of The Hyoides-Bone.
several Bones, which being joined together, resemble the Greek Letter V. or A.
and hence also is called the Upsiloides, or the Lambdoides, though it be more
like an Upsilon than a Lambda, in regard it is not carried about with an acute,
but an obtuse and somewhat round Semicircle.

It consista chiefly of three Bones, very ^eldom of Five, Seven, Nine or
Eleven, of which, the middlemost exceeding the rest in bigness, large, broad,
withoutside gibbous, withinside somewhat hollowed, to which the other two are
joined like Horns. But if it consist of more then three Bones, those are
Gristly.

Riolanus has these Observations touching the Hyoides-Bone. But the
Hyoides-Bone, says he, in Women appears more slender and thin, and consists of
fewer Bones, whose room the Suspensory Productory Ligaments supply. Then you
shall observe that only the Epiglottis is received into the Cavity of the
Hyoides, and that the Tongue rests upon the upper side of the Basis.

To these little Bones are joined four small Gristles, which prove sometimes
bony themselves. Two of these join to the Basis of the middle Bone, resembling
both in form and bigness a Grain of Wheat. Two others are placed near the side
Bones or Horns, and are fastened with a nervous Ligament to the Pen-resembling
Appendix. And so the Hyoides, upon the sides, adheres to that Appendix, on the
forepart to the Target-form'd Gristle of the Larynx, but chiefly to the Tongue,
and receives the Epiglottis into its Cavity.

II. When the Tongue moves, this Muscles.
Bone also moves, and that by the assistance of eight Muscles, which it has in
common with the Tongue.

The first Pair called Sternothyoides, moves it downward and backward, and
rises with a round and fleshy Original from the upper inner Seat of the Bone of
the Sternum, and forward ends in the Basis of the Hyoides. The second Pair
called the long Coracohyoides by the Ancients, rises from the upper side of the
Shoulder, near the Coracoides Process, and in the midst of its Body grown
slender like a Tendon, is carried along obliquely under the seventh Muscle of
the Head, to the sides of the Hyoides, and draws them obliquely downward. The
third Pair slender and round, seated under the Chin, proceeds from the extreme
Process of the Styliform, with a round Belly, therefore called Styloceratoides,
and being inserted into the Horns of the Hyoides, moves obliquely upward. The
fourth Pair called Geniohyoides, drawing directly upward, and somewhat forward,
arising with a large and fleshy Original from the inner and lower Seat of the
Chin, extends it self to the middlemost Seat of the Hyoides. To these Pairs
Fallopius adds two more; viz. A fifth which rising with straight Fibers from
the middle and inner part of the Chin, is inserted into the Hyoides. This Pair
many confound with the preceding fourth, and look upon it to be the same; but
others number it among the Muscles of the Tongue. The Sixth, which he says
constitutes two little pieces of Flesh, bearing the Resemblance of Muscles,
which rising from the same Chin, seem to be some part of them intermixed with
the first that moves the Tongue; but proceeding farther to the lower Parts, are
inserted into the sides of the Hyoides, and draw that Bone to the Chin.
CHAP. XXIV. Of the Tongue, the Salival Channels, the Spittle, Taste and Savor.
See Table XVI.

THE Tongue, by the Greeks called (...) or (...), by the Latins Lingua, is an
Organic Part, the Instrument both of Taste and Speech, and the assistant for the
swallowing of Meat and drink, seated in the Mouth under the Palate.

I. It is oblong, broad, of a Moderate The Shape.
bigness answerable to the Mouth, and toward the Root of a remarkable
thickness, but somewhat thinner toward the Lip.

II. The Substance of it is peculiar to Its Substance.
its self, fleshy and soft covered with a double Membrane; the one outermost
and thick, the other innermost and thin.

III. The Exterior Membrane that The Exterior Membrane.
overspreads the upper Surface of the Tongue, very porous, and in Men
moderately smooth, but in most Brutes, especially fourfooted Beasts, very
rough, and in the Superficies, divided as it were into two Parts, with a small
running along in the middle all the length of it.

This Membrane is thought to proceed from the thick Meninx, and is said to be
common, to the Mouth, the Palate, the Gullet and the Larynx. But in regard it
does not overspread the whole Tongue every way, but only extends it self along
the Superficies, as far as the Root and Jaws, and does not reach either to the
lower part of the Tongue, nor to the Gullet, but is only united to the inner
Tunicle, and that it is apparent that it is a thicker Substance of another
nature in the Tongue and the Palate; it is clearly evident, that it has no
community with the Membrane of the Gullet and Larynx. For though it has not
that thickness and roughness in Men, which is seen in Brutes, however it is
thicker, and differs much from that which enfolds the Larinx and Gullet
withinside, which difference is apparent, for then when it is dried up in
burning Fevers and other Distempers, or by excess of Drought, and afterward
comes to be moistened again, it is separated and falls off three times thicker
then the Membranes of the Larynx and Gullet. Moreover, as the Tunicles of the
Eyes, Ears and Nostrils differ very much from other Membranes, nay, from one
another, though we believe they proceed from the Menix's; so this Tunicle of
the Tongue, together with the Tongue and nervous little Paps, being to
contribute some Service to the Organ of Taste, ought of necessity to have some
Constitution beyond other Membranes, in respect of which it may be enabled to
contribute some specific Service to the Taste. Neither is it that we think the
specific Service here required is due to any specific Nerves, or specific
Spirits, in regard we have already proved that there is nothing of Specific
performed in the Parts upon that ground.

This Membrane is very Porous, and such it ought to be, to the end it may be
able to send through the said Pores in some part of it, to the nervous little
Paps that lie under it, those things which being to be tasted are laid upon it,
and stirred by the Motion of the Tongue. The Taste of which things, by reason of
its obtuse Sense of Feeling, least it should be injured by sharp and
acrimonious Gustables and Tactibles, it does not of it self so quickly perceive.

The very same Membrane in Cows, Sheep, and other such like Brutes, much
thicker than in Men, is rough in the upper Region; out of which grow forth
several little sharp pointed Bodies somewhat grisly, of an unequal length,
disposed in a kind of order, moderately bowed, and extended toward the Root,
covered with a slender Tunicle taken from the Membrane from whence they
proceed, which cause that Roughness. Which little Bodies, however in the more
rising part of the Tongue toward the Root, are much fewer, much less, and in
some none at all to be seen. Such little Bodies of so large a bigness are not
to be found in the Tongues of Men, which is the reason they are not so rough.
Yet in the Year 1660. upon the Dissection of one, who in his Lifetime had been
a Captain of High-way-Men, I found that Roughness very observable. For the
upper Superficies of his Tongue, was as it were stuck with little Strings, that
looked like a kind of Down. Now the reason why in Brutes these Grisly Bodies
are longer and much bigger than in Men, and why they stand with their Points
toward the Chaps, seems to be, because the Nourishment which they take with
their Heads down upon the Earth, may be the more easily retained, and not
easily slip out of their Mouths, while Man that stands upright, may without
trouble hold his Food in his Mouth; and therefore a moderate roughness is
sufficient for the retention of his Food.

IV. But the foresaid use of these The se^undary Use.
small Grisly bodies, it seems to be only the Secundary use, as that which does
not require so large a furniture of little Bodies; but what is the primary use
is much disputed among the Learned. For in regard they are not hollow like
Straws, which could never be discovered by any Microscope, they cannot
discharge either Spittle or any other humor either into the Tongue or the
exterior Parts of the Tongue, as some have imagined, the most acute Malpigius
believes that these Bodies, by the motion of the Tongue, make a certain
Compression upon the Kernels in the Palate observed by Stenonis, and that so
Spittle and Slime is squeezed out of them, to moisten the Tongue and the Mouth;
and therefore that Nature has given to Brutes that feed upon hard and raw food,
not only a thicker covering of the Palate, but has also ordered these grisly
bodies growing in the Tongue to be harder and longer, that by continual rubbing
the upper Parts they may more strenuously squeeze out the moisture; but in men
has made the same Bodies more lank and flexible, where the Structure of the
Palate is more loose and soft, and therefore requiring a slighter Compression
to squeeze and force out the Moisture. Moreover, he thinks it may be
questioned, and that not without reason, whether the glutinous roots of these
Bodies, lying under a thick covering, which are to be inserted in the holes
already mentioned, while standing there side ways they force the little Paps,
do not cause a Compression of the humid Body inward, to the end the vellication
and motion may be more violent.

V. Under the said thick Membrane The glutinous substance.
a certain glutinous substance shows it self, like a thick Net chiefly extended
through the upper part of the Tongue, full of conspicuous holes, among which
innumerable little Passages of various Figures, gaping toward the outer Parts
are discovered with a Microscope. Which holes answer to singular grisly horns,
resting upon the said Exterior Membrane. Malpigius also has observed the traces
of the same glutinous Substance in the Palate and lower Cheeks. Some have
imagined that the Sense of Tasting lies in this glutinous substance; as the
Sight in the Net-like-Tunicle; others that a certain Spitly moisture is
collected in it, and sent forth through the Pores of the thick covering, into
the Tongue to moisten it. For my Part I believe it conduces to receive the
Savoury Moisture, and to retain it for the same time, that it may stick the
closer to the little Paps, and more conveniently alter them by their Asperity,
to the end they may be the better distinguished.

VI. Next to the said Glutinous The Paplike-Body.
substance, lying hid under the covering of the Tongue, a certain Body appears,
which Laurentius Bellinus has called the Fleshy crust, but has given it no
peculiar Name, for that it has no similitude either to a Membrane, or a Muscle,
or a Nerve, or a Kernel, either in color, structure, or substance. This Body,
as it appears in a Cows Tongue, Malpigius has accurately described.

After due examination, says he, of this glutinous substance, there appears a
Nervous Pap-like Body, yellowish and whitish, running chie^ly along the whole
Portion of the upper superficies, like a Membrane, and of a considerable
height. In this inner superficies, where it is fastened to the Flesh under the
Tongue, it seems smooth and equal, besides certain Nervous connexious strewn
between the Fleshy fibers of the Tongue, to which it grows; in the outer part
it is unequal, for it bunches forth with Nervous little Paps disposed in
wonderful Order. These in a Cow, a Goat and a Sheep, and also in Men, as to
shape and bigness differ three manner of ways; some are bigger, chie^ly seated
at the sides of the top of the Tongue between those that are below: in the
superficies of the upper part of the Tongue, they are disposed in a Square: In
the upper Region where the Tongue looks white, they are observed to be very
few: in the sides of the Basis there are some and more remarkable. These in
Substance and Shape seem to resemble the Horns which Snails thrust out and pull
in. Only they have a higher Body, which having past the Slimy Substance,
terminate in a round little head which is placed in a certain Cavity of the
exterior Membrane where it grows thin. They take their rise from a nervous and
Pap-like Body, observing the same Continuity, the same accidents, and manner of
Substance in both: only this they have peculiar to themselves, that in the
basis, there is a Nervous shooting forth, to which they grow. Next to these
succeed more numerous little Paps of another Order; for as many horns as cover
the Tongue without side, so many Nervous little Paps of this sort are to be
found within side. These arising from the common Papillary Body, raise
themselves to a moderate height, and send forth farther Nervous out-lets from
the extreme part of the head; which enter the Cavities cut out for them, and
meet the roots of the horns: round about these innumerable Paps are to be
discerned, rising from the same place, and of the same height, but more
slender, and resembling the shape of a Cone, entering their proper Cavities,
formed in the mucous substance already prepared, and terminating at length
toward the outermost Membrane. About the root of the Basis, the Nervous little
Paps bunching forth where the horns are seated, alter their shape, and being
more obtuse, by and by more round and flat, the most remarkable of which are
not much unlike those which are observed at the root of the Teeth withinside of
the Cheeks. You must understand however, that the same Papillary Body, and both
the Coverings underneath, though very slender, are to be formed in the Palate,
and inside of the Cheeks; with this difference that in these places the little
Dugs bunch forth langer, and resembling a Conic figure: Near which are observed
Spittle-evacuating Vessels inserted into the Kernels underneath, between which
are scattered very small and Nervous little Duggs.

VII. Thus far Malpigius, who concluding writes, that the Original of this
Teat-like Body is very uncertain. Columbus believes that it comes from the hard
Meninx, after it has passed the Scull, together with the rest of the Membranes
of the inner part of the Mouth: But Malpigius conjectures that it takes it is
source from the Nervous shootings forth, dilated into the Membrane, as it
happens in other Sensory Organs.

The Substance of the Tongue, especially Fibers.
in Men is full of slender fibers; so that because of their slenderness some
ignorant Anatomists have imagined that the Tongue has no fibers at all. In the
Tongues of Cows, Sheep and many other Bruits of the larger size, these fibers
are very conspicuous; which we have also seen in the Tongues of Men, as well
raw as boiled. Toward the root of the Tongue these fibers are interlarded with
something of Fat; and in the sides of the Basis, Malpigius has observed small
Kernels like Millet-seed to be intermixed with them.

These fibers are intermixed one among another after so various and obscure a
manner, that it is a difficult thing to demonstrate their order in situation.
Riolanus observing them so contrary one to another and so variously interwoven;
nevertheless these two Bodies, says he, seem to be furnished with oblique,
transverse and straight fibers, which are so mingled one among another, that it
is impossible to find out what sort of fibers they are.

But what Riolanus could not find out Stenonis believes he has attained. Front
the Top to the Basis, we may, says he, distinctly demonstrate the whole Order
of the Fibers, if heed be taken. The outermost fibers, next the upper
Superficies, observe a direct course of the Fibers all the length of the
Tongue: of the rest that are in the middle of the Body, there are only two
sorts. One descending from the upper superficies of the Tongue: another in men
run back from the middle toward the sides. These two sorts are disposed into
two Orders, receiving each other alternately: of which two Orders one scarce
amounts to the thickness of one Fiber.

Thus far Stenonis: but for my part, to confess the truth, I have long Studied
these Fibers, but impatient of the Labor I'gave it over.

VIII. But because the Tongue is The Motion of the Tongue.
interwoven with these innumerable Fibers, and is furnished with various
Muscles, there arises a question, by what manner of motion the Tongue, whether
by its own Fibers, or Muscles or by both. The last Opinion pleases most
Anatomists. Casserius calls the Tongue not a Muscle, but a Musculous part. It
cannot be says he, but that the Tongue must move by its own proper motion, and
that voluntary too, for it is moved after so many manners, and so many parts,
that to assert its whole motion to be performed by Muscles alone is very
ridiculous. Therefore I do not call it a Muscle, but a Musculous flesh, as
participating something of the nature of Flesh, and being between a Muscle and
a glandulous Flesh.

Laurentius Bellinus, considering its wonderful variety and rapidness of
Motion, says that it is a Contexture of Muscles meeting together, besides
Fibers. Riolanus following the Opinion of Averrhois, besides the Motion by
Muscles, ascribes to it another proper Motion, and reproves Andreas Laurentius,
for not observing it. For that the Tongue in swift and continual Speech is
moved of it self, and that the Motion of the extremity so extremely swift is
not caused by the Muscles, after so many varieties, but only that the Muscles
make the Motion more violent. Spigelius observing such a vast number of Fibers
absolutely pronounces it to be a Muscle. But not one of these famous Men seems
to have observed, that so many several, variously overlay'd one upon another,
and interwoven Fibers, with so many contrary courses can supply the action of
the Muscles, which is attraction seeing that the drawing of one Fiber, would be
hindered by the operation of the other; nor that in such a contrariety of
oppositions and impositions, there can be any, that can do the Tongue the
service of a Muscle. Since therefore Fibers only do not show any part to be a
Muscle, for that the Stomach, Guts, Urine and Gall-bladders are furnished with
all sorts of Fibers conspicuous and numerous, yet are not to be accounted among
the number of Fibers. The swiftness and variety of motion does not prove the
Tongue to be a Muscle, but rather to be rapidly moved by Muscles, which appears
from hence, because the motion is voluntary. Which sort of motion is only
performed by the Muscles, in that part which is no Muscle of it self. We move
the extremity of the Tongue at pleasure, but it is by the help of Muscles,
whose Tendons send out their little Fibers to that part. Nor does the swiftness
of Motion prove any thing for the contrary Party; forwe may move our Fingers as
swift as our Tongue, and yet no man will question the motion of the Fingers by
Muscles. 1. No Muscle is made for it self, but for another part of it self
immovable, but if the Tongue were a Muscle, it ought to be made for it self,
seeing it is inserted into no Body to move it. 2. No Muscle is inserted into
another Muscle to move it, but other Muscles are inserted into the Tongue,
therefore it cannot be a Muscle.

IX. Arantius will needs have the No Kernel.
Tongue to be a Kernel, but his proofs are not worth refuting. However Riolanus
seems in some measure to agree with him, taking it from Galen, who says that
the Nature of the Tongue is glandalous, and almost of the same temper. But in
regard the shape, temper and use of the Tongue has nothing in common with a
Kernel, this Opinion is so rejected

X. The hinder Part of the Tongue The Connection.
is joined to the Hyodes, the Larynx, the Chaps, the Tonsile and the Top of the
Gullet, the fore Part being free from all Connection. In the lower Superficies
it has Muscles fastened to it by means of which it is tied to the lower Jaw.
And least it should move beyond it is bounds, it is joined to the Parts
underneath it with a strong Ligament. The extremity of this Ligament, being
somewhat loose, is called Frenulum or the Little Bridle; the over shortness
whereof hinders the free and convenient motion of the Tongue, especially in
Infants. For which reason the Physicians are forced to order the cutting of it
betimes; which Section though it be easy, yet great care is to be taken of
cutting the adjoining Nerves that lie under the Tongue, which may cause a
sudden Convulsion of the Tongue.

XI. It Entertains two large Arteries Its Vessels.
from the Carotides, and sends forth two Veins to the inner Branch of the
external Iugulars, called the Frog Veins, remarkably conspicuous under the
Tongue, from whence we often take away Blood in Distempers of the Chaps.

XII. It admits two Pairs of Nerves.
Nerves. Of which the thinnest that proceeds from the fourth Pair, is carried
along quite through the Substance of the Tongue, and thrusts its extremities
into the Nervous little Dugs, affording also some little branches to the
Nerves, pouring forth Spirits to perfect the Sense of Tasting. The others,
which is thicker, proceeding from the Seventh Pair, enters the Muscles of it,
and by means of the Animal spirits gives it the faculty of Motion.

Note here, that besides that the Tongue is divided into the right and left
side, by a Line running through the middle of it, none of these Vessels are
carried from the right to the left, nor from the left to the right side of the
Tongue. Whence Galen pronounces this Instrument to be twofold like the Organs
of Sense and Hearing. This Duplicity of the Tongue is chiefly conspicuous in
Serpents, Vipers, Lizards, Sea-Calves, and other such little Creatures, whose
Tongues seem to be divided into two or three Parts, therefore called sometimes
double, sometimes treble Tongued.

XIII. Upon the hinder part of The Epigloits.
the Tongue, rests the Epiglottis Grisle, otherwise called Lingula or the
little Tongue. vid. l. 2. cap. 15.

XIV. At the Root of the Tongue The Tonsils.
appear two small Kernels called Tonsillae of which, vid. l. 2. cap. 15. Also a
piece of Flesh consisting of several small Kernels and Fat, seated under the
Chin and Tongue, between the Hyoides and the Muscles of the Tongue; a
glandulous piece of Flesh like which takes up the whole Region of the inside of
the Cheeks; which small Kernels or Kernelly-pieces of Flesh gather together the
Spittly Humor to moisten the Tongue and Mouth, and discharge it as well through
the Lymphatic or Salival Vessels, as through the small Holes of the thicker
Membrane of the Mouth, especially when the Mouth and Tongue move. And therefore
when the Nourishment is chewed in the Mouth, the Liquor pressed out of these
small Kernels by the masticated food partly of its own accord flows in greater
quantity into the Mouth, to be mixed with the Nourishment toward Fermentaceous
preparation, and to render the swallowing more easy. But in time of sleep when
the Mouth does not move, it ceases: which is the reason that they who sleep
with their Mouths open are generally a dry for want of this Liquor.

XV. The Tongue is moved every Its Muscles.
way, partly by the assistance of those Muscles, which it has in common with
the Hyoides; partly by Five proper Pairs of Muscles.

The first by the Ancients called Styloglossum, from it is Pen-resembling
Appendix, arising with a narrow and tendinous Original, is inserted about the
middle into both sides of the Tongue, and both raises it and carries it inward.
But about the Root of the Tongue it so intermixes its Fibers with the Fibers of
the Muscles, moving the Tongue downward, that you would think the Pair to be
united with them. This Pair in Men is slender, but in Cows double, fleshy and
thick.

The Second Pair called Basioglossum, and Upsitoglossum proceeding from the
Basis of the Hyoides ends in the middle of the Tongue, and depresses it by
drawing it in a straight Line inward.

XVI. The Third Pair which is called Genioglossum.
Genioglossum, rises in the inner seat, about the middle of the Chin, and being
inserted into the lower part of the middle of the Tongue, thrusts it forth.
This, as also the preceding Pair has several little Lines in it, as if they
were several small Muscles. Veslingius reckons this Pair among the Muscles of
the Hyoides, and asserts them to be inserted into the Basis of that Bone.

XVII. The Fourth Pair rising from Ceratoglossum.
the Horns of the Hyoides, and thence called Ceratoglossum, is inserted into
the sides of the Tongue, where it mixes its Fibers, with the Fibers of the
First Pair, and moves the Tongue if both act together, directly downward toward
the inner Parts: but only one or the other act at a time, it moves the Tongue
to the right or left side.

XVIII. The First Pair called Myloglossum, Myloglossum.
rises at the sides of the lower Jaw, at the Roots of the hinder Grinding
Teeth, and is inserted under the Tongue into the Ligament of the Tongue, and
draws it downward.

XIX. The Muscles being removed, The little Kernels.
besides the two oblong and round little Glandules lying near the beginning of
the Gullet, several other little fleshy Kernels, as it were a knot of several
little Kernels, furnished with Lympatic Vessels, small Arteries and Veins, and
diminutive Fibers of Nerves, which are seated under the Tongue about the
Bridle, affording continual moisture to the Tongue, from the small Lymphatic
Vessels.

XX. Moreover on each side, from The Spittle Channels under the Tongue.
a great and remarkable Kernel, resembling the Sweetbread of a Man, seated
above the middle Tendon between the Flesh of the double bellied Muscle,
proceeds a certain Channel, from its use called the Salivary Channel.

This Channel, though not unknown to the Ancients, was lost again for many
Ages, till of late again discovered by Glisson and Wharton; whence Modern
Anatomists ascribe the Discovery of it to them.

But that these Channels were known to the Ancients, appears out of Avicent,
who thus describes them; Under the Tongue are two Orifices, both which a small
Bodkin enters, and they are the Fountains of Spittle, which reach to the
Glandulous Flesh, which is in the Root of it, and are called the Generatives of
the Spittle; and those two Fountains are called the Powrers forth of the
Spittle, and preserve the Dew that moistens the Tongue. The same is apparent
from Galen in these Words. Because the Tongue being dry, becomes more slow in
its Motion, therefore Nature wonderfully provides for it, to prevent its being
injured by any such Annoyance. For she has placed two fleshy little Kernels in
the Larynx, like a Sponge, one of each side, which she has also done in the
Tongue. From those Kernels adjoining to the Larynx, certain Channels discharge
the Spitly Humor through the oblique and lower Passages into the Parts under
the Tongue, moistning the Tongue it self: Which Haly also and Carpus both
observe.

XXI. Both these Channels, in form Substance and bigness.
and substance are not altogether unlike the Veins, but somewhat more
transparent, with a Hollowness, which in Men and Calves admits a small Bodkin,
but in Dogs is very straight, though in some larger, in some narrower.

XXII. One of each side rises from Situation and Original.
the said Kernel, with many small Beginnings meeting together in one Channel.
Ascending obliquely upward from the Kernel, it is carried almost as far as the
middle of the Jaw, between two small Kernels there seated; which having passed
by it proceeds straight forward near the Nerve of the seventh Pair, which at
length it passes by, and so terminates somewhat toward the foreparts, distant
about a Fingers breadth from the Teeth, and opens into a peculiar Kernel
(called the Frog-Kernel, or Hypoglottis) covered with a thin and porous
Membrane, which is seated under the Tongue, one upon each side of the Bridle,
near the Frogg veins between the Flesh, which joins the Tongue to the
neighboring Parts, and the Kernels under the Root of the Tongue. These two
Kernels, are as it were two soft small Spunges, sucking in the spitly Humor
from the first Channel. In Brutes, by reason of the length of the Jaw, the
Channel is longer.

XXIII. If in Men it happen that the The Froggdistemper.
Pores of the Membrane under the Tongue are too much close, or that the Spitly
Liquor be so condensed, that it cannot pass through the Pores, and flow into
the Mouth, then the Collect^ on of much Spittle causes a Swelling under the
Tongue, which the Physicians call the Frogg-Distemper, which increasing, causes
a great Obstruction in Speech and Swallowing, but is easily cured by Incision
of the Membrane under the Tongue.

XXIV. Besides, the said Spittle-Channels, Stenonis's Ducts.
there are yet other two of each side, one showed in the Anatomy-Theatre at
Leyden, by Io. Van-Horn, Anno 1661. which he then called the Stenonic Channels
from Nicholas Stenonis the Dane, the first Discoverer.

XXV. They derive their Original Their Original.
from a large Kernel, seated at the Root of each Ear, which Stenonis calls the
conglomerated Parotides; from which, being dissected many little Branches
spring forth, and are discerned running forth into these Channels.

In these Channels, Stenonis observes, besides the proper Tunicle, several
nervous Strings embracing the middle Channel.

Sometimes it happens that these Salival A Physical Observation.
Vessels about the Cheeks being bruised, the Lymphatic Salival Liquor flowing
in great abundance from the Wound, hinders the closing of it. Thus a Nobleman
of Nimmeghen being wounded in the middle of his Cheek with a Drinking-Glass,
thrown at his Head, the Wound was almost closed by the Chyrurgion, but for a
long time a Lymphatic Salival Humor, weeping from a little Hole in the middle
of the Cheek, by reason that the Salival Channel, then unknown to the
Chyrurgion, was burst by the Blow, kept the Wound open for two Years, which at
length was cured by my Advice, upon the Application of an actual Cautery, which
stopped the flowing of the Salival Humor. Aquapendens also tells us of an
Accident of the same nature, which we also saw in a certain Cook at Utrecht.

XXVI. These Salival Vessels already Other Salival Vessels.
described, are more conspicuous. But besides these, there are a great many
others of lesser note in the Mouth, especially in the Palate and Cheeks, which
have hitherto lain hid invisible; but the Passage of the Spittle from those
Parts teaches Us, that the Spittle distills from several small Kernels seated
within the Membrane through some such little Vessels, or the Pores of the
surrounding Membrane. Through the closing of which Pores, the Salival Liquor
being detained within the Membrane, many times little Swellings arise without
Pain. Sometimes in the inside of the Cheeks, sometimes in the Palate of the
Mouth, which either break of themselves, with much Spitting, or else are opened
with a Chyrurgions Instrument.

XXVIII. Des Carts seems to have Des Carts his Opinion.
been ignorant of these Vessels, and therefore deduces the Original of Spitle
from the Stomach, and says, that certain Particles of Arterious Blood fall into
the Stomach and Guts, where they do the Office of Aquafortis, in assi^ting the
Concoction of the Nourishment, from which, because they are very hot, certain
Vapors ascending through the Gullet into the Mouth, thicken there into Spittle.
But in regard that the Salival Juice manifestly descends from the Head and
Kernels, and whereas in a great Heat of the Body, hot Blood flows to the
Stomach and intestines in greater quantity, and yet the Mouth is not for all
that the more moistened, when dry and parched up, when at that time the greater
quantity of Vapors ascending to the Mouth, should cause the more moisture in
the Mouth; whereas also, whatever ascends from the Stomach, causes rather
Puking and Vomiting, which never happen in the increase of Spittle; and lastly,
seeing that in cold and flegmatic Persons, in whom the Arterious Blood is
colder, and flows in less quantity to all the Parts, and consequently into the
Stomach, which is the reason that fewer Vapors ascend from the Stomach to the
Mouth, and yet such Persons abound in Spittle, all these things fully
demonstrate, that the Opinion of Des Carts touching Spittle, is but a Fiction.

XXIX. It remains therefore unquestionable, The true Original of the Saliva.
that the Salival Liquor does not ascend through the Oesophagus; but is
discharged into the Mouth through the aforesaid Salival Vessels. But in regard
the Liquor of those Vessels is carried in a very great quantity to the Mouth;
the Question is, out of what Vessel that Moisture is separated and carried to
the said Kernels of the Parotides and small Kernels, from thence to be
discharged through the Salival Vessels into the Mouth? Wharton asserts, that it
flows out of the Nerves. But in regard they are not hollow enough to give
Passage to so great a quantity o^ Liquor, this Opinion cannot be true. Some
would bring it from the Chylebearing-Vessels. But in regard those Vessels do
not run out so far; and because that the Chylus were it carried thither, might
be concocted to a greater Perfection, but not be changed into another less
nourishing, or more fermentaceous Humor; this Opinion also stands upon no
^ottom. Deusingius believes it is discharged out of the Lymphatic Vessels, and
so comes into the Mouth. Which Opinion, though something more probable; but
because the Lymphatic Vessels do not pour their Juice into the Kernels, but
draw it from thence to be carried to other Parts, neither can this Opinion be
true. Besides, there is no question, but that the Lym^ha and the Spittle,
though they differ in thickness, have the same Original both from the Blood;
and therefore seeing this Liquor cannot be separated from the veiny Blood, as
(...) that which flows from the Kernels and other Parts, it remains, that it
must be separated from the Arterious Blood; for that the Arteries, as they pour
forth nourishing Blood into all the Parts, so likewise into the Kernels; the
more saltish Salival Part of which, apt for the Nourishment of the Kernels,
through the mixture of the Animal Spirits flowing through the little Nerves, is
separated from the rest of the Particles, and in them is concocted somewhat
after a specifical manner, and farther prepared, and the Overplus of their
Nourishment having obtained a kind of slight sowrish Quality in the Glandules,
flows through the Salival Vessels into the Mouth. And indeed you may discern
certain Arteries in these Kernels gaping into the Kernels with small diminutive
Holes, and through those discharging a serous Liquor into the Glandules. And
this Opinion is confirmed by great Salivations, whether spontaneous or provoked
at what time such a vast quantity of Spittle is discharged, which could never
be supplied by the Nerves, or any other Vessels, but the Arteries.

XXX. Now then Spittle is a Liquor The (...) of Spittle.
slightly Fermentaceous, Serous and Lympid, separated from the Arterious Blood
in the Parotides, and various Kernels and glandulous Caruncles, and discharged
into the Mouth through the Salival Vessels and other Salival Passages.

XXXI. Concerning the Qualities The Qualities of Spittle.
of Spittle, we find but little written by others, which nevertheless if
diligently considered, sufficiently demonstrate, that it is not a simple Body,
but compounded and slippery, less fluid than Water, but thicker and more
viscous. It derives not its Forthines, from its self, but from the Air and
Tongue. In sound People, it has neither Savor nor Taste of it self, which in
sick People it sometimes acquires, from the bad Temper of the Humors it self,
or the mixture of other ill Humors, and sometimes from the Savor and Taste of
the Nourishment received.

XXXII. It would be a difficult Its strange Composition.
thing to give an exact Account of its Composition, which is very wonderful.
For it is easily mixed with all sorts of Nourishment, dry, moist, oily, salt,
sulphury, etc. For it mixes with all things received into the Mouth. And when
out of our Bodies, it will mix with Quicksilver; whereas other more simple
Heterogeneous Humors, Water, Spirits, Oils, Salts, and other mixed Humors will
not associate, which Salt will do, and not only mix with, but unite them all
together. So that it seems to be the universal Internal Menstruum, by means of
which, all things received into the Mouth, are united together, and descend
with it to the Stomach, to promote a more exact dissolution of the swallowed
Substances. Whence Francis de le Boe Sylvius conjectures, that it contains in
it self much Water, somewhat of volatile Spirit, least of Laxivious Salt, with a
very small quantity of Oil and Acid Spirit, mixed and tempered one with another.

XXXIII. As to its Use, it is Its Use.
manifold and very remarkable.

1. Being mixed with the Meat chewed in the Mouth, by its slipp^riness it
facilitates Swallowing, which can hardly be done without it, as is apparent in
dry Fevers, and other Accidents that cause Drought. 2. It draws from the drier
sorts of Meat a sapid Salt, which could never be drawn forth without moisture.
3. It quenches Thirst, which is the reason that they who spit much, are seldom
adry. 4. It renders slippery, the inner parts of the Mouth, the Chaps, the
Organs of Speech, and the Gullet. 5. In the Stomach it promotes the
Fermentation of the Nourishment received; nay, it is their primary Ferment,
containing all things in it self to perfect that Fermentation, that is to say,
some slight Acidity tempered with a volatile Spirit in a great quantity of
Water. Which fermenting power appears from hence, for that if a piece of
White-bread chewed and moistened with much Spittle, be mixed with Dow kneaded
with Luke-warm-Water, it will cause it to ferment.
XXXIV. However, there is some The Difference between the Saliva and Sputum.
difference to be observed between Sputum and Salivam; by Sputum, the
Physicians mean that tenacious Humor, the Superfluity of which, becomes
troublesome in the Mouth, as happens in Defluxions of Catarhs, or such as is
generated by some Corruption of the Spittle, or is coughed up by the Lungs. By
Saliva, they understand the natural Liquor, not superfluous in healthy People,
nor to be spit out, but necessary for the moistning the Mouth, the Mixture of
the Nourishment, and its Preparation and Fermentation for Concoction.

There is also some difference between Spittle and that Snot which falls down
from the Brain through the Sive-like-Bone, and is partly discharged through the
Nostrils, partly descends to the Chaps, through the hinder Parts of the Palate.
Not that these Humors differ in respect of their Original; but for that the
Snot, by reason of its longer stay by the way, obtains another quality besides
it, before it comes to the Mouth, and hence it becomes thicker, more tenacious,
yellowish, and sometimes otherwise* ill colored. Which Qualities nevertheless,
when it has not, then it differs little from the Salival Humor, and moistens,
and renders slippety the Chaps, Gullet, and adjoining Part^ and being mixed
with the Nourishment in the Stomach, promotes Fermentation in like manner as
the Spittle. This Liquor, when a Man is in Health, is fluid and thin in the
Ventricles of the Brain, not like the Spittle in the Mouth, but almost like the
Lymphatic Humor contained in the Lymphatic Vessels, and by reason of its being
so thin, easily slides down through the small Holes of the Sive-like-Bone, into
the spungy Bones of the Nostrils, wherein, if it stay long, by reason of the
Passage of the cold Air breathed in and out, it frequently becomes thick,
colored and endu'd with other Qualities; as the Lympha gathers out of
Lymphatic Vessels near the Liver, and other Vessels near the Cochlear, grow
into Gelly through the cold Air, and sometimes becomes yellow, sometimes of
another Color. So that these two Liquors differ little or nothing from the
Lympha, and this same Snivel and Spittle may well be called the Lympha carried
to the Mouth.

XXXV. The primary Action of The Action of the Tongue.
the Tongue is to taste, for which it seems to be chiefly formed; the secundarv
end is for Speech and Swallowing.

XXXVI. Tasting, is a Sense by Definition of Taste.
which the gustable or relishing Qualities of relishable Bodies are
distinguished in Moisture by the Organ of Taste, through the Motion of the
Tongue and the adjoining Parts.

XXXVII. This Sense many confound Distinction between Taste and Feeling.
with Feeling; following the Opinion of Plato, and make it a Species of
Feeling, but erroneously; for though Feeling conduces to the Organ of Taste,
yet Taste and Feeling differ, both as to the Organ and the Object. For the
Organ of Feeling is a Membrane; the Organs of Taste are certain nervous little
Teats, sprouting out from the second thin Membrane of the Tongue, the like to
which are not to be found in the whole Body beside. The Objects of Feeling are
all manner of tangible Qualities, hard, soft, cold, hot, etc. The Objects of
Tastes, are Relishes. Moreover, the Taste may be lost, yet the Feeling remain
entire; thus many sick People can relish nothing of Savor, but they can at the
same time feel a Prick or a Burn, or Cold, or the like.

For which reason we must conclude, that the Sense of Tasting is a Sense
peculiarly distinct from that of Feeling; as the Sense of Sight is performed by
the Eye, which is endued with the Sense of Feeling, and yet sight is altogether
distinct from Feeling.

XXXVIII. From what has been said, No Medium of Taste
it is also apparent, that there is no Medium of Tasting: Seeing that Tasting
is performed when the relishable Bodies immediately touch the relishing Organ,
and hit upon it.

XXXIX. The primary Organ of The Organ of Taste.
Taste, is the Tongue, or some parts of the Tongue. But being composed of
various Parts, Flesh, Membranes, Nerves, Kernels, nervous Teats, etc. the
Question is, in which of these the Sense of Taste is seated?

XL. The Aristotelics, whom Bauhinus, Whether in the Flesh of the Tongue?
Veslingius, Deusingius, Bartholine and others follow, affirm it to lie in the
fleshy part of the Tongue, which is therefore Spungy and Porous. Partly for the
more easy entrance of the tastable Moistures; partly to contain a Specific
Liquor for the Perfection of the Taste. As to perfect the Hearing, there is
required an Air within, and an Air without. But in regard the fleshy Parts over
the whole Body only feel and distinguish tactible Objects, never gustable
Objects, as bitter Salt, etc. nor so much as feel them as such, shall the
Tongue alone, by means of its fleshy Particles, endued with Nerves and
Membranes, be able to judge of Tastes likewise? But you will say the Tongue is
more spungy then the Heart, Reins, Muscles, and other spungy Parts, and
therefore more easily admits the Gustable Humors within its Pores, which the
thickness of the other fleshy Parts will not admit: to which I answer, let them
view the Tongue more considerately, and they will find the Tongue less spungy
than the muscly Flesh. Besides, there is no Sense in the Pores, but in the
Substance it self of the fleshy Parts that are sensible. Hence* when a salt or
bitter Sweat, as in the Jaundice, passes the Pores, and twitches their
Substance more or less, they feel it indeed in their Substance, as soft or
painful, but not as salt or bitter. The Reins and Lungs are also loose and
spungy, wherefore are not they also endued with the Gift of Tasting?

XLI. Others, with Laurentius, Whether in the Membranes or Nerves?
seat the Sense of Tasting in the Membranes of the Tongue. But the Membranes of
the Tongue, like all other Membranes, only perceive by feeling what is hard or
soft, hot or cold, etc. but they distinguish Savours no more then the Membranes
of the Eyes or Ears. And the same reason there is to be given for the Nerves.
To say the Nerves and Membranes of the Tongue are of another Nature and
Construction then others, signifies nothing; for that the difference of
Construction can produce nothing else, but a more obtuse or quicker Sense of
Feeling, but nothing of Taste or Judgment of Savors.

As to the Blood-bearing Vessels, there is no thought that the Taste should lie
in them.

XLII. Wharton believes it lies in Whether in the Kernels?
the Tonsils, others, in all the Kernels seated in the Mouth and round about
the Tongue. But in regard the Taste is most accurate at the Tip of the Tongue,
remote from the Tonsils and other Kernels, and more dull at the Root of the
Tongue, where the Tonsils and many other Kernels lie; and seeing that the Taste
is a peculiar acute Sense, requiring an acute Specific Sensory, whereas the
Glandules are dull of Sense, and contain nothing for the perfection of Taste,
nor ever were observed to distinguish Savors, I see not how this Opinion can be
defended.

XLIII. The last things to be considered, Whether in the Nervous Teats?
are the nervous little Paps, into which several small Branches of Nerves,
rising out of the Substance of the Tongue it self, are inserted and covered
with a thin Porous Film, and being endued with a peculiar Substance, I believe
the Sense of Taste to be brought to Perfection, by the help of the foresaid
porous Pellicle, or slimy fleshy Crust, environing them like a Net, and
absolutely affirm it to be true. 1. Because in what part of the Tongue these
little nervous fleshy Bags are most numerous, as at the Tip, in the Sides, and
upon the Superficies, there the Sense of Tasting is most swift, most acute, and
most exact; where they appear less numerous, the Sense of Tasting is more dull;
and where there are none at all, as underneath between the Tip and the Bridle,
there is no Taste at all. 2. Because in those parts of the Palate where those
Fleshbaggs lie hid under the thick Membrane, the Taste has its Operation. Which
is easily made out, laying a little Aloes or Salt, now to one, now to another
part of the Tongue, by which you shall easily discern the Difference of the
Taste; in one place more quick, in another duller, in another no Taste at all,
according as the Places are more or less furnished with Flesh-bags, or want
them all together. Besides, if we more diligently inspect the Substance of the
Flesh-bags it self, we shall find in it something absolutely specific, which we
may admire, but never be able to explain.

XLIV. Nor are we less unable to The manner of perception of Savors.
unfold by what means the Perception and Distinction of Savors is performed by
those little nervous Flesh-Bags, then how their Sight or Hearing are caused by
their particular Organs.

But then another Question arises, how it comes to pass that one and the same
Taste, for Example, Sweet, or Bitter, always offers it self in the same manner.
This happens, because the Tastable Salt strikes into the Pores of the little
Fibers of those small Fleshbags, with its Particles constituted after the same
manner, and in the same form, which Impulse, by means of the Nerves, is
presently communicated to the Mind. So that as long as those Particles of Salt
have the same Proportion of Measure to the little Pores of the small
Flesh-bags, they communicate the same Savors. But if the Constitution of the
Particles of Salt be altered by the Mixture of some sulphury or other Humor, so
that the Particles which before were stiff, hard, and pointed, become flexible,
soft or round, then the little Flesh-bags and Nerves come to be otherwise
affected, whence the Alteration of the Relish, and another perception of the
Taste.

Now the Agitation and Motion of the Tongue, is that which chiefly strikes the
Gustable Bodies into the little Flesh-bags, by which Motion being forced into
the Flesh-bags, they alter them after a Specific manner, and imprint the
Species of the Relish into them with their sharp Points and slender Asperities,
to be communicated to the Mind by means of the Nerves. Which Species sometimes
fixes within them, when the said Bodies being more violently forced into them,
and by reason of the unequal Proportion of the Particles of Salt to the figure
of the Pores, cannot be got out or washed away by the Spittle.

XLV. As to the great Disputes what Various Opinions about Savors.
Savor is, and wherein it consists, Aristotle affirms it to be nothing else but
a certain Quality in determined Compounds, arising from the Mixture of the
Elements; but what that Savory Quality is, he leaves in the Dark. In another
place, he believes it to be something arising from Water and Earth, being mixed
together, the Heat of Fire concurring. For though Water be of it self insipid,
yet it is capable to receive any Relish, and so, as the Fire variously acts
upon that and the Water, the diversity of Savors arises. But in regard that
Fire contributes to Water only Heat, Attenuation and Discussion, and Dryness
and Hardness to the Earth, this Opinion must fall to the Ground. Nor does Galen
determine any thing certain concerning this Matter, when he says that Savor is
a Water intermixed with some dry Body by the Operation of Heat. In which Sense,
Alstedius will have it to be a Mixture of the Watery Humid, with the dry
Terrestrial. Others alledg that the Stupid quality is the certain Figure,
Magnitude and Motion of the smallest Particles. But seeing they never explain
in what things that Figure, Magnitude and Motion ought to be considered, and
how Savor proceeds from them, they leave the Matter as obscure as they found it.

XLVI. Now therefore to deliver What Savor is?
our own thoughts, it is our Opinion that Savor is not any Specific flowing out
of any things, but a certain Specific suffering imprinted by the Asperities of
certain things into the Organs of Taste, the Perception and Judgment of which
suffering is the Taste.

XLVII. Now we believe, that the Whence the Asperities come?
foresaid Asperities and their diversities are to be fetched from the
Principles of the things themselves, as, Salt, Sulphur, Mercury, etc.
concerning which, See l. 2. c. 12.

XLVIII. The Asperities causing Savor The sapi^ Asperities.
consist in Salt, which as it is variously mixed, concocted and united with
Sulphur or Mercury, the Asperities are greater or lesser, more pointed, stiff,
hard, pricking, or more flexible, soft, or smooth: which diversity begets the
manifold variety of Savors as the suffering of the Tongue, according to the
Asperities of the Salt becomes pleasing or ungrateful. Which is the Opinion of
Fracassarus in these Words. Let us conclu^e, says he, that savors owe their
effects to the Figures which are only taken from the corporeal Principles,
which in mixed things is chiefly the Salt it self, and from the observed figures
in Salts we collect this, that Salt is the Figurative Principle of Savor.

XLIX. The differences of Savors from Difference of Savors.
the various figures of salt Atoms Gassendus endeavors thus to demonstrate. By
which it comes to pass, says he, that he will not incongruously determine the
matter, that round Atoms of a just proportion cause a sweet Savor; the great
Figure produces sour; those of many Angles not orbicular, sharp, acute, conic,
bowed, not thin nor round, pricking; thin and orbicular, with corners and
bowed, biting; with corners bowed unequal in their sides, salt; round smooth,
writhed, equal in their sides bitter; thin, round and small, fat.

L. Now that Savor proceeds only Savor from Salt.
from Salt is apparent by Chimistry. For if Carduus Benedictus, which is
bitter, be burnt to Ashes, and a Salt extracted out of them, those Ashes will
be altogether insipid; but restore their Salt to them and they will recover
their Savor; but not the bitter Savor which the Carduus had before it was
burnt, because the Sulphury particles were consumed by the fire, and thence the
Asperities of the Salt were altered.

LI. If any one ask me, if Savor (...).
be caused by Salt, whence comes the insipidness of any thing which is also
perceived by the last? I answered, that insippidness is not any thing positive
which moves the Taste, being nothing else but a privation of the Salt and
consequently of the Savor, and it is vulgarly said to be perceived by the
Taste, as Silence is said to be heard; or darkness to be seen, when there is no
light to pierce the Eye.

LII. But the Savor which proceeds Savor i^ communicated by humidity.
from Salt is communicated to the fleshy Teats by the means of Humids. For
whatsoever things are dry, unless they deposite their salt Asperities in
something Humid, loose their savor. This Humid is either the Soporiserous
Bodies themselves, Wine, Honey, juices of Herbs and Flowers, etc. Or Water,
Ptisans, Broth, Spittle, or any other Liquor, wherein dry things being bruised,
dissolved, boiled or macerated, dissolve and discharge themselves of Savory
Salt, which then by means of that Humid may be imprinted into the little fleshy
Teats of the Tongue, and perceived by the Taste.

LIII. When things Tastable are put How the Species of Savors are caused?
into the Mouth and moved therein upon the Tongue, then their salt Asperities
being pressed into the humid, through the Pores of the Tongue fall into the
little fleshy Teats, and alter after a Specific manner so or so, according to
the variety of the figures of the salt particles, and so the several sorts of
Savor come to be produced, the Idea of which being carried to the common
Sensory through the little Fibers of the Nerves of the Fourth Pair, inserted
into the Tongue, and comm^icated to the Mind. Thus if the Particles of the Salt
are long, hard, pricking or c^tting, and fall into the round Pores of the
Tongue, then by reason of the disparity of the Figures of the Pores and the
Salt difficultly getting in, they cause a pricking trouble, as in acid, bitter
and sharp things. But if the Particles of the Salt are soft, flexible or round,
then they easily enter the Pores of the little fleshy Teats, and of the Tongue,
and delighting the Tongue cause a grateful relish; as in Sugar, Honey, etc. In
the same sense Lucretius says, that the little Atoms of sweet things are smooth
and round: of bitter and acid things, poynted and forked.

LIVE. The Agitation or stirring of What the Agitation signifies.
the Mouth is requisite, to the end the Savor may the better be perceived;
though Liquids require a less motion, dry things more vehement, and a longer
Agitation. For in the Liquids the savory Salt already dissolved, glides more
suddenly through the Membrane covering the Tongue into the nervous Teats: But
in dry things the salt Particles adhering to the thicker substance, require
longer time for this dissolution and mixture with the Spittle before they can
be felt. Besides that by the same stirring the Pores of the Membrane of the
Tongue are opened and dilated, by which means the said salt Particles now
adhering to the Liquor, are forced upon them by a kind of violence. For without
stirring the Mouth the Savor is not so perceptible in liquids as in dry things.
For if Salt, Sugar, or Ashes be put upon the Tongue continuing motionless the
the Taste will not be so quick; but upon stirring the Tongue the Taste is
presently perceived, and the difference proceeding from the diversity of the
figures of the Salt, is judged of by the Mind.

LV. Yet the various figure of the Diversity of the Pores alters the Savor.
Salt alone is not always the Reason of the different sorts of Tastes, seeing
that sometimes the different Constitution of the Organ conduces much to it. For
the Pores of it in all men, are not always of the same Figure; but those which
are round in some, shall be oblong in others, or quadrangular, which will admit
the smooth round Particles with some difficulty, but the long and pointed
without any trouble. Which is the reason that sweet things are not grateful to
all, nor bitter things nauseous to others.

LVI. But notwithstanding all that Imagination (...) the (...).
has been said, we must understand, that the Imagination contributes very much
to the gratefulness or dispeasing Relish of the Taste. In regard that some
imagine more pleasure from Tastes that please their fancy by pleasing the Organs
of Taste, others from such things as strike the Organs of Taste with a kind of
sharpness. Thus we see many People delighted with the Taste of Wormwood-wine,
Vinegar, salted Herrings, though they cause some trouble in the Organs of
Taste; others abhor sweet things, not but they that perceive the Tastes such as
they are sweet or bitter, etc. but because a moderate sharpness pleases their
fancy more than the pleasantness of sweet things.

Concerning Speech and Voice, so which the Tongue also mainly contributes, See
l. 2. cap. 15.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concering the JOINTS.
CHAP. I. Of the HAND.
THE Limbs, by the Greeks called (...), are Members growing to the Bellys, and
distinguished with Joints.

These are twofold, the upermost commonly called Manus the Hands, in Greek
(...), and the lowermost, Pedes or the feet, in Greek (...).

I. Between these Limbs there is required The proportion between the Limbs.
a convenient Proportion in Men well shaped; that is, that there should be
almost the same Proportion from the Share-bone to the extremity of the Heel, as
from the Arm-hole to the top of the middle Finger, I say almost, for that for
the most part the Thighs are somewhat longer than the Arms. And the length of
the Thighs ought to be the length of the Trunk, measuring from the Share-bo^e
to the top of the Forehead. Here Spigelius observes, that they who have long
Feet, are most commonly loose in their Body, and therefore strong Purgations
are never to be given to such Persons.

II. The hands were given to Man The Hands.
for grasping, that being a naked and unarmed Creature, by the assistance of
his Reason, he might be able by the help of these Instruments to provide
himself not only with one sort of Weapons, Garments and Habitations, but with
infinite numbers; and by that means subdue all manner of Beasts, though never
so fierce and untamed. Moreover to the end so divine a Creature might be
enabled to commit to writing the Laws of God, the Histories and Transactions of
worthy Hero's, the Miracles of God and Wonders of Nature, to paint forth the
Ornaments of Heaven and Earth, the Delineations of Arts and Sciences, and other
Monuments of his Divinity, therefore two Hands were given him that if the one
failed, the other might be serviceable to him.

III. Now the Hand is an Organic The Definition of the Hand.
Part extending from the uper part of the Shoulders to the Extremities of the
Fingers.

IV. It is divided into the Arm and The Arm.
extreme Hand.

The Arm Brachium, in Greek (...) is divided into the Arm strictly so taken and
the Elbow. The one reaching from the top of the Shoulder, to the bending of the
Elbow; the other from the b^nding of the Elbow to the Wrist.

V. The hollow under the Joint The Armpit.
of the Shoulder is called Axilla, or Ala, the Arm-hole covered with Hair.
Which hair prevents the Skin from gauling through the continual motion of the
Arm.

VI. In this Cavity, under a little The Axillary Glands
Panicle lie concealed three considerable Kernels, joined to the divarication
of the Vessels, which being closed together seem to make one. These the ancient
Physicians thought to be Emunctories of the Heart.

VII. The Elbow, in Latin Cubitus, The Elbow.
or Ulna, by Tully is called Lacertus, and by the Greeks (...).

VIII. The Hand at the end, being The Hands.
expanded is simply called Manus, being clutch'd Pugnus, and the Joints of the
inner part of the Fingers are called Internodia: but being shut the
protuberances of the Joints are called Conditi.

The Hand is divided into the Wrist, the space between the Wrist, and the
Fingers.

IX. The Wrists in Latin Carpus, The Wrist.
in the Greek (...), being next adjoining to the Elbow, consists of eight Bones
disposed in a double Order, which want their proper Names.

X. The space between the Wrists, Meta Carpium.
called Meta Carpium consists of four Bones connex'd with a close and strong
Joint.

XI. The inner part composing the Vola and Palma.
hollow of the Hand, in Latin Vola Manus or Palma, and the external Part by the
Greeks (...), by the Latins is called Dorsum Manus, or the back of the Hand.

In the hollow of the Hand several Particulars are to be taken notice of:
chiefly the little Mounts, in Greek properly called (...) and the Lines.

XII. The little Mounts are the The Mounts.
more prominent and fleshy Parts of the Hand. The little Mount under the Thumb
is called the Mount of Mars. That next the Forefinger, the Mount of Jupiter.
That next the Middle finger, the Mount of Saturn. That next the Ring-finger,
the Mount of the Sun: and that next the Little-finger, the Mount of the Moon.

XIII. There are many and various The Lines.
Lines in the hollow of the Hand, not the same nor alike in all men. From
whence they that study Palmistry, leaning upon ridiculous and vain Conjecture,
are wont to tell the Fortunes of many People, prosperous Matrimony, long Life,
numerous Offspring, Riches and the like, milking the Purses of the credulous
and deceiving their Expectations.

By these People there are chiefly observed fourteen Lines; from the Meetings
Inter-sections, crookedness or streightness, etc. of which they gather their
Presages. But three they look upon more considerable than all the rest. The
Line of Life; the Second running athwart through the middle of the hollow of
the Hand, to the Mount of the Moon, and called the Liver-line: and the Third
called the Table-line, or the Line of Venus.

XIV. The Fingers, Digiti in the The Figures.
Greek (...), are five in number upon each Hand, differing in length and
thickness.

The first which is the thickest, and equals all the rest for strength, is
called Pollex, or the Thumb. The Second is the Forefinger from the use, called
the Index, or Demonstrator, the Pointer, because it is used in the
demonstration of things. The Third, or Middle-finger, is called Impudicus,
Famosus and Obscoenus, the Obsence and In^amous, because it is usually held
forth at men pointed at for Infamy, and in derision. The Fourth, the
Ring-finger, or Annularis and Medicus, the Physitian's-finger; because that
Persons formerly admitted Doctors of Physic were wont to wear a Gold Ring upon
that Finger. The Fifth called the Little-finger, in Latin Auricularis, or the
Ear-finger, for that men generally pick their Ears with it.

Every Finger is furnished with three Bones knit together with the Gynglymus,
to which are joined the Sesamina. As to the length of the Fingers, Rases and
Avicen notably observe, that the shortness of the Fingers denotes the smalness
of the Liver, and consequently from the length of the Finger, the bigness of
the Liver. Whether it be true or no, I have not tried my self, neither have I
met with any Anatomists that confirm it, however certain it is, that Avicen
rejects it as an uncertain Observation.

XV. At the end of the Fingers The Nails.
on the outside, grow the Nails, by the Greeks called (...); of which the
hinder whitish part is called the Root of the the white Spots are called
Mendacia, or Lies, and the hidden Parts under the Nails Cruptae.

The Nails are hard, to defend the tender Extremities of the Fingers, which are
endued with a most exact Sense of Feeling, and for the Convenience of
Scratching, they are also flexible by nature, to the end they may not easily be
broken; and as to their Shape, they are somewhat unequal.

They are transparent, so that according to the Color of the Flesh and the
Blood underneath, they are either Black and Blew, Red, Pale, Yellow, etc. from
which Colors, the Physicians make many Conjectures of Health, or a bad
Constitution.

The Skin grows about them on the outside, under lie the Tendons of the
Muscles. For which reason, because of the exquisite Sense of the Place, upon
any Bruise, the Pain becomes terrible under the Nail.

The whole Arm, together with the Hand, consists of Coverings, Membranes,
Bones, Ligaments, Muscles, Arteries, Veins and Nerves, which are common to all
the Parts of the Body.

Such are likewise the inner Coverings, Skin, Cuticles and Fat.

The Membranes are Periostiums, Membranes of the Muscles, and Tendons, etc.

The Bones are many and various, fast^ed together with Ligaments, of which, see
Lib. 9. C. 17. etc.

The Arteries proceed from the Axillary Artery, the b^anchings forth of which
are described, Lib. 6. Chap. 3.

There are many Veins in the Hand and Arm, which meet however all together at
the Axillary Vein, and discharge their Blood into it. Of these, three are
chiefly remarkable by peculiar Names at the Bending of the Elbow, the Cephalic,
Basilic, and Median; which are often opened in letting Blood. Moreover, in the
outer part of the Extremity of the Hand, there is one between the Middle and
Ring Finger, called by a private Name Salvat^lla, the opening of which in
melancholy Distempers, and Quartan Agues, is very much commended, especially in
the Left Hand. But this is only a mere Supposition, (grounded upon nothing of
Reason) of those that being ignorant of the Circulation of the Blood, believe
this Vein more especially to discharge the Melancholy Blood of the Spleen.

Six Pair of Nerves enter the Arm, the Productions of which, see Lib. 8. C. 3.

CHAP. II. Of the Foot.
I. THE Foot, called in Latin The Foot.
Pes, in Greek (...), is an Organic Part, beginning from the Joint of the Hip,
and extending to the Extremities of the Toes.

It is divided into the Thigh, Leg and small Foot.

The Thigh, Femur, (...), proceeds The Thigh.
from the Joint of the Hip, to the first lower Joint, which in the Forepart is
called the Knee, in the hinder-part the Ham.

II. The inner part of the Thigh, is Ischion.
called, Femur, the outer Protuberance about the upper Joint, the Hip, the
Space to the Buttocks between the two Thighs, the Perinaeum.

III. At the top, near the Bending, The Groin.
is the Groin, where lies a remarkable Kernel, composed of eight lesser
Kernels, which was firmly said to be the Emunctory of the Liver. Of the use of
which, see Lib. 1. Chap. 17.

IV. The Leg, by the Greeks called The Leg.
(...), beginning at the Knee, reaches down to the Heel, of which, the
forepart is called Tibia, the Shin, and the hinder part Sura the Calf; but the
two inferior latter Prominences are called Malleoli, or the Ancles. The
Physiognomists observe, that they who have large Heels are Envious, they that
have flat Heels are Slothful; but I cannot believe there is any Credit to be
given to these Indications.

V. The Foot Pes, (...), which for The Foot.
distinction sake they call the small Foot, is the Foundation upon which the
Body stands, and is divided into the Foot, the Metapedium, and the Toes.

The Foot, of which the hinder part is called Calx, or the Heel, consists of
seven Bones, the Metapedium of five, the Toes consist of three Bones, except
the great Toe, which has but two, to which are also added the Sesamina.

The upper part of the Foot, which is ruddy, is called the Top of the Foot, and
the lower part the Sole of the Foot, which if it be so flat as to press the
Ground without any Hollowness, denotes the Person to be Cunning and Fraudulent.

VI. At the end of the Toes grow Nails of the same Substance and Nature with
those of the Hands.

The whole Leg is composed of Membranes, Bones, Ligaments, Muscles, Arteries,
Veins and Nerves, common to all the rest of the Body.

The Membranes are Periosteum's, Membranes of the Muscles, and their Tendons.

The Bones are many and various, fastened together with Ligaments. Of which,
Lib. 9.

Of the Muscles, some extend the Thigh, some the Leg, others the Foot, and
others the Toes. Of which, Lib. 5.

The Arteries proceed from the Crural Artery, and are dispersed through all the
Parts of the Leg with several Ramifactions.

In like manner a great number of Veins are dispersed through all parts of the
Leg, following, for the most part, in their Assent, the Colors of the
descending Arteries. Of which, more Lib. 7.

Four remarkable Nerves also for the Faculties of Feeling and Motion, are
distributed through the whole Leg. Of which, three proceed from the lower Pairs
of the Loins, and the fourth takes its Original from the four upper Pairs of
the Os Sacrum. Of which more, Lib. 8.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the MUSCLES. WITH AN APPENDIX Concerning
the MEMBRANES and FIBERS.
CHAP. I. Of the MUSCLES in General.
A Muscle is called Musculus in Latin, by the Greeks (...) from (...), to
Contract, or from its Resemblance; for that some Muscles seem to resemble a
flead Mouse slender at the Head and Tail, and large in the Middle; by the
Latins also called Lac^rtus, from its Resemblance to a Lizard.

I. A Muscle is an Organic Part, Definition.
the Instrument of voluntary Motion.

II. A Muscle is composed of Dissimular Composition.
Parts, as Fibers, Flesh, Veins, Nerves, a Tendon, a Covering Membrane, and in
fat People, with some Fat to moisten it.

Through the Arteries, the Vital Blood is conveyed for Nourishment, and the
Residue returns through the Veins to its Fountain. Through the Nerves the
Animal Spirits flow into it, contributing Feeling and Motion, and doing their
Duty in the Act of Nutrition. The fleshy Substance abounds with Fibers for
Strength and Bulk, and these Fibers are for the most part straight. Sometimes
where they proceed to their Tendon, somewhat bowed, as in the Muscles of the
Temples, sometimes Orbicular, as in the Sphincters; seldom one Muscle has two
Fibers. It is enfolded with a Membrane to strengthen and cover it, and to
separate the Muscles one from another, and from the adjoining Parts. It
includes these Fibers, and in the whole Circuit sticks to them Rolfinch,
Bauhinus, and Stenonis believes it also admits the Prroductions and Fastnings
to the inner Substance of the Muscle, by which the Fibers are knit together.

III. Andreas Laurentius was in an Error, Laurentius's Error.
to assert that there is a Power of acting in the Muscles, which only proceeds
from the Fibers and Tendony Strings, as is apparent in Persons languishing with
Hectic-Fevers and Consumptions, who still retain their Faculty of Motion,
though the Fleshy Parts are consumed away.

IV. The Muscles are twofold, some Muscles are twofold.
which draw no Parts, as the Orbicular Sphincters of the Fundament and Bladder,
which are orbicularly and equally contracted within themselves, every way like
a Ring without any manifest Beginning, Middle or End. To which the muscly
Membranes are to be reckoned, which only move the Skin upward and downward, as
are the Muscles of the Forehead and hinder part of the Head, in which there is
no manifest Distinction to be observed. Others, which more violently move the
Bones and other Parts, may be distinguished into Beginning, Middle and End, or
else, as others will have it, into the Head, Belly and Tail.

V. The Beginning, or Head, is The Head.
that part of the Muscle, toward which the Motion is made; for this is a
perpetual Rule, every Muscle is moved toward its Beginning. This Head is
sometimes fleshy, often membranous, in others longer, in others shorter,
sometimes thicker, sometimes thinner.

VI. Every Muscle has a Nerve inserted The Insertion of the Nerve.
into its Head, or else about the Middle; sometimes one, sometimes more, as the
Diaphragma, which has two that are remarkable, and the Muscle of the Temples,
which receives three Nerves. Whence Galen makes it a certain Rule, where the
Nerve is inserted, there is the Head of the Muscle. Which Rule, however
Bartholin, following Walaeus, seems to reject, affirming that sometimes the
Nerve is inserted into the End of the Muscle, and that there is no necessity
that the Nerve should be inserted rather into the Head than the Tail of the
Muscle; and that it happens only by accident, that the Nerve is inserted into
the Head of the Muscle, for that the Nerves, while the descend, are more easily
inserted into the Heads, which are higher, then into the Tails that lie lower.
But Experience overthrows the main Prop of this Opinion, by which we find that
never any Nerve was inserted into the Tail of any Muscle, or if it may seem to
enter it by chance, it is only through the Error of the Anatomist, who mistakes
the Head for the Tail. Thus hitherto the middle Membranous Part of the
Diaphragma, into which the Nerves are inserted, has been taken for the Tendon
or Tail of that Muscle, whereas really it is the Beginning of it. The second
Argument, Reason evinces, which teaches us, that of necessity the Nerve ought
to enter that Part from which the Swelling of it ought to begin from the
Entrance of the Spirits; which when it ought to begin from that part toward
which the Motion must be made, of necessity it must be inserted into the Head.
For if the Swelling should begin from the end of the Muscle, then the Beginning
would be drawn toward the Tail. Then Experience or common Sight destroys the
third Argument, seeing that in Nerves which turn back, though they tend upward,
nevertheless one inserted into the Heads of the Muscles of the Larynx, as
looking upward.

VII. The Middle or Belly of the The Belly of the Muscle.
Muscle is the thicker and more fleshy Part, and is for the most part
continuous, sometimes, but rarely separated, with Tendonous Intersections, as
in the straight Muscles of the Abdomen, and the Digastricks opening the lower
Jaw, and some few others, concerning which Intersections, however, some are of
this Opinion, that another Muscle begins at each, and that the intersected
Muscles are not one, but several Muscles conjoined together, for the more
convenience of use.

VIII. The End or Tail of the Muscle, The Tendo.
is that which is fastened to the Part which is to be moved. This is called a
Tendon, in Latin Tendo, because it may be stretched, and therefore by some
called Chorda, or a String. Which Name of Tendon, is by some also translated to
the Membranous Beginnings of some Muscles, as also to the Tendonous Separations
of the middle Muscle, such as are in the straight Muscles of the Abdomen.

IX. Now a Tendon is a part continuous Its Definition.
to a Muscle, extended through the whole length of the Muscle.

Many formerly thought that a Tendon was only the Extremity of the Muscle,
which is fastened to the other part, whereas indeed the Strings of it are
extended through the whole length of the Muscle. Hence Lindan says, that a
Muscle is nothing else but a Tendon clothed with Flesh, and that they are
deceived, who think that a Tendon begins beyond the Flesh; not considering that
Experience teaches us, that it is extended through the whole length of the
Muscle, and that it is as well in the Beginning as in the Middle.

Which Extention of the Fibers through the whole Muscle, Riolanus also
confirms. The Continuity of the Tendon through the whole Muscle, to the very
End, manifestly appears in the Legs of feathered Fowl, and which is a wonder,
is many times observed to be grisly. And in an accurate Dissection, you may
observe the Continuity of the Fibers from the Head of the Muscle to the End, in
a ram or boiled Muscle.

X. It Is a Doubt, whether all Muscles Whether all Muscles have Tendons.
have Tendons? Bauhinus says, that the Tendons were not ordained barely for
Motion, but to cause the more violent Motions, and to move the more heavy
Members, and to strengthen the Muscles to prevent their bursting, and therefore
the Muscles do not all end in Tendons. But this is only true in those Muscles
where the Tendon is stretched beyond the Flesh, not in general as to all: For
they which never move other Parts, but are contracted into themselves as the
Sphincters of the Fundament and Bladder, do not end in Tendons extended beyond
the Flesh, but have tendonous Strings interlaced between their Fibers; as in
the Muscles of the Forehead, hinder part of the Head, and several Muscles of
the Face that stick close to the Skin. But the Muscles that move other Parts,
extend their Tendons into them beyond the Flesh, for ^lower Motions thin and
less discernible; for more violent Motions, stronger and thicker. Therefore we
must conclude in opposition to Bauhinus, that all Muscles have Tendons, some
stronger and more conspicuous, extended beyond the Flesh, others slender and
not discernible, either lying hid under their Flesh, or interlaced with their
Fibers.

This Tendon, according to the weak or strong Motion of the Parts, various in
Bigness and Form, sometimes round, sometimes broad, sometimes long, sometimes
short, sometimes slender, sometimes strong, and sometimes fixed to the Part to
be moved with several Ends.

XI. Bauhinus with Aquapendens asserts, Whether a similar part?
that a Tendon is a similar Body, continuous from the beginning to the end of
the Muscle, simple, of a Kind by its self, and produced out of the Seed like
the other seminal Parts. Which is the Opinion of many at this time. But
Vesalius, Laurentius, Silvius, and others, with Galen, will have it to be a
dissimilar Part, composed of a Concourse of Fibers, Ligaments, and slender
Nerves, by degrees uniting together into one Body. They will have the Nerve, so
soon as it has entered the Muscle, to be divided into many small Branches or
diminutive Fibers, which are met by a Ligament divided in the same manner, and
that those little Branches, traversing to and from, and by that means
intermixing with the interlaced Fibers, and united to the end of the Muscle,
constitute the Tendon, and that the more bulky part proceeds from the Ligament,
the lesser part from the Nerves and Fibers; and because of necessity there must
be some empty Spaces between the Fibers, Nature has filled them up with Flesh,
to assist those little Fibrous Branches in Contraction and Relaxation, and to
defend them from external Injuries. This latter Opinion Bartholinus rejects,
but does not sufficiently refute; only he alleges, that Production of the
Nerve, through the middle of the Nerve to the Tendon, could never be discovered
either by them or any body else; which is no Argument there is no such thing.
For the Chylifer Pectoral Channel, Lymphatic Vessels have lain hid for many
Ages, which were at length discovered, and the same may be said as to the
Production of the Nerve; for the exact feeling of the Tendon shows, it cannot
be without a Nerve, though not to be discerned; and though a Tendon be not a
Nerve, yet it may have Fibers and a Membrane intermixed with it, together with
a Ligament.

Hence perhaps it may be concluded, that a Tendon is the most necessary part of
a Muscle, and extended through the whole Muscle, but that it is most
conspicuous at the end. I answer, that though the Tendons of many Muscles are
covered with much Flesh, the reason why the Tendonous Substance is less
conspicuous, it does not follow that it is altogether absent, for in fat
People, the Mesenterium sometimes is so covered with Fat, that no Vessels can
be discerned in it; and thus it happens in the fleshy Tendons of some Muscles.

The Muscles vary many ways.

1. In respect of their Substance, Fleshy, Membranous, or half Nervous. 2. In
respect of their Quantity, Thick, Thin, Long, Short, Round, Broad. 3. In
respect of their Shape, Round, Flat, Delta-like, or resembling a Monks Hood,
etc. 4. In respect of their Situation; withinside, oblique, orbicular,
transverse; also some in the Head, some in the Trunk, some in the Joints, etc.
5. In respect of their Original, some from the Bones, others from the Gristles
or Tendons. 6. In respect of their Insertion; some with one, others with a
double, others with a threefold Tendon. 7. In respect of their Color; Red,
White, or Livid. 8. In respect of their Closing together, some in one part,
some with another, or with one or more Muscles. 9. In respect of their Use,
some bending, others stretching forth, drawing to, drawing from, lifting up,
pulling down, and some wheeling.
XII. The Use of the Muscles is to The Use.
contribute to voluntary Motion; Which is performed by these Instruments alone:
for no Part moves with that motion which is not a Muscle it self or moved by a
Muscle. And this motion is called Animal or Voluntary being performed at the
will of the Creature.

Here Picolhomini and some others Whether the Motion of the Muscles be
voluntary?
start a Question, Whether the motion of the Muscles can be said to be
Voluntary? Since it is common to Beasts, which have no Reason, and consequently
no Will, and therefore believe Spontaneous to be more proper. Nor can it be
called Voluntary, as being performed in the Womb by the Birth without Will; as
also when it sucks before it knows what the Breast or Milk is; also the
Pulmonary Muscles move the Breast when Men are asleep, and consequently cannot
be said to Will. To the first I answer, that there is a sort of Will in Brutes,
arising from something analogous to the Rational Soul, and proceeding from
Natural Appetite, and therefore they may be said to have a voluntary Motion. As
to the Motion of the Birth, and Breathing of those that are asleep, I say that
Animal Motion is not always directed by the Will; but it is sufficient in
Persons healthy, a sleep or waking, that it be performed according to the Will.
Moreover, the Will is twofold, either by Election or by Instinct, as in Men
sleeping, or the Birth in the Womb. Galen upon this Subject writes, that of
those things which are moved by voluntary Motion, some are free, others are
serviceable to the several Affections of the Body. And that every Creature
knows to what Uses the Faculties of his Soul are ordained, without an
Instructor. Therefore the Motion of the Muscles is Voluntary, and not
Spontaneous; in regard that Spontaneous Motion, such as that of the Heart, is
truly Natural, as not depending upon the Will of the Creature.

Seeing then the Motion of the Muscle is an Animal Action, and that the Muscle
it self is the Instrument of Voluntary Motion; it is a certain Rule, that
wherever there is a Muscle, there, in the same part may be Action, and that
what part cannot be moved at pleasure, that is neither a Muscle, nor moved by a
Muscle, though the Structure of it may seem to resemble that of a Muscle.
Therefore the Heart is no Muscle, nor moved by a Muscle. On the contrary,
Stenonis affirms, that there are several Muscles of the Larynx, Tongue and
Back, which are never moved at the Will of the Mind. Though it is never to be
proved that there is any of them, but what may be moved at pleasure; and to
confirm his Opinion, he maintains the Heart to be a Muscle.

XIV. Whatever Part, says he, Whether the Heart be a Muscle?
neither requires any Part necessary for a Muscle, nor possesses any Part
denied to a Muscle, yet in Structure is like a Muscle, cannot but deserve the
Name of a Muscle, though it be not subject to the Power of the Will. But the
Heart, etc. Which way of Arguing, were it allowable, I might argue thus.
Whatever Part, neither requires any part necessary for the Stomach, nor
possesses any part denied the Stomach, yet in Structure and Composition, is
like the Stomach, cannot but deserve the Name of the Stomach, though it do not
concoct the Nourishment; but all these things requisite, are found in the
Urinary Bladder; Figure, Shape, Substance, Arteries, Veins, Nerves, etc.
therefore the Urinary Bladder deserves the Name of the Stomach. Then says
Stenonis, nor possesses any part denied to a Muscle; where as it is obvious,
that there are in the Heart two little Ears, two wide Ventricles, and eleven
large Valves, the like to which, were never seen in any Muscle. So that the
Heart possessing many Parts denied to a Muscle, the Structure of it cannot be
like to that of a Muscle. Then the Action of the Heart is to make Blood, which
no Muscle in the whole Body can pretend to do. If he draws his Argument from
the Contraction of the Fibers in the Motion of the Pulse, which is a voluntary
Motion, and hence we prove the Heart to be a Muscle; he may as well prove the
Ventricle to be a Muscle, which offended by corroding things, contracts it self
by the Help of the Muscles, to expel the offending Matter by Vomit or Hickup;
or the Gallbladder, which does the same, when offended with boiling Choler; or
the Womb contracting it self for the Expulsion of the Birth. Nay, the very
Membranes of the Brain, which in Sneezing, contract themselves, would come to
be Muscles; which being all Absurdities, prove the Certainty of our Axiom
before mentioned.

XV. There is but one Action of The Action of the Muscle.
the Muscle, which is to draw; which is performed by the Animal Spirits
determined into the Muscle, and flowing into the Fiber, which causes the
swelling Muscle to contract it self according to its Length. For so the Tendon
is drawn toward the Head; which Determination, and copious Influx of the
Spirits, so long as i^ lasts, so long the Muscle remains contracted.

While this Muscle is contracted, the opposite Muscle relaxes, because the
Spirits, before determined into that, flow into another, which causes it to
grow languid, so that the Swelling and Contraction ceases; because the
Alteration of the Determination of the Animal Spirits may happen in a moment;
though how it is done, we cannot so well explain.

XVI. But this Relaxation of the Relaxation (...) Action.
Muscle is no Action, but a ceasing from Action; and therefore they are in an
Error, who think it so to be. Which Galen seems to assert in one Place, though
in another, he says, that Contraction is more proper to the Body of the Muscle
then Extension; and so he seems to make Relaxation a kind of secundary Action.
But if we rightly consider it, it is no Action, either primary or secundary,
but only a Motion by Accident.

XVII. Another Question is, Whether The Tonic Motion.
there be any Action in the Tonic Motion, when the Muscles being every way
contracted together, the Parts to be moved are never bent, but are at rest; nor
do the Muscles themselves seem to be moved? I answer, there is a manifest
Motion in that case; for the Muscles act every way with equal Stri^e, and that
which is thought to be the motionless rest of any Part, is caused by the
Opposite Muscles acting together at the same time, and at the same time drawing
every way the Part to be moved.

XVIII. Riolanus seems to make some No difference between Contraction and
Tension.
Difference between Contraction and Tension, and this he calls the Conservation
of the Thing contracted. But in regard this Tension is nothing else but the
Continuation of Contraction, it cannot be separated from Contraction. But, says
Riolanus, many things are extended which are not contracted. As the Yard is
extended by a distensive Faculty, but then it is not contracted like a Muscle.
Worms are distended, but not contracted; but the Muscles are both distended and
contracted. But all this signifies nothing to the Muscles, which by their own
ordinary voluntary Motion contract and relax; but by some preternatural Cause
are hindered from that Motion, and many times distended, when voluntarily they
ought to be relaxed, as in Convulsions, and relax and flax when they ought to
be contracted, as in the Palsy.

XIX. The Action of the Muscle is The Action is performed by Fibers.
performed by its Fibers, Tendons and Nerves. The Fibers cause Contraction, by
which the Tendon is drawn to, together with the Part which is fastened to it.
Through the Nerves, the Animal Spirits flow in, causing Feeling, Swelling and
Contraction. But if one of these three be wanting, or hindered, the Action
cannot be performed. For if the Nerve be obstructed or cut, then the Animal
Spirits not flowing into it, there can be no Swelling or Contraction of the
Muscle. If the Fibers are cut athwart, their Contraction is made toward two
several Parts, upward and downward, and so the Part to be moved is not brought
to. If the Tendon be wanting, though the Muscles swell, because it is not
fastened to the Part that is to be moved, it does not draw it. As to the Flesh
that is interlarded among the Fibers that contributes nothing to the Motion,
but only strengthens the Fibers, and by its Heat cherishes and renders them
nimble, and defends them against the Injuries of Heat and Cold; but is unfit
for the Motion of Contraction, by reason of its Softness and Looseness, which
renders it unable to contract it self, or raise other Parts. Which Vesalius,
Erastus and Laurentius not aware of erroneously affirming this Flesh to be the
chief Instrument of Motion; the Absurdities of which is apparent, for that the
Muscles of meager Men are stronger than the Muscles of those who are more
fleshy. If any one object that the Muscles of the Calves of the Legs and Arms
draw with more force, by reason of their Carnosity; I answer, that their
Carnosity is not the reason, but because they are furnished with stronger, and
more numerous Fibers than others.

XX. The Operations of the Muscles The difference of Operation.
are various, according to the Variety of the Muscles, to which they are
fastened. In the Breast they dilate and contract, in the Gullet they facilitate
Swallowing; in the Larinx, they cause the Modulation of the Voice, etc.

XXI. But how the Animal Spirits Determination of the Spirus.
causing the Operation of the Muscle, flow, and are determined in greater
quantity at the pleasure of the Mind, sometimes into these, sometimes into
those Muscles, is a difficult Question: some will have them conveyed through
Imaginary Valves, which they ascribe to the Nerves. Others, not satisfied with
this Fiction, have invented double Tubes, so placed from one Muscle to the
other, that in the Contraction of the Muscle, the Orifice, guarded by a
peculiar Valve, opens; and that through that same Passage, the Spirits flow out
of the relaxed Muscle, into that which is to be contracted, the Valve of the
other Closing at the same moment; so that they cannot flow forth again, but of
necessity must distend the Muscle, until the Situation of the Parts being again
altered, that Valve opens, and the other shuts, by which means there is a
Passage opened for the contracting the other Muscle. This is indeed ingenious,
but little to the purpose. 1. Because the Muscles that move the Part to the
opposite Part, are most commonly too far distant from the former, so that those
little Pipes must be very long, as in those Muscles that move the Part forward
and backward. 2. These little Pipes, if not every where, yet would be some
where visible, seeing that the small little Nerves, through which the Spirits
flow, are visible. 3. For that in Wounds, the Muscles are many times divided
one from another, and yet notwithstanding their Separation, their Motion
proceeds in good order every way. Which could not be if there were any such
intervening Pipes in those Places cut, and then cicatrized. For by reason of
their smallness, they must of necessity be quite closed up by the Scar. 4. The
altered Situation of the Parts, cannot cause an opening and shutting of the
Valves. For it is supposed that the Situation of the Parts alters, as the
Spirits flow into this or that Muscle, and so the thing caused would precede
the Cause, and the Influx of the Spirits must be before the Cause of the Influx.

XXII. Cartesius seems to favor this Des Carts his Opinion.
Opinion of the little Pipes. For, says he, there are little gapings in every
one of these Muscles, through which those Spirits may slow out of one into the
other, and which are so disposed, that when the Spirits come from the Brain
toward one of those, they have somewhat a greater force than those that go
toward the other, and together close up all those Passages, through which the
Spirits of this may pass into the other. By which means, all the Spirits before
contained in these two Muscles, immediately slow into one of them, and so swell
and contract it, while the other relaxes.

This seems a fpecious Fiction, and needs no other Refutation than the Story of
the little Pipes. Add to this, that when a Body is bended forward and backward,
who can imagine such Gapings can be extended from the Muscles before, to those
behind? Shall those Gapings and the Spirits pass in a straight Line through all
the other Parts that lie between? To this De la Forge answers, that those
Spirits do not pass through all the Parts that lie between, but from the Tendon
of the whole Muscle, through the Pores and invisible Channels, into the Tendon
of the other, for though the Muscles are remote one from another, the Muscles
lie close together. This specious Fiction pretends that the Spirits flow
rapidly from the Tendon of the acting Muscle, through those supposed Channels,
in the Tendon and Belly of the Muscle which is to act: but what if the opposite
Muscle should not act but lie still, wherefore then, the action of the acting
Muscle ceasing, do not those spirits flow into the opposite that rests, when
the Passages are open, and the Muscle is capable to receive them. If it be
impossible they should be so soon dissipated through the Pores of the Muscle,
or return into the Veins or Arteries, where do they then remain? Since they do
not enter any other from the acting Muscle surceasing its action so suddenly?
Or if they cannot enter the Muscle that is to act by reason of the length of
the distance; What hinders their entrance into the next adjoining Muscles or
Tendon? This the Valves occasion adjoining to the Channels, says de la Forge.
But wherefore are they not sufficiently open when the violent rushing of the
Spirits into the acting Muscle and it is Tendon is sufficient to open the Valves
of the Channels, tending toward the other opposite, and so to make a free
passage for its self from that into this: Besides that all Valves give passage
to one Part, but still prevent the flowing back. So that those Valves that open
to transmit the Spirits from the right acting Muscle to the left, which never
permit the same spirits to pass back from the left to the right. Besides, if
those spirits enter the Muscle, which is to act through the Tendon, then the
Tail of the Muscle will swell sooner then the Head, and so the Tail shall be
drawn toward the Head, and not the Head toward the Tail. Then if the Muscles
that are to act, could not swell so soon as they ought, unless they borrowed
spirits from the neighboring Muscles ceasing to act, nor fall again, unless
they discharged their spirits into the adjoining Muscles, what shall we think
of the Sphincters that rise and fall, act and surcease to act, yet neither
receive any spirits, nor discharge any into any opposite Muscles, as having no
such. Or else as if the spirits were endu'd with reason, and knew when to open
or when to shut the Valves, or when to pass through and when not: Certainly
such Philosophers seek rather to wrest Nature to their conceits, then to direct
their conceits according to the Laws of Nature. See more of this l. 8. c. 1.

CHAP. II. Of the Muscles of the Head.
THE Muscles of the Head, either move the whole Head, or some parts belonging
to the Head.

The whole Head is moved either Secundarily, as it follows the Muscles of the
Neck, caused by the Muscles of the Neck; or Primarily, as it is turned by its
proper Muscles above the First Verteber, upon which it is immediately placed,
either forward, backward or sideways: also as it is turned above the
Tooth-resembling Process of the Second Verteber, as upon an Axle.

The First Motion is performed by Nine pair of Muscles.

I. The First Pair, called Splenium, The Spleny Muscles.
oblong, thick, fleshy and spread over both Vertebers. It rises from a Nervous
beginning, partly from the Spines of the five upper Vertebers of the Breast;
partly from the lower Spines of the Vertebers of the Neck, and ascending
upwards inserted with a broad end into the hinder part of the Head; and draws
the head directly to the hinder Parts: or if one only act, it draws the head
backward toward the side.

II. The Second Pair, called the The complex Pair.
Complex Pair, because every Muscle seems to consist of three Muscles, as
having various beginnings and many Tendonous and Fleshy parts. This Pair arises
at the seventh Verteber of the Neck, and the first, second, third, fourth, and
fifth Vertebers of the Breast, and is most firmly fastened to the hinder part
of the Head, sometimes with a single, sometimes with a treble Tendon. Whence
Galen affirms these Muscles to be three fold. Nevertheless that they are single
is apparent, because there is no separation of any Membrane, but are included
within their own Membrane only, which could not be, if they were divided into
many Muscles. For then they would have every one their proper Membrane, by
means whereof it might be separted from the other.

III. The Third Pair called the small The small and thick Pair.
and thick Pair, ^eated under the Second Pair, rises with a Nervous beginning
from the transverse Processes of the first Vertebers of the Neck, rarely from
the Five Pairs of the upper Vertebers of of the Breast, and growing fleshy,
extends it self obliquely upward and inward, and is inserted with a Nervous end
into the hindermost root of the Mamillary Process, and lighty draws the head
backward; but if one only act, it bends it backward toward the side.

Riolanus believes this Pair to be nothing else, but a production of the
Spinatic Muscle, reaching to the head near the Mamillary Process.

IV. The fourth Pair, called the The bigger straight Pair.
bigger, straight Pair, is small, fleshy and slen^er, and rises from the top of
the Spine of the Second Verteber of the Neck, and ending in the middle of the
hinder part of the Head, assists the motion of the Third Pair.

V. The Fifth Pair, called the lesser The lesser straight Pair.
straight Pair, lies under the former, and resembles it in substance, shape and
course. It rises from the hinder part of the first Verteber, and being inserted
into the hinder part of the Head, assists the motion of the Third and the
preceding Muscle.

VI. The sixth Pair, called the The upper oblique Pair.
Upper Oblique Pair, is seated under the right Pairs, and resembles them in
substance and shape. It is small and rises from the Process of the first
Verteber of the Neck, and ends in the hinder part of the Head, near the outward
side of the right Pair. Bauhinus says it rises in the hinder part of the Head,
and ends at the lateral Processes of the first Verteber of the Neck. This
acting we nod slightly straight forward: if either act, it inclines the Head
backward to one side.

VII. The Seventh is the Lower The lower oblique Pair.
Oblique Pair, oblong, fleshly and round, rising from the Spine of the Second
Verteber of the Neck, and inserted into the transverse Process of the first
Verteber, and turns it round with the Head annexed to it, to the sides.

VIII. The eighth, called Mastoides, The Mastoides Pair.
seated in the forepart of the Neck, strong, long and round, which by reason
of its two beginings, some assert to be twofold. It rises Nervous and broad
from the upper part of the Sternon and Clavicle, and with a fleshy Tail is
inserted into the Mamillary Process and the hinder part of the Head; this Pair
bends the Head forward and downward, and if one act at a time turns it
obliquely to the side.

IX. The Ninth Pair, discovered by The inner straight Pair.
Fallopius, which may be called the Inner Straight Pair, seated under the
Gullet in the forepart of the Neck, joins to the First Pair of the Neck. It
rises with a Nervous beginning from the Ligaments of almost all the Vertebers
of the Neck, and with a Fleshy tail is inserted into the Basis of the Head,
between both Processes, where it is joynted with the first Verteber, and bends
the Head forward, when we nod.

X. The Muscles which move the The movers of the Parts in the Head.
Parts contained in the Head are many and various: two in the Forehead four
belonging to the Eyelids; twelve to the Eyes; eight to the Ears; four to the
Membranes of the Tympanum; eight to the Nose; fifteen to the Cheeks and Lips;
ten to the lower Jaw; ten to the Tongue; eight to the Hyoides bone; the form,
beginning, insertion, situation and use of all which we have described, l. 3.

So that the Muscles of the Head in all are Ninety and Nine.

CHAP. III. Of the Muscles of the Neck.
THE Muscles which primarily move the Neck, and secondarily the Head, are four
on each side, which move the Neck forward, backward and sideways.

I. Two Long, which lie hid under The long Muscles.
the Gullet. These rise fleshy from the fifth and sixth Verteber of the Breast,
and ascending upward, with a sharp Tendon are inserted together into the
extuberant Processes of the first Verteber of the Neck: sometimes they are
fastened to the hinder part of the Head near the Great hole. By the benefit of
these Muscles, the Neck together with the Head is bent directly toward the the
fore Parts; but sideways, by the single motion of one.

II. Two Scalen's, (these some reckon The Scalen-Muscle.
among the Muscles of the Breast) which are more properly seated in the Sides,
and proceeding from the first Rib with a fleshy Beginning, are inserted within
side into all the transverse Processes of the Vertebers of the Neck, the first
and second sometimes excepted, and assist the Motion of those already
mentioned. These Muscles have a peculiar Hole, through which the Arteries
descending to the Arm, and the Veins ascending thence, find their Passage.

III. Two Transversals, seated in the The Transversal Muscle.
Back; These arising from the Roots of the Processes of the six superior
Vertebers, and insensibly becoming more fleshy, are fastened to all the
Transverse Processes of the Vertebers of the Neck without-side, and bend the
Neck to the hinder Parts, or by the single Motion of one, obliquely backward.
Between these Muscles the Nerves of the Spinal Pith are carried, arising from
the Vertebers of the Neck.

IV. Two called Spinati, which being The Spinati Muscles.
long and broad, possesses the whole Neck between the Spines. They arise from
seven Spines of the Breast, and five of the Vertebers of the Neck, lying one
upon another, and distinguished only by the Spines, and are implanted into the
whole inferior Seat of the second Spine of the Verteber of the Neck. and
together with the Transversals move the Neck obliquely toward the hinder Parts.

To these eight Muscles of the Neck, The number of the Muscles of the Neck.
if you reckon the thirteen Muscles of the Larynx, seven of the Gullet, the
eight of the Hyoides-bone, and ten of the Tongue, which are all seated in the
Neck, the Muscles of the Neck will amount to forty six.

CHAP. IV. Of the Muscles of the Arms or Shoulders.
THE upper Part of the Arm, reaching from the Top of the Shoulder to the Elbow,
which they call the Shoulder, is moved by various Motions; five in the first
place, forward, backward, upward, downward and circular. Which Motions are
performed by nine Muscles.

I. The first, by reason of its Situation, The Pectoral Muscl^.
is called the Pectoral; which being of a fleshy Substance, and incumbent upon
the Breast, which arises with a membranous Beginning from the middle Clavicle,
and the whole Sternon Bone, as also from the Muscles of the Sixth, Seventh and
Eighth Rib; as if it were composed of several Muscles, and being straightened
toward the End, is implanted with a straight and narrow Tendon into the Bone of
the Shoulder, a little below the Head of it, and brings the Arm forward before
the Breast, and that either in a straight Line, or somewhat upward or downward,
as sometimes all, sometimes the middlemost or uppermost, or lowermost Fibers
are contracted. This may be manifestly divided into two Muscles, but not into
three or four, as Bauhinus was of Opinion.

II. The Second, from the Figure The triangular humeral Muscle.
of the Greek Delta, is called Deltoides, and the Triangular Humeral. This
proceeds with a broad and nervous Beginning from the middle Part of the
Clavicle, to the Top of the Shoulder, and the whole Spine of the Scapula, and
with a strong Tendon, fleshy without, nervous within, is extended to the middle
of the Shoulder Bone, and raises the Arm upward, sometimes before, sometimes
backward, according to the various Contraction of the foremost, hindermost,
middlemost, or all the Fibers. In the middle Part of this, Unskilful
Chyrurgeons make little Issues; but very erroneously; for that upon Contraction
of the Muscle, the Hole of the Fontanel must be contracted, by which means, the
Pea or Pellet is forced out with Violence and Pain, and the Fontanel suddenly
closes up again. Which Mistake is easily avoided, by making the Issue between
this and the Biceps Muscle, four or five Fingers Breadth below the Joint of the
Shoulder; in which Place, while the Arm is bent, this Space between the two
Muscles is presently perceived.

III. The Third, from the Use of The Aniscalptor Muscle.
it, Aniscalptor, or Buttock-Scratcher, because it draws the Arm downward
behind; but by reason of its Largeness, it is called Latissimus, or the
Broadest; because, that together with its ^llow Muscle, it covers the whole
Back. It arises with a membranous and broad Original from the Tops of the
Vertebers of the Spine, which are seated between the Os Sacrum and the sixth
Verteber of the Breast; as also from the upper part of the Hion-Bone; from
thence, being become fleshy, it approaches the Basis of the Scapula, from
whence sometimes it receives several fleshy Fibers, and at length, with a
short, but strong and broad Tendon, it is inserted between the Pectoral and the
Round Muscle, and draws the Arm downward behind; sometimes more to the upper,
sometimes more toward the lower Parts, according as these or those Fibers are
contracted, of which it has many, by reason of its large Beginning.

IV. The Fourth, called the bigger The bigger round Muscle.
Round Muscle, which being fleshy, is seated behind under the Arm-pit, arises
with a fleshy Beginning from the whole lower Rib of the Scapula, and with a
short, broad and strong Tendon, ends in the Bone of the Arm, a little below the
Neck, and draws the Arm downward behind.

V. The Fifth, from its Situation, The lesser round Muscle.
called the Shorter Transversal Muscle, from its Form, the Lesser Round Muscle,
rises from the lower Corner of the Scapula, and being extended to the Neck of
the Arm, assists the Motion of the fourth Muscle, of which, some think it to be
a Portion.

VI. The Sixth, is called Supra The Infra Spinatus.
Scapularis Inferior, by others, Infra Spinatus, because it covers the whole
Exterior Part of the Scapula, that lies under the Spine. This arising from the
Basis of the Scapula, below the Spine, is inserted with a short and broad
Tendon into the Ligament of the Shoulder, which fastens the Joint, as into a
Semicircle, and winds the Arm to the hinder Parts.

VII. The Seventh, is called Super The Supra Spinatus.
Scapularis, Superior, by others, Supra Spinatus. It arises from the Basis of
the Scapula, and filling the whole Cavity between the Spine and the upper Rib
of the Scapula, is inserted obliquely into the Neck with a broad and strong
Tendon that passes beyond the Joint, and together with the former, causes the
circular Motion of the Arm; though others believe, that together with the
Deltoides, it moves the Arm upward.

VIII. The Eighth, which is called The Subscapular Muscle.
the Subscapulary or the Immersed, is very fleshy, and being seated between the
Scapula and the Ribs, possesses the inner Part of the Scapula, and is inserted
with a broad Tendon withinside into the Second Ligament of the Shoulder, and
brings about the Arm toward the inner Parts.

The Tendons of these three Muscles, sixth, seventh, and eighth, that bring
about the Arm, as it were orbicularly enfold the whole Ligament of the Joint.
Nevertheless we are to understand, that this same circumacting Motion is very
much assisted by the rest of the Muscles, acting successively.

IX. The Ninth, is called Perforatus The Perforate Muscle.
Coracoides, and Coracobrachiaeus, which rises with a short and nervous
beginning from the Process of the Scapula, and with a strong Tendon runs almost
to the middle of the Arm before, and together with the Pectoral, brings it
forward toward the Breast. The Belly of this is boar'd through, and affords a
Passage to the Nerves, which are distributed to the Muscles of the Elbow.
Riolanus believes this Muscle to be a Portion of the Biceps, or first Muscle of
the Elbow.

CHAP. V. Of the Muscles of the Scapula.
THE Scapula, (which is joynted with the Bone of the Shoulder, by means of a
most thick Ligament, and a large Nerve) besides that, it is moved by accident
by the foresaid Muscles of the Shoulder, has also four peculiar Motions, which
are performed by the benefit of the four following Muscles.

I. The Lesser Serratus, which lying The Serratus minor.
under the Pectoral Muscle, arises, as it were, like so many Fingers, from the
four uppermost Ribs, the first excepted, and is inserted into the Scapula, at
the Corocoides Process, and brings forward toward the Breast.

II. The Trapezius, or Cucullaris, The Trapezius*
because that together with its Pair covering the Back, it has some kind of
Resemblance to a Monks Hood. It takes its beginning from the hinder part of the
Head, and the Top of the five Spines of the Neck, and the upper eight or nine
of the Breast; thence growing more narrow, it proceeds toward the Scapula, is
inserted into the whole Spine of it, the Top of the Shoulder, and the broader
Part of the Clavicle, and moves the Scapula, by reason of its various Original,
and several Fibers, upward, downward, right forward, oblique, according to the
Contraction of these or those Fibers.

III. The Rhomboides, which is The Rhomboides.
thin, broad and quadrangular, lying hid under the Skin, and arises with a
fleshy Original, from the Spines of the three lower Vertebers of the Neck, and
the three uppermost of the Breast, and is inserted into the External Basis of
the Scapula, and draws it somewhat upward toward the hinder Parts, and brings
it to the Back.

IV. The Levator, which proceeding The bigger and round Muscle.
from the transverse Processes of the second, third and fourth Verteber of the
Neck (the diverse Heads uniting about the Middle) is by a broad and fleshy
Tendon inserted into the upper and lower Angle of the Scapula, and draws it up
forwards, and raises it with the Shoulder.

To these Muscles of the Shoulders, The Levator.
some there are who add the larger Serratus and the Deltoides; but erroneously,
when the one belongs properly to the Breast, and the other is a Muscle of the
Shoulder.

CHAP. VI. Of the Muscles assisting Respiration.
SEeing that the Blood which rarefied in the right Ventricle of the Heart,
ought to be refrigerated and condensed, before it comes to the left Ventricle,
there is a necessity for Respiration, that by the Alternate Dilatation and
Contraction of the Breast, the cold Air may be received into the Lungs, and
again expelled from thence, together with the Vapors; and there is so great a
necessity of this, that without it, it is impossible for Man, after he is born
to live, but that he must dye upon the Suffocation of the Heat.

Now this Motion of Respiration, not being a Natural, but an Animal Motion, it
must be performed by Instruments that serve the Animal Motion, that is to say,
the Muscles, of which, though the Lungs are destitute, yet to the end, this
Motion may continually go forward, the Supreme Creator has added to the Breast
seven and fifty Muscles for the Service of Respiration, to dilate and contract
it by continual Alternation, and after the same manner, by accident to move the
Lungs.

I. The broadest and biggest of these The Diaphragma.
Muscles, which more inwardly separates the Breast from the lower Belly, is
called the Diaphragma.

The rest are interwoven with the Ribs, or else are spread upon them.

II. Those that are interwoven with The Intercostal Muscles.
the Ribs, are the Intercostals, forty four in all, on each side twenty two,
eleven external, and as many internal; all short and fleshy, sprinkled with
oblique Fibers, carried from one Rib to that which is next, and mutually
cutting each other like the Greek Letter chapter Of which, these arise from the
lower Parts of the upper Ribs; and descending obliquely toward the hinder
Parts, are inserted into the lower Parts of the upper Ribs; the other are
carried a contrary Course, these end in the Gristles, the other fill the Spaces
of the Ribs and Gristles.

Here Nicholas Stenonis well observes, that there are some Muscles besides the
Intercostals, which are vulgarly numbered among the Intercostals, whereas they
are Muscles quite different from them; that is to say, Those which from the
transverse Processes of the Vertebers terminate in the upper side of the lower
Ribs, and properly to be called the Lifters of the Ribs. Moreover, he adds this
Caution, that neither that same Part of the exterior Intercostals is to be
passed slightly over, which fastens the bony Extremity of the upper Rib, with
the Gristle of the lower.

III. The Intercostals receive Arteries The Vessel. of the Intercostals.
from each Intercostal Artery, and send forth Veins to the Azygon, and upper
Intercostal. They receive Nerves from the sixth Pair, to which are joined those
which proceed from the Pith of the Back.

IV. As to the Action of the Intercostals, The Action of the Intercostals.
Anatomists are in dispute about it.

John Mayo, an English Man, ascribes to these Muscles, the Office of dilating
the Ribs in Respiration, or of removing them one from another, and adds also,
that the Diaphragma dilates the Breast. But the first is impossible, seeing
that the Office of the Muscles, is by contracting themselves to draw with them
the Parts fastened to them, and so the Intercostals would draw the Ribs which
are fastened to them, and streighten the Brea^. The latter, concerning the
Diaphragma, we have refuted al* ready. Some believe that the Internal dilate,
and the External contract the Breast; others assert quite the contrary, both
erroneously, for the reason last alleged. Others believe they act nothing in
Respiration; but that in Expiration they contract the Ribs together, and help
the Motion of the Diaphragma; which is our Opinion also, because their Actions
cannot be different, but that they must conspire to one end, which is to draw
the Ribs to themselves, and contract the Breast.

By reason of the smallness and thinness of these Muscles, Fallopius was of
Opinion, that they were not Muscles, but only fleshy Ligaments of the Ribs.
Which were it true, the Ribs had not wanted Fibers cross-wise cutting one
another, as we observe in these Muscles.

The Respiratory Muscles which are spread upon the Ribs, are six of each side.

I. The Subclavial, seated under the The Subclavius.
Clavicle, arises fleshy from the inner Clavicle near the Acromium, and carried
forward with oblique Fibers, for the most part transverse, is inserted into the
first Rib near the Sternon, and by drawing it upward and outward, dilates the
Breast.

II. The bigger Serratus, seated in The Serratus Major.
the side of the Breast, and remarkable for its singular broadness and
Carnosity, reaches from the inner Basis of the Scapula to six or seven Ribs,
and with five unequal Extremities, is inserted into five true, and two or three
spurious Ribs, before they terminate in the Gristles; though Riolanus will have
it arise from the two upper Ribs, and extend it self to the Clavicle. However
Spigelius and Vestingius, ascribe an Original and Use quite contrary, but
erroneously. The Motion of this Muscle is much assisted by the oblique
descending Muscle of the Abdomen, and the Motion of this by that. And hence it
is that the Extremities of the one are interposed into the Extremities of the
other, Finger-wise, and so they both together form a serrate Jointure, like the
lower Serratus Posticus.

III. The upper Serratus Posticus, The upper Serratus Posticus.
which being small, is seated in the Back under the Rhomboides, between both
Scapulas, and above the first Pair of the Muscles of the Head, and rises with a
membrany Substance from the Spines of the three inferior Vertebres of the Neck,
and of the first of the Breast, and is inserted into the Intervals of the three
or four uppermost Ribs, and by lifting them upward dilates the Breast.

IV. The lower serratus Posticus, The lower Serratus posticus.
broad and Membranous, seated almost in the middle of the Back, under the third
broadest Muscle of the Back, or the Aniscalpter, proceeds from the Spines of
the three inferior Muscles of the Back; and of the first of the Loins; and
terminates in the three or four lower spurious Ribs, by drawing which outward,
it dilates the lower part of the Breast.

V. The Sacrolumbus, spread under The Sacrolumbus.
the preceding, which arising from the Brim of the Ilion Bone, the hinder part
of the Os Sacrum, and the Spiny Apophysis of the Loins, ascends with a fleshy
portion even to the Ribs, into all and every one of which it is inserted in the
lower part; and about three fingers distance from the Spines, in the place
where the Ribs begin to bow fastens to a Tendon, concerning which Tendon
Anatomists have been much mistaken, some with Laurentius, were of opinion that
this Muscle sent forth a double Tendon, one upward to the inferior part of the
Ribs; another downward toward their upper part, and that so by the means of
these various Tendons, (which are manifest by seven about the Ribs) the Ribs
were lifted up in fetching breath, and drawn downward in expiration. But in
regard such contrary Actions cannot be performed by one and the same motion, I
thought it probable that the descending Tendons proceed from some other
peculiar Muscle, and therefore upon diligent search I found, that they
proceeded from a certain Muscle, that lies spread under the Sacrolumbus, and
sticks so close to it, that it can hardly be parted. This I perceived owed its
Original to the three, four, five, six, seven Vertebers of the Neck (and
therefore I called it the descending Cervical) and that it rose from them with
a fleshy substance and sent forth Tendons downward to the upper part of all the
Ribs, directly opposite to the Tendons of the Sacrolumbus, and that the Tendons
of these two Muscles mutual intercut one another crose-wise, and that they did
not act together but alternately. For that the Tendons of the descending
Cervical draw the Ribs upward in fetching breath, so that they may not be
removed or dilated in the middle spaces one by another; but the Tendons of the
Sacrolumbus in expiration draw the Ribs downward; so that they may not be
contracted to themselves. As to the insertion of the Tendons of the
Sacrolumbus, Nicholas Stenonis makes this Observation. The Fibers says he, are
not presently carried from the lower Rib to the next inferior, but some pass
over three, others more that lie in the middle; neither are those which one
Fiber sends forth inserted into one Fiber only, but some provide for three,
others five, others seven Ribs. By the same reason, every conspicuous Tendon,
not contented with that flesh which one Rib affords, in some places muster
Fibers together from four or five Ribs together. Neither are these things so
confused, but that in a Carcass of any reasonable bigness they may be easily
demonstrated and shown; as well by straight dissection from a Tendon descending
back ward; as in a transverse dissection, proceeding upward from the
intercepted space between the Ribs; to the end the Number of the Tendons of one
Belly may be seen. In regard that every entire Belly affords its part to each:
so that every entire Tendon proceeding from several Bellys, receives its
Portion from every one in particular.

VI. The Triangular, vulgarly so The Triangular.
called, though it does not form a true Triangle. This being very small and
slender proceeds from the middle Line of the Sternon, and sends forth on each
side four small Projections to the Bony Extremities, of the three, four, five
and six true Ribs, (where they are joined to the Grisles) by lifting up which
Ribs they streighten the Breast, and depress the forepart of it.

To these six Muscles Fallopius adds three others seated in the Neck, which
Vesalius with more reason judges to be part of the Muscles of the Neck and Back.

These Respiratory Muscles are secundarily assisted in their duty by the
Muscles of the Abdomen, Scapula's, and Arms.

CHAP. VII. Of the Muscles of the Back and Loins.
BY reason of the various motions of the Back, and especially of the Loins,
forwards, backward and sideways, Tendons of Muscles are inserted into every one
of the Vertebers; as if there were many Muscles there; which nevertheless some
Anatomists refer to one great Muscle, from which they hold all those Tendons
are produced. Which Opinion seems to have been grounded upon this, that the
Muscles of the Back and Loins in many places stick so close one to another,
that they can hardly be separated, but an exact and curious Dissection will
show four Pairs of Muscles, in the Back and Loins, by means of which the
violent motions of those Parts are performed, especially about the last
Verteber of the Breast, and first of the Loins, as being those which stick less
close together then the rest.

I. The first Pair consists of two The Quadrati Muscles.
Triangular Muscles, which being joined together make a kind of a square,
vulgarly called Par Quadratum. These being broad and thick internally proceed
from the hindermost upper Cavity of the Ilion Bone, and the lateral part of the
Os Sacrum; and are inserted into the transverse Extuberances of the lumbal
Vertebers, as far as the last Ribs, being of a fleshy substance, and bend the
Vertebers of the Loins foward, or one or other acting obliquely forward toward
the sides.

II. The Second and Primary Pair, The longest Muscles*
consist of the Longest Muscles, which are extended from the Extremity of the
Os Sacrum and Ill^um to the Mamillary Processes, near the Temple bones; and
afford Tendons to the several Processes of the lumbal Vertebers and Back; and
for the most part are confused with the Sacrolumb ^s, and semi-Spinatus as far
as the lowermost Verteber of the Back; being separated from it toward the upper
Parts which is the reason that many mistake these three for one Muscle, in
regard it is so hard a matter to separate them. Some have divided this Pair,
into as many Pairs as there are Muscles; but Galen rightly describes it for one
Pair affording Tendons to all the Muscles.

III. The Third Pair of the Sacred The Sacred Muscles.
Muscles, which rise with a sharp and fleshy beginning from the hinder part of
the Os Sacrum, and terminate with several Tendons in the Spine of the twelsth
Verteber of the Breast, and for the most part in the Spines and oblique
Processes of the lumbal Vertebers also, and assist the action of the former.

IV. The Fourth Pair is composed The Semi-Spinati.
of the Semi Spinati, which rising with a Nervous beginning from all the Spines
of the Os Sacrum and Loins, in the Processes of the Loins, and lower transverse
ones of the Breast; and lift up the Breast.

All these Muscles acting together the Spine is lifted up, and so upheld or
bowed. But when those that are in either side act alone, it is writhed to the
sides.

But the Muscles of the Abdomen, especially the straight ones, mainly assist
the bowing of the Loins and the whole Spine toward the fore-parts. For while
they are contracted they depress the Abdomen and Breast, and withal bow the
Spine, which he who lying upon his back, and would raise himself without the
help of his hands, shall manifestly perceive.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Muscles of the Abdomen and the Parts contained in the lower
Belly.
I. THE Abdomen is furnished The Muscles of the Abdomen.
with ten Muscles, for squeezing down the Nourishment and violent expulsion of
the Excrements and Birth. Two obliquely ascending, and as many obliquely
descending; two straight, and as many Pyramidical, these adhereing together in
the lower Part; and two transverse. The Podex has three Muscles one Sphincter
and two Lifters up. l. 1. cap. 8.

The Bladder is purs'd together with one Sphincter. l. 1. cap. 21.

The Testicles of Men hang by two Muscles called Free-masters. l. 1. cap. 22.

The Yard has four Muscles. l. 1. cap. 23.

The Clitoris in Women is furnished with four Muscles. l. 1. cap. 25.

CHAP. IX. Of the Muscles of the Elbow.
THE Elbow consists of two Bones, which as they are knit together with various
Articulations, so have they their Motions somewhat various. The Bone of the
Elbow directs bending and extention. The Radius turns the Palm and back of the
Hand either upward or downward; and therefore they have their proper Muscles to
direct their different Motions.

I. The Bone of the Elbow is moved The Muscles of the Elbow.
with four Muscles, two bending, seated in the forepart of the Arm, and two
extending, which possesses the hinder part of the Arm. The first are called
Biceps and Brachioeus, the latter Long and Short.

II. That called Biceps, rises with a The Biceps.
double and strong beginning, the one Nervous, from the Acetabula of the
Scapula it self. The other partly Fleshy, partly Nervous, from the Coracoides
Excrescence of the Scapula. Which Beginnings being afterward united, it takes
up with its Body the inner seat of the Arm, and is inserted with a thick Tendon
into the innermost Prominency, somewhat fastened to the Ligament of the Joint.

III. The Brachiaeus is laid or spread The Brachiaeus.
underneath the former, and is altogether fleshy, proceeding from the middle
part of the Bone of the Arm, and terminating between the Radius and the Elbow,
in the place where they are fastened together, this with the former most
rightly bends the Elbow.

IV. The Long Muscle shows it self The (...)*
with a strong, broad, but double beginning, the higher, from the lower Rib of
the Omoplate; the other lower, which being joined together, under the head of
the Shoulder Bone terminates in the Olicrane or top of the Elbow.

V. The Short one, arising from the The Short.
hinder Neck of the Arm, terminates in that part of the Olicrane, where the
former ends, and upon which it rests. This together with the former makes a
strong and sinewy Tendon, by which the Arm is extended.

To these four Muscles the two former are added by latter Anatomists.

VI. 6. The Externai Brachiaeus, The external Brachiaeus.
by Riolane so called, which is a Fleshy lump, confounded with the Long and the
Short, and inserted into the same Part.

VII. The Aconaeus, which being but The Aconaeus.
of a small bulk, rises from the lower part of the Shoulder behind, and running
along between the two Bones of the Elbow obliquely descends to the side of the
Arm. These if they are to be accounted particular Muscles, must assist the
Extension of the Long and the Short.

CHAP. X. Of the Muscles of the Radius.
FOur Muscles move the Radius, of which the two innermost, which move it
inward, are called Pronators. The two outermost which turn it outward are
called Supinators.

I. The first of the Pronatores, from The round Muscle.
its round form is called Rotundus; which being produced from the inner part of
the little swelling of the Shoulder runs with a Membranous Tehdon, almost to
the middle of the Radius.

II. The Second, which is the lowermost, The Quadratus.
and is called Quadratus; being extended from the inner side of the Arm
athawrt, proceeds above the Ligament, which fastens the Radius to the Elbow,
and is joined to the inner part of the Radius.

III. The first of the Supinators, The longer Supinator.
which is the Longer, arising from the Extreme little Bunch of the Shoulder,
descends to the lowermost top of the Radius.

IV. The other proceeding from The Shorter.
the External Apophysis of the Arm, terminates near the middle of the Radius.

Note, That although the Descriptions of the Muscles of the Radius follow next
in order to that of the Muscles of the Elbow, however in demonstrations the
Muscles of the Fingers, Thumb and Wrist are first to be shown; afterward the
Muscles of the Radius, as being more commodiously to be seen, when the others
are taken away.

CHAP. XI. Of the Muscles of the Wrist, and Hollow of the Hand.
THE Wrist is extended, bended, and moved sideways by the benefit of four
Muscles, two external, and as many Internal.

I. Nevertheless, before these, the The Palmary Muscle.
Palmary Muscle is in the first place to be demonstrated, which is spread under
almost all the Muscles of the inner part of the Hand. It derives its Original
from the inner little Bunch of the Shoulder, fleshy at the beginning,
afterward attenuated into a slender Tendon, which passing beyond the Annulary
Ligament of the Wrist, is dilated into the sinewy Membrane through the Hollow
of the Hand, expanded to the Confines of the Fingers, so closely adhering to
the Skin, that it can hardly be separated from it. This by wrinkling the Skin,
strengthens the force of Grasping, and endues the Hollow of the Hand with an
extraordinary Sense of Feeling.

Next to the Palmary Muscle, lies a certain piece of Flesh at the beginning of
the inner part of the Hand, in the lower part of the Mount of the Moon, close
by the eighth little Bone of the Wrist, sometimes divided into two, sometimes
into three, outwardly representing the form of two sometimes three Muscles, and
is carried into the inner and middle part of the Hollow of the Hand, stretched
under, and folded into, the Palmary Muscle. This, by bringing the fleshy
Eminency lying under the Articular Finger to the Tenar, renders the Hand
hollow, and forms a Diogenes's Dish.

II. The first of the inner Muscles The inner Cubitaeus.
of the Wrist, called by the Name of the inner Cubitaeus, rises from the inner
Apophysis of the Arm, and being fastened to the Elbow, is inserted with a thick
Tendon into the fifth Bone of the Wrist.

III. The Second, called Radiaeus The inner Radiaeus.
internus, being produced from the same place, is extended through the Radius,
and terminates in the Bone which sustains the Index of the Metacarpus. These
two clutch the Hand.

The first of the external Mufcles of the Wrist, called the External Radiaeus,
or Double-horned, proceeding with a broad and twofold Original from the bony
Sharpness of the Arm, rests with a fleshy Substance upon the Radius, and with a
double Tendon is inserted into the first and second Bone of the Metacarpus.
This, by reason of its double Beginning, and double Insertion, by some is
described as double.

IV. The other called the External The External Cubitaeus.
Cubitaeus, rises from the External Apophysis of the Arm, and being carried
through the Elbow, is inserted with one Tendon into the fourth Bone of the
Metacarpus, lying under the Little-finger. If only one or two of these four
Muscles act on one side, then the Hand is moved sideways, and that either
upward or downward, or in the middle, as either the External or Internal only,
or both move together.

CHAP. XII. Of the Muscles of the Fingers and Thumb.
THE Fingers have several strong Muscles allotted them, as well to strengthen
them, as for the Performance of their various Motions; by which they are
bended, extended, or moved side-ways. The Sublimae, the Profound, and the
Lumbrical bend.

I. The Sublime, which is also called The Sub lime Muscle.
the Perforated, arises from the inner Bunch of the Shoulder Bone, and is
divided about the Wrist into four Tendons, being as it were slit toward the end
like a Chink, through which the Tendon of the following Muscle passes, which
are inserted into the second Internode of the Fingers.

II. The Profound, called also the The Profound Muscle.
Boaring-Muscle, rises from the upper Parts of the Elbow and Radius a little
below the Joint, and passing in four Divisions, with strong Tendons through the
Chinks and Clefts of the former, is inserted into the third Bone of the Fingers.

III. Now that there may be a direct The Channel of the Tendons.
bending of the Fingers, and that the contracted Tendons may not rise and lift
up the Fingers, they are enclosed in a Channel composed of strong Membranes,
and fat and oily withinside, running the whole length of the inner part of the
Hand, wherein they have a free Course.

IV. Those which are called the The Lumbricals.
Lumbricals, rising with a slender Substance from the Tendons of the Profound
Muscle, terminate in the first Internode with a round Tendon, intermixed with
the Tendons of the Interbone Muscles. Sometimes mixing themselves farther with
the Inter-bone Muscles, they run along the sides of the Fingers, as far as the
third Internode, and bend the Fingers side-ways.

V. Muscles of two sorts extend The Extenders.
the Fingers, some Common, others Proper.

VI. The Common ones, which The common Extenders.
serve to all the four Fingers, are two, rising from the Extreme Part of the
Shoulder-bunch, which in their Progress unite together, and are firmly knit
with united Tendons to the second and third Bone of the Fingers. Whence Sylvius
and Riolanus describe them for one Muscle, which they call by the Name of the
Great Extender, or Magni Tensoris.

VII. Those called Proper, being The Proper.
such as extend one Finger only, are of two sorts.

VIII. The First, the proper Extender The Extender of the Forefinger.
of the Forefinger, which it has besides the Common one, by Riolanus and
Veslingius called the Indicator, rising from the middle and extreme Region of
the Elbow, and is inserted with a forked Tendon into the second Articulation;
of which two Tendons, the other unites with the Tendon of the Common Extensor.

IX. The other is the proper Extender The Extender of Little-finger.
of the Little-finger, which rising from the upper Part of the Radius, and
running between the Elbow and the Radius, is externally inserted with a double
Tendon into the auricular Finger, one of which intermixes with the Tendon of
the common Extensor.

X. The Fingers are drawn sideways, The Interossei.
either toward the Thumb, or from it, by the Assistance of the eight Inter-bone
Muscles; of which, the four innermost obtain the Interval between the Bones of
the Metacarp; the four outermost being placed in the Palm of the Hand, rest
upon the upper side of the former. They rise from the upper Part of the
Metacarp near the Wrist; thence sometimes alone, sometimes united with the
Lumbricals, with their Tendons, creep along the sides of the three Bones of the
Fingers, to the very Root of the Nails, where the Tendons uniting above and
below, terminate. From these the middle and Ring-finger receive two Tendons,
the Forefinger and Little-finger one; Galen believes the hinder Bones of the
Fingers to be extended also by these Muscles.

Besides the Lumbricals aforesaid, these are two proper Muscles that move
side-ways.

XI. The first is the proper Aductor The Adductor of the Forefinger.
of the Forefinger, by some confounded with the proper Extensor of the
Forefinger, which rises from the first internal Internode of the Thumb,
terminates in the Bones of the Forefinger, and brings the Forefinger toward
the Thumb.

XII. The other, called the proper The Adductor of the Littlefinger.
Adductor of the Little-finger, and which Riolanus believes may be slit in two,
takes its rise in the Hollow of the Hand, from the third and second Bone of the
Wrist, of the second Order, and is inserted into the side of the first joint of
the Little-finger, and draws it from the rest of the Fingers.

XIII. The Thumb, which is equal in The Extenders of the Thumb.
strength to all the rest of the Fingers, is extended by the Benefit of two
long Muscles, which arise from the exterior side of the Elbow; of which, the
one reaches to the third Internode. The other carried beyond the Wrist, is
inserted withoutside with a double Tendon, into the first and second Joint of
the Thumb.

XIV. It is bended by two Muscles, The Benders of the Thumb.
the one a strong one, which rising from the upper part of the Radius, runs
forth to the first and second Internode of the Thumb; the other of a lesser
Bulk, which proceeding from the Bone of the Wrist, is spread underneath the
other, and extended to the middle of the Thumb. Riolanus will not acknowledge
this latter for a Bender, but believes the Muscles rising from the Bones of the
Wrist and Metacarp, to be the Adductors and Abductors.

XV. It is drawn to the other Fingers The Adductors of the Thumb.
by three Muscles, proceeding from the three lower Bones of the Metacarp, and
inserted into the second Bone of the Thumb.

XVI. It is drawn outward by two The Abductors.
Muscles, of which, the one arising from the inner Bone of the Wrist, which
sustains the Thumb, is inserted into the second Internode of the Thumb, with a
membranous Tendon. The other possessing the Space between the Thumb and
Forefinger, rises from the hinder Seat of the Bone of the Metacarp that lies
under the Forefinger, and with a fleshy Substance, is inserted into the
Internode of the Thumb, all along the outermost side, whence it sends a
membranous Tendon to the second.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Muscles of the Thigh.
IN regard the Office of the Foot is to walk and stand, which consists in
Fixation and Motion, for that in walking, while one Foot is set to the Ground,
the other still moves forward; for the Performance of both these Offices, there
is a necessity of various Muscles, of which, some move the Thigh, others the
Leg, others the Feet, together with the Toes. The Thigh is extended, bended,
brought forward, carried backward, and turned about. Three Muscles therefore
bend the Thigh.

I. First, the Lumbar Muscle, The Lumbar Muscle.
which is for the most part round, thick, and livid, and seated in the hollow
Capacity of the Abdomen. It arises with a fleshy Beginning about the two lower
Vertebers of the Breast, and the three upper Vertebers of the Loins, and
descending along the inner Superficies of the Ilion Bone is inserted with a
round and strong Tendon into the lesser little Wheel of the Thigh, in the
higher part before, and strongly draws the Thigh upward. But because the Reins
lie upon this Muscle, being endued with a remarkable Sinew, in the same place
where the Sinew enters them; hence it comes to pass, that if any Stone be in
the Kidneys, there happens a Numness in the Thigh on that Side, by reason of
its Compression.

Over this, sometimes is spread the other small Muscle, called the small
Lumbal, which where it begins for about a Fingers length, being carried over
the Lumbal it self, fleshy, slender, and with a flat Tendon, terminates
together with the Lumbal and Iliac, closely embraces it and keeps it firm in
its Seat. This Riolanus reports is not to be found in Women. Bartholine also
writes, that in the Year 1651. he saw another Psoa, somewhat bigger than this,
about the breadth of three Fingers, which bending outward more to the sides,
lay partly under the great Lumbal, and lastly, was inserted with a fleshy
Substance into the upper edge of the Iliac Bone, where the inner Iliac Muscle
rises.

II. 2. The Internal Iliacus, which The inner Iliacus.
with a slender and fleshy beginning rising in the inner Con^avity of the Ilian
Bone, unites with its Tendon to the Lumbal, and terminates forward between the
greater and the lesser Trochanter.

III. 3. The Pectineus, which is The Pectineus.
of a livid Color; this rising broad and fleshy from the upper part of the
Share-bone, near the Commissure, close by its Gristle, is inserted with a short
and broad Tendon into the inner side of the Thigh, and starts out to the hinder
Parts, where the Thigh bends strongly upward and inward, and by that means one
Thigh is laid upon another. And therefore not without reason, it is by
Bartholin referred to the Adducting Muscles.

Three Muscles extend the Thigh, which are called Glutaei, and constitute the
Buttocks, and are besides serviceable to the Act of Walking.

IV. 1. The larger Glutaeus, which The larger Glutaeus.
rising very fleshy from the Coccyx, the Spine of the Os Sacrum, and the Rib of
the Ilion Bone, terminates with a strong Tendon four Fingers below the great
Trochanther.

V. 2. The middle Glutaeus, both The middle Glutaeus.
for situation and bigness, is for the most part spread under the former. This
springing forth with a fleshy Beginning from the Rib and Back of the Ilion
Bone, in the Forepart, and possessing almost the whole Region of the Ilion
Bone, is inserted with a broad Tendon into the foremost and higher part of the
bigger Trochanter, girdling it every way.

VI. 3. The lesser Glutaeus, which lies The lesser Glutaeus.
altogether hidden under the second; this comes out of a fleshy Substance from
the back of the Ilion Bone, and from the hinder and lower Seat of it, and is
inserted with a strong and robust Tendon into the inner Part and Top of the
larger Trochanter or Extuberance of the Thigh.

VII. The three-headed Muscle The Triceps Adductor.
draws the Thigh inward, which from its fourfold Beginning, according to
Fallopius, Bauhinus and Riolanus, more truly deserves to be called the
Fourheaded Muscle. This is the thickest of all the Muscles in the whole Body,
of which, the several Parts, as they vary in their rise and Insertion, so also
in their Fibers, and somewhat as to their use. For which Reason, Bartholinus
divides it into three Muscles, though he had done better to have made it four.

The first part rises with a sinewy Beginning from the upper Line of the Share
Bone, and is inserted into the rough Line of the Thigh. The second comes out
from the lowest Commissure of the Share-bone, and terminates in the sharp Line
of the Thigh, at the upper Part. The third Part arises from the whole lower
part of the Hip, and is inserted into the hinder rough Line of the Thigh under
the lesser Rotator. The fourth Part proceeding from the Top of the Hip with a
round Tendon, which unites with a slender Tendon of a Portion of the first
Part, terminates in the inner and inferior Extuberance of the Thigh.
Riolanuus writes, that the first part is inserted into the middle of the
Thigh, the second below the Neck, and that the third extends it self with a
most robust Tendon to the Extremity of the Thigh.

They who allow but three beginnings to this Muscle, instead of a fourth
beginning, add to it a peculiar Muscle, which Riolanus calls the Pectineus,
Veslingius the Livid Muscle, which indeed is but the forth part of the Three
headed Muscle.

VIII. Four small Muscles bring The Quadrigemini.
the Thigh to the outer side, called Quadrigemini, because they are almost
alike one to another, and alternately placed in the Part behind, above the
Articulation of the Thigh.

The first and uppermost Quadrigeminus, from its Pear-like Shape, called
Pyriformis, from its Situation, the external Iliacus, comes out from the
lowermost Part of the Os Sacrum. The second from the Extuberance of the
Thighbone. The third contiguous to it from the same place. The fourth called
Quadratus, broader and more fleshy than the rest, and about two Fingers breadth
distant from the Third arises from the inner part of the Protuberancy of the
Ischion, and terminates in the External part of the great Trochanter.

IX. Two Muscles wheel the Thigh The Obturatores:
obliquely, called the Coverers or Obturators, which possess an open hole
between the Share-bone and the Thighbone, and assist the Thigh in going
backward; one Internal, the other External.

The Internal which is the stronger, proceeding fleshy and broad from the inner
Circumference of the said Hole, and being carried transversly outward above the
Hip, with a three headed Tendon, passing through a Purse for securities sake,
enters the Concavity of the great Trochanter, and there causes external
Rotation.

The External, which lies under the Pectineus, beginning from the outward
Circumference of the said Hole, with a fleshy substance, and winding through
the neck of the Thigh, like a Periwincle shell is inserted into the Concavity
of the Great Trochanter with a large and strong Tendon, and directs Internal
Rotation.

Note, that although the Muscles of the Thigh, in the order of Demonstration
hold the first place, yet in dissection they cannot so commodiously be shown
unless the Muscles of the Leg be first removed. Which are therefore in
demonstrations first to be showed.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Muscles of the Leg.
THE Leg is moved three ways, bent, extended and moved obliquely. Five Muscles
bend the Leg.

I. 1. The Longest, also called Fascialis, The longest
or the Swath-band Muscle, presently occuring before, under the Skin rises with
a Sinewy and fleshy beginning from the inner Extuberance of the Illion-bone,
and being spread, slender as it is, like a Swath-band over other Muscles, is
carried through the inner Parts of the Thigh, and terminates near the Knee, in
a Tendon, which is inserted into the forepart of the Shinbone, in an acute
Line; and therefore Riolan^s not without reason justifies, that this Muscle
rather extends the Leg than brings it inward.

II. 2. Called Gracilis, or Slender, The Slender.
resting toward the inside upon the Longest, rises at the Commissure of the
Share-bone, with a large and Sinewy beginning, and running out into the inner
Parts of the Thigh, is inserted into the inner part of the Leg with a round
Tendon.

III. 3. Called the Seminervous, The Seminervous.
rising from the Extuberancy of the Ischion, with a nervous and slender
beginning, obliquely descends through the hinder and inner Parts of the Thigh,
and terminates with a round Tendon, in the hinder and inner Part of the Leg,
and its Tendon runs out into the middle of the Leg.

IV. 4. The Fourth called the Semimembranous, The Semimembranous.
rises from the same place and extends it self to the hinder part of the Leg
with a Tendon somewhat broader.

V. 5. The Two-Headed Muscle, The twoheaded.
proceeds from the same Extuberancy of the Hip, and in being carried through
the External Part of the Thigh, and about the middle of the Thigh assuming a
new fleshy Lump, as it were a new Muscle, and so descending downward, is
inserted with a remarkable Tendon, into the Process of the Bone of the Button
in the lower Part.

This Muscle has been observed, to have a double Rise and Termination: for that
Reason by Vesalius called the double Muscle.

To the Extention of the Leg belong five or six Muscles.

VI. 1. The Membranous proceeding The Membranous.
accute and spiny from the upper Spine of the Ilion bone; in the outer Part,
near the larger Process of the Thigh it alters into a very long and broad
Membrane, which like a transverse Ligament, therefore called the broad
swathband enfolds all the Muscles of the Leg and Thigh, and by that means keeps
them fixed in their seat, running out to the extreme Part of the Thigh.

It is intermixed, about its insertion with the Tendons of the following
Muscles, and is inserted into the fore Part of the Leg and Button, toward the
outer side; and extends the Leg right forward, and draws it, as others affirm,
somewhat outward.

VII. 2. The Long Muscle, by Riolanus The long.
called Sutorius, by Veslingius Fascialis, rises from the foremost Appendix of
the Ilion-bone, and carried with an oblique course through the inner Parts of
the Thigh, descends under the Knee to the Leg, within side, and extending it,
brings it to, and lays one upon the other, after the manner of Shoo-makers.

VIII. 3. The Straight Muscle, growing The straight.
from the lower Spine of the Ilionbone, runs along with a fleshy and round
Belly all the length of the Thigh, and with a strong and round Tendon including
the little dish, terminates under it in the Leg.

IX. 4. The Internal vast Muscle, The internal vast.
arising from the Neck and lesser Rotator of the Thigh, is inserted into the
Leg with inside a little below the small Cup.

X. 5. The External vast Muscle, The external vast.
taking its rise more outwardly from the lesser Rotator of the Thigh,
terminates a little below the small Cup, with a large Tendon in the outer part
of the Leg.

XI. To these five Extensory Muscles The Crureus.
some there are who add a sixth Muscle adhering to the Thigh, which they call
Crureus; whose Original they place between the two Rotators of the Thigh, and
give it the same ending with the Vast Muscles.

The four last of these Extensory Muscles uniting together about the Knee, from
one common broad and strong Tendon, wherewith they involve the Cup, and
strongly bind together the Bones of the Thigh and Leg.

XII. The Poplitan or Ham-Muscle, The Poplitaeus.
brings the Leg obliquely to, lying hid in the hollow of the Ham, and rising
from the lower and exterior Extuberance of the Thigh, and carried obliquely
through the hinder and inner part of the upper Appendix of the Leg, is inserted
therein, with a square body. This Muscle Riolanus asserts, that he has seen
double.

CHAP. XV. Of the Muscles of the Foot or Ball of the Foot.
THE Foot is bent, extended, and moved sideways.

Two Muscles before bend the Foot upward.

I. 1. The Tibial before, arising from The Tibilis anti^us.
the upper part of the Leg and Button, adheres to the whole Leg upon the
outside. Thence running out under the annular Ligament of the Foot, terminates
in the Bone of the Ball under the great Toe. Sometimes it is divided under the
Ligament of the Foot into two Tendons. Of which the one is inserted into the
first nameless Bone, the other is inserted into the Bone of the Metatarsus just
before the great Toe. This Muscle, where it winds back under the Ball, is
furnished with a Gristle and a little Sessamoides Bone.

II. 2. The Peronaeus before, which The Peronaeus anticus.
all along its whole Progress is joined to the side of the Preceding Muscle,
and terminates in the outer side of the Leg. This beginning fleshy and nervous
from the upper part of the Button, and passing the fissure of the External part
of the Heel, with a strong Tendon, sometimes parted into two, is fixed into the
Bone of the Metatarsus, which sustains the little Toe. When the Muscle is
parted in two, then the bigger part of it running obliquely under the Sole of
the Foot, is inserted into the Bone of the Pedion just against the great Toe.
But when the Tendon is divided, then the beginning of it uses to be double;
that is one from the upper part of the Button, the other from the middle of the
Heel: And hence it is that some Anatomists make two Buttons of it.

Three Muscles extend the Foot; called by the Names of Gastrocnemius, Soleus,
and Plantaris; of which the two first by means of their thickness and bulk,
constitute the belly of the Calf.

III. The Gastrocnemius, rises with a The Gastrocnemius.
twofold beginning from the Internal and External head of the inside of the
Thigh, under the Ham; and by reason of its double beginning is taken for two
Muscles. This, growing out into a tumid belly, at the lower part by means of a
strong Tendon united with the Tendon of the Selo^s, is inserted into the Heel.

IV. The Soleus, so called from a Fish The Soleus.
named a Sole, is a Muscle broad and thick, which rising from the hinder and
uppermost Commissure of the Leg and Button, and uniting a little above the
Heel, with the Tendon of the Gastrocnem^us is inserted into the hinder part of
the Bone of the Heel.

V. The Plantaris lies hid among The Plantaris.
the rest in the Ham, and proceeds with a small and fleshy body, from the
outermost head of the lower part of the Thigh, and then terminates under the
Knee into a long and slender Tendon: which being close united with the Tendons
of the Gastrocnemius and Soleus is fixed into the Heel, and extends it self
half way to the bottom of the Foot.

These three Muscles toward the end are intermixed together, and form one
strong Tendon inserted into the hinder part of the Heel, which by reason of its
extraordinary strength, is called the Great Cord, the wounds of which are very
dangerous causing Fevers, Hickups and Convulsions. Veslingius believes this
Tendon not only to be inserted into the Heel, but also to extend it self to the
very confines of the Toes. However, that before its insertion, by reason of the
Prominency of the Heelbone, it separates somewhat from the Leg, and forms that
space, where Achilles so luckily hit Hector when he slew him.

VI. The hinder Tibial Muscle The Tibialis posticus.
moves the Foot inward, which rising between the Leg and the Button and assix'd
to the whole Leg, runs out underneath to the Bone of the Ball, which is
fastened to the Cubeform'd bone. Sometimes it produces double Tendons, of which
one is inserted into the Navicular-bone, the other into the first Nameless-bone.

VII. The hinder Peronaeus draws The Peronaeus posticus.
the Foot outward, which being produced from the upper and hindermost part of
the Button, and carried through the fissure of the external part of the
Malleoles, together with the foremost Peronaeus, with a hard and round Tendon,
separated from the Tendon of the Antic Peronaeus, winds toward the lower Parts
of the Feet, about the Region of the cube-form'dbone, and carried below the
Pedion, is inserted into the Root of the large cubeform'd-bone, which is placed
before the Thumb. Riolanus numbers this Postic Peronaeus among the Benders,
perhaps because it bends the Foot at the same time it carrys it away.

VIII. Sometimes, though very rarely The third Peronaeus.
a Third Peronaeus is found, very slender, which runs forth together with the
Postic, through the lower Parts of the Foot, nothing different either in its
insertion or use, though much inferior in strength.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Muscles of the Toes and great Toe.
THE Toes have several Muscles, which bend, extend and move them obliquely.

The four lesser Toes are extended by two Muscles which are called Tensors.

I. 1. The long Tensor, which being The long Tensor.
hid under the forepart of the Leg, rises from the forepart and inner part of
the Leg, where it is joined to the Button under the Knee. Hence it descends in
a straight Line all along the length of the Button, and separated into four
Tendons, passes beyond the Anulary Ligaments, and is inserted into the three
Articulations of the four fingers at the upper part.

II. 2. The short Tensor, rising not The short Tensor.
far from the Bone called Astragalus at the upper part, and spread under the
long Tensor, thrusts it self into all the Joints of the first Internode with
its Tendons, which are crossed like an X with other long Tendons above the
Meta-Tarsus.

The four lesser Toes are bent by six little Muscles called Flexores or Benders.

III. 1. The long Bender or broad, The long Bender.
and sublime, which together with the following short lies hid behind under the
Muscles that constitute the Calf. This derives its Original from the upper part
of the Muscle behind, and about the inside of the Malleolus creeping under the
Ligament of the Leg and Heel, in the Sole of the Foot is shivered into four
Tendons, which passing through the Holes of the short Flexor is inserted into
the third Articulation of the four Toes.

IV. 2. The short Flexor which The short Bender.
is also called the Bored and Deep proceeds more below, and more inwardly from
the Heel, and sending forth four Tendons, divided toward the end with a cleft
at the passage of the Tendons of the preceding Muscle, runs forth into the
second internode of the Toes.

V. 3, 4, 5, 6. Called the four Lumbrical The Lumbrical.
Muscles, proceeding from the Tendons of the long and short Tensor, or rather
from the Ligament enfolding them, and augmented by a certain piece of flesh
rising from the Heel, are inserted with their Tendons into the first Internode
of the four lesser Toes, with their several Tendons.

Bartholinus, writes that he has observed another Flexor of the little Toe,
rising from the head of the Leg, and divided into two Tendons about its
insertion into the Toe.

VI. The oblique Motion of the Toe The interossei.
is performed by ten Inter-bone Muscles, seated both in and between the Bones
of the Metatarsus, and springing from a fleshy mass; of which the External
terminate in the first Internode of the Toes; the innermost run forth to the
second Internode, by the first the Toes are drawn outward, by the second they
are bent inward; and when both act together, they are extended.

VII. The little Toe has a peculiar The Abductor of the little Toe.
Abductor proceeding from the Heel, and fixed without side to the fifth Bone of
the Metatarsus; which is inserted into the outmost side of the first Internode.

The great Toe has several Muscles.

VIII. 1. The Flexor, joining to The Flexor of the great Toe.
the long Tensor of the Toes, which rises more behind with a Fleshy substance
from the upper part of the Button, and following the Boaring Muscle, is
fastened with a strong Tendon to the third Bone of the great Toe. Sometimes it
is divided under the Sole of Foot into two Tendons, of which one goes to the
great, the other to the second Toe; and then the long Flexor sends but three
Tendons to the other Toes.

IX. 2. The Extensor rising from The Extensor.
the outer side of the Leg, where the Button goes back, and creeping through
the upper Parts of the Foot, is inserted into the whole great Toe on the upper
part. Sometimes it sends forth a double Tendon, one to the last joint of the
great Toe, the other to the Bone of the Metatarsus, that lies under the great
Toe.

X. 3. The Abductor proceeding The Abductor.
from the inner part of the Heel, and being fastened to the inner side of the
Foot all the length of it, is fastened without side into the first Bone of the
Thumb.

XI. 4. The Abductor Major arising The Abductor Major.
from the Ligament of the Bone of the Metatarsus, which lies under the little
Toe and the next to it, terminates with a short and strong Tendon, in the first
Joint of the great Toe in the inner Part.

XII. 5. Abductor Minor, by Casserius The Abductor Minor.
called the Transversal proceeding from the Ligament of the little Toe, which
binds the first Internode, is carried transverse and fleshy, and stretches it
self more inwardly to the first Bone of the great Toe, with a short and broad
Tendon. To this some ascribe another Use, believing it there applied to gather
together the first Bones of the Toes. Riolanus believes that it serves only for
a Pillow, least the Tendons should be injured by the hardness of the ground and
the Bones. Casserius, who is said to be the first Discoverer of this Muscle,
will have it assigned to bring the great Toe toward the little Toe, thereby to
make the foot hollow, for the more easy walking in Stony and unequal places,
by the more firm taking hold of the step.

XIII. In the flat of the Foot, which The Vestigium.
is called Vestigium, or the Footstep, there is to be observed a Fleshy mass,
which like a Cushion, lies under the Muscles and Tendons. Which some confound
with the Universal Muscle.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the MEMBRANES and FIBERS.
CHAP. I. Of the Membranes in General.
I. A Membrane is a white similar Definition.
part, broad, flat, thick, and extensible, produced out of the clammy and
viscous part of the Seed, preserving, containing, gathering together,
corroborating and disterminating the Parts that lie under it or contained
within it.

II. It was called by the Ancient (...), The Names.
and (...). All which words at that time signified one and the same thing.
Afterward these words became particular, and were attributed to particular
Membranes. For now Hymen properly signifies that Membrane which resides in the
Neck of the Womb, vulgarly called Claustrum Virginitatis, the Fence of
Virginity. Menina, signifies that Membrane that enfolds the Brain. And (...) or
T^nica, is the general Name for all Membranes that cover the Veins, Arteries,
Ureters, etc. At this day Membrane is a general word, signifying any Membrane
that enfolds a fleshy Part, the Pericardium, Periosteum, Peritonaeum, the
Membrane of the Muscles, etc.

III. There can be hardly any certain Original.
Original of the Membranes described; as being Parts subsisting of themselves,
formed out of Seed, and every where conspicuous in the Body. Many have with
probability enough derived them from the Menin^es. Lindan writes, that the
Substance of the Heart is wrapped about with a very transparent and very thick
Membrane, which he believes to grow from the dilated Extremities of the Fibers
of the Heart, and thence would have us consider whether all the rest of the
Membranes do not arise by a certain Propagation from this Membrane of the
Heart. But these are mere Conjectures, hardly credible; rather it is to be
said, that the Membranes are Spermatic Parts, formed with other Spermatic
Parts, out of the Seed at the first formation of the Embryo, and that therefore
they have no other Original than the Seed.

IV. The Membranes are nourished Their Nourishment.
like the rest of the Parts by Arterious blood, flowing out of the Arteries
into their Substance, and fermented therein, by the mixture of Animal Spirits,
the residue of which either unapt for Nourishment or superfluous, is carried
back through the Tubes of the Veins, into the hollow Vein.

V. Now the Membranes are the The office.
Organs of Feeling, for all the sensible Parts, even the Nerves themselves,
feel by the help of the Membranes only: which those Parts that want are
destitute of sense, as the Bones, Gristles, the fleshy Parts of many Bowels,
wherein the Sense of Feeling no farther extends it self then to the Membrane
that enfolds it.

This Faculty of Feeling is bequeathed to them by the Animal Spirits
continually flowing into them through the Nerves, which influx ceasing, the
Sense of Feeling also fails, as in Apoplexies, Palsies, etc. Such Membranes
also into which few Spirits flow, are dull of Feeling. Thus Veins and Arteries
are said to be void of Sense, because they feel but dully.

VI. The Differences of Membranes The differences.
are many. In respect of their Substance; some thin, some thick, some
legitimate, as the Pleura, Periosteum, etc. Others illegitimate, as being
rather Membranous Bodies, such are membranous Ligaments, Tendons, the Stomac,
Intestines, Bladder, etc. In respect of their Figure, some broad, some long,
some triangular, etc. In respect of their Situation, some inward, some outward.

VII. The number of the Membranes The number.
is almost infinite, but the most considerable are these that follow.

In the Birth, the Chorion, Amnios, the Urinary Membrane, and in Brutes, the
Alantois.

In the whole Body of Man, the Cuticle, the Skin, the fleshy Pannicle, the
Membranes of the Muscles, the Periostea, and the Membranes of the Vessels.

In the Head without, the Pericranium, more inward, both the Meninxes, which
descend from the Cranium into the Spinal Concavity, involving the Spinal Pith,
and extends themselves the whole length of the Nerves.

In the Eye, seven Tunicles, the Nameless, the Conjunctive, the Horny, Uveous,
Net-like, Spiders Web, and Vitreous.

In the Ear, the Membrane of the Tympanum.

In the Mouth, the Tunicle proper to the Tongue and Palate, as also that which
is common to the Mouth, the Chaps, the Gullet and Stomach.

In the Breast, the Pleura, the Mediastinum, the Pericardium, the Tunicle
investing the Lungs and Heart, and the Valves of the Heart.

In the lower Belly, the Peritonaeum, Epiploon, the Mesenterie, and the
Membranes that enfold the several Bowels; as also those of which the
Intestines, the Bladder, and other Parts are composed.

Of all which primary Membranes, mention has been already made in their proper
Places.

Besides these, there is an infinite number of thin Membranes that have no
Names.

CHAP. II. Of the Fibers.
Fibers are white similar Parts, solid, oblong, like little Strings, designed
for the Motion of some, and the Preservation of other Parts.

I. They are Parts which are not Their Original.
derived from others, but existing of themselves, for the Complement of those
Parts where they are required. And therefore they mistake, who believe them to
be produced from the Brain, or from the Spinal Marrow, as are also they who
think them the Productions of the Nerves, it being impossible that the Nerves
should be expanded into so many Strings. For Example, a small Nerve, which
shall consist of twenty fibrous Strings, is inserted into some larger Muscle,
consisting of a hundred fibrous Strings, much bigger and stronger than those in
the Nerve. Thus the whole Body of the Heart is fibrous, whereas it has very
few, and those very small Nerves. The Fibers indeed communicate with the
Nerves, so far as they receive Animal Spirits from them, yet they are no more
Productions from them, then the Veins are Productions of the Arteries, from
whence they receive Blood.

Therefore they are Parts existing of themselves, united to others for common
use.

II. Their Action is, to be contracted Their Action.
into one another. Though Riolanus believes, that rather Use than Action is to
be attributed to them.

All the Muscles are moved by Fibers, which being cut or wounded, their Motion
ceases. Therefore the wonderful Contexture of the Fibers of the Heart, is the
reason that it is able to endure such a continual Motion. The Stomach,
Intestines, Womb, Bladder, and the like Parts are furnished with Fibers, the
more to strengthen them in Retention and Expulsion. Lastly, all the Parts that
are appointed for actual Performance, are full of Fibers. However, some do
question whether there be any such things as the little Fibers of the Brain,
Lungs and Liver, and Fallopius positively denies them; but now adays there is
no Body doubts of them, more than that the Arteries and Veins are not without
Fibers; though Fallopius and Vesalius will hardly admit them, because they are
so very small: however Fernelius Brisot, Fuchsius, and other eminent Men allow
them, for the Strength and Preservation of the Vein, and teach us that their
streightness is to be observed in Blood-letting. And this Experience teaches us
in Warts, when the orbicular and oblique Fibers being broken, the Tunicle of
the Veins will be extended after a strange manner, nor can ever be again
contracted or reduced to its first Condition.

III. Vulgarly there is a threefold Difference.
difference observed from their Situation. Some are straight, which are
extended at full length; some are transverse, which intercut the straight ones;
others oblique, which mutually cut both. But to these three differences we must
add orbicular Fibers, as in the Sphincter Muscle, unless you will reckon them
among the transverse ones. The straight ones, are vulgarly said to attract, the
Oblique to retain, the Transverse to expel; which three Distinctions,
Fallopius, not undeservedly derides, and teaches us how that all the Fibers
expel, but that none in respect of themselves either attract or retain.

But the Parts that perform one single Action, have single Fibers, as several
Muscles whose Action is single, that is to say, Contraction. But they that
perform many Actions, are furnished with various Fibers, as the Intestines
which retain and expel, to which the straight ones are added to strengthen and
corroborate. But the Membranes which ought to be every way fitted and prepared
for Action, have Fibers so intermixed, that their whole Substance seems to be
but a Contexture of Fibers joined together.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Treating of the ARTERIES.
CHAP. I. Of the Arteries in General.
IN the Body of Man there are three Vessels that go under the Name of Arteries.

1. The Aspera or Trachea, Lib. 2. Cap. 16. 2. The Pulmonary, by some
erroneously called the Arterious Vein, Lib. 2. Cap. 9. 3. The Great Artery, or
Aorta, to be discoursed of in this Book.
I. This great Artery is an Organic Desinition.
Similar Part, oblong, round, hollow, appointed for conveighing the Spirituous
Blood.

It is called Organic, because it is appointed for a certain Use, that is, to
conveigh the Blood.

It is called Similar, not in a strict, but profunctory sense. For though it be
thought to be composed of Fibers and Membranes, yet because it is every where
compacted after the same manner, the Artery in the Hand not differing from the
Artery in the Foot, or in any other Part, hence it is reckoned among the
similar Parts.

It is said to be appointed to carry or convey the Spirituous Blood.

II. Not that the Arterious Blood The Arte^ious Blood, what it is?
is altogether spirituous, but the greater Part of it is such, from which
greater Part the Denomination is taken. For some Parts of it are more, others
less Spirituous. For when the Chylus being mixed with the Blood of the hollow
Vein, enters the Heart the first time, it does not presently obtain so great a
Subtilty, Attenuation, and Spirituosity, as those Particles of the Blood mixed
with the Chylus, have obtained, which have passed many times through the Heart
by Circulation, and have been many times dilated therein. For as in the
Distillation of Wine, the oftener it is distilled, the more subtle, the more
pure and efficacious the Spirit is, which is drawn off from it; so the Blood,
the oftener it is dilated, the Spirituous Particles are the better separated
from the thick Mass, and the more attenuated, and what is not yet so perfectly
attenuated, and consequently less fit for Nourishment, returns through the
Heart again, to be therein more perfectly dilated.

And therefore, I admire at the Learned Ent, who says that the Arterious Blood
is worse than the Veiny Blood, whereas the first is far more spituous than the
latter. But, says he, it is much thinner and more serous than the veiny.
However it is much more spirituous; whence that thinness, which seems to be
Serosity, though it be not so. Thus Spirit of Wine is thinner and more fluid
than Wine, is it therefore more serous and worse? But, says he, the Arterious
Blood has left much of its oil in the Lap of Life, the Heart. I deny it, for
there is no Comparison to be made between a lighted Lamp and the Spiritification
of the Heart, Vid. Lib. 2. C. 13.

Besides the Blood, the Arteries sometimes by Accident, carry depraved and
corrupt Humors mixed with the Blood, though there be no mention made of this in
the Definition, because it is not their designed use.

III. Andreas, Laurentius, Emilius, Whether they attract Air?
Parisanus and others, believe, that the Arteries attract Air through their
Ends and invisible Pores to cool and ventilate the Blood. But then there would
be two contrary Motions at the same time in the same Arteries, of the Blood
pushed forth to the Exterior Parts, and of the Air entering the inner Parts,
which can never be. Besides, there being a necessity that the Vital Spirits
should be conveyed through the Heart through all Parts of the Body, it would
be a dangerous thing to cool that Heat so necessary to Life, especially in cold
and phlegmatic People.

IV. Rolfinch believes the Arteries Whether they dissipate Vapors?
serve for the Dissipation of Vapors. But the thickness of their Substance
declares this to be false, that nothing, or very little of spirituous and
serous Liquor can exhale through it, but less what is thick and earthy as adust
Vapors, therefore those adust Vapors are dissipated and separated from the
Blood, when the Blood is poured forth out of the Arteries into the Substance of
the Parts, whose larger Pores are proper to evacuate those adust Vapors, either
insensibly or by Heat.

More absurd are they, who believe the Blood to be carried through certain
Arteries to the right Ventricle of the Liver, and through certain others from
the Spleen to the left Ventricle of the Heart, and as ridiculous are they, who
think they carry nothing but Vital Spirits, and no Alimentary Blood.

Baertholin believes the Limpha to be carried through the Arteries, and with
him Rolfinch. For that the Lympha being mixed with the Chylus and veiny Blood,
when the whole Mass is dilated in the Heart, it ceases to be Lympha any more.
Nor do any Lymphatic Vessels open into the Arteries in the Midway; neither do
the Arterious Blood, when sufficiently spirituous, stand in need of that
fermentaceous Liquor.

The great Artery, from whence the lesser Branches spring, derives its Original
from the left Ventricle of the Heart, as from its local Principle, but not as
its material Beginning, or Principle of Generation, for that as Hippocrates
says, no Part arises from another.

V. The Substance of the Arteries The Substance.
is Membranous, for the more easy Contraction and Dilatation. They also
consist of a double proper Tunicle, the one external, the other internal. Which
least they should be pained with continual Pulsation, are endued but with an
ordinary Sense of Feeling, and are therefore vulgarly thought to be quite void
of Sense.

VI. The outward Tunicle is thin The outer Tunicle.
and soft, endowed with many straight, and some few oblique Figures; which
seems to be derived from the Exterior Tunicle of the Heart, and to be
continuous with it.

VII. The Innermost, harder and The inner Tunicle.
much thicker, to conveigh the Spirituous and vaporous Blood with more
Security; which thickness and hardness is more conspicuous in the great
Arteries next the Heart, which first receive the boiling Blood from the Heart,
both Thickness and Hardness abating, the farther off they recede from the
Heart, and as the Blood by the way relaxes of its Heat and Subtilty, so that
toward the Ends it is very thin and soft; very little differing from the
Substance of the Veins, only in the Whiteness of their Color.

VIII. Vulgarly this Tunicle is said Fibers.
to have many transverse Fibers, few oblique. But Rolfinch deni^s any Fibers
proper to the Arteries. But the contrary appears in the great Arteries being
boiled, where the Fibers are manifestly to be discerned. Besides that, unless
the Arteries were strengthened by transverse Fibers, they would be two much
dilated by violent Pulsation, and would so remain, as being destitute of
contracting Fibers, which is the reason of the Tumor called Aneurisma, for that
this Tunicle being burst, together with its Fibers, the Blood slips into the
first soft Tunicle, and presently swells it up.

IX. The inner Tunicle, as Galen observes, The third Tunicle.
is overcast with a very thin little Skin within side, like a broad Cobweb,
which may be said to be a third proper Tunicle. Riolanus writes, that he never
could find it; but for all that it is sufficiently conspicuous in the greater
Arteries, and therefore probable to be in the lesser, and appears continuous
with the Tunicle ensolding the inner Ventricles of the Heart, when it is
manifest, that the Arteries borrow this inner Tunicle, as well as the
outermost, from the Heart, as the Nerves borrow two Tunicles from the Brain.

X. Besides the foresaid Tunicles, a The fourth Tunicle.
certain improper or common Tunicle enfolds the Aorta with its Branches lying
hid in the Trunk of the Body; in the Breast, proceeding from the Pleura, in the
lower Belly, from the Peritonaeum, by means of which it feels more sensibly,
and is fastened to the neighboring Parts; but this Tunicle it puts off when it
enters the fleshy Parts of the Bowels. And so in other Parts, the Arteries
which do not enter the Muscles, borrow an outer Tunicle from the neighboring
Membranes. For the Substance of the Arteries ought to be very strong, for fear
of being burst by the violent Impulse of the spirituous Blood, and to enable
them to endure the strongest Pulsations without prejudice.

XI. We lately made mention of a The breeding of an Aneurisma.
preternatural Tumor in the Arteries, called Aneurisma, which happens when the
second harder Tunicle of the Artery comes to be burst by any Accident with its
Fibers, by which means, the Blood flowing upon the soft external Tunicle,
dilates it, and gathered together therein, as in a little Bag, causes a
Swelling, wherein there is many times a very painful Pulsation and
Reciprocation of Dilation and Contraction; which Tumor, if it be burst or
opened by an unskilful Chyrurgion, the Patient presently dies of a violent
Bleeding not to be stopped. Regius opposing this Opinion of the best and most
famous Chyrurgions, attributes the Cause of an Aneurisma, to the flowing of the
Blood into the Muscles, out of an Artery burst or wounded; which Blood wraps it
self about with a little Pellicle, generated out of its own more viscous
Particles. Led into this Opinion by James de Back, a Physician of Rotterdam,
who told him the Accident of a Man wounded in the Arm, to the Damage of an
Artery; in which Arm, being open, a great quantity of Arterious Blood was found
among the Muscles, wrapped about with a Pellicle. Upon this, Regius arrogantly
grounds his Opinion, and makes it his own; not considering, that the Blood
contained in an Aneurisma, is never corrupted, nor ever apostemates, nor
engenders Inflammations, and that extravasated Blood never generate investing
Membranes, but presently putrifies: and lastly, that in such a Tumor, caused by
extravasated Blood, there is never any remarkable Pulsation perceived, as is
continually to be felt in an Aneurisma. Regius writes farther, that in that
same Wound of his Patient, almost brought to a Cicatrice, there appeared a
Tumor that beat very much about the place affected, and which increased more
and more every day; but this which is related of Back's Patient and not his,
has not one word of Truth. For neither was the Wound cicatrized before my
coming, which was within eight or ten Hours after the Man was wounded, neither
was there any Pulsation to be perceived in the Arm, very much swelled by reason
of the extravasated Blood poured forth among the Muscles; neither was there any
Pellicle to be found afterward upon Incision.

XII. As to the Substance of the The Substance.
Arteries, there is a great Duspute, whether it be nervous or gristly.
Aristotle asserts the Aorta to be nervous, and calls it in many places (...),
the Nervous Vein. Others believe it rather of a gristly Nature, by reason of
the Heat and Hardness of the Arteries; of which Opinion, Galen seems to be. But
Fallopius believes them to be of a middle Nature, between Nervous and gristly,
but most gristly, and hence it has been observed, that the Arteries near the
Heart have been observed to be sometimes gristly and bony in old Beasts of the
larger Sort, as also in Man himself. Of which Gemma, Solenander, Riolanus,
Harvey and others, produce several Examples. But Reason evinces the Mistake of
these three Opinions. For that the Substance of the Arteries is not nervous,
their most obtuse Sense evinces, whereas all nervous Parts seel most exactly.
Nor gristly, because of its Fibers, which Gristles and gristly Parts want:
Lastly, not of a middle Nature for the same Reasons. It remains then that the
Substance of the Arteries is membranous, proper, and of a Nature peculiar to
its self.

XIII. The Arteries are nourished by Their Nutriment.
the Spirituous Blood passing through them, wherein, because there are many
salt, volatile and dissolved Particles, a good part of which grows to its
Tunicles, hence their Substance becomes more firm and thick.

XIV. The Bulk of the Arteries varies The Bigness.
very much. The bigness and thickness of the Aorta is very remarkable, but the
Part of it ascending from the Heart, is less; the other descending larger, by
reason of the greater Bulk and number of the lower Parts to be nourished. The
rest vary in bigness, according to their Use, as they are required to stretch
themselves shorter or longer, as they are required to supply the Arteries
derived from them with more or less Blood, and the farther they are from the
Heart, the narrower they are, and of a thinner and softer Substance: For that
the Blood, the more remote it is from the Heart, looses much of its
Spirituousity, and consequently less salt Particles grow to the Tunicles, there
not being so much strength required in these remote Vessels, as in those which
are nearer the Heart, in regard the less spirituous Blood may be contained in
weaker Vessels.

XV. Some assert the Number of the Their Number.
Arteries to be less than that of the Veins; which however cannot be certainly
determined, seeing that the little Arteries are much more white and pellucid,
and consequently less discernable. Others make the Number equal, others, that
of the Arteries more, in regard there is a greater quantity of Blood thrust
forth through the Arteries, for the Nourishment of the Parts then is carried
back through the Veins, seeing that a good Part of it is consumed in
Nourishment, and no less dissipated through the Pores before it comes to the
Veins. But then you will say, how comes a greater quantity of Blood to be
contained in the Veins then in the Arteries, and a more conspicuous Swelling of
the Veins, by reason of the Blood? The reason is, because the Motion of the
Blood is more rapid through the Arteries than through the Veins; for there
passes more through the Arteries in the space of one moment, then through the
Veins in ten, by reason of the greater force by which the Blood is expelled by
the Heart into the Arteries; whereas the motion of the Blood is remiss and weak
in the Veins, and consequently there is more Blood stays in the Veins than in
the Arteries.

XVI. The Arteries lie hid in most Situation.
places under the Veins, partly for securities sake, partly to stir the Blood
residing in the Veins forward, by their Neighboring Pulsation. Sometimes they
separate from the Veins, but rarely cross over them; only in the lower Belly
about the Os Sacrum, where the great Artery surmounts the hollow Vein.

XVII. The Arteries differ, either The differences.
in respect of their Magnitude, some being very large, as the Aorta and the
Pulmonary; some indifferent, as the Carotides, Emulgent, and Iliac; others
lesser, as those that creep through the Joints and Head; others least of all,
as the Capellaries dispierced through the whole Habit of the Body, and the
substance of the Bowels. In respect of their Progression, some straight, others
winding like Vine-twigs: In respect of their Situation in the Breast, in the
Head, in the lower Belly, in the Joints; others in the Superficies, others
deeper in the Body. In respect to their Connection; some to the Veins, others to
the Nerves; some to the Membranes, some to other Parts.

XVIII. The Arteries run along Their Progression.
through all parts of the Body, there being no part to which Arterious Blood is
not conveyed for Nourishment. Yet Ent and Glisson seem to affirm, that all
the Parts of the Body are not nourished with Blood. But this difficulty is
easily resolved by distinguishing between those Parts that are immediately
nourished with the Blood, as the Flesh of the Muscles, the Parenchym's of the
Heart, Liver and Kidneys; others mediately, as when another sort of Juice is
first made out of the Blood for the Nourishment of some Parts. As when for the
Nourishment of the Nerves, not only arterious Blood is required, but also there
is a necessity that a good part of it be first turned into Animal Spirits, for
the Nourishment of the Bones, the Arteries are extended to their inner Parts,
and power forth Blood into their Concavities and Porosities, for the generating
of Marrow; also, that the Arteries themselves and Veins may be nourished with
the Blood which passes through them: the one with the saltish Particles of the
Blood and nearest to fixation, which renders their substance thicker and more
solid: the other with the Sulphury and more humid Particles, whence the
substance becomes more moist and languid. The manner of nourishment Fernelius
thus describes. The Veins and Arteries says he, are nourished much after the
the same manner, which though they contain in themselves, the Blood which is
the next cause of their nourishment, yet cannot in a moment alter it into their
own Substance. But the Portion which lies next the Tunicles, and being first
altered grows whitish, like dew, is hurried away into the little holes or Pores
of the Veins and Arteries, to which when once opposed and made thicker, it is
first fastened, and then assimilated.

XIX. The Blood is carried to The Pulse.
the several Parts by the means of the beating of the Heart, which at every
stroke contracting it self, and squeezing the Blood into the Arteries, causes
the Arteries at the same time to be dilated and to beat: for as the Heart beats
when it contracts it self and expels the Blood, so on the contrary the Arteries
beat, when they receive the Blood, and are filled and dilated by it.

XIX. The reason of this many with Whether a a Pulsific faculty in in the
Arteries?
Praxagorus and Galen assert to be a Pulsific and proper faculty, which causes
all the Arteries to be distended and beat at the same time that the Heart is
contracted. To confirm which Plater asserts, the Arteries tobe formed and beat,
before the Heart. The Arteries, says he, are formed and beat, and carry
Spirits, before the Heart perceives any motion, which is a mistaken Opinion.
For first, upon all alterations of the Pulse of the Heart, presently the Pulse
of the Arteries is changed, whether weak, strong, swift, slow, or interrupted,
and c. which would not happen if the Arteries had a proper Pulsific faculty.
Secondly, Let an Artery be bound in a living Creature, at the very same moment
the Motion shall cease beyond the Ligature; which certainly would remain a
small while, if the faculty of moving were innate. But you will say, that the
Tunicle of the Artery being compressed by the Ligature the Irradiation of the
Heart, which should excite the Motive faculty to act, cannot pass beyond the
Ligature. In opposition to which I shall make use of the Experiment of
Plembius. In a living Animal, compress with your Finger the Aorta, or any other
bigger Artery near the Heart, and below the pressure make an Incision, and
thrust a little Cotton into the hole, only to a slight obstruction of the
Artery, then take off your Finger from above the Incision, and then it will
appear, that the Artery below the Cotton will not move at all, though the
Tunicles be neither compressed nor bound. As to Platerus's opinion we have
already answered it, l. 1. cap. 23.

XX. Therefore the Cause of the The cause of the Pulse in the Arteries.
Pulsation of the Arteries is only repletion, and the violent impulse of the
Blood into them from the Heart. Which Walaeus, Bartholin and others think
impossible, because the Blood fills the Arteries successively, and one Part is
moved after the other, and therefore they believe one Artery beats after
another and not altogether. Not considering that the Arterious blood is
rarified, hot, thin and easily moved, and that it is forced into the Arteries
full of the same Blood before; so that upon the forcing of never so little into
the great Artery from the Heart, the whole is forced forward into all the rest
of the Arteries, and so all the Arteries must of necessity be distended at the
same time. Thus if you lay a Circle of contiguous Balls upon a Pewter-plate,
and thrust forward but one, that moves first, then the second, then the third,
and so all move at the same time. And thus it is in the Areries, where one part
of the Blood being moved, all the rest of the Parts of it must of necessity
give way, by reason of its contiguity. Indeed the Heart might fill and cause
the Heart to beat successvely, were they empty, but not in Arteries full
before. These reasons Experience confirms, which teaches us, that so soon as
the Heart ceases to force Blood into the great Artery presently the Pulse of
all the Arteries ceases. Thus at Nimmeghen I saw a Man in a Duel thrust through
the left Ventricle of the Heart, as afterward it appeared upon opening the
Body: Presently the wounded Person fell down like a Man Thunder-strook and
died: so soon as he fell, I made up to him and sought for his Pulse in his
Wrist and Temples, but could not perceive the least motion; because the Blood
flowing through the Wound into the cavity of the Breast, could not be forced
into the Aorta, which rendered the Blood of all the rest of the Arteries
immovable without the least Pulsation. The like I saw at Leyden and Utrecht.
Also in such as dye of a Syncope, when the motion of the Heart ceases, the
Pulse of the Arteries fails, or at least as the Pulse of the Heart grows weaker
and weaker, so does the Pulse of the Arteries answerably. Therefore all
Physicians agree, that the beating of the Arteries is the most certain
Indication of the Constitution of the Heart. But if the Arteries had an innate
Pulsific Faculty, the Pulse would indicate the Constitution of the Arteries,
and so all the Physicians had been in an Error from Hippocrates till this time:
therefore we must conclude that the Motion of the Arteries proceeds only from
the Motion of the Heart. Which motion is somewhat helped in the depression of
the Arteries, by their transverse Fibers. Though those Fibers are not moved of
themselves, unless there be a distention first by the Blood expelled from the
Heart; for they only contract to their first Estate, the Arteries distended
beyond their usual rest, wherein they remain till again distended.

Some put the Question, whether the Heart beating all the Arteries beat to
their utmost Extremities, I answer, That if the Pulses of the Heart be very
violent, then it is sensibly perceived; but if weak and languid the Motion is
not so sensibly perceived in their Extremities. Hence says Harvey, not without
good Reason, The Impulse of the Heart diminishes by Parts according to the
several divisions of the Arteries; so that in their Extreme divisions the
Arteries becoming plainly Capillary, are like the Veins not only in their
Constitution and Tunicles, but also in their rest; while no sensible Pulse or
none at all is performed by them, unless the Heart beat violently, or the Heart
be over dilated. And this is the Reason why at the Fingers ends we sometimes
feel a Pulse and sometimes none; and why Harvey knew those Children in a Fever,
if the Pulse sensibly beat at the Tops of their Fingers.

Of the Motion of the Arteries, Read the Epistle of Descartes to the Lovain
Physician. Tom. 1. Epist. 78.

CHAP. II. Of the great Artery, or Trunk of the Aorta.
THE great Artery from whence all the Arteries of the Body, except the Rough,
and Pulmonary, proceed, very much exceeds all the rest of the Arteries in
thickness and length of Course. Nevertheless in substance and largeness it is
not much different from the great Pulmonary Artery, extended from the right
Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, which is vulgarly though erroneously
called the right Arterious Vein.

I. Now it is requisite that the The Substance.
Aorta should have such a solid Substance, least the hot and spiritous Blood,
forced into it from the very Furnace it self, should be dissipated; and
largeness is moreover required, to the end it may contain a sufficient quantity
of Blood to be distributed to all the other Arteries proceeding from it.

II. The Orifice of the Heart being It Is rise.
laid open, it adheres continuous to the left Ventricle; at it is very rise
being furnished with three remarkable Valves, fashioned like a Sigma prominent
from the Heart toward the outward Parts, and hindering the return of the Blood
from the Artery into the Ventricle of the Heart.

Before it issues forth from the Pericardium it emits from it is self the
Coronary Artery, sometimes single, sometimes double, encircling the Basis of
the Heart like a Crown, and thence scattering branches the whole length of it,
accompanied with the Coronary Veins, with which some affirm it to be united by
Anatomists, which however would be a very difficult thing to demonstrate.

Near the Orifice of this Coronary Artery stands a Valve, so ordered, that the
Blood may easily flow back out of the great Artery into the Coronary.

This will not admit a slender Bodkin thrust into it, from the Part next the
Heart into the great Artery; but from the Part next the great Artery a Bodkin
will easily enter the Coronary; by which means we find where the Valve is,
which otherwise is hardly discernible.

The Aorta having left the Piricardium, constitutes a Trunk, the smaller Part
of which ascends upward, the larger Part slides down toward the lower Parts.

CHAP. III. Of the Branches proceeding from the Subclavial Arteries.
THE lesser ascending Part of the Aorta, spread between the inner separating
Membranes of the hollow Vein, rests upon the Aspera Arteria.

I. Rising from the Heart, it is The Subclavial branches.
presently divided into two Subclavial Branches; the right being the higher and
the larger, which proceeds from the same place where the Aorta is ^lit into the
Carotides: the left more low and narrow, which rises where the Aorta winds
downward, and with a more oblique Channel then the other is carried to the Arm.

From both these Branches several Subclavials proceed; some before it falls
into the concavity of the Breast; others, after it has left the Breast.

II. While both the Subclavials lie The upper Intercostal.
hid in the Breast, it sends forth from the lower Part the upper Intercostal,
which being fastened on each side to the Roots of the Ribs, communicates
several branches to three or four spaces of the upper Ribs of its own side,
from which other little branches are imparted to the adjoining Muscles and the
Pith of the Back. However sometimes these Intercostals are derived from the
Cervical Arteries, passing thence through the holes of the Vertebers.

From the upper Part of both the Subclavials proceed these three Arteries.

III. 1. The Mammary, which descends The Mamary Artery.
through the Muscles possessing the Spaces of the Gristles of the true Ribs,
and proceeding to the side of the Mucronated Gristle, is divided into several
branches under the straight Muscles of the Abdomen, which till of late most
Anatomists would have to be united at their ends by Anastomosis, with the
ascending Extremities of the branches of the Epigastric Artery. But I could
never observe that conjunction, nor does it stand with Reason, seeing that the
Arterious Blood redundant in the Artery, cannot be transfused into another
Artery annexed to its ending; for the Blood is forced from the Heart through
both the Arteries to the end, and therefore can neither be received nor carried
to the Heart by the end of either Artery. So that if there were any Anastomosis
under the said Muscles, it ought to be of the Mammary Artery with the Epigastic
Veins, and the Epigastic Artery with the Mammary Veins. Which conjunction
however I could never observe.

IV. 2. The Cervical, which contributing The Cervical.
little branches to the Vertebers and Muscles of the Neck, passes to the
seventh Verteber of the Neck, through the holes of the tranverse Apophyses, and
under the Pith uniting with the branch of the opposite side, is shattered into
an Infinite number of diminutive branches, which running along with the little
branches of the Cervical of the opposite side, intermixed and in several places
as it were ingrafted into one another from the wonderful Net-like-fold in the
thin Meninx belonging to the Cerebel. Which little branches partly creep
through the substance of the Cerebel invisibly; partly gaping toward the inner
Parts of it, pour forth a great quantity of the most pure and subtle Blood into
the pores of the Cerebel; the little drops of which are seen to weep out of the
dissected substance. Moreover little branches run out toward the Horses Saddle,
which are intermixed with the innumerable branches of the Carotides, at the
lower Part of the Wonderful Net, and so seem to contribute toward the
completing of the Net, though the chiefest Part of it be made by the Carotides.

V. 3. The Muscula, which imparts The Muscula.
little branches to the Muscles resting upon the Neck, and sometimes to the
Muscles of the Arm.

VI. When the Subclavial has forsaken The Axillary and Humerary
the Breast it changes it is name for that of Axillaris, because it runs to the
Arm-hole, and before it descends to the Arm, sends forth from its upper Part
the Humerary Artery to the Muscles covering the Shoulder and the Gibbous Part
of the Scapula.

From the lower Part it casts ^orth three Arteries.

VII. 1. The Upper Pectoral, The upper Pectoral.
which runs forth with several little branches to the Muscles spread under the
Breast.

VIII. 2. The Lower Pectoral, The lower Pectoral.
which runs downward by the side of the Breast, but is chiefly carried through
the broad Muscle.

IX. 3. The Scapulary, which enters The Scapulary.
the Muscles possessing the Concavity of the Scapula.

X. These branches sent forth, the rest The Arteries of the Arm and Hand.
of the Axillary Artery, after it has communicated the little branches to the
Kernels, seated under the Arm-holes, goes away to the Arm, called therefore by
some the Brachial Artery, through the inner Part of which descending between
the Muscles, together with the Basilic Vein, distributes on both sides slender
little branches to the Muscles embracing the inner Seat of the Shoulder: There
rising outward with a deep branch of the Basilic Vein, it runs to the outer
Parts of the Elbow, and affords branches to the Joint and Neighboring Parts,
but then descending inward, under the bending of the Elbow, is divided into two
remarkable Branches, of which the uppermost carrying along the Radius, goes to
the Wrist, where the Physicians feel the Pulse, and thence proceeding under the
Annulary Ligament, sends forth the following branches.

1. Between the Bone of the Thumb, and Metacarpus to the Muscles of the outer
Part of the Hand. Nor has the outer part of the Hand any other Arteries but
these discernible. 2. A double branch, to the inner Parts of the Thumb. 3. A
double branch to the inner seat of the Forefinger. 4. One to the
Middle-finger.
The lower branch runs along the lower Arm to the Wrist, from whence the
following branches proceed.

1. To the Muscles seated next the Little-finger. 2. To the Middle-finger. 3. A
double branch to the Middlefinger. 4. A double branch to the Littlefinger.
CHAP. IV. Of the Carotides and their Branches.
I. THE Subclavials being sent The Carotid Arteries
forth, presently the Carotides start out from the ascending Aorta; of which
the left arises from its upper Trunck, then proceeds from the beginning of the
right Subclavial, sirmounting the Clavicula; though many by mistake will have
it to rise from the same Trunck with the former.

These two Corotides, near the upper Part of the Sternon, being supported with
the Thymis Glandule about the beginning, take their course upward, and with
their External and Internal branch ascend to the Head. For after they have
distributed branches to the Larynx, Tongue, the Hyoides Muscles, and the
neighboring Glandules, they ascend on both sides along the Aspera Artera,
together with the Jugular Vein to the Chaps, and there are parted into the
inner and outer branches.

II. The outer Branch, which is the The outer branch of the Carotid.
slenderest is dispeirs'd with a vast number of scarce discernible sprigs
through the Face and Cheeks, and waters the Forehead and Pericranium; partly
crawling to the Ears, sends forth the following Branches.

1. One branch forward toward the Temples, which is perceived in that place by
the Pulse, and sometimes is opened, in obdurate pains of the Head. 2. A Branch
to the hinder place of Ear. 3. A Branch to the lower Jaw; the small boughs of
which are inserted into the lower Lip; and entering the Bone of the lower Jaw,
run with a little branch to the Roots of all the Teeth. From this branch,
little small Twigs penetrate the external Table of the Cranium through
diminitive holes, and enter the Deploids, to which they convey Blood for the
making the Medullary juice.
The innermost branch which is the The innermost branch.
larger, is carried first to the Chaps, where it affords branches to the
Larynx, the Paristhmii and the Tongue, and sends little branches to the Kernels
behind the Ears, and the spungy Parts of the Palate and Nose. Then it enters
the upper Jaw, and affords a little Branch to every Tooth, through which when
sharp Humors descend, they cause the Toothache; with the remaining Part
ascending the Skull, toward the bottom of it, it is divided into two Branches
of an unequal bigness.

One of these, which is the lesser, and the hindermost, affords a little Branch
to the inner Muscle of the Neck, and having sent another through the Hole of
the upper Verteber into the hard Meninx, involving the Pith of the Spine,
ascending farther, it enters the Cranium through the Hole in the Vagous Nerve,
and creeps through the hard Meninx, and about the Hollow of the thick Meninx,
into which it seems to open it self with slender little Branches, the end of it
vanishes.

IV. The other, which is bigger and The Rete Mirabile.
almost equal to the Trunk; tending upward, through the bony Channel in the
Wedg like-bone, near the Fore-side of the auditory Passage, is carried with a
winding Course to the Mares Saddle. At the bottom of which, after it has sent a
Branch on both sides into the side of the thick Meninx, expands it self into
several minute Tendons, which inserted into the little Branches of the Cervical
Artery, form the Wonderful Net, conspicuous in Calves, Cows and Sheep, but more
obscure in Men, unless upon the Dissection of a Body but newly deceased.

V. Nevertheless, the said Branch does not terminate in those Tendrils, but
making way through the hard Meninx, enters the thin Meninx with two remarkable
Branches, which intermix infinite little Strings, with the little Branches of
the Cervical Artery fastened to the Marrow; and also without the Skull,
accompany the Spinal Pith to the Loins. This done, it sends another lesser
Branch through the second Hole of the Wedg-like-bone, together with the Optic
Nerve without side the Skull to the Eye. Also it stretches out another Branch
through a torn Hole, not far from the Infundibilum, which is ^lit into two
Stocks at the side of the Spittle Kernel; the innermost of which being united
with the inner Artery of the opposite side, and shivered into diminutive
Arteries, is scattered all over a thin Membrane, at the beginning of the Optic
Nerves, and partly with innumerable visible Tendrils passes through the Bulk of
the Brain, partly discharges the Spirituous Blood through the gaping Orifices
into the Pores of the Substance of the Brain. The other more outward, more
reflex and wrapped about with a thin Membrane, and united to its own little
Branches, with the diminutive Arteries carried from the Cervical to that Seat,
is partly disseminated through the thin Meninx, partly ascends upward to the
foremost Ventricles of the Brain, wherein it constitutes the Choroide Fold.

From the same larger Branch of the The Plexus choroides.
Carotis, another Artery proceeds, which after it has passed the Skull through
the second Hole of the Temple, is presently parted into two Stocks, of which
the Exterior runs through the eight Hole of the Wedg-like-bone, into the larger
Concavity, winding a little Branch to the Extremity of the Nose. The innermost,
which is bipartited at first, sends a slender Branch to the thick Meninx.

CHAP. V. Of the Arteries proceeding from the descending Trunk of the Aorta,
before it comes to be divided.
THE descending Part of the Trunk of the Aorta, which is larger at the upper
Part, adheres to the Gullet. Hence some vainly believe, that a Man overheated
with violent Exercise, or the Rays of the Sun, perceives such a remarkable
Refrigeration from a large drought of cold Water; the Gullet being thereby
cold, and by that means the Blood being also cold that is contained in the
Trunk of the great contiguous Artery; and that some in the same cases sound
away, upon drinking cold Water too freely, because, as they say, that which is
contained in the adjoining great Artery, being too suddenly cooled by the cold
Water passing through the Gullet, is somewhat thickened, and the Motion of it
thereby interrupted.

I. This descending Part of the The lower Intercostals.
Trunk, before it passes the Diaphragma, sends forth the lower Intercostals,
which are sent from the hinder Seat of it on both sides, to eight or nine
Intervals of the lower Ribs, and communicate little Tendrils to the Muscles of
the Back and Breast, through the Holes in the Nerves.

II. Moreover, about the Diaphragma, The Phrenic.
from the Trunk comes forth the Phrenic, from hence the Right, from thence the
Left, which is carried to the Diaphragma, the Mediastinum, and sometimes to the
Pericardium.

The Remainder of the Trunk of the Aorta penetrating the Diaphragma, scatters
Branches every way through the lower Parts of the Body. Some before it is
parted into the Iliac Arteries, others after it is divided from them.

The Branches which proceed from it before division, some accompany the Vena
Porta, others the Branches of the hollow Vein.

The Branches that accompany the Vena Porta, are two, the Coeliac and
Mesenteric.

III. The Coeliac, which some also The Coeliac.
call the Stomachic, proceeds from the Body of the Aorta before, at the first
Verteber of the Loins, and descending under the Hollow of the Liver, is divided
above the Trunk of the Vena Porta into two Branches, which adhere to the
Sweetbread under the hinder Seat of the Stomac.

IV. Of these, that on the Righthand, The right Gastric.
and the more slender, produces the Dexter Gastric, which approaches the
Pylorus, and by Spigelius is called the Pylorie; also the double Cystic's,
being very small, dispeirsed through the Gallbladder with several Branches.
But in the lower Part, these three following, have their Original, and proceed.

V. 1. The Right Hand Epiplois, The Right Epiplois.
to the Right Hand Seat of the lower Caul, and the Colon annexed to it.

VI. 2. The Intestinal, to the Duodenum, The Intestinal.
and beginning of the Iejunum.

VII. 3. The Right Hand Gastro-Epiplois, The Right Gastro Epiplois.
to the bottom and middle of the Stomach.

VIII. 4. Two small Hepatic Arteries, The Hepaticks.
concerning which there is some dispute. For as Galen says, they enter the
Parenchyma of the Liver, and so betake themselves for the greatest part into
the Hollow of it. Rolfinch affirms, that he has observed them very numerous in
the Unequal Part. Glisson affirms, that they do not enter the Parenchyma of the
Liver, but only insinuate themselves into the common Capsula, and therewith are
divided into the Capillary Vessels, and communicate several Branches to the
Gallbladder, and Bilary Pores.

The remaining Portion of this Right Hand Branch enters the Mesentery, and
waters it with many Sprigs.

IX. The Left Hand Branch of the The Splenic.
Coeliac, which is called the Splenic, larger than that on the Right Hand, and
somewhat swollen, with a winding course proceeds above the Sweetbread to the
Spleen, at the upper Part sends forth the Larger Gastric, which afterward
bestows a little Branch upon the higher and middle Seat of the Ventricle, and
throws out two stocks of Arteries, noted with particular Names, to the Stomach.

X. 1. The Coronary Stomachic, The Coronary Stomachic.
which girds the upper Orifice of the Ventricle like a Crown; and affords
several little Branches to the Body it self of the Stomach.

XI. 2. The Left Hand Gastric, The Left Gastric.
which is carried toward the Right Hand to the upper Parts of the Ventricle,
and to the Pylorus.

Besides these, there proceed also from the Splenic Branch, but at the lower
Part.

XII. 1. The Postic Epiplois, The hinder Epiplois.
to the lower Part of the Caul, and annexed to the Colon it self.

XIII. 2. The Sinister Epiplois, The Left Epiplois.
to the Lower and Left-side of the Caul.

XIV. The remainder of the Splenic The Vas breve arteriorum, and the left
Gastro-epiplois.
Branch approaching the Spleen, enters its Parenchyma, after that, a little
before its entrance at the upper Part, it has sent forth a Short Arterious
Vessel to the Left-side of the bottom of the Stomach, and the Left Hand
Gastro-epiplois, which being supported by the upper Part of the Caul, crawls
along the Leftside of the bottom of the Stomach, affording little Branches to
the fore and hinder Part of it, as also to the Caul; this Branch entering the
Spleen, is distributed through the Substance of it with several Divarications.

XV. The Mesenteric Artery, The mesenteric Artery.
which also accompanies the Roots of the Vena Porta, proceeds from the forepart
of the Trunk, sometimes single, sometimes divided into two Branches, presently
after its Exit. Of these, the uppermost, rising below the Coeliac, is extended
through the whole upper part of the Mesentery (where it constitutes the
Mesaraics) as also into the Jejunum, Ileon, and part of the Colon, to the
Right Hand Kidney.

XVI. The lower, rising below the The inner Hemorrhoidal.
Spermatics, near the Holy-bone, enters the lower Region of the Mesentery, and
is distributed with several Branches into the Lest part of the Colon, and the
straight Gut, and lastly, descending to the Podex, constitutes the Inner
Hemorrhoidal Arteries.

Through the said Branches, proceeding from the Mesenteric, the Arterious Blood
is carried for the Nourishment of the Intestines and the Mesentery it self. Nor
are they to be credited, who upon Galens Authority, affirm that the Mesenteric
Arteries suck in the thinner part of the Chylus. For the Heart continually
forces the Blood through the Arteries from its self to the Parts, but receives
nothing through them from the Parts. Nor can the two contrary Motions of
Expulsion and Reception be allowed at the same time in the Arteries. Which
Mistake proceeded from hence, that Galen did not understand the milky Vessels,
but judged them from their white Color to be Arteries.

The Branches proceeding from the Trunk of the Aorta before its Division, which
follow the Stocks of the Vena Cava, are several.

XVII. 1. The Emulgent Artery, The Emulgent Artery.
of each side one, rarely more, to each Kidney, which begins about the
Conjunction of the first and second Verteber of the Loins. The Right a little
lower, the Left a little higher, and slit into two; three or four Branches
enters the Kidneys of its own side. Rolfinch writes, that the Extremities of
this unites after many Fashions, with the Extremity of the Emulgent Vein, by
Anastomose's, which is no way probable. Vide l. 2. c. 18.

XVIII. 2. The Spermatics, both The Spermatic.
proceeding from contiguous beginnings, of which, the Right surmounts the Trunk
of the hollow Vein; rarely the Right Hand One proceeds from the Emulgent,
though the Left, in Women, has been observed so to do. Each of these uniting
with the Vein of its own Side, presently after their Rise, scarce two Fingers
breadth from the Emulgent, in Men, descend through the Process of the
Peritonaeum to the Testicles; in Women, so soon as they approach the Testicles,
they are divided into three little Branches, of which, the first is inserted
into the Testicles; the second enters the bottom of the Womb with many little
Sprigs, and the third is distributed into the Tube and Ligament of the Womb.

XIX. 3. The Lumbars, which are The Lumbars.
not only distributed to the Muscles adjoining to the Loins and Peritonaeum;
but in the hinder Part, where the Trunk of the great Artery rests upon the
Vertebers, are carried through the holes of the Vertebers of the Loins to the
Spinal Marrow; which some think thence ascend to the Brain, all the whole
length of the Pith, together with the Veins adjoining.

XX. 4. The Upper Muscula, of The upper Muscula.
each side one, which runs out to the sides of the Abdomen and its Muscles.

CHAP. VI. Of the Arteries rising from the descending Trunk of the Aorta, after
its Division within the Peritonaeum.
I. THE Trunk of the Aorta, descending The Iliaca. and Sacra Arteria.
when it comes to the Region of the fifth Verteber of the Loins, ascends the
hollow Vein, and is divided into two Branches called Iliac. Now at the Division
it self comes forth the sacred Artery which passing the Holes of the Os Sacrum
with little Sprigs, opens it self into its Marrow.

Every Branch, not far from its Biforcation, is again divided into the inner
and outer Branch. From the inner Iliac Branch, which is the lesser, proceed
three Stocks.

II. 1. The Inferior Muscula, which The inferior Muscula.
proceeds to the Muscles called Glutei, constituting the Buttocs, as also to
the Extremity of the Iliac Muscle, and Psoa. About the first beginning of this
Artery, sometimes from each Trunk, a Branch runs out to the skinny Parts of the
Pubes, Ilion and Abdomen.

III. 2. The Hypogastric, which is The Hypogastric (...) external Hemorrhoidal.
large, and at the lower Seat of the Os Sacrum, proceeds to the Bladder, and
the Neck of it, and the Muscles covering the Share-bone, and with some
Root-strings, runs to the Podex, where it constitutes the External
Hemorrhoidals. But in Men it is carried through the two hollow Bodies of the
Yard to the Nut. In Women, it is distributed through the bottom of the Womb,
and the Neck of it, with a numerous attendance of Rootstrings.

IV. 3. The Umbilical Artery, The Umbilical.
which ascending near the sides of the Bladder, and inserted into the doubling
of the Peritonaeum, proceeds to the Navel, from whence it passes forth again,
while the Birth is in the Womb, and runs into the Uterine Cheeskake. But in a
Man born, after the Navelstring is cut, it ceases any more the conveyance of
Blood; and therefore becomes more solid and harder, and is extended like a
string from both the Iliac Arteries to the Navel.

The remainder of the inner Branch, assuming a Scien or Graft of the External
Branch is dispeirsed into the Muscle possessing the hole of the Share-bone and
the Muscles adjoining.

From the outer Iliac branch two sprigs go forth.

V. 1. The Epigastric, which winding The Epigastrick.
upward without the Peritonaeum ascends the straight Muscle of the Abdomen in
the inner Part, and is met above the Region of the Navel by the descending
Mammary, and with the Extremities of which it is thought to unite by
Anatomists: which is a mistake: as is proved already, cap. 3. and lib. 1. cap.
5.

VI. 2. The Pudenda Arteria, The Pudenda.
which sends forth on each side a remarkable Artery into the Sinewy or Fungous
Bodies of the Yard, and in Women into the Clitoris. Hence it is carried inward
along the Commissure of the Share-bone, to the Privities and Groins, and their
Kernels, and is lost in the Skin of those Parts and of the Yard.

These Branches being sent forth, the Iliacs forsake the Peritonaeum, and are
carried to the Thighs, and then changing their Name, are called Crural.

CHAP. VII. Of the Crural Arteries.
I. THE Crural Artery, which The Crural Artery.
is less then the true Crural, descending toward the lower Parts of the Thigh,
sends forth some branches above, and others below the Ham.

Above the Ham three branches issue from it.

II. 1. The Exterior Crural Muscula, The Exterior or Crural Muscula.
from the Exterior Part of the Crural Trunk.

III. 2. The inner Crural Muscula, The inner.
from the innner Part of the Trunk.

IV. 3. The Poplitea, or Ham-Artery, The Poplitea.
which descending through the hinder Muscles of the Thigh, runs out as far as
the Ham, whence it derives its Name.

V. Below the Ham the Sural The Sural
proceeds from it, which lying hid a while under the Ham, sends forth on each
side, a deep sprig to the Knee and the Muscles constituting the Calf. Thence
descending toward the small of the Leg, it is divided into the Tibiaean
Arteries.

VI. 1. The Exterior Tibiaean, The Exterior Tibiaean.
which descending along the Button is consumed in the Muscles of the Leg.

VII. 2. The hinder Tibiaean, The hinder Tibiaean.
which runs to the Commissure of the Tendons of the Muscles of the Calf.

VIII. 3. The lowermost hinder Tibiaean, The lowermost hinder Tibiaean.
which passes through the Membranous Ligaments of the Button joining the
Muscles of the Leg, and is distributed into the upper Parts of the Foot, and
the Muscles carrying the Toes outward.

IX. The remainder of the Crural The Arteries of the Feet.
Artery, descends directly straight between the second and third Muscle of the
Toes, and proceeds between the Heel and the Malleolus to the lower Parts of the
Foot, sending forth a little branch from the side not far from the Malleolus,
to the Muscle of the great Toe, and the upper Parts of the Foot. What remains
is divided between the Tendons of the Muscles of the Toes into two little
Branches. Of which the innermost affords two little sprigs to the great Toe, to
the next Toe two, and to the Middle-toe one. The outermost affords two little
sprigs to the Little-toe, two to the next, and one to the Middle-toe.

Note, That in the Description of the Arteries all Anatomists mention, only
those which are manifestly conspicuous; the rest, as not so apparent or not
discernible they omit; the Nutrition shows, they are in the Parts. Thus we see
the Skin is nourished by the Arterious blood, though we can find no conspicuous
Arteries therein: and the same may be said of other Parts.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the VEINS.
CHAP. I. Of the Veins in General.
I. A Vein is an Organic similar The Definition.
Part, membranous, long, round, hollow, containing the less spirituous Blood,
and carrying it to the Heart.

It is called Organic, as designed for a certain Use, which is to carry the
Blood.

It is called Similar, in the same manner as the Arteries are said to be.

The Form is expressed in the words long, round and hollow, for that it
resembles a Pipe.

The Use is declared in the last words. Containing the less spirituous Blood,
etc. for that the Blood is the primary Humor which is carried through them.

I say less Spirituous, to distinguish it from the Arterious Blood which is
much more Spirituous, and comes not to the Veins till it has lost a great Part
of its spirituosity.

I say containing; not because such Blood is contained in the Veins only, for
there is sufficient found in the substance of many Parts; but because the
greatest quantity is carried in these Vessels, and as much as may be preserved
from Putrefaction, which otherwise being so great a quantity would be soon
corrupted.

I say, carrying to the Heart; because this appears to be their primary Office.
lib. 2. cap. 8.

But the Blood is carried through the Veins without pulsation; but flows only
and is pushed forward as one Wave pushes forward another.

The Ancients ascribed two other Uses to the Veins.

1. Distribution of the Blood. For they thought the Blood flowed out of the
hollow Vein into the lesser Veins which is now disproved by the Circulation of
the Blood. 2. The Concoction and making of the Blood. Which was Galens Opinion,
who affirms that the Veins were made for the generating and conveighing the
Blood into all the Parts; and farther least the Nourishment should loose time,
while they were busied only in conveighing the Blood; moreover, he says that
the Distempers of the Veins oft-times hinder the Generation of profitable
Blood. And among the Moderns, Spigelius agrees with Galen. The Veins, says he,
which boil and concoct the Blood, and have in themselves an innate sangulfying
Faculty. And a little after, If we conclude that the Brain is the Domicel of
Reason, because that being injured, we find our Understanding crazed; we may
justly call the Veins the Workhouse of Blood, because that they being injured,
we find depraved and bad Blood to be generated.
Vesalius, Ioubertus, Laurentius, Schenkius, and others, consent with Galen.
However, this Operation belongs not to the Veins, but to the Heart, as being
the only sanguifying Bowel, from which, the farther the Blood departs, so much
the more imperfect it becomes and never is restored or elaborated to a better
Condition in the Veins; and therefore for that very reason, there is a
necessity for the Blood to be returned again to the Heart, there to be a new
concocted and wrought to perfection. Which Highmore considered, and therefore
signally refutes this Opinion. Vide lib. 2. cap. 11, and 12.

II. The Vein is of a Membranous The Substance.
Substance, indifferently soft, to the end it may the more easily be distended,
and grow languid again.

III. It consists of one proper Tunicle, Its Tunicles.
soft and dull of feeling, so that it is vulgarly said to have no feeling at
all. It is also thought to be interwoven with a threefold sort of Fibers.
Concerning which, there is a great Dispute among the Anatomists. Fallopius and
Vesalius very much question, whether there be any or no? because with all their
Industry they could never observe any. Scaliger also denies them strenuously.
On the other side Brissot and Fernelius admits Fibers in the Veins; telling us,
that the Fibers of the Veins are to be observed in letting blood, with whom
Fuchsius and Dunius agree. To give our own Judgment in this case, we think,
that though no Anatomist can manifestly demonstrate Fibers in the Veins, yet
that they are easily to be imagined by any one that considers their necessary
Use, which is to preserve the Veins in their due State, and to bring them to
their Natural Condition, after being distended with too great a quantity of
Blood, by Contraction. Which is manifestly apparent in Warts, when the
transverse and oblique Fibers being burst, the Tunicle of the Veins is very
much relaxed, nor can ever be reduced to its first Estate. Which Lindan seems
not to have considered, wonders that Physicians should admit such a multitude
of Fibers in the Veins, when the straight ones are only requisite. Which was
Lindans Mistake, for if the straight ones are to be admitted, much more the
Transverse and Oblique. Spigelius and Plempius observe that these Fibers may be
demonstrated by boiling the Trunks of remarkable Veins in large Animals.
Deusingius believes, that by means of these Fibers, the Veins attract the
Blood, and carry it to the Heart; and affirms, that the Meseraics also draw the
Chylus. But these are mere Imaginations, contrary to Reason and Experience.

IV. That the Tunicle of the Veins Sense.
has little or no Sense of Feeling* appears by the opening of it in
Blood-letting, at what time, if there be any Pain, it proceeds from the Skin,
and other adjoining sensible Parts, that adhere to the Vein.

Riolanus reproves Bauhinus, for saying the Veins do not feel; citing out of
Plutarch, that Marius felt an extreme Pain upon the cutting his Warts; and
farther, that the swelling of the Hemorrhoids causes a most sharp Pain. But
this Pain was felt in the Skin and adjacent Parts, not in the Vein. We have
also ordered Warts to be cut, which have been very painful till the Vein has
been freed from the Incumbent Membranes, but no longer.

V. Besides the foresaid proper Tunicle, The improper Coat.
a Vein has also another improper and common, with the neighboring Parts, in
the Breast from the Pleura, in the Abdomen from the Peritoneum, in other Parts
from the next Membrane, the more to secure it, being annexed to the
neighboring Parts in the length of its Progress. This Tunicle it puts off,
when it enters the Perenchymas of the Bowels, and the Substance of the Muscles
or other Parts.

VI. The Vein is nourished with Its Nourishment.
the Blood which flows through it, with which, by reason few salt Spirits are
mixed, there being nourished with a moister Juice, the Substance of it becomes
more soft. The manner of its Nourishment, see l. 6. c. 1.

VII. Here arises a Question, why Why the Veins (...) not beat?
the Veins do not beat? seeing they receive the Blood from the Arteries, and
carry it back to the Heart. I answer, that the Motion of Pulsation in the
Arteries, is continued to their very Extremities. But by reason of their
Divarications, the violence of it is diminished more and more by degrees, and
toward the ends is but very weak; if it does not cease altogether, so that
there can be no Pulsation in the Veins. Besides, the Blood gently gliding out
of the small ends of the diminutive Arteries, and entering the narrow Orifices
of the Veins, presently flows into the broader Veins; so that then all violent
Motion ceases, and consequently all Pulsation. See the Comparison concerning
this Matter, l. 2. c. 8.

The Veins more inwardly are furnished with several Valves Membranous and thin,
however close and compact, and are sometimes single like a little Half Moon; or
double, two opposite one to another, as is observed in some of the larger
Vessels. Sometimes threefold, triangularly opposed one to another. These are
all so situated, as to give free passage to the Blood flowing through them to
the Heart, but preventing its Reflux from the Heart. And therefore the Valves
of the Veins of the Head look downward, but the Valves of the lower Parts look
upwards.

VIII. The Number of the Valves Valves.
is infinite, neither can they be all discovered by the Anatomists. Yet some
have taken an account of the most conspicuous, which they reckon to be a
hundred and eight. But that is nothing, in the lesser Veins there are Myriads
of Veins not to be discovered; but that they are there, is apparent, for that
the Blood is so restrained by those Valves, that you cannot force it back with
your Finger into those Parts from whence it flowed.

IX. The Bigness of the Veins is The bigness.
very various. In general, the soft, hot, and most moving Parts, have the
bigest Veins, because the most Blood is required from them; the hard, colder,
and less moving Parts have smaller Veins for the contrary reason. The biggest
of all, by reason of its remarkable Hollowness, is called Vena Cava, which is,
as it were, the main River of the Blood, into which, the lesser Veins, like
lesser Streams discharge their Blood. The bigger sort are by Hippocrates called
Blood-powrers, because that being broken or cut, they power forth a great deal
of Blood; the lesser he calls Capillaries, as resembling so many Hairs.

Some few Veins proceed unaccompanied, but most have an Artery that runs along
with them; frequently jigg by jowl, rarely spread under it, but more frequently
by resting upon it. Many at their Extremities unite with the ends of the
Arteries, by Anastomasis, but the Capillary ends of most vanish in the
substance of the Parts.

X. The Veins differ, 1. In respect The Difference.
of their Substance, some having a thicker, some a thinner Tunicle. 2. In
respect of the Bigness, some large, some indifferent, some Capill^ry* 3. In
respect of the Figure; some straight, some arched, others winding. 4. In
respect of their Situation; some in the Head, some in the Breast, others in the
Abdomen or Joints. 5. Others in respect of their Connection; some to the Flesh,
some to the Arteries, others to the Nerves, Bones, and other Parts. But in
regard there is but one use of the Veins to carry Blood to the Heart, there can
be no difference observed from hence.

XI. The Number of the Veins, The Number.
some think to be greater than that of the Arteries, others equal, which is a
hard thing to determine; seeing it is impossible to discern all the
Productions, either of the Veins or Arteries. If you mean the main Trunks, then
they are equal. Three main Arteries* and three primary Veins, the Porta, Cava,
and Pulmonary. To which, if we add the Umbilical, then we may the umbilical
Arteries to their Number. And as the latter are the Productions of the Iliac
Arteries, so is the former the Product of the Vena Porta.

XII. No Man questions but that Their Original.
the Veins have their material Beginning from the Seed. But whether they first
proceed from the Liver or the Heart, is much disputed. Most affirm that they
rise from the Heart. Hence Epigelius, The Veins, says he, are so intermixed
with its Parenchyma, that hardly any Anatomist could be hitherto persuaded, but
that they arise from the Liver. But these Disputants are all out of the way,
for every Part is said to spring from another three manner of ways. Either by
way of Generation, Radication, or Distribution. In respect of Generation, a
Vein cannot be said to spring from another Part, seeing that all the solid
Parts, Heart, Liver and Veins, etc. are all formed at the beginning out of the
Seed, one before another, not one by another. Not in respect of Radication,
seeing that a Vein has no Roots to conveigh alimentary Juice for the
Nourishment of its Parts drawn from Matter foreign from the Body of Man, nor
the ends of the Veins be said to be Roots, but only their beginnings, through
which the Blood, which has lost its Spirituosity, and is become useless for
Nourishment is conveyed back to the Heart to be new concocted and restored to
its first Purity. Nor in respect of Distribution; seeing the Blood is not
distributed to the Parts through the Veins, or by any of their Productions, but
rather taken away from the Parts to be carried back to the Heart; whence it is
apparent, that the Veins arise from no Part. With much more Reason they might
be derived from the Substance of the Parts, from whence they seem to rise with
little Roots, and grow into a Stalk, such as the Vena Cava, like a Tree, whose
Root receives the Juice of the Earth, and conveighs it to the Trunk, as the
Veins receive the Blood from the Parts themselves, and from the Arteries
therein contained. But this is easily disproved by what has been said before,
so that we must conclude the Veins to be Parts subsisting of themselves, formed
with other Spermaticks out of the Seed. As to any farther Enquiry, Hippocrates
said well, The Veins diffused through the Body, and many springing from one,
but whence that one derives its self, or where it terminates, I do not know;
for the Circle being made, there is no end to be found.

In the mean time, as the Rivolets, which are the first Receptacles of the
Water flowing from Springs and Mountains, do not derive their beginning from
the Channel of the River: So the small Veins cannot be said to rise from the
great ones, or the Bowels thereto annexed, but are the first Springs that suck
in the Blood, and carry it to the larger Vessels; otherwise than in the Nerves
and Arteries, wherein there is a Progress of the Blood and Spirits from the
primary Bowels to the larger Vessels, and from them to the lesser; and
consequently the primary and larger Vessels are first to be described. But in
the Description of the Veins, we must begin with the Capillaries, which are the
least, to the end we may understand more easily, how, from whence, and whither
the Blood is conveyed. Which is the reason we make use of this Method, quite
contrary to what has hither been observed in the beginning, with the Springs
and Fountains and smallest Roots of the Veins.

As to the Umbilical Vein, see l. 1. c. 32. Concerning the Pulmonary we have
sufficiently discoursed, l. 2. c. 9. and 13. Here therefore we shall only treat
of the Porta and Cava, and the lesser Rivolets that discharge themselves into
them.

CHAP. II. Of the Vena Porta, and the Veins united to it.
I. THE Vena Porta enters the The Vena Porta.
Hollow Part of the Liver between the two Eminences, which Hippocrates calls
(...), or Gates with a broad, but short Trunk, seated under the Duodenum.

II. The beginning of this Vein, is Its Rise.
by some derived from the Liver, by others from the Mesentery. But the Doubt is
easily resolved, by saying that it takes its Rise from the Intestines and the
Mesentery both. For that from those Parts through its Roots, it receives the
Blood remaining after Nourishment, and conveighs it to the Liver, being poured
forth into its Trunk through its Ramification expanded into the Liver; to the
end it may be therein converted into bilous Ferment, as in l. 1. c. 14. But to
prevent the Blood from slipping back from whence it came, it has many Valves
both in the Roots and little Branches, none in the Trunk to withstand the force
of the retiring Blood.

Into this Vena Porta several lesser Veins discharge the Blood as into a
Channel, thence to be carried to the Liver, into which it is inserted in with
an extraordinary Ramification. But how those little Branches are intermixed in
the Liver with the Roots of the Vena Cava, and Porus Bilarus, has been already
said in the forementioned place. These following Veins enter into the Vena
Porta.

III. 1. The Umbilical Vein, proceeding The Umbilical Vein.
from the Navel, and uterine Cheeskake.

IV. 2. The Suspensory Vein, observed The Suspensory.
by Fallopius and Eustachius, which descends from the Septum to the Porta.

V. 3. The double Cystics, which The double Cystics.
are two small Veins running forth from the bilary Bladder to the left part of
the Porta.

VI. 4. The Right Hand Gastric, The right Gastric.
which proceeding from the hinder part of the Ventricle and Pylorus, from the
Right Hand, enters the Trunk of the Porta, somewhat lower than the Cystic.

VII. 5. The Branch or Splenic The Splenic Branch.
Channel, which being very large, and supported by the membranous Body of the
Caul, is carried from the Spleen, transverse to the Vena Porta, and opens its
self into its Trunk in the higher and left Part.

VIII. 6. The Mesenteric Vein, The Mesenteric Vein.
which is larger than the former, and proceeds from the Mesentery to the lower
and right Part of the Porta.

But because that by the means of these two larger Veins, the Splenic and the
Mesenteric, the Blood of many Parts seated in the lower Belly, is carried to
the Porta, we must enquire what lesser Veins, and whence they come to these
greater.

Many Veins terminate in the Splenic Channel; some at its double beginning
above and below, where it first issues out of the Spleen; others, after the
beginning unite into one Channel.

Into the lower beginning these Veins open themselves.

IX. 1. An innumerable Number The Splenic Veins.
of diminutive Veins dispiersed through the Spleen, and at length unites into
one Trunk, continuous with the Splenic Branch, to which it gives its Name.

X. 2. The Left Epiplois, which The left Epiplois.
crawls from the Interior Membrane of the Caul, with a double Sprig. Yet
Vesalius and Bauhinus tells us, that this is not always to be found.

XI. 3. The Left Gastro-epiplois, The left Gastro-Epiplois.
which is sufficiently remarkable, starting from the left Part of the bottom of
the Ventricle, together with the Branches ascending from the upper Membrane of
the Caul, proceeds thither.

XII. Into the upper beginning of the The short veiny Vessel.
Splenic Channel, sometimes two, sometimes three, sometimes more short Branches
descend from the Stomach; frequently one, which they call the Short Veiny
Vessel, which is many times as big as a Goos-quil.

After these two beginnings are united, the Trunk of the Splenic Channel is
formed, into which they descend at the upper Part.

XIII. 1. The lesser Gastric, from The lesser Gastric.
the hinder gibbous Part of the Ventricle.

XIV. 2. The larger Gastric, into The greater.
which, several Branches are united from the larger Part of the whole
Ventricle, and the upper Part of the Orifice it self, wherein is constituted
the Stomachic Coronary, and sometimes from the lower Part.

XV. At the lower Part enter the The right and hinder Epiplois, and Pancreatic
Veins.
Dexter Epiplois, which is lesser, from the lower Membrane of the Caul, and the
place annexed to it; and the Postic Epiplois, which is the bigger; also the
Sweetbread Vein, from the Pancreas, carried between both the Epiplois's.

XVI. Several lesser Veins enter the The Meseraic Veins.
Meseraic, which exceeds the Splenic Channel in bigness, and those either at
its double beginning, or at the Right or Left Mesenteric, or into the Trunk of
it.

In the Mesenteric, on the Right Side, meet an innumerable company of Veins,
called Mesaraic Veins, ascending from the Iejunum, Ileon, blind Gut, and
Right Hand Part of the Colon, supported with many Kernels interspeirsed,
receiving the Milky Vessels, which nevertheless they do not enter. These, at
first uniting into fourteen Branches for the most part terminate at length in
the said Mesenteraic.

XVII. Several Mesaraic Veins terminate The internal Hemorrhoidal.
also in the left Mesenteric, ascending from the left and middle Part of the
Mesentery. Among which, the most remarkable is the Inner Hemorrhoidal, which at
its beginning orbicularly embraces the Podex with slender Roots, and thence
ascending under the Right Intestine, receives little Sprigs from the whole
Colon, till it enter the Mesenteric with the rest. However, in some Bodies it
has been observed that this Vein runs directly to the Splenic Branch, and opens
into it.

But into the Trunk of the Mesenteric, which the Veins meeting both on the
Right and Left Side, two Veins enter.

XVIII. 1. The other Right hand The other right Epiplois.
Epiplois, rising from the bottom of the Ventricle and the upper part of the
Caul, and this sometimes, but very seldom enters the Left Mesenteric, after it
comes to be divided. In Dogs, this sometimes proceeds to the Intestinal,
sometimes is wanting, and then the left supplys the place of both,

XIX. 2. The Intestinal proceeding The Intestinal.
from the middle of the Duodenum, and the beginning of the Iejunum, as also
from the upper part of the Caul and Sweat-bread.

XX. The Vena Porta by the Physicians The use of the Vena Porta. The first
Opinion.
is assigned to several Uses. For the Ancients asserted that their Veins and
the Mesaraics the Blood flowed for the Nourishment of the Intestines and other
Parts contained in the Abdomen; that the Chylus also ascends through the same
passages to the Liver; moreover that the more feculent Part of the Chylus was
carried through the Splenic Channel to the Spleen, and was there concocted into
a certain acid Juice, afterward for the stimulating of Hunger to be conveyed
into the Stomach through the Short* veiny Vessel. But Dr. Harvey's discovery of
the Circulation of the Blood has scattered all these Mists of Error; So that
now adays there is no man versed in Dissection but will deride these Vanities.
For in the Dissection of a living Animal, the short Veiny vessel being tied,
presently by the swelling between the Ventricle and the Ligature, and the
falling on the other side, it is apparent that the Blood flows from the
Ventricle to the Splenic Channel, but nothing from the Spleen or Channel to the
Ventricle. Also bind the Splenic Channel, and by the swelling between the
Ligature and the Spleen, and the falling toward the Porta Vein, it is manifest
that the Blood is carried from the Spleen to the Porta Trunck, but not the
Chylus from the Porta Vein to the Spleen.

As to the Motion of the Chylus and the Blood moving upward and downward though
the Mesaraics it is contrary to sense; since such a contrary Motion of two
different humors can never be at the same time in those Vessels so extremely
narrow. Nor will the similitude signify any thing of shavings of Iron and
Straw mixed together in one Pipe, and putting a Lodestone at one end to draw
the Iron, and a piece of Amber at the other to draw the Straw. For two dry
bodies of that Nature do not unite like two moist bodies. Nor are there any two
such different Magnets belonging to the Mesaraics, to draw the Chylus upward
and the Blood downward, but in the whole Body of Man a single propulsion of the
Blood from the Heart.

XXI. Others affirm the Blood and The second Opinion.
Chylus to pass through by turns; as if there were a certain Contract between
the Blood and the Chylus, that when the Chylus is coming, the Blood should go
back or stop in the Liver, and cease to flow for that time to the Bowels, which
is ridiculous.

XXII. Others will have the Chylus The Third Opinion.
only ascend to the Liver through these Veins, and that they have a proper
faculty to die the Chylus of a red Color. But neither is there any such faculty
in the Veins, nor could the Blood remaining after Nourishment return to the
Heart, if the Misaraic Veins were only designed to carry the Chylus.

Plempius, says, that the Arterious The fourth Opinion.
blood remaining after Nourishment flows back to the Porta through the
Mesaraics, and that the Chylus from the Intestines is mixed with it. But he
should have showed us which way the Chylus enters the Veins: which ought
somewhere to open into the Intestines, to receive the Chylus: rather why does
not the Blood which is thinner and more spirituous then the Chylus flow through
those Openings into the Intestines? Why should the thicker Chylus enter, rather
then the thinner Blood go forth? If Plempius plead attraction in those Veins,
there is no such thing to be allowed in our Bodies, as you may see more at
large. lib. 1. cap. 12. and lib. 2. cap. 8. If he fly to the diversity of the
Pores or Mouths of the Vessels; I answer that through whatever Pores the
thicker Chylus can pass, with more ease the thinner Blood may go through.
Besides that never any man could hitherto observe any thing so much as like the
Chylus in the Misaraics, which is always to be found in the Milky and other
Chylifer Vessels.

XXIV. These last Assertions of mine The fifth Opinion.
perhaps Lewis de Bills may oppose, agreeing with Plempius; to which end he has
feigned certain Valves at the ends of the Misaraics to withstand the Exit of
the Blood, but admitting the Chylus, in his Epistle to D. Iordaen Physician at
Dort, wherein he endeavors to prove the entrance of the Chylus into the
Mesaraics by this Experiment. Dissect the Abdomen of a living Dog, separate the
Arteries and Mesaraic Veins one from another, and tie strings about all the
Arteries, to prevent any more Blood from running into the Veins; then sow up
the Abdomen again and keep the Dog alive for three or four hours, till the Meat
given him before Dissection be turned into Chylus; then opening the Abdomen
again, and you shall find the Arteries quite empty, but the Veins full of a
muddy Liquor, of a dark Ash Color.

This Experiment the Bilsianists admire; but if we consider the thing more
narrowly, we shall find that neither the Color, Consistence or Quantity of the
Blood contained in the Veins, can persuade us that the Chylus runs through
those Passages. For the Blood contained in the Meseraic Veins, considering the
Part may be more feculent than that contained in other Parts. And perhaps the
Blood mentioned in the Experiment might be of a bad Color, by reason of the
Arterious Blood, because the Ligatures could not come to purify it; but this
does not prove that Feculency does proceed from any Mixture of the Chylus. Now
why the Blood is better and more pure at the same time in some Parts of the
same Person than in other Parts, where it is more feculent and dissolved;
Fernelius tells us, l. 4. Potholog c. 6. which Experience also confirms; for
that upon opening a Vein, the first Blood shall be more feculent and
discolored than the last, and many times out of the Arm the Blood shall be
fresh and good, and at the same time taken from the Foot feculent and livid,
and yet no Man will believe that the Chylus comes to the Foot to change the
Color of the Blood. But this proceeds from the depraved constitution or
specific Temper of the Foot. Thus, by reason of the specific Temper of the
Mesentery, the Blood passing through it may be more feculent and discolored by
passing through a muddy Channel, then that which passes through the fleshy and
well tempered Parts, which Feculency vanishes when concocted by the Liver, it
acquires a fermentaceous Quality, and comes to be again dilated by the Heart.
And this is the reason, that in the Vena Porta and the Meseraic Branches,
sometimes more thick and impure Blood is found, than in the Hollow and other
Veins. I say sometimes, because that for the most part it does not differ from
the Blood in other Parts, or other sanguiferous Vessels. We our selves also
have taken Blood out of the Meseraics of Beasts, at the same time, when all the
Lacteous Channels swelled with milky Juice, and have compared it with the Blood
of other Veins, but could find no manifest difference either in Color,
Substance or Coagulation. The same has also been observed by Nicholas Stenonis,
I observed, says he, Bilsius's Method, bound the Arteries, kept the Dog alive,
the first time three Hours, the next four, and then cut open his Abdomen again,
and exposed the Blood separately taken out of the Porta and Aorta to the Air,
but they coagulated with equal swiftness, glisten'd both alike, and blackened
both alike. And therefore Clement Niloe frivolously asserts, that the Blood
taken under the Porta from the Meseraics coagulates otherwise than the Blood of
other Veins; nay, that it coagulates into a glassie hardness.

Nor do I admire that L. de Bills found all the Meseraics full. For what should
force the Blood farther out of them, when all the Arteries were bound? And
therefore if you bind the Arm too hard, before you prick the Vein, by which
means the Arteries are compressed after the Wound is made, the Blood will never
come forth; for the Impulse of the Arteries ceasing, the Blood ceases to flow
through the Veins.

But yet still to persuade us that the Chylus passes through the Meseraics,
Lewis de Bills tells us, that these Veins about the Intestines, exceed the
Lacteous Veins in bigness and capaciousness. Which is contrary to Sight it
self, the Lacteous Swelling with Chylus being no less conspicuous about the
Meseraics, then the other Swelling with Blood: though indeed when the Lacteous
Veins are empty, the Meseraic are more apparent, because of the ruddy Blood
contained therein. So that this is but a weak Argument of Bills to prove his
Assertion. Besides that, that James Henry Pauli, Professor at Coppenhagen,
writes, that he has observed the milky Vessels to be larger at their Insertion
into the Intestines than the Meseraics; and that the milky Vessels passed
directly into the Tunicles of the Intestines, gaped toward their inner Parts,
and being squeezed, poured forth Chylus, whereas the Meseraics being squeezed,
did not pour forth Blood until the inner Tunicle of the Intestine were scraped
away. But though these things might be sufficient, yet some were so curious to
invent the following Experiment to put all things out of doubt. They take the
Iejunum with part of the Ilium and Mesentery annexed to it, out of the live
Animal, and tie it strongly to both ends. Then before the Knot, they pour in a
certain Liquor blackned with Ink, and gently squeezing the Intestine Swelling
with that Liquor, they find that nothing of the black Liquor enters the
Meseraics, but that very much enters the milky Vessels. Much more of this, see
l. 1. c. 11, 12.

XXV. Now then the true use of The true use of the Vena Porta.
the Vena Porta is threefold.

1. To receive the Blood of the Birth included in the Womb, the sanguinous
alimentary Juice out of the Uterine Cheescake, through the Umbilical Vein, and
deliver it to the Liver or the Hollow Vein. 2. To conveigh to the Liver and
Hollow Vein the Blood which is forced to the Intestines and other various
Bowels of the Abdomen, and remaining after Nourishment, and carried thither
through the Meseraics and other lesser Veins. 3. To conveigh to the same place,
the Arterious Blood concocted after a specific manner, and endued with a
subacidish, fermentaceous Quality.
Therefore in its Use, the Vena Porta differs very little from the Vena Cava,
and other Productions of the Cava, for all the Veins of the Body return the
Blood to the Heart, which the Arteries took away from it. There is indeed some
little difference in the thickness of the Tunicle from the hollow Vein, and the
darkness of the Color; but for any difference in Substance, as Bauhinus and
some others assert, it is a mere Notion.

CHAP. III. Of the Hollow Vein, and the Veins united to it above the Diaphragma.
I. THE Hollow Vein is the largest The Hollow Vein.
of all the Veins in the Body, and the River into which all the other
Blood-bearing Vessels like so many little Streams discharge their Blood.

II. It is seated all along the Spine The Situation.
of the Back, from the Os Sacrum to the Jugulum, and so is carried with a
straight Course through the middle and lower Belly, there immediately fastened
to the Heart, here to the Liver.

Several Veins enter this Vein, some above and some below the Diaphragma.

Above the Diaphragma, these that follow.

II. 1. The Phrenic or Diaphragmatic, The Phrenic or Diaphragmatic.
of each side one, the Roots of which, adhere to the Mediastinum, Diaphragma
and Pericardium; some write, that it has a Valve at its entrance into the
Hollow Vein, preventing the sliding back of the Blood from the Hollow Vein,
which is very probable, both in this and many other Veins gaping into the
Hollow Vein.

III. 2. The Pneumonic, which The Pneumonic.
proceeding out of the Lungs, not far from the Phrenic, opens it self into the
Trunk. This, by reason of its slenderness, is not easy to be found, but has
been observed by Sammichelius, whom Aquapendens, Castius and Mongius cite.

IV. 3. The Coronary of the The Coronary of the Heart.
Heart, sometimes double, into which many lesser Veins ascending from the Point
to the Basis of the Heart, and girding it like a Crown, assemble together. At
its ingress into the Hollow Vein, Eustachius first discovered a Valve like a
little Half Moon. This, Bauhinus says, is so seated, that it hinders the
flowing back of the Blood from the Heart to the Hollow Vein, wherein he is
grossly mistaken; for it is to hinder an Influx of the Blood out of the Hollow
into the Coronary Vein.

V. 4. The Vein without a Pair or The Azygos.
(...), because in Men it is single, having no Fellow on the opposite Side. Yet
Fallopius and Bauhinus have sometimes observed in Men another Vein like to it
on the opposite side, and inserted into the left Branch of the Subclavial, and
sometimes into the Hollow Vein it self on the left Side, about the Region of
the third Verteber of the Breast, which supplies the Office of the Azygos, and
receives the Blood some spaces distant from the Intercostals, and then, about
the sixth or seventh Verteber of the Breast united with the Azygos. However,
this rarely happens in the Body of Man, though Bauhinus asserts it to be
frequent in Goats and Hogs, and many Creatures chewing the Cud, wherein it is
many times double, one on the Left, the other on the Right Side. Riolanus
derides this second Vein, or if it be found, declares it preternatural, as all
things are which he discovers not himself.

In Man, the Azygos enters the Hollow Vein about the fourth and fifth Verteber
of the Breast, a little above the Heart, on the hinder and right side, but in
Sheep and many other Animals it enters it on the Left Hand.

It receives Blood from the Intercostal Veins, possessing the Intervals of the
ten inferior Ribs, rarely of the uppermost; sometimes also from the
Mediastinum, the Vertebers, the Gullet, the Intercostal Muscles, and those of
the Abdomen, and some other Parts from whence Branches ascend to it. Sometimes
also a Branch from the sinister Emulgent, and sometimes another Branch from the
Trunk of the Hollow Vein above the Emulgent, ascending upwards and passing the
Diaphragma, is united above the Spine with the Roots of the Azygos, and then
the Blood not only flows through the Trunk of the Azygos, but also through
these Passages out of the Intercostal Spaces, and the Parts adjoining to the
Hollow Vein. By Virtue of the Communion of these Passages, Aquapendens asserted
for a certain, that Snivel and purulent Matter in those that are troubled with
much Spitting, may be easily purged out of the Hollow of the Breast, by the
Urinary Passages, not considering that such an Evacuation can never pass by
these Ways. First, because these Veins in the Breast being enveloped with the
Pleura Membrane, can by no means receive that Matter. Secondly, that they must
of necessity open to receive it; but being opened, the fluid Blood may easily
flow into the Cavity of the Breast, but that it would be a difficult thing for
the slimy Phlegm to flow through the narrow Passages of these Veins. Thirdly,
because the Valves stand in the way, preventing the Efflux of any Liquor out of
the Breast to the Kidneys. For at the Root of the Azigos, many times three
Valves are observed, one at its entrance into the Hollow Vein, two in the
middle of the Trunk, by which the Influx of the Blood out of the Hollow Vein
into the Azygos is prevented, but free Egress out of the Azygos into the hollow
Vein is allowed. Bauhinus writes, that he never observed these Valves, either
in Men or Beasts. Riolanus avers, that he has shown them in all sorts of
Carcasses; but both seem to speak over absolutely. For I have diligently sought
for them, both in public and private, as well in Men as in Brutes, but never
found them all in every one; only in some I have observed one Valve at the
Entrance of the hollow Vein, in some none at all, so that there is no certain
Determination to be given.

VI. 5. The upper Intercostal, The upper Intercostal*
of each side one, which oft-times however enters the Subclavial Branch, near
the beginnings of the Jugular Veins. Sometimes the Right Hand Intercostal is
inserted into the Trunk of the Hollow Vein, the Left into the Subclavial
Branch; but at the entrance, fortified with a Valve to hinder the Relaps of the
Blood. The Roots of it rises from three or four Intervals of the Superior Ribs,
and are frequently mixed with the mammary Roots, creeping through the Gristles.
Sometimes it happens that Veins are carried from all the Spaces of the Ribs to
the Azygos, and then this upper Intercostal is wanting.

6. Two Subclavials, of which, in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Subclavial Veins, and Veins of the Head.
TWO Subclavial Veins, the Right and Left enter the Supreme Part of the Trunk
of the Cava, and while they stay within the Breast, are called Subclavial; but
having forsaken the Cavity of the Breast, are called Axillary.

Many lesser Veins carry the Blood to these Subclavials, some of which, open
themselves into them at the lower Part, others at the upper part.

At the lower Part, five Veins enter each Subclavial.

I. 1. The upper Intercostal, rising The upper Intercostal.
from the Intervals of the three upper Ribs. But this frequently enters the
Trunk of the Hollow Vein also.

II. 2. The Mammary, which however The Mammary.
is not always inserted into the Subclavial, but sometimes into the Trunk of
the Hollow Vein. The Roots of it are both Internal and External. The Internal
arises from the gristly Extremities of the Ribs, and their Intercostal Spaces,
as also from the Glandules of the Paps: The External, from the straight Muscles
of the Abdomen, the Glandules of the Teats, the Skin, and the Muscles spread
over the Breast.

III. 3. The Mediastine, which The Mediastinum.
carries Blood from the Mediastinum, the Pericardium, and the Thymus Kernel:
Though neither does this always enter the Subclavial, but sometimes the Trunk
of the Hollow Vein.

IV. 4. The Cervical, which adheres The Cervical.
partly to the slender Roots passing the lateral Holes of the Vertebers, the
Pith of the Neck, or rather the Membranes wrapped about it; partly to the Muscles
next incumbent upon the Vertebers.

V. 5. The Inferior Muscula, which The lower Muscula.
proceed from the Superior Muscles of the Breast, and the lower of the Neck.
This also sometimes opens into the Exterior Jugular.

At the upper Part, three Veins enter the Subclavial.

VI. 1. The Superior Muscula, The upper Muscula.
rising from the Skin and the Muscles of the Neck.

VII. 2. and 3. The External and The Iugular.
Internal Iugular, whose Entrance is guarded by one thin Valve only, though
there are two, looking from above toward the Subclavial, and preventing the
Ascent of the Blood cut of the Subclavial to the upper Parts. Riolanus denies
any Valve to the External, and boasts himself the Discoverer of the Valve in
the Internal, though there be no reason why the External should want a Valve
more than the Internal, since there is the same necessity of stopping the
Reflux of the Blood out of the Subclavial into the one as well as the other.

These Jugulars are seated in the sides of the Neck, and adhere to the
neighboring Parts. They descend from the Head, and the Blood of the whole Head
remaining after Nourishment, slides into them through several lesser Veins and
Hollownesses of the hard Meninx; for several Veins open into each Jugular with
many Valves, hindering the Reflux of the descending Blood.

VIII. The External Jugulars admits The Vena Frontis, Vena Puppis, and the
Ranariae.
two Veins, of which, the Exterior adheres with its Roots to the skinny Parts
of the Head, Face, Top of the Head, Temples, hinder part of the Head, Cheeks,
Nostrils, the Muscles adjoining, and the Bones of the Jaws; and receives thin
Fibers from the Menix's themselves through their Sutures. Into this also the
Forehead Vein seated in the Forehead, exhonerates it self, arising from the
Concourse of the Vein on each side. Also the Vena Puppis, seated in the hinder
part of the Head; the opening of which Veins is highly extolled in Distempers
of the forepart and hinderpart of the Head, as the Distemper lies. The Roots
of the inner Vein are inserted partly into the Mouth, that is, the Muscles of
the Chaps, Larynx, Hyoides, Palate and Tongue, under which they constitute the
Ranaries or Hypoglottides, wont to be opened in Inflammations of the Chaps;
partly into the inner Membrane of the Nose. Some little diminutive Veins
proceed also hither from the Seith, through the Hole of the Temple Bone.

The Internal Jugular Vein receives two Veins of each side, through the Holes
of the Cranium; of which, the first which is the bigest, being produced from
the Bosom of the thick Meninx, lying under the Lamdoidal Suture, and is
continued with its Vein, which passes through the Bone of the hinder part of
the Head in the sixth Pair of the Nerves, and admits an ascending Root from the
Pith of the Spine. The other which is lesser proceeding partly from the thick
Meninx passes through the holes of the second, third and fourth Pair of the
Nerves; partly from the Organ of Hearing through the hole of the Bone of the
Temples.

CHAP. V. Of the Axillaries and Veins of the Arm.
I. THE Axillary Veins are The Axillary Veins.
Continuous with the Subclavials, and indeed the same, only changing their
Names according to the Diversity of Situation. For where it lies under the
Clavicles, it is called Subclavial; when it extends it self to the Armpits, it
is called Axillaris.

II. To the Axillary, at its first The Scapular Veins.
issuing forth from the Breast there come two lesser Veins; The Internal and
External Scapularis; of which the one proceeds from the Muscles occupying the
hollow of the Scapula, the other from the Muscles covering the Scapula's.

A little farther, at the very beginning of the Axillary, two larger Veins are
continued with it, which pour forth the Veiny Blood of the whole Arm into the
Axillary, of which the upper is called the Cephalic, and the lower the Basilic.

III. The Cephalic ( which is also called The Cephaelic Vein.
Humeraria, and the outer Part of the Elbow) so called, because the ignorant
Anatomists in former times thought this Vein descended directly from the Head
to the Arm, and brought its Blood along with it, and therefore in Distempers of
the Head prescribed it to be opened before any other Vein, whereas this Vein
ascends from the Arm to the Axillary, and neither receives from, nor carrys any
thing to the Head; but only empties the Blood ascending from the lower Part of
the Hand into the hollow Vein through the Axillary.

Now this Cephalic in Human Bodies enters the Axillary at the upper Part, and
sometimes but rarely runs forth with a little Branch toward the External
Jugular, for in many Four-fo^ted Beasts it is inserted into the External
Jugular.

IV. It receives Blood from the Hand, The Salvatella.
and Parts adjoining to the Arm, into which the Roots of it are inserted. For
from the outer seat of the Hand, after the Salvatella or Suele of the Arabians
is formed between the Ring and Little-finger, several Branches arise, making a
Conflux into this Cephalic about the Elbow; which Cephalic ascends from the
Elbow along the superficies of the Elbow, to the Shoulder, between the fleshy
Membrane, and the Tunicle of the Muscles; receiving as it runs little small
Veins from the Muscles of the Arm and Shoulder.

V. The Basilic Vein, which more The Basilic.
below and more inward enters the Axillary, exceeds the Cephalic in Magnitude;
and in the Right Arm is called the Hepatic, in the Left the Spleen Vein, for
the Distempers of which the Ignorance of former times ordered them to be opened
as the Distempers lay.

The Basilic receives Blood from the lower and adjoining Parts. From each
Finger two, from the Skin of the hand as well outward as inward several
Ramifications grow, which first unite into four, and those about the Joint of
the Elbow into two Veins. Of which the one lies very deep concealed; the other
under the Skin. These both ascend upward from the bending of the Elbow. The
pr^found one along the Bone of the Radius and Elbow; the other along the outer
Parts; and both receive several branches from the adjacent Parts, as well
Exterior as Interior. When they come to the Shoulder they unite together in one
Vein. Into which two other Veins Insinuate themselves besides the Cutaneous
Vein of the Shoulder and Breast.

VI. 1. The Upper Thoracy, which The upper Thoracy.
rises from the Skin, and the Inner Part of the Pectoral Muscle, and the Hand.

VII. 2. The Inferior Thoracy, The lower.
adhereing with its Roots to the broad Muscle and the whole side of the Breast,
and some affirm that it unites with the Orifices of three or four of the
Intercostal Roots of the Azygos.

VIII. Out of the Basilic and Cephalic The Median or common Vein.
is made a third Vein, of which that Part which is in the midst between the
said Veins is called Mediana, or the Common Vein, as being made of both
concurring a little below the bending of the Elbow. This is double; the one
conspicuous under the Skin; the other, lying deep; but both inserted with many
Roots into the Hand and Fingers, as also into the Membranes and Muscles of the
Hand and Elbow.

It would be a difficult thing to describe all the divarications of the small
Veins belonging to the hand, though some have in vain attempted it. So frequent
are the Conjunctions, Intermixtures and Distributions. And therefore we leave
those exact investigations to such as have more patience and more leisure. And
what I say of the Hand is also to be said of the Feet.

CHAP. VI. Of that Part of the Vena Cava below the Diaphragma, and the Veins
discharging themselves into it.
AS all the Parts seated above the Diaphragma transmit the residue of the Blood
remaining after Nutrition through the lesser Vein to the Vena Cava, so do all
the Parts below the Diaphragma.

I. 1. Through the broad Orifice, The Veins of the Liver
where it adheres to the Liver innumerable little Veins discharge themselves
out of the Liver into the Vena Cava. Between which and the Vena Porta, there is
said to be a great communication. Riolanus mentions a Valve within the Trunk of
the hollow Vein near the Liver, to let in the Blood out of the Liver into the
hollow Vein, but to prevent its egress into the Liver. This he says was
discovered by Stephanus and Silvius and found in Cows, but whether in Men or
no, he knows not.

II. 2. The Adipous or Fatty Vein, The Adiposa.
both right and left. The left proceeding with its Roots from the Exterior
Membrane of the Kidney, the Fat of it, and the Kernel laid upon it, is inserted
into the Left side of the Trunk of the hollow Vein a little below the Emulgent.
The Right, proceeding from the same Parts most commonly approaches the higher
and middle Emulgent Channel, but seldom both enter the Emulgent, and more
rarely the hollow Vein.

III. 3. The Emulgent, large, but The Emulgent.
short, and both right and left. These each of them adhere with their stringy
Roots to the Kidney of it is own side, which meeting at length about the middle
and hollow Part of the Kidney, break forth out of it sometimes with one, two,
three, and sometimes more Branches, after their egress concurring into one
short and broad Channel, which descending somewhat obliquely opens with a broad
Orifice into the Trunk of the hollow Vein, the Left in a place somewhat higher
then the Right. At the Orifice of the Emulgent gaping into the hollow Vein
stands a remarkable Valve, looking upward from the Inferior Part of the Orifice
and granting a free Influx of the Blood out of the Kidney into the hollow Vein,
but preventing the reflux of it into the Emulgent.

There is great variety in the Number of the Emulgents; which though most
commonly are from each Kidney, yet sometimes two, many times single by
themselves, many times meeting half way, fall into the Vena Cava; and only one
rises from one Kidney, and two from the other.

Sometimes a Branch descends from the Breast to the Emulgent, which is believed
in this place to intermix with the Roots of the Azygos, and here and there to
unite. Sometimes a Branch slides down to the Emulgent from the Loins and Spinal
Pith. Seldom any Branch is extended thither from the Succenturiated Kernel.
Sometimes also little Branches gape into it from the Neighboring Parts; for
Nature often varys in these particulars.

IV. 4. The Spermatic or Seminal, The Spermatic or Seminal.
of each side one, a Right and Left. Riolanus writes, that sometimes in Lustful
Persons that have been hanged for Adultery, he has often found these Veins
double especially on the Right side. But there is no certain Reason why men
should be more Lustful for that; and therefore I question his Assertion.

The Right Hand Vein enters the higher Part of the Trunk it self, below the
Emulgent of the same side, which has been often observed by Galen and Vesalius.
At its entrance into the hollow Vein, it bunches forth with somewhat a thick
Prominence; which Riolanus believes to proceed from the Valve distended by the
ascending Blood, and looking toward the hollow Vein. This Valve by reason of
its extreme smallness and slenderness can hardly be shown, but reason persuades
us it must be there; there being a necessity of some obstacle to prevent the
Blood from flowing back from the hollow into the Spermatic Vein. To which end
it is probable that all the Veins gaping into the Vena Cava are so furnished,
unless the Iliac and Sub clavial, whose Valves are more remote.

The Left Seminal enters the middle Left Emulgent, at the lower Part, guarded
with a Valve at the Orifice. From this another Branch is sometimes sent forth
to the Trunk of the Cava.

But Nature varies in the Spermatic Veins: for that their ends sometimes enter
the Cava on both sides, sometimes the Emulgent on both sides; and the Left
enters the Cava, and sometimes though rare the Emulgent and Cava on both sides
with a forked end.

These Veins rise in Men without the Abdomen from the Testicles themselves, and
the Warty substance, from which they carry back the Blood remaining after
nourishment of the Parts, and generation of Seed to the hollow Vein, In Women
they rise within the Abdomen, partly from the bottom of the Womb and
neighboring Membranes, with innumerable stringy Roots; partly they rise up
from the Testicles. Besides, it has been observed by some that three or four
Roots are extended further from the Spinal Pi^h.

V. 5. The Lumbaries, two, three or The Lumbary.
four, which enter the Trunk of the Cava, at the hinder seat looking toward the
Vertebres, so that their ingress cannot be perceived but by raising the Cava.
They proceed from the Lumbary Muscles and the Spinal Pith, between four
V^rtebres of the Loins through the holes of the Nerves perforated on each side,
and receive on each side a little Branch inserted into the involvings of the
Marrow, and descending all along the whole length of it, through those M^ninx's
that enfold it. This Riolanus believes at its beginning to be united by
Anastomosis with the beginning of the Root of the ascending Jugular; which
seems not probable.

VI. 6. The two Illiacs, large The Iliacs.
Veins, which about the fifth Verteber of the Loins, and the beginning of the
Os Sacrum, enter the end of Trunk of the Cava; so that the Cava seems to rest
upon these two Veins as upon two Thighs. A little above their Ingress into the
lower Belly, beforethey are united with the Cava, they are guarded with a large
Valve looking upward, which transmits the ascending, but stops the descending
Blood. These Iliacs discharge into the Cava the Blood of all the Inferior
Parts, brought to them out of the lesser Veins which are under them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Veins which open into the Iliacs.
I. TO Each of the Iliacs, about the The upper Muscula and the Sacra.
same place, where it approaches the Cava, The Upper Muscle extends it self,
which proceeds from the Peritonaeum and Muscles as well as of the Loins and
Abdomen. Hither also reaches the Sacred Vein sometimes single, sometimes
double, which ^uns forth from the Membranes investing the Marrow through the
Holes of the Os Sacrum.

II. A little lower a large Vein but The lower Iliaca.
short enters the Iliac called the Lower Iliac, into which only two lesser
Veins enter.

III. 1. The middle Muscula, at the The middle Muscula.
outer Seat, which with its Roots adheres to the Inferior Muscles of the Thigh,
possessing the Seat of the Hip; as also to the Skin of the Buttocks and the
Adjacent Parts.

IV. 2. At the inner Seat the Hypogastric; The Hypogastric.
which is larger then the first, sometimes double to which most of the Veins of
the Hypogastrium are carried.

1. In Men, several little Branches from the Yard and Bladder. 2. In Women,
several Branches from the Bladder, but more from the Bottom and Neck of the
Womb. 3. The External Haemorrhoidals, The external Haemorrhoidais.
from the Straight Gut, or the Podex. 4. A Branch from the Parts adhereing to
the Hole of the Share-bone, which perforating the Tenth Muscles of the Thigh,
and Peritonaeum, reaches hither.
V. Where the Iliac admits this The Epigastric.
Inferior Branch, in a place somewhat lower it receives from above the Epi
gastric, adhereing with its Roots to the Womb, Skin of the Groins, and Muscles
of the Epigastrion, especially the straight ones. To the Roots of these are
joined the two Mammary Roots under the Muscles of the Abdomen, near about the
Navel; thence ascending to the Teats, but not United with the Epigastrics by
Anastomosis, whatever Laurentius, Fallopius, Bauhinus, and other Anatomists
Write, vid. l. 1. c. 5. and l. 6. c. 3.

A little below the Peritonaeum, two more Veins open into the Iliac.

VI. 1. The Pudenda, which The Pudenda.
enters the inner Seat, before the Iliac Branch enters into the Peritonaeum;
rising in Men from the Scrotum and Skin of the Yard; in Women, from the sinus
Muliebris, the Lips of the Privities, the Nympha, and Parts adjoining.

VII. 2. The Inferior Muscula, The lower Muscula.
which adheres with its Roots to the Skin and Muscles possessing the Hip, and
the Muscles adjoining.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Crural Veins, and Veins of the Foot.
I. THE Crural Vein in both The Crural Vein.
Thighs is continuous and the same with the Iliac, and only changes its Name
according to it is Situation; for that rising from the Foot it is called Crural,
as far as the Groin, but when it is goes about to enter the Peritonaeum it is
called the Iliac.

This Crural is a great Vein, into which the lesser Veins of the whole Thigh
discharge the Blood remaining after Nutrition, to be conveyed to the Cava.
But in the folding of the Thigh where it is accompanied with Nerves and
Arteries, it is underpropt with several Kernels.

Besides many other small Veins, the Crural receives from the neighboring and
lower Parts six remarkable Veins, 1. The Saphaena. 2. The lesser Ischias. 3.
The Muscula. 4. The Poplite. 5. The Sural. 6. The larger Muscula.

II. The Saphaena, is the longest, The Saphaena.
and most remarkable unaccompany'd by any Artery, adhereing to the Foot and
Toes with its lowest Roots, of which some uniting at the upper Part of the
great Toe, make the Vein vulgarly called the Cephalic; and this proceeding
farther, and meeting again with other Veins in the inner Part of Malleolus,
constitutes the said Saphaena, which is usually opened in Distempers of the
Womb; which ascending hence between the Skin and the fleshy Pannicle through
the inner Parts of the Thigh in the midway admits several little Veins into
the Leg, Thigh and Knee. The Roots of which adhere to the Skin, Muscles and
other neighboring Parts, and so at length it enters the Crural Vein near the
Groin.

III. The lesser Ischias, proceeding The lesser Ischias.
from the forepart of the Hip, and the Muscles of that Place, at the Exterior
seat approaches the Crural, right against the Saphaena.

IV. The Muscula being double, The Muscula.
the Exterior which is the lesser arises from the second and fourth Muscle
extending the Leg; and from the Skin. The innermost, which is the larger and
deep, proceeds from the Knee and almost all the Muscles of the Thigh,
especially from the fifth, and the third extending the Leg. These two, directly
opposite one to another, enter the Crural within the Groins.

V. The Poplite Vein, adheres with The Poplitea.
its Roots to the Heel, and sometimes to the Malleolus. Then ascending upwards,
it admits from the Skin and Muscles of the Calf, oblique and transverse
Branches; and so perambulating the Muscle of the Ham, is divided into two
Branches, which being parted a little above the Ham, not far from one another,
sometimes one enters the Crural, and another the Saphaena. The opening of this
Vein was very frequent among the Ancients in Distempers of the Kidneys, and
prescribed by Hippocrates.

VI. The Sural, is a larger Vein, The Sural.
which about the bending of the Leg, and a little above, is joined continuous
to the Crural. It is formed out of the two Branches meeting above the Region of
the Ham; of which, the Exterior rises from the Toes and Extremity of the Foot
(wherein meeting and concurring with the Roots of the Poplite, it forms that
various Fold of Veins, conspicuous under the Skin) the outer part of the
Malleolus, and the Muscles lying hid between the Button. The lower rises from
the great Toe, the Heel, and the Muscle constituting the Calf.

VII. The larger Ischias, approaches The larger Ischias.
the Crural, being deeply hid, a little below the Entrance of the Sural. This
rises from the Musculous Substance of the Teeth and Toes, and so ascending,
penetrates the Exterior Part of the Malleolus, and in its farther Progress,
admits several Branches from the forepart of the Leg to the Muscle of the Calf
and the Parts adjoining, till at length it reaches the Crural, and opens its
self into it.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the NERVES.
CHAP. I. Of the Nerves in General.
A Nerve is called by the Greeks (...) from (...), to bend, and (...) from
(...) to stretch. For that the Nerves give to the Muscles a Power to bend and
extend the Parts.

Some of which, Galen is the chief, divide the Nerves into three sorts,
Ligamentous, Tendonous, and Nervous. But only the last is a true Nerve,
proceeding from the Marrow of the Brain. The other two rather Nervous Bodies,
so called from their Resemblance of hardness and dryness; for that they neither
proceed from the Marrow, neither are they similar Bodies, but composed of
Membranes and Nerves, and concurring little Arteries and Veins. But here we
shall treat only of the true Nerves, proceeding from the Marrow.

I. A Nerve is an Organic similar The Definition.
Part, white, long and round, appointed to conveigh the Animal Spirit.

II. The Substance of it is white, Its Substance.
thick, and consisting of many slender Threads, growing together by the means
of little Membranes, with no conspicuous Hollowness, but endued with most
subtle Pores, for the Passage of the Animal Spirits; which that they are
present within them, and diffused through them, both Wounds, and the
Obstructions wherewith they are afflicted, abundantly argue.

III. As to what I say, that they Whether hollow?
are endued with no manifest Hollowness, the Authority of Galen is opposed
against me, who writes, that the Optic Nerves are hollow; and where he says,
That the Influx of the Animal Faculty is hindered, when the Nerve which has a
Passage, is either obstructed or compressed. From which Words of Galen,
Bauhinus, Riolanus, Gemma, Spigelius, and others conclude, that the Nerves are
hollow. Nay, some have asserted, that they have observed a manifest Hollowness
in the larger Nerves, as in the Optics, and in the Trunk of the Nerve near the
Hips. To which purpose they propose certain Conditions out of Galen and
Plempius. 1. To make a Dissection in a larger Creature. 2. To make use of a
clear Light, and a sharp Knife, for fear of compressing or extending the Nerve.
3. That it be divided beyond its Coition. These Conditions observed, Bartholin
writes, that he has both seen and shown a Cavity in the Optics, which I will
believe when I see it; for with all my Industry I could never find any. Their
middle Substance is more Porous indeed, but never discerned to be hollow, which
Vesalius, Fallopius, Coiter, Aquapendens and Columbus assert to be true. Nor
could we by any Art or Help of Microscopes perceive any Cavity in any other of
the Nerves. And therefore I believe those Assertors of Cavity in the Nerves to
be in an Error. And Bartholinus himself, who admits Cavity in the Optics,
condemns the Opinion in general. As for the Mamillary Processes, they are no
Nerves, Vid. l. 3. c. 8. Nor are the spungy Bodies of the Yard Nerves, though
erroneously so called; besides that, Hollowness in the Nerves is against
Reason: For they carry invisible Spirits through the invisible Pores of their
Strings, but no conspicuous Liquor, there being no such thing ever known to
flow from them, either upon Wounds or Dissections. Moreover, seeing the Spinal
Marrow, from whence they derive their Original, has no Cavities, much less the
hard and dry Nerves that proceed from it. Now that the long Marrow is not
hollow, we have often tried, by means of a long Pipe, through which we could
never make any Breath to pass, though the Pipe being thrust into the Division,
easily went to the end of it. Nor do Galens Words contradict my Opinion, who
does not speak of any sensible Cavity, but of an insensible Hollowness, meaning
the Pores, in which respect they may be said to be insensibly hollow.

Therefore says Nellianus Glancanus, Though the Nerves do not appear sensibly
perforated, yet they are esteemed capable to conveigh the Animal Spirits: For
that the Spirits is most subtle, and the Marrow of the Nerves so spungy, as to
be easily penetrated by a subtle Spirit, Vid. l. 3. c. 11.

IV. The Substance of the Nerves The Substance is threefold.
is thought to be threefold. The first the Internal Medullary Substance,
proceeding from the Marrow of the Brain. The second and third is the double
Membrane, investing the inner Substance; of which, the one thinner and more
inward, is the Production of the Pi^ Meninx; the other thicker and more
outward, the Production of the hard Meninx: But this threefold Substance;
though perhaps it may be conspicuous in the Optic Nerves, in the rest is rather
to be distinguished by Reason than Sense: Seeing all the Nerves are only long
Threads, wherein there is no Pith or Medullary Substance to be seen, whence
some deny that there is any Marrow at all in the Nerves. And hence it is, that
that the Nerves which seem to be composed of Threads only, are numbered among
the similar Parts; not that they are simply so, but seem to be so, and are all
alike in all Parts.

V. How the Nerves are nourished, Their Nourishment.
is hard to judge. Ves^ingius allows them Veins and Arteries for Nourishment
and vital Heat: For which reason, Hossman will have them hollow. Lindan says,
that all the Nerves are not only hollow, but admit a little Capillary Artery.
Stenonis also believes, that he has observed Blood-bearing Vessels between the
Strings of the Nerves. We have our selves observed in the Optics some slight
Footsteps of a Blood-bearing Vessel, passing and expanding it self into the
Net-resembling-Tunicle, for the Nourishment of the Humors and Tunicles of the
Eye; but never in any other of the Nerves. And therefore I hold the Opinion
that extends to all the Nerves, to be groundless. 1. Because never any such
little Arteries were ever discernible in any of the largest Nerves, except the
Optics; and what Stenonis observed among the Threads, I should rather think
might be found in the enfolding Tunicles, if there were any such thing. 2.
Because the narrowness of the Pores is not only extremely straight, but plainly
invisible, not able to admit a small Hair, much less a Capillary Artery. 3.
Because the Pulsation of the Arteries would be a hindrance to the Passage of
the Animal Spirits, especially the Passage of the Nerve being straightened by
the Swelling of the Artery in a violent Pulsation of the Heart. 4. Because that
upon the Dissection of any Nerve, not the least drop of Blood appears to flow
out of any Artery, supposed to be within side.

Glisson writes, that the Nerves, by Whether they conveigh the nutritious
Juice? Glisson's Opinion.
conveighing the Animal Spirits, are not only serviceable to Sense and Motion,
but also carry a certain nutritive Humor for the Nourishment of themselves and
the Parts which they enter, and that they do not receive this Humor from the
Muscles, Bones, Heart, Lungs and Kidneys, but from the Spleen, Stomach and
Intestines, and partly also mediately from the Brain. But the narrowness of the
Nerves is sufficient to refute this vain Opinion; and we see that the least
Humor getting into them, obstructs the Spirits and causes the Palsy. Besides
that, no Juice can be squeezed out of the Nerve when hurt at any time; nor does
the Nerve, being tied with any Ligature, either swell or grow languid in any
Part; nor is there the least Tumor to be observed, either about or beyond the
Ligature. To this add the Experiment of Regner de Graef; We laid bare, says he,
the remarkable Nerve tending to the hinder Part of the Thighs, and slit it
athwart through the Middle, and being freed from the Lymphatic Vessels, put it
into a glass Viol, such as wherein we used to collect the Pancreatic Juice; the
Neck of which was so narrow, that the thickness of the dissected Nerve gently
closed the Orifice of it, least any Spirit, or whatever passes more subtle
through the Nerves, might exhale into the Air. This Viol we fixed to the Skin,
in hopes, that if any thing of liquid passed through the Skin, we should by
that means preserve it; but all in vain. For during the space of four or five
Hours, not a drop came forth; nor could we perceive any sticking of the Animal
Spirits to the Sides of the Glass by Condensation.

Moreover, what Glisson propounds in the last place, is remote from Truth; for
if any Liquor were received by the Nerves, it must necessarily flow into their
Beginnings; but there are no Beginnings of the Nerves that open either into the
Stomach, Intestines or Spleen; but they all proceed without Exception, from the
long Pith of the Brain. Read what we have discoursed upon this Point, l. 3. c.
11. and a farther Refutation, see l. 1. c. 16.

VII. Wharton and Charlton admits Wharton and Charlton's Opinion.
this nutritious Juice, but will have it prepared and made in the Glandules,
seated up and down in the Body, and appointed for this use. But in regard that
only thick and visible Juices are prepared in the Kernels, no way possible to
enter the Nerves, and that Juice ought to flow with a contrary Stream to the
Animal Spirits, and for that either none at all, or at least no preceptible
Nerves reach to the Glandules, most certainly it cannot be the Office of the
Glandules to carry nutritious Humors.

VIII. Malpigius believes some notable Malpigius his Opinion.
Juice to be conveyed through the Fibers of the Nerves; but that it is
derived from the Glandulous Cortex of the Brain, and for this reason he numbers
the nervous Fibers among the Vessels. The nervous Fibers, says he, are to be
reckoned among the Sorts of Vessels, which being cut, I have observed a certain
Juice like the White of an Egg, and thickning before the Fire, to flow forth in
a considerable quantity. But still what has been already said concerning the
streightness of the Nerves, sufficiently evinces the Falsehood of this Opinion;
the Cavity of their Fibers being such, as not able to transmit the thinnest
Juice.

IX. Therefore it is most probable, The Nourishment of the Nerves.
that the Nerves are nourished by the Arterious Blood, but chiefly by the
Animal Spirits. For though they admit no Blood-bearing Vessels into their inner
Parts, yet they are nourished like the thin and thick Meninx in the Head by the
Arterious Blood; the Exterior Tunicles of the Nerves, which are derived from
the Menixes, receiving through their invisible Arteries, some little Portion of
Blood for their Nourishment, and communicating something of the same Blood by
Exhalation to the inner Substance. In the mean time it is unquestionable that
these Tunicles, but chiefly the inner Fibers are more especially nourished by
the Animal Spirits passing through them ( vid. l. 3. c. 11) of which, the more
fixed Particles growing to their Substance, turn to Nourishment. The Arteries
and Veins are nourished with the same Blood which they carry, and therefore why
not the Nerves? which may be the reason also that they have such a quick Sense
of Feeling, and have their peculiar hardness and dryness; in regard the
Spirits, with which they are nourished, are like a most volatile and dry Salt,
or like a dry and subtle Exhalation. And then, that besides these Spirits,
there is something of Arterious Blood which concur to the Nourishment of the
Exterior Tunicles, and communicates something by exhalation to the interior
Tunicles, is apparent from hence, that the Nerves being obstructed, though they
are deprived of Sense and grow languid, yet they are not deprived of Life, nor
dry up for want of Nourishment, for the Obstruction being removed, they shall,
after many Years, be restored to their pristine Sanity. I knew a Woman so
paralytic, on one side, for thirty years together, that she had no use either
of her Left-Arm or Thigh, besides that, all that side of her was number, till at
length, the Fright of a most hideous Tempest, with Thunder and Lightning,
having expelled the Obstructing Matter from the Nerves, she was freed from her
Palsy, and walked abroad the next Day, to the Admiration of all that beh^ld
her. Which could not have been, if the Nerves had been all that time without
Nourishment; for they must have been dried up in so many years time; which they
must have been, had they been only nourished by the Animal Spirits, which could
not flow into the Nerve while obstructed. A Story much like to this, Valleriola
reports of one that had been paralytic for several years, but suddenly freed
from his Distemper by the Fright of a House on Fite. However those little
Arteries are only derived from those that crawl through the Menixes of the
Brain.

X. The Nerves vary in bigness, Their bigness.
according to the variety and necessity of their Use, the Organs to which they
run forth, and the importance of the Actions which they are to perform.

XI. The Original of the Nerves is Their Original.
twofold, in respect of Generation and Administration. In respect of the first,
they are generated from the Seed, as are all the solid Parts. In respect of the
latter, from the Brain, or its appendent Matter. For, to reject the Opinion of
Aristotle and others, that the Nerves arise from the Heart, or partly from the
Heart, and partly from the Brain; we say that all the Nerves rise from the long
Pith of the Brain, contained as well within the Brain, as the Cavity of the
Spine. Which Varolius, Picholhominus, Bauhinus and others testify upon
orbicular View.

XII. From that Pith they proceed Their Passage out of the Pith.
all through the Holes of the Pith and Vertebres, but not all after the same
manner. For some pass through the Holes nearest the Place where they make their
Exit; some pass by two, three or four Holes before they make their Egress. For
the more the Marrow tends to the lower Parts, the more Holes the Nerves pass
by, before they transmit themselves.

XIII. The Nerves, some are softer Softness and hard^ess.
and some are harder, according to the Variety of the Use, and Difference of
Length and Situation, as also in respect of the Parts which they enter. Galen
writes, that their softer Parts are the only Parts that are sensible of
feeling; but that those which both feel and move, are the harder.

XIV. The use of the Nerves is to The Use.
conveigh Animal Spirits to the Parts, that by their ordinary Influx, Nutrition
may go forward, and by their determinative Motion, that the Parts destined for
Sense and M^tion, may be made more sensible and more vigorous, Vi^. l. 3. c.
11. To which purpose they are inserted into the sensible and moving Parts with
wonderful Artifice. And those that move the Muscles are inserted into their
Heads, or a little below or at least not beyond the Middle, of which Insertion
see the Reason, Lib. 5. Cap 1.

XV. Hence some conclude, that Why they be Instruments of Sense a Motion.
they are the Instruments of Sense and Motion; whereas they are rather the
Channels to which the Animal Spirits are conveyed to the Instruments of Sense
and Motion. The Instruments of Feeling, are the Membranes, which the more
Nerves they receive, the more acutely they feel; the fewer they admit the more
dully. And this appears in Palsies; for though the Nerve be present, yet the
absence of the obstructed Spirit causes the Defect of Sense. Now because the
Nerves are furnished with Membranes, it is no wonder their Sense of Feeling is
so quick; more especially, since they contain a greater quantity of Animal
Spirits, which are the immediate Causes of the Senses. The Muscles are the
Instruments of voluntary Motion, which the Nerves do not move by contracting
themselves; but only by infusing into them store of Animal Spirits which cause
the Motion.

Fernelius, Laurentius, Mercurialis and Whether the Sensory and Motory Nerves
are different?
others, observing in the Palsy, the Sense sometimes stupefied, sometimes the
Motion to cease, and sometimes both lost, thought the Motory and Sensory Nerves
to be distinct, and that as the one or the other come to be obstructed, it
causes a Variety in the Distemper. But there is no more diversity of the Nerves
than of the Animal Spirits, only the diversity of Operations proceed from the
diversity of the Parts which they enter. Thus they infuse into the Eyes, the
Faculty of Seeing, into the Ears, the Faculties of Hearing, etc. Nay, sometimes
one and the same Nerve inserted into several Parts, contributes to one Sense
only, to another both Sense and Motion. Thus the Pleura, Mediastinum, Stomach,
and several other Parts, feel by means of the Nerves of the sixth Conjunction,
and by means of the same Nerves and Muscles of the Neck, the Hyoides, Larynx,
and other Parts, both feel and move. But Willis observing that the Stomach,
Ventricle, Intestines, and many other Parts, had a Spontaneous Motion, though
not arbitrary, believed there were two sorts of Nerves, and two sorts of Animal
Spirits. One that assisted spontaneous Motion, by means of the Spirits
generated in the Cerebel; the other voluntary or arbitrary Motion, by means of
the Spirits generated in the Brain. To which, what has been said already will
serve for Answer, that the diversity of Motion does not proceed from the
variety of Nerves or Spirits, but the diversity of the Parts to which the
Spirits are conveyed. Thus carried to the Muscles, they cause arbitrary
Motion; to places wanting Muscles, but endued with moveable Fibers, they cause
spontaneous Motion.

XVII. Note by the way, that no While Motion lasts there is always Sense.
Muscle is moved which is not sensible at the same time, and that the Motion of
the Muscle may fail, and yet the Sense remain, but not the contrary; few
Spirits being requisite for the Sense of Feeling, but many to cause and perform
Motion. And therefore it is a false Notion, that the Sense may fail in the same
Member, and yet the Motion remain. For common Practice tells us, that sometimes
the feeling may fail in the Skin, so as not to feel the Heat of a burning Coal;
but pierce the Skin with a Needle, and you shall find a most acute Sense in the
Muscles, moving underneath, which would not feel, if this Hypothesis were true.
As frivolous is the Example produced by Regius, of a young Man, who had lost
the Sense of feeling in his Hand, the Motion remaining; for I can never believe
any Perforations were made to the Muscles in that Hand, which had they been
done, Regius must have been of another Opinion; but Persons as ignorant as
himself will believe any thing.

But these Physicians seem not to have observed, that this Stupidity of the
Sense is not in the Muscles, but only in the Skin, or perhaps in the cutaneous
Pannicle, which being vitiated, they thought the inner Parts of the Member to
have lost the Sense of Feeling. So that the Mistake proceeds from hence, that
because the Sense of Feeling failed in the Skin, which might happen through
vicious Humors obstructing or contracting the Pores of the Skin, or else
Extremity of benumming Cold, the Physician never minded the Muscles, which had
they diligently inspected, they had found by them, that the Sense never fails
in them while the Motion remains.

XVIII. I shall clear this by some Examples. Observations.
A Woman came to me for Advice, she moved all her Limbs indifferent well; but
her Skin, that was wrinkled and somewhat cold, had no feeling in it, though
pricked with a Needle, or held to the Fire; but if you thrust the Needle deep
into any Muscle that lay underneath, she was presently sensible of the Pain of
the inner Muscle. In like manner I met with a Seamen, returning Scorbutic from
the East Indies, who had no more feeling in his Skin than a Stone, though you
held his Hand to a scorching Fire. But if you thrust a Needle more deeply into
the Muscles, he was presently sensible of Pain. The same Story I could tell of
a Tobacco Merchant, whose Skin had quite lost its Feeling; but when you pricked
him to the Muscles, he was presently sensible of the Pain. So that most certain
it is, that in the moving Parts the Sense never fails, unless at the same time
the Motion also fail.

XIX. They that imprudently maintain The Error of Philosophers.
this Argument, assert, that Sense is contributed to the Parts by the little
Fibers of the Nerves; but Motion by the Animal Spirits, which flow into the
Muscles through their little Pipes in great quantity, and so that the Fibers
may be obstructed, though the Passage of the Animal Spirits may be free; by
which means the Sense fails, the Motion remaining. On the other side, that the
lower Cavity may be obstructed, the Fibers remaining free and entire, and then
the Motion fails, the Sense remaining perfect. True it is, that the Nerves feel
by reason of the Fibers and Tunicles proceeding from the Meninx; but that they
contribute Sense to all the feeling Parts by means of their little Fibers, is
altogether false. For they are not the little Fibers, but the Animal Spirits
flowing through the Porosities of the Nerves that cause the Faculty of Feeling
in all the membranous Parts; without the Influx of which, the little Fibers
never feel, as appears in the Palsy. And hence it appears, how absurd it is to
say, That the inner Porosity being obstructed, and the Passage of the Spirits
by that means hindered, the Motion fails, but the Sense remains, seeing that the
Sense proceeds from the Influx, and fails without it. But it may be objected,
that though the inner Porosity of the Nerve be obstructed, yet a sufficient
Quantity of Spirits may pass through the Substance of the Fibers to create
Motion. But in the same manner it may as well be said, that the Artery being
obstructed within side, and the Passage of the Blood being hindered, suff^cient
vivific Heat and Spirit may pass through its Substance to preserve the natural
Heat of the Parts; whereas the Preservation of the Heat proceeds from the due
Influx of the Blood, and that failing, the Heat also fails in the upper
Substance of the Artery, which is warmed and nourished by the Substance that
passes through it. Besides, how can the inner Cavity of a Nerve or Artery be
obstructed without the Compression of the little Fibers and the Substance it
self? For that if the obstructing Matter exactly close up the inner Cavity, so
that the most subtle and invisible Spirit cannot pass, of necessity it must
more closely compress the Substance of the Vessel and the little Fibers, seeing
that without such an exact Compression, the Stoppage cannot be; but the
Substance being compressed with the little Fibers, the Pores therein, and the
Fibers are quite stopped up, and they being stopped, how shall the Spirits
pass, either through the Fibers or the Substance? Then again, seeing that in
the Motion of the Muscles their Fibers and Membranes must require a greater
quantity of Animal Spirits, which Spirits cause a quick Sense of feeling in the
Fibers and Membranes, how is it possible, that a great quantity of Spirits
being employed toward Motion, which the Fibers and Membranes necessarily supply
at the same time with the same Spirits, should be deprived of Sense, which
requires much fewer Spirits than Motion? Is not the Feeling granted, by
granting the necessary Means of Feeling? But this Axiom they seem to reject,
who say, that the Feeling is lost in the Muscle, yet grant that many Spirits
flow thither to complete the Motion. Lastly, they should prove that there is an
inner Cavity in the Nerves, which could never yet be made out by any Person in
the World.

XX. But there arising another (...) (...) (...) (...) by the Spirits.
Question, while many believe Sensation to be communicated to the Brain by the
Animal Spirits contained in the little Tubes and Membranous Substance of the
Nerves; others by the little Fibers of the Nerves.

The first Opinion seems less probable, because the Animal Spirits are
continually pressed away from the Brain through the Nerves, but never ascend or
return from the Nerves to the Brain; and this seems strange again, that the
Ideas imprinted in the Spirits should in a moment of time be carried from the
remotest Members of the Body, against the Stream of the Spirits, to the Brain,
to be there offered to the Mind. Nevertheless Gass^ndus describes a single way,
by which he believes, this return of the Spirits to the Brain may be effected.
For, says he, a Nerve, or little Nerve cannot be touched, but it must be
compressed; nor can it be compressed, but the Spirit contained must be provoked
by Distention, and being stirred, it must push forward, or rather repel the
next to it, and by the same reason, the Spirit coming from the Brain; nor can
that be repelled, but the whole Series, by reason of Repletion and Continuity
being repelled, the Spirit at the beginning of the Nerve flies back to the
Brain. And therefore it is that the Faculty of Sense residi^g in the Brain, is
moved by this flying back, and presently perceives and apprehends the Touch
which is made. And afterward he adds, That nothing is sent, but rather seems
to be remitie^ and repelled; that is to say, the Spirit contained in the
Nerves; neither does (...) appear that any thing else can touch the Brain. But
after this manner the Nerve being compressed, the Spirit flowing into it, being
by that Pressure hindered from any farther Passage, may be stopped indeed, but
no way repelled to the Brain, or any Idea-carrying Motion be made from thence
to the Brain, because the continual Pressure, or impulsive Motion of the Brain
it self, is an Obstacle to hinder the Spirits from being so strongly provoked
toward the Nerves or their Ends, that no contrary Motion can repel them to the
Brain; and that so much the less, for that granting a stopping Cause, yet there
is no other repelling Cause. Therefore it is with the Nerves, as with the
Arteries; for the Arteries being squeezed, the Blood is stopped from passing,
but does not flow back to the Heart, because the Pulsation drives it so
strongly from it, that it cannot by any outward Pressure, return again through
the Arteries to the Heart: And thus, seeing the Brain with the same force
expels the Spirits from it into the Nerves; and seeing also that when any
contract is made in any of the remotest Parts of the Body, it is perceived at
the very same moment in the Head; and in regard so rapid a Motion of the
Spirits from the Foot to the Head cannot be comp^ehended by thought; neither by
reason of Repletion or Continuity, the Spirits being prohibited farther, passes
through the Pressure of the Nerve, can those Spirits which are at the Original
of the Nerve fly back to the Brain, because of the Propulsion aforesaid, by
which, the Brain by its own proper Motion urges the Spirits continually toward
the Nerves, not permitting any to fly back. Lastly, seeing that by that
Stoppage of Spirits, no Idea of feeling, whether soft or hard, etc. can be
carried to the Brain from the thing felt, and there be represented to the Mind,
it is manifest that Gassendus's Opinion is but a Fiction.

XXI. The latter Opinion, that Whether Sense be made by the little Fibers of
the Nerves.
Sensation is caused in the little Fibers constituting the Body of the Nerve,
though more plausible, yet it is hard to understand, how in a moment of time
the specific Image of Sensation can be carried from the Thigh to the Brain,
through the solid Substance of little Fibers and Nerves to be there apprehended
by the Mind. I know that some would make this out by the Similitude of the
Strings in a musical Instrument, which being touched at the lower end, will
tremble at the same time at the top. But in the Bodies of Men, there is not so
strong a Tension of the Nerves, not that streightness of Situation, as in
Strings pegg'd up; but a great Laxity and Contortedness, and a manifold
Connection every where with the Parts, that such a continued Trembling should
happen in the little Fibers of the Nerves. Which Gassendus observes, where he
says, That it is not the Spirit contained, but the containing Tunicle, which by
reason of its Continuation and Distention to the Brain, carries the Affection
thither. But because the Nerves are not extended in a straight Line, like the
Strings of a Lute, but contorted and relaxed, they cannot repress the Motion
which is made at one End in the other Extremity. Lewis de la Forge opposing
these Words of Gassendus, proves indeed, that the Perception of Sense is caused
by the Spirits flowing from the Part felt to the Brain; but does not
sufficiently convince us, that this Perception is caused by the Motion
communicated to the Brain. His whole Argument rests upon the Influx of the
Animal Spirits into the little Fibers of the Nerves, which are thereby kept
continually stretched. But that loose Tension is not sufficient to enable a
small Nerve that has so many Windings from the Foot to the Head, and
intervening Connexions to extend its Motion; being lightly touched in the Foot,
so suddenly to the Brain. The Noise of a Gun does not presently reach the Ear,
through the Air, which is a yielding Body; consequently there is a longer space
of time required in the solid Body of a Nerve, passing through so many
intricate and various Turnings, and yet at the very individual point of time
that the Foot is touched, the Idea of the Touch is felt in the Brain. So that
the Touch and the Perception seem to be both at the same Instant, which could
not be, if the Motion of the Fibers were to extend it self to the Brain before
the Touch could be perceived in the Brain. If it be objected, that this is done
by the Continuity of the Nerve: I answer, that it may be done in hard extended
things, but not in soft and languid. Thus, if you set a Stick twenty foot long
to the Ear, and slightly strike the the other end, the Ear will presently
perceive the Percussion; but take the Gut of any large Beast, and put it to the
Ear blown up with Wind, and h^ld it to the Ear, and strike at the other end,
the Motion shall never extend it self much above a Span, much less will it
reach the end next the Ear. And so it is with any Motion made in a soft,
languid and contorted Nerve, at a distance from the Head. Besides the Nerve is
composed of innumerable Nerves so strongly adhering together, that they cannot
be parted asunder but by force. Now if any small Fiber be moved in the Foot,
how shall that Motion reach the Brain, when none of the rest which are annexed
to it, never so much as stir? If you say, the first being moved, the rest move,
and so the whole Nerve moves, then the Perception of the Brain will be
uncertain, not being able to judge whether the first Motion were in the Toe, or
any other Part of the Foot.

Des Carts makes mention of this Question, and the better, as he thinks, to
explain it, We are to understand, says he, that those little Threads, which, as
I said, arise from the innermost Recesses of the Brain, and compose the Marrow
of those Nerves, are in all the Parts of the Body, which serve for the Organ of
any Sense, and these Strings may be most easily moved by the Objects of those
Senses. But when they are moved never so little, presently they attract the
Parts of the Brain from whence they derive their Original, and at the same time
open the Passages of some Pores in the foremost Superficies of the Brain.
Whence the Animal Spirits taking their Course, and carried through the same
into the Nerves and Muscles, stir up Motions altogether like to those with
which we also are excited, our Senses being affected after the same manner.

Here the two former Opinions seem to be joined together by the most excellent
Philosophers of our Age, to extract the Perception of the Senses out of this
Conjunction. For he believes that the Idea of the Object is to be carried
through the small Fibers to the Brain, and that then in the Brain, certain
Pores being opened, the Animal Spirits flow through the Porosities of their
Fibers into the Nerves and Muscles, and so excite a Motion which causes the
Perception. But still I wish that this ingenious Invention would teach us, how
at the same instant of time, that Motion of the Fibers can be carried from the
Toes to the Head, and at the same Instant, the Influx of the Spirits from the
Brain to the Feet. Mechanics here will not serve turn. Pull a Rope, says he, at
one end, and the Bell at the other end of the Rope will presently sound: But
the Parallel will not hold. For in Man there is a rational Soul and Life: Now
the Soul perceives, and moves the Parts without any external Object. It Is
otherwise with a Bell, which is void of Life and Soul, nor can be moved but by
some external Agent, and consequently has need of other Organs than a living
Body. For Example; the Rope does not move the Bell, unless pulled by some
external Mover; but there is no such Mover, or pulling in the Nerves or their
little Fibers, much less in the soft and marrowy Substance of the Nerves. When
a Man lies crumpled up several ways in his Bed, there is neither Sreightness
nor Tension, but many times a Compression of the Nerves, and yet he feels the
least Prick in his little Toe. Is the soft Medullary Fiber of the Nerve,
notwithstanding the crooked Posture of the Body moved through so many Windings
and Turnings to the Innermost Recesses of the Brain? Is there then any Tension
of the Fibers and Nerves? Rather will there not be some Pressure to intercept
and stop that Motion? No, says Des Carts, because these Fibers are included in
those little Tubes through which the Animal Spirits are carried into the
Muscles, which always swelling, those little Tubes prevent the little Threads
from being too much compressed. As if, when the Nerves are up and down
compressed by that crooked Posture of the Body, those fictitious Tubes remained
open and dist^nded, to prevent the Compression of those little Strings. Now
compare the two Sentences of Des Carts, from his Similitude of a Bell-rope, he
says, the more extended the Nerves are, the more easily and suddenly those
Threads are moved to the innermost Recesses of the Brain. On the other side, in
another place he says, that the Filaments that serve the Organs of Taste, are
more easily moved than those that officiate for the Sense of Feelling, because
they are more relaxed. Shall then the more relaxed String more suddenly and
easily be moved, than another more distended? Lastly, I would fain know,
whether that thin invisible Fibers being moved, has any Faculty to open in the
Brain any Pores for the Influx of Spirits. This is an Action of the Mind, not
of any Nerves or Fibers: For the Mind can open or shut the Pores, sometimes of
these, sometimes of those Nerves, and has power to appoint the Spirit to these
or those Parts, in greater or lesser quantity, vid. l. 3. c. 5.

XXII. No less difficult it seems to The Determination of the Spirits by the
Nerves.
explain, how the determinative Motion of the Spirits through the Nerves
proceeds, and how they come to flow and cease to flow, sometimes into these,
sometimes into those Muscles so suddenly, in a moment of time. A Question which
the Ancients, by reason of its difficulty, cared not to meddle with. But
lately, Regius has undertook the Point, and tells us there are many Valves in
the Nerves, for the opening and shutting of which, the Animal Spirits flow and
re-flow, sometimes to these, sometimes to those Parts, according to the
determination of the Mind. But not to believe any thing rashly, no man shall
persuade me that there are any Valves in the Nerves, the opening or shutting of
which, either admits or restrains the flowing or reflux of the Animal Spirits,
according to the determination of the Mind, the least shadow of which could
never be demonstrated by any Anatomist that ever I heard of, so that this
Opinion falls to the Ground.

First, Because that if the determinated Influx of the Spirits should take
effect, the Soul while it finishes those determinations, would only be employed
in the opening and shutting of those Valves, but not in the Emission of Spirits
(for those flow continually and spontaneously through the Impulse of the Heart
and Brain) like an Organist; who laying his Fingers upon these or those Keys,
causes the wind to enter these or those Pipes from the Bellows according to his
own determination, and as he opens or shuts the Valves of the Pipes with his
Fingers, so the several strings in the Brain, from whence the Operations of the
Mind proceed, ought to be extendded, like the conveyances of an Organ, to the
several Valves of the Nerves by which they may be shut or opened at pleasure.
But in regard that many times one Nerve sends it Branches to many Muscles; as
the Turning-back Nerve, sends its Branches to many Muscles, Hyoides, Neck and
other Parts, and several to the Diaphragma, consequently there ought to be
Valves belonging to every Branch, from each of which peculiar strings ought to
be extended to the Brain, and so should ascend of-times through one Nerve,
which runs out to various Parts, though very slender, like the Vagous Nerve of
the sixth Conjunction, a hundred, two hundred, or more according to the Number
of the Valves; but that there are such Filaments, there is no Man of reason but
may easily conceive. Secondly, Seeing that as those Valves are opened and shut,
the motion of the Parts is said to be swifter or slower, and for the same
reason by the determination of the Mind, the Sense of Feeling would move more
or less acute at pleasure nay some times would intermit; which that it never
happens is known to all Men. Any Man may either move or not move his hand as he
pleases, but he can never so move it at his pleasure, but the Skin of the Hand
shall be more or less sensible of it, which he might do if those Valves were
allowed in the Nerves, and were moved at the determination of the Mind.
Thirdly, Perhaps you will say these Valves are not moved like the Valves of an
Organ by the help of Keys, but that they are open and shut by the Influx of the
Animal spirits. But this is easily refuted: for that the Animal spirits flowing
into the Nerves from the Brain and Pith, always proceed directly, but that they
never return, is apparent from the continual expulsion of the Brain, but
repelling of nothing. Now in their progress, their passage is always open
through the Valves, so seated, as to give free egress. But what is that which
in the various determination of the Spirits shuts and opens them again in a
moment of time? The Spirits flowing in, only open the Valves; and there is no
Spirit allowed to return, because there is nothing that can expel it; nor can
the Soul do it; for what is already flowed into the Nerves, out of the Brain,
is without the Instruction of the Determiner; having already performed the
Commands of the Mind by its Efflux, neither can it in a moment of time recall it
at Libitum back from the Part, because the Blood and Spirits are always moved
forward in the Bodies by Impulsion, but never repelled by the same ways.
Fourthly, Valves are allowed in Bodies that have a manifest Cavity, as the
Milky, Lymphatic Vessels and Veins; where there is only a space for Expansion;
but in the Nerves there is no Cavity to be discerned; besides that in the Cure
of a wounded Nerve, we have seen those Filaments which were cut off, to the
great pain of the Patient, as long as a Man's Hand separated from the rest not
cut off, the rest remaining entire about the half way of the Nerve, and the
Cure being perfected, officiating as before; and yet in such rare accidents
could we observe any hollowness in the Nerves: and had there been any Valves
therein, they must have been dilacerated upon taking away half the length of
the Nerve, nor could the Nerves have afterward, as they did, perform their
duty.
Des Carts and his Followers, to avoid these Rocks, tells us, that* the Valves
are only in those places of the Nerves, where being divided into Branches they
enter several Muscles. And so they write, that one Muscle being dilated by the
Spirits more impetuously flowing into it from the Brain, and swelling at its
full breadth, and contracted at its full length, by the compression made by the
dilated Muscle, the Spirits are repelled upward, and forced into that Valve
seated at the Biforcation of the Nerve. So that when they cannot pass it, they
presently flow into the other Branch of the Biforcation to contract and
increase the swelling of another adjoining or opposite Muscle. But this is
easily refuted, for that the Ramifications of the same Nerve are inserted into
the Muscles, either adjoining or opposite, and moving the Members by contrary
motions, so that there can be no such regress of the Spirits to the Valve
seated next the Biforcation, there being many times no such Biforcation, but
only several Muscles receiving several Nerves.

XXIII. The Nerves differ in respect The difference of the Nerves.
of their substance and quality; some are thicker, some thinner; some softer;
as those which proceed from the Marrow within the Cranium, as also those which
extend but a short way to the Sensitive Parts, or require but little Motion,
and proceed from the Pith without the Brain. 2. In respect of their Quantity,
some are large, some small, others long, others short. 3. In respect of their
rise, some from the Pith within, others from the Pith without the Cranium. 4.
In respect of the Pairs; some more Porous, as the Ceptics, some less, as the
rest of the lesser Nerves.

XXIV. The Pairs or Conjunctions The numbers of the Nerves.
of the Nerves are reckoned to be Thirty Nine, with one Nerve that is not
Paired. That is to say Nine pair arising from the Pith of the Brain, within the
Cranium; and Thirty without side of the Cranium, proceeding from the Spinal
Pith through the holes of the Vertebres, eight Pairs of the Neck, twelve of the
Breast, five of the Loins, and five of the Os Sacrum. To this number is to be
added the Nerve that has no Pair, going forth at the end of the Spinal Pith,
which Fernelius will have to be rather numbered among the Ligaments. But this
Number differs from the Computation of those who will have but only Seven Pair
of Nerves within the Cranium according to Galen, whereas there are rather Nine,
( See lib. 3. cap. 8) and so they number Thirty Seven Pairs, with one odd Pair.

As to the Devarications of the Nerves, they are innumerable, not to be
described by all the Art of Anatomists, and therefore we shall only mention
those which are most remarkable.

CHAP. II. Of the Nerves of the Neck.
OF the Nerves proceeding from the long Pith of the Brain, within the Cranium
we have discovered sufficiently, lib. 3. cap. 8.

But from the Pith of the Spine several Nerves proceed, of which more at large
lib. 3. cap. 7. of which Anatomists number so many Conjunctions, as there are
wholes in the Vertebres out of which they proceed.

The Nerves proceeding from the Spinal The Coats of the Nerves.
Marrow, consist of several little Strings, which tacked together from the thin
Meninx, make one Nerve, which the thicker it is, into so many the more little
Threads it is divided, which appears upon the Diffection of the Membrane. But
least the said little strings, at their first egress, should be parted one from
another, first they are wrapped above with the thin Meninx called the Dura Matter,
and no sooner have they made their egress through the holes of the Vertebres,
but they are bound about with a strong fleshy substance, like a Ligament.

The Nerves proceeding from the Marrow descending into the Spine, (where it
uses to be called the Spinal, or the Dorsal Morrow) according to the Order in
which they descend from the Marrow, and divided into the Nerves of the Neck,
the Back or Breast, the Loins, and of the Os Sacrum.

From the Pith passing through the Vertebres of the Neck, proceed Eight Pairs;
though others count but Seven, numbering the lowermos^ Pair among the Nerves of
the (...)

II. The first and second Pair, springing out from the forepart of the Marrow,
not from the side, least they should be prejudiced by the peculiar Articulation
of the first and second Vertebre, arise with a double beginning; the one
between the hinder part of the Head of the first Vertebre; the other between
the first and second Vertebre, at the sides of the Denti-form'd Process. But
the first beginning of the Pair is distributed into the Muscles resting upon
the Neck, and lying under the Oesophagus or Benders of the Neck. The hinder
beginning of it proceeds with a double dissemination. Of which the slendrest is
distributed into the lesser straight Muscles, and the upper oblique Extenders
of the Head; the other is inserted into the Beginning of the Muscle rasing up
the Scapula. But the First, and most slender beginning of the second Pair,
making its egress at the side of the Denti-form'd Process, is distributed into
the Muscles of the Neck, and wastes it self in the Skin of the Face. The Hinder
Beginning, bursting forth at the sides of the Process of the hinder Vertebre,
is presently after divided into two unequal Branches. Of which the thicker,
tending toward the hinder Parts, and joining its self with the third Branch of
the third Pair of the Nerves, crawls over all the hinder Muscles of the Neck,
and partly communicated to the Ears, ascends the very Top of the Head, and
there wastes it self into the Skin. The Other which is more Thin, is distributed
into the larger straight and oblique Muscles of the lower Part of the Head.

III. The third Pair, rises in each side, between the Lateral hole, between the
second Vertebre, immediately after its egress is divided into two Branches. The
foremost of these is again subdivided into four Stocks of which the First runs
out to the first Muscle, of those that bend the Neck, called the long Muscle
The Second, descending, and united with a Sprig of the Fourth Pair, ends in the
Muscles lying under the Gullet. The Third ascending, and concurring with the
thicker Branch of the Second Pair, vanishes in the Skinny Parts of the hinder
Part of the Head. The Fourth, sending forth Branches to the Muscle. extending
the Neck, in the Transverse Processes at the end of the Neck and the raiser of
the Scapula, seated at the beginning of the Neck, terminates in the four square
Muscle, drawing down the Cheeks. The hinder Branch of this Pair is inserted
into the second Pair of the Muscles extending the Breast.

IV. The fourth Pair, rising between the third and fourth Vertebre, is
presently divided into two unequal Branches. Of these, the foremost and biggest
is again tripartited into three little Sprigs. Of which the First being joined
with another Branch of the Third, enters the first and long Pair of the Muscles
bending the Neck; the other is carried to the transversal Muscle, extending the
Neck, and the first of the Scapula, called the Cucular. The third, slenderer
then the rest, being joined with a little Sprig descending close by the
Mediastinum and Pericardium, together with those little Sprigs constitutes the
Diaphramatic Nerve. The hindermost and least, proceeding backward toward the
Spine, affords several Branches, to the Muscles of that place, and thence is
carried between the four square Muscle drawing down the Cheeks.

V. The fifth Pair, rising between the fourth and fifth Vertebre, is also
divided into two Branches, the foremost and the hindermost. The foremost sends
forth four little Sprigs; of which the first is carried to the Benders of the
Neck; The second, together with the Stocks of the fourth and sixth Pair, and
sometimes the seventh, when the Branch of the seventh is wanting, descending by
the sides of the Vertebres, along the fore-parts of the Vertebres, is inserted
into the middle of the Diaphragma, and therein constitutes the Phrenic Nerve.
The third proceeds to the Deltoides, or Muscle that raises the Shoulder,
through the upper and outer-most seat of the Shoulder, and thence sends forth
little Branches to the Cucular, and Muscle rearing the Scapula. The fourth,
approaching the Neck of the Scapula, is divided into two Branches; of which the
one is carried to the Deltoides, where it parts from the Scapula; the other
which is somewhat thicker, is contorted toward the Spine, and is distributed in
the same manner as the hinder part of the fourth Pair.

VI. The Sixth Pair, breaking forth under the fifth Vertebre, and being divided
also into two Branches, when it has sent forth a little Sprig to constitute the
Phrenic Nerve, which being joined with a little Branch of the fourth and fifth
Pair, it forms, proceeding farther, is united with the seventh of the Neck, and
the first Pair of the Breast, and then parts from them, but being again United,
forms the Net-resembling Fold, from whence the Nerves proceed which are carried
to the Arm. The hindermost is carried to the hinder Muscles extending the Head
and Neck.

VII. The seventh Pair makes its Passage through the Common Hole of the sixth
and seventh Vertebres. The foremost and biggest Branch of this Pair, is united
presently after its Egress with the sixth of the Neck, and first of the Breast,
which we reckon the eighth of the Neck, and with the rest, is carried the
greatest part of it to the Arm. The hindermost and lesser Branch goes away to
the Muscles resting upon the Neck, and the foursquare Muscle drawing down the
Cheeks.

VIII. The eighth Pair, which some call the first of the Breast, coming forth
between the last of the Neck and the first Vertebre of the Breast, is presently
slit into two Branches. The foremost and biggest is united with the seventh of
the Neck, and the first Nerve of the Breast, and so is afterward altogether
dispersed into the Arms. Except one Stock, which rising at the beginning of it,
is united with the Nerves aforesaid, and carried into the Foreparts as far as
the Sternon, all the length of the first Rib of the Breast; affording also a
little Sprig to the Subclavial Muscle; then winding back upwards, terminates in
the Muscles rising from the upper part of the Sternon, that is to say, the
Mastoides, Sternon hyoides, and Hyoides; into which, nevertheless some Branches
are transmitted from the sixth Conjugation of the Brain, and the third of the
Breast. However, from the same Branch ready to go into the Arm, another
Ramification proceeds at the hinder Part, which enters the Muscle possessing
the Cavity of the Scapula. The hindermost and the lesser, lies hid under the
Muscles which grow to the Vertebres; from whence it sends some Ramifications
into the second Muscle bending the Neck, as also into those which extend the
Head and Neck; but descending about the Spine of the seventh Vertebre, it sends
forth little Sprigs into the lower Part of the first Muscle of the Scapula,
that is to say, the Cucullar, and of the third, or Rhamboides, and the Upper
Postic Serratus.

CHAP. III. Of the Nerves of the Breast o^ Back.
TWelve Pair arise out of the Dorsal Marrow, all which Nerves, after their
Egress, are divided into two Branches, of which, the biggest is contorted
toward the Fore-parts, the lesser toward the hinder Parts.

I. The first Pair, rising between the first and second Vertebre of the Breast,
is presently divided into two Branches: Of which the foremost and biggest is
united with the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth Pair of the Neck, and with
them forms the Net-resembling Contexture, from whence all the Nerves arise that
are to descend to the Arm. This also sends forth a Branch all along the Course
of the first Rib, to the Sternon-bone, which constitutes the first Intercostal
Nerve, and distributes little Twigs into the Muscles, resting upon the Breast.
The hindermost and lesser Branch is disseminated into the same manner as the
hinder Branch of the eighth Pair of the Neck.

II. The ten following Pairs, are likewise divided into the foremost bigger
Branch, and the hindermost lesser: Of which, the foremost Branches being
accompanied with as many Branches descending under the Ple^ra from the Inner
Branch of the Nerve of the sixth Pair, constitute the Intercostals; which,
together with the Intercostal Arteries and Veins, are carried all the length of
the Rib toward the fore-parts, through the Cavity in the lower and innermost
Seat of the Ribs. But those which belong to the true Ribs, proceed as far as
the Sternon. But those which belong to the spurious Ribs, are carried to the
fore-parts of the Abdomen above the Peritonaeum. From these several little
Branches run out to several Muscles; as to the External and Internal
Intercostals, the two Antic Serrati, the broad Withdrawer of the Shoulder, and
the Pectoral, which brings the Shoulder to; also to the first Pair of the
Muscles of the Abdomen, and the whole Skin of the Breast, and the Nipples of
the Breast, to which they impart a most acute Sense. The latter Branches hasten
toward the Spine between the Muscles growing to the Vertebres, and send
Branches both to them, the Muscles rising from the tops of the Vertebres, and
the Skin of the Back. Galen observes, that the Nerves which issue from the
bastard Ribs, are bigger than those which proceed from the Superior Ribs, and
are always bipartited about the middle of the Ribs, make their Egress at one
Part, and at the other crawl through the inner Rib. But we have observed that
Division not about the middle of the Rib, but presently after they have made
their Egress out of the Holes of the Vertebres.

III. The twelfth Pair, which others reckon to be the first of the Loins,
breaks forth between the last of the Breast, and the first of the Loins, and is
presently divided into two Branches; of which, the foremost, which is the
biggest, is inserted into the fleshy Appendix's of the Diaphragma, the
obliquely descending Muscles of the Abdomen, and the first of the bending
Muscles called the Psoas; the Compression of which, by the Stone in the
Kidneys, causes a Numness in the Thigh on that side. From this Branch, that
little Sprig derives is Original, which, together with the preparing Artery is
carried to the Testicles. l. 1. c. 22. Which Vesalius, Plater and Laurentius
affirm to proceed from the first Pair of the Loins, being our twelfth Pair of
the Breast. The Hindermost enters the Muscles of the Loins, resting upon the
hinder Part of the Vertebres; that is to say, the longest, the Sacrolumbus, and
the broadest withdrawer of the Shoulder.

CHAP. IV. Of the Nerves of the Loins.
FRom the Spinal Marrow contained in the Vertebres of the Loins, proceed five
Pairs, which are bigger than the Dorsals, and divided into two Branches; of
which, the four Branches are carried to the Muscles of the Abdomen; the
hindermost to the Muscles of the Vertebres, resting upon the Spines and
nameless Bones, and afford some little Branches to the Skin investing the
Loins. The foremost being united at some distance, constitute that Fold from
whence the Nerves proceed, that are to be sent to the Thighs.

I. The first Pair makes its Egress between the first and second Vertebre of
the Loins, under the Psoas or Ploas Muscle, and is carried with its foremost
Branch to the second Muscle bending the Thigh, and the first Fascial bending
the Leg, as also to the Skin of the Thigh. With the latter, going forth from
the Abdomen, it provides for the three Glutaei extending the Thigh, and the
Membranous Extensor of the Leg.

II. The second Pair proceeds between the first and second Vertebre under the
first Muscle bending the Thigh. The Fore-branch of this passing near the Ileon
Bones, sends forth two Stalks; one to the Knee and its Skin; the other long,
which accompanies the Saphaena. The other turns backward and enters the Muscles
that cover the Loins.

III. The third Pair, which is the biggest of the Lumbal Nerves carried under
the said Muscle bending the Thigh and the Share-Bone, accompanies the Crural
Vein and and Artery. Columbus writes, that there is a Branch extended from it
to the Groin, Scrotum and Skin of the Yard; which Bauhinus however derives from
the Pith of the Os Sacrum.

IV. The fourth Pair rises between the fourth and fifth Vertebre; and its
foremost Branch passes through the Hole between the Bone of the Hip, the
Sharebone, and the Ileon, and sends forth Branches to the two Muscles that
fling the Thigh about; as also to the Muscles second and third that send the
Thigh and others to the Muscles of the Yard; some believe that it sends other
Branches to the Neck of the Womb and Bladder. The hinder most goes away into
the Muscles and Skin that covers the Vertebres.

V. The fifth Pair, which some will have to be the first of the Os Sacrum,
rising between the last Vertebre of the Loins, and the upper part of the Os
Sacrum, is divided into two Branches; of which, the foremost is intermixed for
the most part with the Nerves going to the Thigh, and sends forth a little
Branch near the inner Region of the Ileon-bone, to the Muscles of the Abdomen,
and the second of the Thigh-benders. The latter is disseminated into the
Muscles growing from the Ileon bone, chiefly the greater Gluteus, and the Skin
of the Bottocks.

CHAP. V. Of the Nerves proceeding from the Pith of the Os Sacrum.
FRom the Marrow contained in the Cavity of the Os Sacrum, five Pairs proceed;
which Nerves, before they take their Progress through the Holes of this Bone,
are divided each into an inner and outer Branch, which go forth before and
behind through the transverse Hole.

The three inner and uppermost go away to the Thigh; the two lowermost to the
Vessels of the Bladder and Podex, also to the Perinaeum, the Yard and Scrotum,
and the Neck of the Womb.

The hindermost are distributed to the Muscles possessing the hinder Seat of
the Ileum and Os Sacrum; the first and second Extenders of the Breast, the
longest Muscle of the Back and Sacrolumbus; the Bender of the Loins, called the
Holy Muscle, the broad Muscle withdrawing the Shoulder, and the three Glutaei
which constitute the Buttocks.

The End of the Spinal Marrow, penetrating into the Coccyx-bone, sends forth
one Stock, therefore called the Pairless, which is first divided into two, then
more Branches running forth to the Buttocks, Podex, and certain Muscles of the
Thigh. This Pairless Nerve, Fernelius reckons among the Ligaments.

CHAP. VI. Of the Nerves of the Arm and Hand.
FRom the Spinal Marrow through The Plexus retiformis.
the Holes of the Vertebres, five Nerves are carried into each Arm, that is to
say, from the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth Pair of the Neck, and the first
of the Breast. These Nerves presently after their Egress are united with the
foremost and larger Branches, which are presently parted again, and again
united, are a second time separated, and so form a certain Net-resembling Fold,
which proceeds under the Clavicle, at the Egress of the Axillary Vein and
Artery. From which Fold, having at length freed themselves, they descend to the
Arm of their own side; yet so, that the true Original of either is uncertain,
by reason of the foresaid reiterated Implication and Extrication; nor can the
Anatomists decribe it otherwise than by Conjecture.

I. The first Pair is produced with a double Branch from the fifth Pair; of
which, the one is carried to the second Deltoides Muscle of the Shoulder, and
the Skin that covers it. The other toward the Neck of the Scapula, and there is
cleft into two Branches, of which, the first is inserted into the Deltoides,
where it rises from the Clavicle. The latter enters the fourth Pair of Muscles
of the Hyoides-bone, or Coracohyoides; the other affords a Branch to the upper
Scapulary and Deltoides, in the same place where the Spine of the Scapula
rises. This is carried through the upper part of the Shoulder, as the rest of
the Nerves are carried through the Ala to the Arm, and there are slit into many
Branches.

II. The Second, which is the thicker, and carried through the forepart and
middle part of the Arm, under the two-headed Muscle, and affording little
Branches to the two Heads of the same, as also to the Head of the longer Muscle
depressing the Hand, is divided below the bending of the Elbow into two
Branches: Of which, the External and the slenderest being carried along,
together with a Branch of the Cephalic, through the External Seat of the Elbow,
enters the first and second Internode of the Thumb. The larger Internal is
divided under the median Vein into two Branches; of which, the Exterior
proceeding obliquely under the Skin, after it has left the Vein, runs toward
the Radius as far as the Wrist. The innermost being fastened to the inner Branch
of the Basilic, and taking an oblique Course, is divided about the Elbow into
two principal Branches; of which, one goes away to the Wrist through the Region
of the Radius; the other through the Region of the Elbow, and having passed
beyond that, vanishes in the Skin of the inside of the Hand.

III. The Third, before it comes to the Arm, throws forth a little Branch
between the Muscle, withdrawing the Shoulder and the Deltoides; thence
proceeding to the Arm under the twoheaded Muscle, sends forth a little Sprig
into the Head of the second, bending the Elbow. From hence descending with a
Branch of the second Nerve, it approaches the inner Tubercle of the Bone of the
Shoulder in the bending of the Elbow on the fore-side, which having past, it
casts forth several little Branches, which being united with other little
Branches from the fifth Nerve, carried through the hinder Region of the said
eminency, are distributed into the Muscles possessing the inner Seat of the
Elbow, and springing from the Internal Eminency of the Shoulder, viz. into the
two Muscles of the Fingers, bending the External Internodes, and another that
bends the third Joint of the Thumb. From thence it casts forth another Stock,
which descends between the said Muscles through the Radius toward the Wrist,
and passing under the Transverse Ligament, sends forth certain* little Sprigs
to the withdrawing Muscle of the Thumb, and the other two bending the first
Joint of it. Afterward, coming to the Hollow of the Hand, it is divided into
three Branches; of which, the first gives two little Sprigs to the Thumb; the
second, two to the Forefinger; the third, one to the Middlefinger about the
inner side.

IV. The Fourth, three times as thick as the rest, is carried through the Arm,
deeply concealed among the Muscles, together with the Axillary Artery and the
Basilic Vein. But entering the Arm, it sends forth upward and downward several
little Sprigs into the Heads of the Muscles extending the Elbow, and the Skin
investing the Internal Seat of the Elbow. Hence through the inner Hollowness in
the Eminency of the Shoulder Bone, proceeding toward the hinder Parts, there it
goes away into the Skin of the Arm, and descends from thence to the Wrist. Now
the Joint of the Elbow, it is divided into two Branches, which descend between
the Muscles to the Wrist. Of which, the External being produced all the length
of the Radius, and at the Wrist, on the outer side, passing the Transverse
Ligament, is there divided into two Branches, of which, one is inserted with a
double Sprig into the external Seat of the Thumb; the other partly into the
Forefinger, and partly into the Middle-finger. The Internal, stretched out all
the length of the Elbow, sends forth several Ramifications. 1. Into the first
Muscle, extending the Fingers. 2. Into the second Muscle, extending the
Fingers. 3. Into the inner Muscle, extending the Wrist; hence it affords
several Stalks in its Progress, to the three beginnings of the Muscles,
deriving their Original from the Bone of the Elbow. What remains, termiminates
in the Wrist.

V. The Fifth, proceeding from the Inferior Part of the foresaid Net-resembling
Fold, and joined to the fourth, descends between the Muscles bending and
extending the Elbow, and proceeds entire to the Internal Eminency of the
Shoulder, and there, together with the third Nerve, sends forth Branches to the
Muscles springing from that Eminency, and possessing the inner Seat of the
Elbow. It also throws forth somewhat farther, between the Muscles bending the
second and third Internodes of the Fingers, a little Sprig to the Hollow of the
Hand, where it brings forth three Branches: Of which, the first being
bipartited, enters the inner Part of the Little-finger; the second, being
bipartited, enters the Ring-finger; the third proceeds to the External Seat of
the inner side of the Middle-finger. Besides this fifth Nerve casts forth
another little Sprig from the outer side, all along the middle of the length of
the Radius; which Sprig being again divided into three Branches, enters the
External Part of the Middle, Ring, and Little-finger.

VI. The Sixth, which is sometimes added to the preceding five, arises from
the inner Part of the Net-resembling fold descends through the inner seat of
the Shoulder and Elbow, with many little Sprigs dispersed by the way to the
neighboring Skin. But when it touches the Internal Eminency of the Shoulder
Bone, it is divided into several Stalks, which being accompanied with the
branches of the Basilic Vein, when they come to the Wrist vanish under the Skin.

CHAP. VII. Of the Nerves of the Thighs and Feet.
THere are four Pair of Nerves that descend to the Thighs, which rise from the
seven Pairs descending from the Spinal Marrow; that is, the four lower Pairs of
the Loins, the three upper Pair of the O^ Sacrum which being all intermixed at
their beginning from the Netresembling fold, from which on each side the four
aforesaid Nerves issue differing both in thickness and course. The first and
third, because they do not stir out of the Thigh, are shorter and more slender,
the second longer and thicker is carried through the middle of the Thigh and
extended to to the Leg. The fourth much thicker and longer then the former, is
carried through the Thigh and Legs to the Tops of the Fingers. Of those the
three foremost appear before the Fourth behind.

I. The First, rises from the upper part of the Net-resembling fold, where the
Second Nerve of the Loins unites with the Third, and enters the two Muscles
extending the Thigh, and its Skin; distributing little Branches to the first of
the Leg-benders, and to the second and third extending it, and terminates above
the joint of the Knee.

II. The Second, rising from the same Fountain, next under the first, goes away
with the Crural Arteries and Vein through the Groyns to the Thigh, and enters
its inner and foremost Muscles, distributing little Branches also to the
adjoining Membranes and Skin, and sending one remarkable Branch to the Foot.
Laurentius Spigelius, and others erroneously assert, that this Nerve is united
with the Saphena Vein, for which reason it is somewhat dangerous to open this
Vein; whereas it takes its course all alone without any Companion.

The Third, rising from the Fold presently under the Second, and carried about
the second Muscle bending the Thigh.

IV. The Fourth, which Bartholin has observed double both at its beginning and
Progress, and which is the thickest, dryest and strongest of all the Nerves in
the whole Body, formed out of the lowest of the Loins; and the three upper
Pairs of the Os Sacrum, after it has provided for the Thigh and the Skin of the
Buttocks, sends forth little Branches to some Muscles of the Thigh, Leg and
Foot. Thence descending farther with its Trunk, at the bending of the Knee in
the Ham, it is divided into an outer and inner Branch. Of which the outermost,
which is the slenderest, is produced to the Ham, the outer Parts of the Foot,
Perinaean Muscles and the Internal part of the Malleolus by the way affording
many little Sprigs to the Skin; The innermost, which is the bigger, all along
the length of the Leg dispatches other Sprigs to the Muscles of the Feet and
Toes, to the great Toe, the Sole of the Foot, and the Skin of the Calf, and to
both the lower sides of the Toes. Wherefore all the Nerves, carried below the
Knee to the Nerves, proceed from this Crural Trunk except that Branch which
descends from the second Pair next the Heel.

We have not given any particular description of the Cutaneous Nerves, which
are only little Branches sent to the Skin from the Nerves adjoining, whose
productions are only conspicuous, but their particular Descriptions are
impossible, and therefore never undertaken.

THE NINTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the BONES.
CHAP. I. Of the Bones in General.
MAny Anatomists begin their Anatomical Descriptions from the Bones, in
imitation of Galen; because the Bones are the Establishment of the whole Body,
without which the rest of the Parts could not subsist. For Nature says Galen
imitates the building of Ships; adapting the Vertebres in the place of the
Keel, to which she afterward fits the Ribs, Beams, Planks, and sides, and the
rest of the Wood-work. And therefore Galen begins with the Bones presupposing
them to be found before the other Parts as being the Groundwork upon which all
the other Parts must subsist. But we dislike that method for more pregnant
reasons. 1. Because the Bones are not formed before the other Parts, but at the
same times, lib. 1. cap. 29. 2. Because they are later completed then the
other Parts. 3. Because the Bones are not the necessary basis for a Ground*work
at the beginning, until they have obtained a convenient hardness, which they
have not at the beginning, but some Months after Conception and the Formation
of the whole, nay many are wanting till after the Birth. 4. Because the Bones
cannot be shown, till all the Parts annexed are removed, and the Bones be laid
bare. 5. Because all the softer Parts, are liable to Putrefaction, which the
Bones are not, and therefore necessarily the soft Parts are first to be
demonstrated; as leading the nearest way to instruction and dueness of Method.
And therefore we have observed this course; adding in the last place the
Gristles and Ligaments which fasten the Bones together.

But here you will say, that the Knowledge of the Bones is beneath a Physician,
and only fit for Chyrurgions whose manual Operations are only proper, in
Fractures and Luxations of the Bones. But in regard it is necessary for a
Physician to understand the whole Body of Physic which consists but of two
Parts, knowing, and curing, and that Curation is performed by Diet, Chyrurgery
and Pharmacy, a Physician certainly ought to have the perfect knowledge not only
of the whole Body of Man, it is health and distempers, but also of the Remedies,
and consequently of Chyrurgery, which is certainly the most Noble and Ancient
Part of Medicinal Cure; And although a Physician taken up with more profound
Speculations, may not practice Chyrurgery, yet the Knowledge of it is
absolutely necessary for him, that he may be able to perform the Office of a
Chyrurgion, where a Chyrurgeon is not to be had; and that he may be able many
times to direct a Chyrurgeon in his Operation, to which purpose, the Knowledge
of the Bones is of great importance. For which reason, Hippocrates, the Father
of all Physicians, recommends it to his Son Tessalus. And for the same reason,
Galen would have all that read Hippocrates's Books of Fractures and Luxations,
to be perfectly skilled in the Skeleton.

I. The Bones, by the Greeks called The Name.
(...) from (...) to stand, because the whole Structure of the Body stands by
means of Bones; according to that of Hippocrates, the Bones afford Stability,
Streightness, and Form to the whole Body.

II. The Bones are similar Parts, very Desinition.
hard, very dry, and destitute of Sense, colder than all the rest of the Parts,
framed for the support of the whole Body.

They are called similar, not that they are absolutely, but because they appear
so to the Sense, nor can be easily divided into other Parts. For the clearer
Explanation of which, S^igelius distinguishes between Simile and Similare,
which he says differ as much as the Denominative from the thing from whence the
Denomination is derived.

III. The Bones are generated in Generation.
the Womb out of the thicker and more tartareous, or earthly Part of the Seed,
nourished with the tartareous Particles of the Blood, and moistened with the
marrowie Fat.

IV. But the marrowy Fat called Marrow.
Marrow, is not of the same sort in all the Bones; for that in the large
Hollownesses of the larger Bones, it is very oily and Fat, yet of a Color
somewhat inclining to red; but in the Cavities of the lesser Bones it is white.
But in the spungy Bones the Marrow is less thick and unctuous. The Marrow is
generated out of the Blood thrust forward into the inner Parts ^f the Bones
through the little Arteries, of which, more by and by. Two things are here to
be noted. 1. That the Marrow is plainly destitute of feeling; though formerly
Paraeus thought otherwise. 2. That it is not enveloped with any Membrane in the
Cavity of the Bones. By which Mark, Hippocrates distinguishes it from the
Spinal Marrow. The Spinal Marrow, says he, is not like the M^rrow which is in
the other Bones, for only this has Membranes, which the other Marrow has not.

This Marrow is very useful to the Bones, for that the tartareous Particles,
when they are near to fixation, quickly congeal into an Icy Hardness; so that
the Bones would become very brittle, and never grow to their due Magnitude,
unless that marrowy Fat penetrating the whole Bone, did not temper and s^ften
the extreme Hardness of the tartareous Particles, and so provide that in the
Growth of the whole Body that the tartareous Particles do not separate, but
still continue new Intermixtures with fresh Particles, till the Bone have
attained its Perfection. Which growth surceases, when by reason of the
increasing Heat of the Body, these Particles are so drved up, that they can no
longer be mollified by the marrowy Fat; nor extend themselves. Whence it comes
to pass, that the more the heat of the Body increases, the less the Body shoots
out in length; because the bones which are the Basis's and Props of the Body
become more and more dry and hard^ed, and the Marrow grows thicker and less
moist. Hence it comes to pass, that Insants grow much in a short time, Children
less, and Youth less than they, and aged Persons never grow at all, by reason
their Marrow is less in quantity, and less moist and oily; and their dryness of
their Bones causes them to be more brittle and easily broken.

Now the Tartareous Particles are separated from the Arterious Blood by the
mixture of the Animal Spirits, which that they flow in great quantity to the
Periostea, the quick Sense of the Periostea testifies, Vid. l. 3. c. 11. After
which separation, the Particles are opposed to the Bones by the help of the
marrowy Fat which moistens them.

V. But the Blood* flows to the Periostea The Vessels.
and inner Parts, through the Arteries, and the less useful remainder flows
back again through the Veins. To which purpose, those Vessels not only
terminate with their Extremities in the Periostea, but also penetrate the Bones
themselves, and pour forth Blood into their innermost Concavities, to be
changed into Marrow, which is the proper Nourishment for the Bones. And though
their Ingress is not discernable in all, yet in the larger Bones of the
Shoulder and thigh, it is apparent, where the Cavities are perspicuously
pervious, as far as the Marrow, affording passage to the Arteries. Besides,
their Ingress into the Bones, appears by the Sanguinous Juice which is formed
in the Deplois, the middle spungy Table of the Skull, and in the inner spungy
Substance of the Ribs of Infants, and many other Bones, which could never come
thither through any other Channels. To this, add the Observation of Spigelius,
who at Padua, in a great Rottenness of the Shin-bone, saw the substance of the
Bone perforated by the Arteries, at what time, Plempius was present by his own
report. I my self, in the Year 1665. had a young Man in cure, whose Shin-bone
in the Forepart was corroded with an extraordinary Rottenness. After I had
taken away the Flesh about it with the Periosteum. I perceived in the inner
Cavity, which reached to the Marrow, a little Artery beating very quick;
whereas no Man could dream of an Artery in the hardest Place of all the Bone;
nor was the Artery continuous with the Flesh, for that was taken away, and yet
the Pulse remained for many days in the inner rotten Cavity of the Bone. Which
makes me believe that these Arteries are seldom conspicuous in the hard Part of
the Bone, when Men are at their full Maturity; perhaps because the Arteries
being pressed by the hardness of the growing Bone, at length vanish all
together; and where they are somewhat bigger than ordinary, those People, by
reason of some ill Humors in their Bodies, are easily subject to Rottenness in
their Bones, by reason of the sharp and corrupt Blood poured into them through
the Arteries, which by the Infusion of good Blood, when Bones are broken,
afford Matter for Callosity. However, this shows Platerus's Error, denying that
the Arteries never enter the Bones; and how much Galen was in the Right, who
allows to every Bone a Blood-bearing Vessel, bigger or lesser, according to the
Proportion of the Bone.

Now that the Bones harden by reason of the increasing Heat, is plain from
those Men who are born and bred in hot Countries; for by reason of the great
external Heat, and the Internal sooner increasing within, they are generally
shorter, dryer and leaner, the Humidity of the Body being sooner wasted. On the
other side, they who inhabit cold and most Countries; and eat and drink
plentifully, they grow tall, by reason of the flower increase of their Heat and
Drought; as we find by the Danes, Norwegians, Muscovites, etc. Now that Growth
is hindered from the Increase of Heat and Drought, is apparent from hence, that
Ladies, to prevent their Lap-dog Puppies from growing, take away their Milk and
moist Food, and feed them with Wine or Spirit of Wine, which causes a quicker
increase of the natural Heat, and renders the Alimentary Blood more dry and
sharp; by which means, the Bones being dried more suddenly, the Puppies cease
to grow.

VI. The officient Cause of the The efficient Cause.
Bones, is the vivific Spirit seated in the Seed, which Galen calls the Ossific
Faculty, disposing the more Tartareous Parts of the Seed, for the Materials of
Bones. These Spirits therefore may be said to be the Essential form of the
Bones, which some Physicians will have to be their cold and dry Temper; but
Aristotle will have it to be the same. Rolsinch finding that the Bones were
still the same in dead Bodies as in living, believes the formal Cause of the
Bones to be no more known than the formal Cause of a Stone. But what if we say,
that the vivific Spirit is the Form of living Bones, and their cold and dry
Temper, together with their own Conformation the Form of living Bones.

As for their accidental Form it is their Shape and Figure, whether round,
flat, straight, or crooked, according to their various use.

VII. As to the Time of their Formation, The time of their Formation.
Aquapendens believes, that the Bones are first generated among the other
Parts, resting upon Galens Argument at the beginning of the Chapter. Harvey
believes them not to be sooner generated than other Parts, of which, many turn
into Bones of the Birth, as in the Teeth. Neither is there any thing to be seen
in the first Principles and Beginnings of Formation, but a soft, slimy,
gluteous Substance, that approaches no way to the Constitution or Nature of
Bones, which Constitution it acquires afterward by degrees.

VIII. The end of the Bones, when Their Use.
arrived at their just Hardness is no Action but a Use, for no Bone exercises
any Action. This end is either common or particular; common to be the Props and
Supports of all the Parts. Their particular Use is various, to defend many
principal Parts and Bowels from external Injuries, to afford a secure Passage
for others, as in the Spine; to bind the Laxity of the Joints, as in the
Knee-pan, etc.

IX. The Differences between the The Difference.
Bones, according to Galen, are three. In respect of their Bulk, some larger,
some little; in respect of their Cavity, some hollow, others solid; in respect
of what they contain, some containing Marrow, others none. The other
differences we shall show as we go along.

X. Their Substance is whitish and Their Substance.
hard, though harder or softer according to the difference of Age, not
altogether dry in living Creatures, but bespread with a certain Fat and viscous
Moisture, which the more plentifully it abounds in the Bones, the more
tenacious they are, and the less brittle, and being broken, they the sooner
unite together again, by means of the brawny Callosity.

XI. I say that they unite by means Callus.
of the brawny Callosity; for that the Bones being taken away, never grow
again, according to that Maxim of Hippocrates, A perfect Bone, or Gristle, or
Nerve, or any thin Particle of the Preputium, neither grows again nor unites.
That is, it does not unite without a Heterogeneous Medium. But the Callosity,
by means of which, broken Bones unite, by degrees hardens and becomes bony in
such a manner, as if it were a real Bone. This Lindan seems to have observed,
where he says, that in Children some Bones are consolidated together without
the help of any Callosity; for proof of which, he produces the Example of a Boy
of six years old, that broke his Thigh Bone, the Fragments of which, being
sequestered by Art and Nature, there happens in the middle of the Bone, a
boneless Space of about four Thumbs breadth. This was at length so filled up by
the rest of the Parts of the Bone insensibly increased, and at last united
together, that you could not tell where the Bone had been wanting, or that the
Fracture had done any harm. I remember something like this Story in a Person
full grown. In the Year 1655. a Miller of Nimmeghen falling from his Mill,
broke his Leg with a Button in the middle, with that violence, that the upper
Part-of the Bone boaring the Flesh, stuck in the Ground, which not only
deprived it of the Flesh, but of the Periosteum. My self, with three
Chyrurgeons more, were of Opinion, the Leg was to be cut off, there being no
hopes of Cure: But one of the Chyrurgions being old and experienced, resolved
first to cut of that part of the Bone which was bereft of its Periosteum, about
the breadth of two Fingers: So said, so done, and then the Chyrurgion extended
the Leg to its first length, and splintered it up all alike, dressing and
cleansing the Wound every day; in a short time there grew a Callus from each
end of the Bone, which at length uniting, grew into a bony hardness, and the
Wound being cured, retained its due length, so that you could not perceive the
Bone to have been taken away by any limping of the Patient afterward; which
Cure proved the more successful, because there was no great Artery or Vein
broken, and the Blood which flowed out of the small ones easily stopped by the
first Ligature. From whence it is apparent, that broken Bones do not unite but
by means of the Callus. As for the Bones of Infants, that unite and consolidate
without the help of any Heterogeneous Medium, this is to be said, that in
Newborn Infants, many Bones have not attained their due hardness, but are as
yet soft and flexible like Membranes, whereas really they appear to be such as
when they have acquired their Hardness; and such are the Bones of the Bregma in
Infants, of the hinder Part of the Head, and the nameless Bones, which are
still Bones, though they have not attained their due hardness, which being
afterward acquired, they become absolute Bones.

XII. Many Bones, as those of the Cavities.
Thigh, Shoulder, Leg, etc. have a remarkable Concavity, the Domicel of much
Marrow. Others, as of the Cranium and Ribs, etc. have only small and obscure
little Cells, filled with a sanguineous and marrowy Juice, necessary for their
Nourishment. But these Cavities are so small, that they can either be hardly,
or not very plainly discerned, and then those Bones are said to be sollid, as
the Bones of the Nose, the little Bones of the Wrist and Foot, etc. which
without question are furnished however with some small Porosities, though not
manifestly conspicuous.

In the Superficies of the Bones are to be considered Cavities and Prominences,
made for the Convenience of the Joyntings, the Insertion of the Tendons, of the
Muscles, Ligaments, etc. The Cavity, if it be deep, and receive the Head of
another Bone, as in the Ischion-bone, is called (...); if superficiary, as in
the Knee, (...) and Sinus, or a Hollowness. The Processes which occur at the
top of the Hollownesses like Lips, and most conspicuous in deep Hollownesses,
are called (...), in Latin, Labra and Supercilia, Lips and Brains.

XIII. A Prominence is either A Prominence.
round, as in the Head of the Thighbone; or long, as in the Stytoides; or
hollow, as in the Scapula-bone. The round Prominence is called the Head, and if
it be low and depressed, is called Condilus.

A Prominency is twofold, Apophysis and Epiphysis.

XIV. Apophysis, in Latin Processus Apophysis.
or Process, is the continuous Part of a Bone, manifestly bunching out beyond
the flat Superficies, for the more commodious Insertion of the Muscles,
Tendons, and other Parts; of which Processes, there are many in the Vertebres
of the Back, also in the lower Jaw and Scapula.

There is another short Apophysis, as in the Bones of the Fingers; and another
long, and that either sharp pointed, or simply long, variously named, according
to the Figure which it resembles, as Styloides, Coracoides, Odontoides, etc.

XV. Epiphysis, or Appendix, is Epiphysis.
a Bone growing to a Bone, like an Addition, by simple and immediate
Contiguity, and that by the Inlet of small Heads or Bosoms, like a Gynglynos,
though without Motion.

The Substance of the Epiphysis in Infants new Born, is thin and gristly, in
Men of ripe Years it hardens into a thin and spungy Bone, and so in progress of
time, is united with the Bone, as if it were an Apophysis, and were one
continuous Bone, so that it cannot be separated again, unless by long
maceration and boiling, if the Party were young. But it is no where more soft
and weak than about its Connection, for there as spungy as a Pumice Stone, it is
furnished with many little Cells: But it has no remarkable Cavity containing
Marrow; only a certain marrowy Juice in its porous little Cells, for its own
Nourishment. But it is broader than the Bone it self, and for that reason,
renders the Articulation the stronger.

XVI. The Bones are destitute of Whether Bones have Sense?
the Sense of Feeling; neither are they furnished with any conspicuous Nerves,
except the grinding Teeth; but without side they are wrapped about with a thin
Membrane very quick of feeling, that is to say, a Periosteum, which because it
immediately adheres to the Bones, and is cruelly pained upon any Distemper,
hence that painful Sensation is improperly attributed to the Bones; not that
the Bones are affected, but the Periostea that lie next the Bones and the
adjoining Membranes. However the Teeth are destitute of Periosteums, after they
make their Egress out of their proper Seats; as also the little sesamoid Bones,
the four little Bones of the Ears, and the ends of the Bones constituting the
Joints, to prevent their being pained by overmuch Motion and Collision.

Nicholas Massa relates an unusual accident, that he saw an ulcer'd Thigh the
Bone of which, after the Periosteum, was scraped off, felt an extraordinary
Pain, that it would hardly endure to be touched; nay, that he boar'd the Bone,
and that there was within a most cruel Sense of Pain, which, as he says, he
therefore set down in Writing, that Anatomists might observe whether any
Sensation of the Nerves penetrated to the Bones: From which Observation, some
conclude, that some of the Bones, if not all, are endued with the Sense of
Feeling: But rather we must believe, that that same Corruption of the Bone
being freed from its Periosteum, extended it self farther to those Parts of the
Bone which were not yet covered with a Periosteum; and thence, by the Motion of
the Bone laid bare, there might be some Pain in the Parts adjoining to the
Periosteum, still remaining covered; which Pains, I have often observed in my
Practice, which were caused by the Motion of the Particles without Sense, but
really proceeded from the next adjoining sensible Parts.

Against this Opinion of ours, there is an Objection raised from the Words of
Avenzoa, who argues thus. The Bones participate of the Rational Soul, and are
nourished, therefore they are sensible; for there is, according to Aristotle,
both a vigitative and a sensible Faculty in every thing that is rational, as in
a Pentagon, a Triangle and a Square; therefore there must be either two Souls
in the Bones, or of necessity they must be sensible. Moreover, if they were not
endued with the Sense of Feeling, the greatest Part of Animals would not differ
from Plants. Lastly, if the vital Spirits could slow into their Substance
without the help of the Arteries, much more easily the Animal, which is much
more spirituous, without the assistance of the Nerve. Which Arguments, some
have improved so far, as to deny any Obtuseness of Sense, but all quickness of
feeling to the Bones. But these Arguments fall to the Ground, being seriously
examined. For the consequence of the first does not follow, where there is a
Soul and Nutrition, there is Sense: for there is a rational Soul and Nutrition
in the Carotides, in Cataleptics and Apoplectics, but no Sense.

Nay, the contrary to this is manifest in Brutes, which are quick of Sense,
though destitute of a Rational Soul. Moreover, a Rational Soul operates
variously, according to the diversity of the Organs; in the Eyes, it causes
Sight; in the Membranes, Feeling; in the Muscles, Motion; and there all the
Parts that want the Sense of Feeling, are not to be proscribed out of the
Jurisdiction of the Soul; otherwise the Parenchyma's of the Bowels, the Fat,
and other Parts must be exiled. A Man differs from Plants, in that he feels
both Pain and Pleasure; but hence it does not follow, that all his Parts must
of necessity be sensible; it is enough that a Man has those sensible Parts
which the Plants have not. For because a Man differs from Plants in seeing,
does it follow that all his Parts must see? But lastly, Experience teaches us,
that all the Bones are not sensible of feeling. For we have often trepanned and
filled the Skull and Bones, and burnt them with red hot Instruments, without any
Sense of Pain; so that if you blind-folded the Patient, he knew nothing of the
Operation. Thus Scaliger writes, that he has pulled Bones out of his own gaping
Wounds without any pain.

XVII. The Number of the Bones The Number.
is not the same in all Ages. For in Infants and Children they are more, which
as the Heat increases, unite and become fewer, as the Bones of the Sternon
unite into one or three; the Sharebones, Hip-bones, and Ilion-bones into one,
etc. Nor is there always the same Number at the same Age. For sometimes one Rib
is either superfluous or wanting of each side: Sometimes the Vertebres of the
Neck and Back; as also the Bones of the Thighs unite into one. Sometimes you
shall find one Vertebre added to the Vertebres of the Loins. As was observed in
a Skeleton preserved by Antony Polt of Utrecht, wherein there were six
Vertebres of the Loins. Lastly, Anatomists vary in the Computation of the
Bones. Some computing Epiphyses among Bones, and others reckoning in the
Sesamoids.

XVIII. The Qualities of the Bones The Qualities.
consist in their Substance, in those things which follow the Substance, and in
the Accidents. Their proper Temper compleats the Substance of the Bones, as
being that which gives them their Being. Hardness and Color follow Substance.
The Accidents, are Bigness, Figure, Number, Situation and Connection. From these
three Qualities, proceed the Judgment of the Constitution of the Bones, whether
entire and well, or endamaged and ill constituted. Bones in living Creatures,
sound and well constituted, ought to be hard, wrapped about with a Periosteum,
whitish, not absolutely dry, but somewhat unctuous; their Substance also ought
to be equal and continuous, and their Figure proper; otherwise they are
diseased and out of order.

CHAP. II. Of the Conjunction of the Bones.
THE Bones are fastened one to another, Symphisis.
either for Rest or Motion. Connection for Rest is called Coalition, and is a
firm Natural Connection of the Bones without Motion, when two Bones are so
united one within another, that they seem to be one Bone.

I. Symphysis is twofold, real, and not real. Real, is when two Bones harden
and unite without any manifest Heterogeneous Medium; thus the Chin or lower Jaw
consists of two Bones, united without any manifest Heterogeneous Medium, and
this is done three manner of ways.

II. 1. By Syneurosin, when the Syneurosis.
Bones are joined by a Medium that seems to be nervous or membranous, as in
Infants, the Bones of the Skull, the name-less Bones, and Bodies of the
Vertebres cohere together. I say, seems to be; because that Medium is not
really nervous or membranous, but is truly bony; but such as has not yet
acquired a perfect hardness; such as are many Bones of the Birth in the Womb,
till the fourth Month after the first formation.

III. 2. By Synchondrosin, by Synchondrosis.
the means of some Gristly interceeding Medium, as the Share-bones are united
one with another, and the Os Sacrum with the Bones of the Hip.

IV. 3. By Sysarcosin, when the Sysarcosis.
Conjunction is made by means of the Flesh, as that of the Teeth in the Gums.

Spigelius rejects Syneurosis, and instead thereof, sets up three other sorts
of Coalition: Syndesmosis, when the Bones are bound together by means of a
Ligament. Syntenosis, when they are knit together by means of a Tendon; and
Synemeusis, when the Conjunction happens by means of a membrane.

Now the reason why some Bones unite without a Medium, and some not, is given
by Galen. Bones that are hard, solid and thick, require a Medium to to unite
them. For those things which differ much one from another, as hard and soft,
cannot be united but by a Medium; soft with soft easily unites, but hard with
hard cannot unite, unless something intervene to bind both together.

V. For Motion, Bones are joined Articulation.
together by Articulation; which Composition consists in Contiguity, and the
Connection is for the most Part made by the Ligaments, and either it is to cause
a conspicuous or a less violent Motion.

VI. In order to a violent Motion, Diarthrosis.
the Bones are joined by Diarthrosis, that is, by a loose Articulation that has
an evident Motion. And this is threefold.

VII. Enarthrosis, when the great Enarthrosis.
Head of the Bone, protuberant from the long Neck, enters the profound Cavity
or Cotyle, as in the Articulation of the Thigh Bone, with the Ischion.

VIII. Arthrodia, when the lesser Arthrodia.
Head of the Muscle protuberant from the Neck, which is not so large, is
inserted into the superficiary Cavity, and such is the Articulation of the
Shoulderbone with the Scapula.

IX. Ginglymus, when one Bone Ginglymus.
with one or two Protuberances enters the Cavity of another Bone, and also
possesses the Cavity into which it receives the Protuberances of the other
Bones, as in the Bone of the Arm and Shoulder.

Gynglism happens three manner of ways.

1. When the Bone is received by one Bone, and receives the other. 2. When one
Bone receives, and is received by another which it does not receive, as in the
Vertebres. 3. When Articulation is made after the same manner as of a Wheel to
the Axle; as is the Articulation of the first Vertebre of the Neck, with the
second.
IX. For slow Motion or Rest, Synarthrosis.
the Bones are joined by Synarthrosis, which Articulation, has but little
Motion, or none at all, unless upon necessity.

The Conjunction of the Bones for slow Motion, is threefold.

1. Enarthrosis in Synarthrosis, as between the Bone of the Heel and the
Astragalus. 2. Arthrodia in Synarthrosis, as between the Cyboid-bone, and the
Bone of the Heel; the Bone of the Wrist and Matacarpus. 3. Gynglymus in
Synarthrosis, as between the Bone of the Heel and the Ancle.
Synarthrosis is not moved of it self to rest, unless great necessity require,
which moves the Parts not subject to arbitrary Motion, without drawing them one
or the other way.

XI. 1. The Suture, when the Bones Suture.
are so unequally joined together, as if they were sowed on.

XII. 2. Harmonia, which is a Harmonia.
Conjunction of the Bones by a simple straight, oblique or circular Line, as in
the Bones of the upper Jaw and Nose.

XIII. Gomphosis, when the Bones Gomphosis.
seem to be driven in like a Nail, as the Teeth into the Jaws.

CHAP. III. Of the Cranium in General.
I. THE whole Frame of all the Skeleton.
Bones in the Body of Man adhering together, is called a Skeleton, from the
Greek, (...) to dry up, because in dried Bones such a Conjunction is made by
Art.

This Conjunction is either of the Bones of grown Persons, or of Infants.

The Skeleton of grown Persons is divided into the Head, Trunk and Joints.

The Head is all that which is set upon the Neck, and is divided into the
Cranium and Face.

II. The Cranium is globous and The Cranium.
round, withinside the Concave bony Part of the Head, containing the Brain; by
some called Calva and Calvaria, the Skull or Scalp.

III. The Face is that Part of the The Face.
Head which is extended between the Forehead, Ears and Chin.

IV. The Figure of the Skull is oblong, The Figure of the Skull.
protuberant before and behind, and depressed on both sides. Whatever Figure
deviates from this is vicious, and the more it deviates, the more vicious it is.

But here arises a Doubt, whether the Head shapes the Brain, or the Brain the
Head? Hippocrates says, the Bones give the Shape to the Body. Galen writes,
that Nature, in imitation of the Bones, forms all the other Parts in a living
Creature. Others add, that the House is first built and formed for the Person
that is to inhabit it, and that the softer is more easily shaped by the hard,
than the hard by the soft. Which Reasons so far prevailed with Arnold
Senguerdius, that he subscribed to it. On the other side, Galen teaches us in
several Places, that the Brain shapes the Cranium, not the Cranium the Brain,
which seems to us the more rational Opinion. 1. Because the Brain was not made
for the Cranium, but the Cranium for the Brain. 2. Because the House is never
made before the Person, for whom it is designed, but is generally built by the
Person that is to inhabit it. Thus the Heart is conspicuous before its Domicil
the Breast; in the salient Point, in the Bubble of an Egg, after the He^ has
sat some few days. 3. Because the Brain in an Embrio is as soft as the Brain
it self, as being alt^gether Membranous, so that it is easily and naturally
shaped according to the Figure of the Brain, as the Membranes take their Shapes
in other places from the Parts contained; nor is there any necessity that the
Hard should be shaped by the Soft, because that when it is figured, it is not
soft, but after it is shaped, it grows hard by degrees. 4. Because the Wrinkles
which are imprinted into the insides of the Skull, and which receive the more
eminent Veins of the hard Meninx and other protuberances of the Brain
sufficiently show, that they were not furrowed in the hardened Brain, but while
the Birth was in the Womb, by the Protuberances of the Brain and Veins, making
an Impression in the soft and membranous Substance of the Skull.

V. The Substance of the Skull in The Substance.
the Embryo, is altogether Membranous, and in newborn Infants, for the most
part bony, but so soft, that it will yield to compression, especially at the
upper part of the Head about the Sutures, where at that time it has hardly
attained its due bony hardness, but is extraordinary thin, to the end the
plentiful Moisture of the Brain abounding in Children, may the more
commodiously exhale. Afterward, for the greater security of the Brain, it
grows hard by degrees, like other Bones, but in the middle, remains spungy, for
the more easy passage of the Vapors.

VI. The thickness of it is various, The Thickness.
according to the variety of Ages; nor is it always the same in the same Age.
For the diversity of Regions also causes a great difference. Thus Herodotus
relates, that the Skulls of the Persians are very thin and brittle, and easily
cracked; those of the ^gyptians very strong and thick, hardly to be broken with
the fall of a large Stone. Moreover the Skulls of tender People, are less thick
and hard than in laboring Folks, enured to Hardship. The cause of which Carpus
believes to be, for that tender People always keep their Heads covered from
heat and cold; but Husbandmen, Seamen and the like are used to go bare-headed
Winter and Summer, for which reason, he advises not to cover over much the
Heads of Children, which are strengthened by being left bare, and rendered more
sit to endure external Injuries.

VII. The Cranium consists of two The Tables.
Tables or Slates, the External and Internal, thinner in Women than in Men. Of
which, the one is thicker and smoother, the other harder, hollowed with several
Furrows, to give way to the Vessels creeping through the hard Meninx, from
which Meninx, some remarkable Vessels insinuate themselves near the Ears into
the Plates of the Skull, and moisten the space between. And the Reason why the
Cranium is made of a double Table, least any Con^usion of the Head should
easily penetrate the whole Cranium, by which means, sometimes one Table is only
broken, the other remaining entire.

VIII. In the middle, between these The Diplo^.
Tables, lies hid a certain spungy and cavernous Substance, containing a
marrowy Juice, somewhat bloody, for the Nourishment of the Cranium, which is
made out of the Blood flowing through the small Arteries, which pass through
the little Holes of the Tables. And this is that Blood, which when the Skull is
trepanned, when you come to the Diplois, flows forth somewhat ruddy. Concerning
this Blood, Riolanus has (...) worthy to be observed by all Practitioners. From
these Caruncles, says he, (that is, the spungy little Caverns, seated between
each Table) being very much contus'd, the Blood being sque^z'd and putrefying,
ulcerates the Bone, outwardly appearing entire; but the matter* sweating forth
from the inner Table, putrifies the Brain it self. Wherefore, if in scraping
the Cranium, you perceive the Blood to distill forth, never think for that
reason that the Blood penetrates the second Table, because the Blood flows from
the foresaid middle Space.

This middle Spungy space between the double Tablature of the Cranium, by
Hippocrates and the Anatomists is called Diploe, though Galen rather chooses to
call the External and Internal Table, both taken together Diploe.

This middle space is sometime bigger, sometimes less, sometimes scarcely
discernable, where both Tables seem to unite and constitute the simple and
pelucid Cranium. Bartholinus reports that he dissected a Cranium wherein this
middle Space was altogether wanting; and all the Cranium seem to consist all of
one Table: perhaps, because the Bones being dried and contracted through Age,
it did not manifestly appear: or else, because the Cranium was only dissected
in that Part by Bartholin, where both the Tables unite together, and left the
other spungy Part untouched. For Anatomists rarely cut the whole Cranium into
small Parts.

Hippocrates making mention of some certain Caruncles, means that middle spungy
Substance of the Cranium, which Fallopius not perceiving, seeks after other
particular Caruncles in that spungy Substance; but erroncously; for Hippocrates
by those Caruncles, means no other than that spungy Substance; for that there
are no other Caruncles in that Substance. But sometimes it happens, that in
Wounds and grievous Contusions of the Head, that a spungy Hyposarcosis grows
out from that middle space; which nevertheless was no more in that spunginess
before, than the flesh in the Pyramidical Body near the Testicle before the
Sarcocele Burstness.

In this spungy middle Space, especially where the Persons are infected with
the French Disease, a certain vicious Humor gathers together, which in time
growing more sharp and virulent, corrodes the Tables themselves, but more
frequently the exterior, as being less hard, and causes dreadful Pains in the
Perios^eum and Pericranium: sometimes we have seen both the Interior and
Exterior corroded, and so the whole Cranium perforated. Which Palmarius,
Riolanus and Benivenius confirm by their own Observation.

CHAP. IV. Of the Commissures of the Bones of the Cranium.
THE Bones of the Cranium are joined together with various Commissures, which
some call generally Sutures: Others more properly distinguish into Sutures and
Harmonies.

I. A Suture is a certain Composure The Sutures.
of the Bones, like things sowed with Seams, distinguishing and conjoyning the
Bones. Which in the upper part of the Head resembles two Saws with their Teeth
clapped together.

In the Cranium there are many Sutures, alike both for Number and Situation,
both in Men and Women, con trary to Aristotle's Opinion. The Skull is seldom
seen without Sutures. And probable it is, that in young People it is never
without Sutures, for that such a Skull as it would be less apt to resist
external Injuries, and it would hinder the Growth and Distention of the Head,
with the rest of the Body. Yet Aristotle tells of Skulls that have been seen
without Sutures; and among the Neoterics, Vesalius, Fallopius, Coiter, Johannes
a Cruce, Alexander Benedictus, and others assert the same, and as is shown at
Helmstadt, and the Monastery of the French at Heidelbergh; which were perhaps
the Skulls of old Men, in which those Sutures were dried up; such as I have two
by me at this present, and as have been many times seen in other places. And
thus we are to understand Herodotus, Arrianus, and Arrian concerning the Heads
of the Moors and Ethiopians, by them reported to be without Sutures, not that
they were without Sutures when they were young, but were afterward so hardened
by the extreme Heat of the Air, and dryness of Age, that the Sutures united.

II. These Sutures are twofold; Sutures are twofold.
some proper to the Skull, others called Illegitimate.

III. The real Sutures resembling The Real.
the Teeth of two Saws clapped one into another, and hence called Serratae.
These, I say, will sometimes part asunder and give way to Humors and Vapors
molesting the Brain, as in those Hydrocephalics troubled with redundancy of
^erous Humors.

IV. The Illegitimate Sutures lying The Illegitimate.
upon the Bone like Scales, are therefore called Squamous. But these
Commissures are rather to be referred to Harmony than Suture, or else to the
middle between both, and therefore are not unduly called Harmonical Sutures.

The real Sutures are three.

V. The first, which is foremost, is The Coronal.
the Coronal, because it surrounds the Forepart of the Head like a Crown. This
runs forth from one Temple to the other Transverse above the Forehead, and
joins the Bones of the Forehead with the Bones of the hinder Part of the Head.

VI. The Second, which is the hindermost, The Lambdoidal.
opposed to this, resembling a Greek ^ and therefore called Lamdoidalis, by
others, from the Figure of a Ypsilon, Hysiloides, and by others, the Suture of
the Prow. This rises from the Basis of the hinder Part of the Head, about the
Roots of the Mammary Processes, and ascending obliquely to both Ears,
terminates in a Cone at the Sagittale, and distinguishes the Bone of the hinder
Part of the Head, from that of the Temples and Forepart of the Head.

But in the Bone of the hinder Part of the Head, frequent in Children,
especially such as have large Skulls behind, Nature seems to sport her self.
For sometimes it is separated with a Transverse Suture, sometimes bounded with
a double Suture, as if the lesser Triangle were included in the greater, and
sometimes with a triple Suture, the greater Triangle including two lesser.
Which included Bones, are called by the Anatomists Triangulars and Triqueters.
For which reason, sometimes, but very rarely, certain other little triangular,
oblong, oval Bones are there found, as well in the right as left side of the
Bone; many times two, three, or four, conjoined with their Sutures, first
observed by Olaus Worm, and more conspicuous in the Concave Part of the Head,
than in the Unequal, of which, the biggest does not exceed a Thumbnail. But
notwithstanding all this multiformity, the whole Bone of the Head, even in
young People, is one continued Bone, but such whose other Parts have already
acquired a bony Hardness, others not, which when they have once attained, then
they differ nothing from the rest of the Particles of the Bone.

VII. The third, which is the middlemost, The Sagittal.
is called the Sagittal, because that like an Arrow it is carried from the top
of the Lambdoidal all the length of the upper Part of the Head to the middle of
the Coronal in grown People. This distinguishes and joins the Bone of the
Bregma; and in Infants, for the first two or three years, and in some Children,
to the eight or ninth year, passing the middle of the Coronal, runs forth to
the upper Part of the Nose, dividing the Bone of the Forehead into two. Which
Suture of the Forehead, in grown People, unites by true Symphosis, in such a
manner, that no Footsteps are to be seen. Yet I have by me the Skull of a
certain Person fi^ty years of age, wherein this Suture is altogether entire,
the Sagittal between the Bones of the Bregma, and the Lambdoidal being hardly
conspicuous. Galen, Vesalius and Sylvius have also observed the S^gittal Suture
in Infants reaching through the middle Bone of the hi^der part of the Head to
the beginning of the Spinal Marrow. Which Fallopius utterly denies to have ever
been.

VIII. The Illegitimate Sutures are The Illegitimate Sutures.
two.

IX. The first carried upward with The Squ^moides.
a circular Course from the Root of the Mammilary Process, surrounds the
Temple-bone on each side of the Head, and proceeds downwards to the Basis of
the Ear, joining the Bones of the hinder and forepart of the Head and the
Sphenoides with the Temples, with a scaly Contexture, therefore called the
Squamoides Suture; which loose Conjunction is most commodious for this Part, in
regard of some Motion of the Temple-bone, which it performs, together with its
Muscle in Mastication.

The Second is carried downwards at the sid^s, from the top of the Scaly
Conjunction, obliquely toward the Orbit of the Eye to the beginning of the
First common Suture, and this joins the upper Bones of the forepart of the
Head, and the lower Bone, with the Bone of the Forehead.

X. Besides these Sutur^s, there are The four Commissures.
also four other Sutures proper to the Cranium, to be referred to Harmony,
though Bauhinus will have them to be Sutures.

The first proceeds from the Extremity of the Lambdoidal Suture, at the Root of
the stony Bones, obliquely to the Basis of the Head toward the inner Parts, and
is as it were an addition to the Lambdoidal Suture. The second is a Line in the
middle Basis, which is carried on both sides with a short Course to the Chink
or Cleft which is common to the Sphoenoides with the Bone of the Temples. The
third, more inwardly conspicuous in the Fore-seat of the Skull, is carried to
the lower Corners of the Sphenoides, and the hinder Part of the Orbits of the
Eyes. The fourth proceeds under the Spungy Bones of the Nostrils, with an
oblique Course to the Hole of the Sphenoides-bone.
Besides the foresaid Sutures, some describe several others which are only the
Parts of the said Sutures extended farther, and only various Harmonies.

XI. The Commissures common to The common Commissures.
the Skull and the Iaw, are reckoned to be five; which being of a middle sort,
between Suture and Harmony, are to be called Harmonial Sutures.

The first, in the right Seat of the Orbit of the Eye, proceeds outward from
the end of the fifth Suture, and imitates the Real Suture, and is common to the
Bone of the Forehead, and the first Bone of the upper Jaw. The second appears
in the lateral and lower Seat of the Eye. The third ascends from the inner and
latteral Seat of the Eye, obliquely to the upper Part of the Nose. The fourth
proceeds obliquely through the middle of the Jugal-bone, and joins it with the
Temple-bone, and imitates a Real Suture. The fifth below, tends forward in the
spaciousness of the Nostrils from the hinder Parts.
These Sutures Riolanus describes somewhat otherwise, and adds five more to
these, which we believe to be only the Productions or Appendixes of the other.

XII. The use of these Sutures is The use of the Commissures.
partly to afford a more easy Passage to the Vapors, partly to prevent any
contusions in the Skull from going any farther than one Bone. Add to this, that
the small Fibers pass through these from the hard Meni^x, arnexed to the
Pericranium, by which, the hard Meninx, together with the Brain, are kept tite,
to prevent their being moved out of their place by any violent Motion, which
might cause the falling of the Ventricles of the Brain. Therefore, said
Hippocrates, and that truly, that they have soundest Heads who have most
Sutures, and that heads without Sutures are continually distempered with many
and various Vapors, which cause the Headache, Epilepsie and several other
grievous Diseases; besides that, by any Blow or Fall, their Skulls are easily
broken, and contract long Fissures.

XIII. This occasions the mentioning Whether there can be a Contra-fissure.
of Fissures in the Skull, which we have said are not extended farther than one
Bone, but stop at the next Suture, and gives us an opportunity to enquire, how
that decry'd Contra-fissure happens, when the Skull is split in the opposite
Part, to that where the Blow is given? Which Hippocrates is thought to describe
in these Words. The Bone is broken under the Wound in another part of the Head
than where the Ulcer is, and the Bone is laid bare. Many have taken this place
for a Confirmation of a Contra-fissure, and has drawn Galen, Avicen, Celsus,
Soranus, Johannes de Cruce, Johannes de Vigo, and others, into the same
Opinion; and which Fontanus endeavors to maintain, by the Example of a Boy
that fell from a Wall fifteen foot high, in whose Head there was a Fracture
with many Fissures, about the Temporal Muscle, but the Skull being opened after
his Death, two other Counter-fractures were found in the opposite side. But
Fallopius strenuously denies these Counter-fractures, not only from the
Authorities of Galen, Paulus and others, but by his own Experience, and writes,
that he has an hundred times seen Persons bruised in the Head, but never could
find any Counter-fractures. To which, we add our own Practice, who in the
Field, have above two hundred times seen Soldiers, especially Horsemen, whose
Skulls have been broken, but never could see any Counter-fractures; sometimes
indeed we have seen Fissures on both sides, but it was only where the Persons
were wounded on both sides their Heads. And so, without doubt, it was with that
Boy, mentioned by Fontanus; though it was not known how he came to be hurt on
the other side. So that we are clearly for denying Counter-fissures. As for
Hippocrates, he speaks nothing of any Counter-fissures; only he says that
Matter is gathered together on the opposite side of the Skull to that which was
broken, which we have also seen, but cannot allow it for any proof of a
Counter-fissure.

CHAP. V. Of the Bones of the whole Head in general.
THE Bones of the Head, some belong to the Cranium, others to the Jaws.

I. The Skull is cast about the Brain The Skull.
like a Headpiece for its Security, as we have said before.

Now the Bones of the Skull are either proper or Common.

II. The Proper are either containing, The proper Bones.
or contained.

The containing Bones that constitute the outward Scutel of the Skull, are six
or seven. 1. The Bone of the Forehead, which in young Lads, rarely in those
that are of mature Age, is divided into two. 2. Two Bones of the forepart of
the Head. 3. One Bone of the hinder part of the Head. 4. Two Bones of the
Temples.

The Contained Bones, are eight little Bones lying hid, in every stony Bone
four, and serving for the Sense of Hearing, the Anvil, little Hammer, Stirrup
and orbicular Bone. To these Bauhinus adds two Bones of the Labirinth, and two
nameless Bones.

III. The Bones common to the The common Bones.
Skull with the upper Iaw, are two; the Wedg-resembling-bone, and the
Sieve-like-bone, with the spungy Appendix.

And thus the Bones of the Cranium are reckoned to be sometimes more, sometimes
fewer, according to the diversity of Age, Sutures and Computation.

The Bones of the Jaws constitute the chiefest Part of the Face, and these are
the Bones either of the upper or lower Jaws.

IV. The Bones of the upper Iaws The Iaw Bones.
are reckoned to be five; two of the lower Jaw in Children, which afterward
unite together, and in grown People become one Bone. In these Jaws are twenty
or thirty Teeth.

V. Now in these forementioned The Cavities.
Bones of the Head, are several occult Cavities, concerning the use of which
there is great dispute amongst the Anatomists. Riolanus describes them jointly
together in these Words. In the Head, says he, are many remarkable Cavities.
There are four of each side, the Maxillary lying hid between the upper Iaws.
The Frontal placed near the Eyebrows in the Forehead. The Sphenoidean, latent
under the Seat of the Sphenoides. The Mastoidean, contained within the
Mastoides. Only the Mastoidean is hollow and empty; but distinguished into
seven, eight, or nine little Cells like a Honeycomb. The Entrance of the
Frontal Cavity is discerned at the top and inner Parts of the Nostrils. The
Ingress into the Maxillary Cavity, appears within the Cavity of the Nostrils,
at the side of the spungy Bone. The Entrance into the Sphenoidean Cavity ^yes
more deep within the Nostrils, the Spungy Bones being taken away. The Entrance
into the Maxillary Cavity is evident without Incision of the Bones. The
Entrance of the Frontal Cavity is seen, the Frontal Cavity being cut away above
the Eyebrows. The Entrance of the Sphenoides, appears upon taking away the
inner Table of the Sphenoides. The Entrance into the Mastoidean, is contained
in the left side of the Concha, near the Mastoidean Apophysis, nor does it
appear without breaking the Arch of the Concha, or tearing the Auditory Porus.

VI. Besides these Cavities, there The Holes.
are several Holes in the Bones of the Skull, and some Furrows. Of which
Riolanus thus writes. The Holes are inward and outward. The inner Holes are
often twenty five, sometimes twenty seven, of each side twelve or thirteen, and
one without a Pair, which affords a Passage to the Spinal Marrow. The first, is
the Ethmoides; the second, the Sphenoides; the third, the Optic; the fourth,
the Orbitane Sissure; the fifth, the Templehole, for the Nerve of the third
Conjunction passing into the Temporal Muscle. The sixth, the Gustative; the
seventh, the second Gustative; the eighth, the Iugular; the ninth, the Carotic;
the tenth, the Auditory; the eleventh, the I^gular; the twelfth, the Ligous;
the thirteenth, the last uneven Cervical. The External, according to Sylvius,
are ten on each side; to which, I add the eleventh, i. e. the External Hole of
the Ear. Also at the Root of the Styloides, at the Extremity of the Auricular
Apophysis, without-side there is a Hole bipartited withinside, and divided with
a thin Scale, which appears, and looks into the beginning of the Hollowness. Of
the external Holes, the first is the Superciliar; the second, the Lachrymal;
the third, the External Orbitary; the fourth, the Ethmoids Orbitary; the fifth,
above the Palate; the sixth, In the Extremity of the Palate; the seventh, the
Scissure under the Zygoma; the eighth and ninth, within the Gaping above the
Wing-resembling Apophysis; the tenth, the Mastoides; the eleventh, the External
Auditory Hole.

VII. The Furrows or Moats, are External The Fossae.
and Internal. The Internal six in the Basis of the inner Part of the Skull.
Two Frontals, two Temple Furrows, and two Occipitals. The External are seven on
each side; to which I add an eight, which is the Cavity of the Nostrils. 1. The
Ocular. 2. The Nasal. 3. The Zygomatic. 4. Above the Palate. 5. The
Wing-resembling. 6, 7. The Auditory of the lower Iaw. 8. In the Hole of the
sixth Conjunction.

Thus far Roilanus, now we shall see the difference between him and us in the
following Descriptions.

CHAP. VI. Of the Proper Bones of the Skull in Specie.
THE Bones of the Skull are several, the Bones of the Forehead, fore and hinder
Part of the Head and Temples.

I. The Forehead Bone, by others The Forehead Bone.
called Os Puppis, in Infants at the upper part is soft and double, as being
divided by the Sagittal Suture, running out to the top of the Nose, which
uniting and vanishing in grown People, becomes one, and that so exactly, as if
it had never been divided. In old Men it is rarely seen divided by a Suture.

II. It possesses the forepart of the The Cell of the Forehead Bone.
Head, and is of a semicircular Figure between both Tables, distinguished with
a little Cell, and bony Scales, and girt with a most slender Membrane,
sometimes empty, sometimes full of a slimy juice, which in Infants especially
flat faced, or that have a divided Forehead is hardly conspicuous. This is not
very large in Men, but in Oxen, Horses, Sheep and the like, it has a remarkable
large Cavity, which breeds Worms as some say in the Summer time which makes
those Animals run Mad; which make expert Farriers, for the Cure of that
Disease, open the Head about that place and take out the Worms.

The Exterior Table making this Moat, forms the upper flat Part of the Orbit of
the Eye. The other constitutes the Gibbous Extuberance with many Prominences as
if it were an Arch on each side above the Eyes.

This Furrow or Moat is furnished with several little holes terminating in the
spaciousness of the Nose; to which little holes is added one little hole ending
within the Skull above the Fence of the Sphenoides-bone: which nevertheless for
the most part is not found to be previous; because perhaps it consolidates in
Persons of mature Age. Riolanus believes that it assists the long Adhesion of
the hard Meninx.

III. Concerning the Use of this The use of the Cell.
little Cell, there are various Opinions. Some think it serves for the
preparation of the Air in the Generation of Animal Spirits: others for the
longer preservation of the Odoriferous Air, others for the reception of the
Flegmatic Excrement, others to render the Voice sonorous. But these are all
groundless conjectures. For neither can any Air meet here to complete the
Generation of Animal Spirits; nor is there any need of the preservation of
Odoriferous Airs in this place; besides that the ventricles of the Brain are
appointed fort he receptacles of Flegmatic Excrements, which are rarely found
here, and then but in small quantities: nor does it give any sound to the
Voice, which proceeds from the Larynx and passage of the Nose, so that we are
still at a loss what the use of this Cavity is, nevertheless, we believe so
remarkable a Cavity, especially in Brutes was not granted for nothing.

IV. There are small Processes belonging The Processes.
to this Bone of the Forehead prominent on both sides at the corners of the
Eyes, constituting the upper part of the Orbit.

V. Withinside also it has a furrow The Furrow.
not very deep, hollowed upwards through the middle, affording room to the
large hollowness of the hard Meninx.

VI. It has also holes, sometimes one The Holes.
oblong or found, sometime two at the middle of each Eyebrow, and terminating
into the Orbit of the Eye; through which a Nerve of the third Conjunction
ascends from the seat of the Eye to the Eyelids, the Muscles of the Forehead
and Skin. To this we may add a third hole seated about the Crested Bone, and
ending in the foresaid furrow; which is often observed not to be perforated.

VII. The Bones of the Mold of The Bones of the Bregma.
the Head, or top of the Head, or Bregma, are two, placed in the upper part of
the Head, and joined together by a real Suture, as also to the Bones of the
Forehead and hinder Part of the Head, and adhering to the Temples by a Bastard
Suture.

VIII. Being joined together they Their Figure.
form a Unequal and Semicircular figure.

IX. The Substance is hard in grown Substance.
Persons, but thinner and more porous then the rest of the Bones; for the more
easy passage of the Vapors: In Infants by reason of their redundant Moisture
they are Membranous and soft, but begin to harden when they begin to speak,
seldom that softness remains to perfect Age; yet I observed it once in a Lady
of forty Years of Age; and Bauhinus writes, that it was so with his first Wife.
And Lyndan relates Laxities and softness in the Skull of a Woman thirty years
old, that if her Head ak'd, or that she fell in labor, the Coronal Suture
would gape the breadth of four Thumbs, and show the Motion of the Thumb
conspicuous.

X. The use of this gaping is, The use of Gaping.
1. For the Exhalation of thick and viscous humors, that redound in the moist
Brain of Children. 2. To the end that in the delivery these upper Bones closing
by compression may afford the more easy passage to the Infant through the
streights of the Hupogastrion-Bone.

These Bones of the Forepart of the Head, though they are generally two, yet
in Old men the Suture being closed up, they become one solid Bone.

XI. Without side they are smooth, The Furrows.
within side rough, having several furrows in the inner Part long and winding
and receiving the Veins of the hard Meninx; two also, and sometimes three or
four at the sides of the Sagittal Suture, as it were imprinted with the Top of
the Finger, and furnished with several little holes penetrating to the
Delplois, to which furrows the Dura Matter firmly adheres, so that it often
tears it taking away the Skull. Through those little holes certain Diminutive
Arteries enter the Diplois out of the Dura Matter, and diverse little Veins go
from the Diplois to the Dura Matter, which Vessels being broken in taking off
the Skull discovers a great many little drops of Blood in those places, at the
Top of the Menynx.

XII. The Bone of the hinder Part The Bone of the Occiput.
of the Head, called the Basillary, the Prow and Box-bone, constitutes the
hinder and lower Part of the Head.

This is all one in grown People, very seldom divided into several Bones: but
in Children frequently into three or four, or according to some into five, six
or seven Bones. But Fallopius never observed more then four, with whom Eisson
agrees.

XIII. The Figure of it is Triangular, Shape.
hollow within, unequal without.

XIV. The Substance of it is thick Substance.
and hard, stronger then the rest of the Bones of the Skull to preserve the
hinder Part of the Head from external injuries. Yet is it not in all places of
an equal thickness, but in some Parts thicker, in some Parts thinner.

It is fastened to the Bones of the forepart of the Head and Temples, and to
the Wedg-like Bone.

XV. There are nine Cavities in it, Cavities.
which Riolanus calls Ditches; two withoutside, in the lower Part of the sides
of the great hole. Seven within, of which the lowest and biggest receive the
Protuberances of the Cerebel. To which are joined two others, one of each side,
which ascend obliquely from the Bones of the Temples, and proceed transversly
through the Bones of the hinder Part of the Head, unite in the middle of it and
receive the lateral Cavities of the hard Meninx. From these a third ascends in
a straight line to the Bones of the Bregma, and admit the upper and large
Cavity of the same Meninx.

XVI. Two larger Processes stand Processes.
at the side of the large hole of the Marrow, looking toward the inner Parts of
the Mouth: to which two oaths somewhat less and plain, are joined toward the
hinder Parts, which being all covered with a slippery Gristle, are received by
the Cavities of the first, and serve for the Articulation of the Head. To these
within side two other Eminencies are opposed; so that in the same place the
Bone bunches forth both inward and outward. There is also a fifth to be added,
which is the biggest Process contributing great strength to this Bone at the
lower end, where it is slenderer, which ascending within side directly from the
great hole, distinguishes the Protuberances of the Cerebel. In Dogs the
transverse Process rests upon this at the upper Part, dividing the Brain from
the Cerebel.

XVII. It has five holes; one Hol^.
which is the largest below, through which the long Marrow slides into the
Cavity of the Vertebres. To which at the sides two more holes join, for the
passage of the seventh Pair of the Nerves, and Artery and a Vein. At the sides
of these on both sides, between the little Head of the hinder Part of the Head,
and the Styloides Appendix, there is a large long hole to be seen, common to
the Bone of the Temples, affording passage to the sixth Pair of the Nerves, as
also to a Branch of the Carotis Artery and the Iugular Vein. Besides this hole,
some Anatomstis observe sometime though very seldom in the outward Capital
seat of this Bone on each side, a proper hole, not very large, which also
transmits an Artery and a Vein.

XVIII. The Bones of the Temples, The Bones of the Temples.
possess the lateral Regions of the Head, on each side one, of which the
Exterior and Superior Part is called the Scaly Bone, by reason of the flat
thinness of the Scale, the lower is called the Stony Bone, which hardness it
requires to render it more fit for the repercussion of sound.

All these particular Bones of the Temples, in Persons of mature Age, are one
continuous Bone; but in Infants the Scaly Part is divided from the Bony; also
in Children till the seventh year, the foremost Circle of the Auditory passage
is divided from it by an interceding Gristle; the Footsteps of which Division,
in Persons grown up are in some measure to be seen remaining at the beginning
of that passage.

XIX. The figure of it more upward Sh^pe.
is Semicircular and equal, more below and more inward, rough and unequal with
many Protuberances, like the jetting forth of the Rocks. The substance also of
it at the sides is thinner; below and within side much thicker.

XX. There are two Cavities in this Cavities.
Bone to be considered. The more outward larger, overcast with a Gristle,
between the Auditory passage and the Process of the Jugal Bone, which receives
the long Head of the lower Jaw.

The inner most is less, common to the Bone of the hinder part of the Head,
seated at the said Process behind.

XXI. Close by those Cavities stands The Styloides.
a long Appendix, sharp-pointed and slender, called the Styloides or
Bodkin-bone, which in Infants appears Gristly, in Men grown is Bony. This in
boiled Carcasses is easily distinguished.

XXII. Also there are two other External The Mamillary Processes.
Processes to be observed. The first obtuse, thick and short, withinside
somewhat concave from the like of a Cows Teat, called the Mamillary Process;
which Fallopius and Bauhinus deny to be in Children, but that it grows
afterward.

XXIII. The Second is carried forward The Os jugal.
from the passage of the Ear, and by a long Suture is joined with the Bone of
the upper Jaw, and so by the means of two Apophysis concurring and united
together is formed the Bone of the Zygoma or Jugal, so called, because it
resembles an Oxes Yoke, and extends it self like a Bridge from the Eye to the
Ear; and is very hard and ^olid, contrary to what Columbus thought, who would
have it to be hollow. Proceeding on both sides with thick Roots, it grows
slender in the middle. It is made for the Security of the Temple Muscle, and
the rise of the Master Muscle; also to the end the Tendon of the Crataphyte
Muscle may be fortified with a kind of Stony Bulwark, and the Protuberant Bone
of the Cheeks underpropt with a sort of strong Joint.

The Third, bunching out in length to the inner Basis of the Skull, from its
singular hardness and inequality called the Rocky, proceeds with a broad
beginning from the Bone of the Temples and ends by degrees in a sharp point,
without side somewhat rough, within side altogether smooth, but unequal with
many Tubercles, by reason of the Cavities which are to be formed therein. This
has two holes within the Skull, through the foremost and least of which a small
Artery; through the other which is bigger and looks toward the hinder Parts,
the Auditory Nerve enters the inner Cavity and Caverns, which presently after
its Ingress being divided into two Branches, goes away through two inner
different holes into the upper and lower Cavity, the Labyrinth, and the
Periwinckle. Without side of the Skull it has three holes. The first is the
Auditory Passage, with which a broad passage opens into it, and carr^'d from
the hinder Part obliquely forward and upward, grows narrow by degrees, to
collect the reverberated Air; entering at a larger passage within that narrow
straight, for the more perfection of the hearing. Moreover to the end that in
that oblique Tortuosity the violence of the Airs may be somewhat broken, and so
strike upon the Tympanum with less force. The Orifice of this passage in
Children new born is altother Gristly, but in a short time it grows Bony by
degrees; and after seven or eight Months by means of the Gristle is still
distinguished from the rest of the Bone, and is separated by boiling, but
afterward it is dried to that degree, that it can never more be separated tho
there may some appearance of the first separtion remain in the Skulls of Men
perfectly grown up. Adjoining to this passage, near the passage of the
Sphenoides Bone stands the Second hole, narrow, short and oblique, through
which a Vein runs to the Jugulars through the inner Cavity. The Third hole is
seated between the Mamillary Process, and the St^loides Appendix; and
terminates in the passage that goes from the Ear to the Mouth.

In this Process or Rocky Bone is comprehended the Organ of hearing, and theein
lie hid the Tympanum, Labyrinth and Periwincle; as also four Bones, the Anvile,
Hammer, Stirrup, and Orbicular-bone. Of which lib. 3. cap. 18.

CHAP. VII. Of the Bones common to the Skull, with the upper Iaw.
THere are two Bones common to the Skull, with the upper Jaw, the Wedge-like,
and the Sieve-like Bones.

I. The Wedge-like, by the Greeks The Wedg-like Bone.
(...), not that it resembles a Wedge in Shape, but is as it were wedged in
among the rest of the Bones. But because it is of various Figures, it is
therefore called the Multiform Bone, and because it constitutes the Basis of
the Skull is the Basilar Bone.

In Infants it consists of several Bones united by a Gristle, of which, the
first is said to separate scarce a Fingers breadth from the Crowns of the
hinder Part of the Head. The second comprehends the Horses Saddle, and the
Processes designed for the Visory Nerves. The third and fourth are the winged
and flat Processes. On the other side, Riolanus writes that the Wedge-bone in
Children, till the twelfth year, consists of a double Bone only. But if the
Wedge-bone in Infants be but more accurately observed, you shall find it to
consist of three Bones, the biggest in the middle, which constitutes the Basis,
forms the Saddle, and spreads forth two Wings forward toward the Sides, and two
less, constituting the Batts Wings. In progress of years, all these three Bones
are joined and united into one Bone. To these some add the Bone called the
Plough-share Bone, or Os Vomer, as a part of the Sphenoides, because it is
fixed to it below. Which however dislikes Fallopius and Riolanus, who describe
that Bone distinct and separate.

II. It is seated in the middle Basis of The Situation.
the Head, and adjoining to it on every side, stands the proper Bones of the
Cranium, as also the Bones of the upper Jaw, and are fastened to it by bastard
Sutures and Harmonies, which in the Perfection of Age are quite obliterated.

III. The Substance of it in the The Substance.
middle is thick, but in the lateral Expansions thinner, hard and scaly, which
in Children till twelve years of age seems to be solid, but in Men grown,
consists of two Tables, and a middle spungy Cavity, which appears under the
Saddle.

IV. It is furnished with various Processes, Its Processes.
External and Internal.

The External are four; of which, two are conspicuous near the bony Fence of
the Nostrils and Palate, where it coheres with the upper Jaw; from their Figure
called (...), or Wing-resembling, by others called the Batts-wings. The other
two occurring behind, are extended toward the Styloides, with double Tops or
Points.

The Internal are also four opposite to each other, and called (...), because
they resemble the four Legs of a Bed or Table. Of these, the two foremost and
bigest are taper'd by degrees, from a broad Basis to a sharp Point. The two
hindermost in some never jet out, but resemble a Wall, and are accounted as
one. However, most commonly being stretched out in breadth, they taper into two
Points, ^omewhat hollowed in the middle, and these Processes, together with the
Spaces between them, from the likeness of a Turkish Saddle, is called Sella
Equina, Sella Turcica, Sella Sphenoidis, and in one Word, Ephippion.

V. Galen writes, that the Sieve-like Bone Whether the Saddle be perforated.
is perforated with many Holes, for the passage of the Phlegm collected in the
Kernel; which Opinion is applauded by I. Sylvius, Riolanus, Casser, H^ffman,
and de le Boe Sylvius. Puteus also writes, that he saw these Holes in an
Anatomy at Versailles; and Laurentius reports, that he has found them in some
dried Skulls, but that they are not to be found in a fresh Carcass, as being
stuffed up with Phlegm. But as Galen was deceived, so were all his Followers. For
the Cavity of the Bone of the Saddle is overcast with a continuous hard and
thick Seat, never perforated with any Holes; which Vesalius also observes; with
whom Fallopius, Columbus, Valverda, and Baubinus agree. But which way the Phlegm
is evacuated, ^ee Lib. 3. Cap. 8.

VI. There are many Cavities in The Cavities.
this Bone; without side, in each wing-like Process, one long and deep,
affording a Seat to the inner Wing-like Muscle. Within side, one in the middle
of the Ephippium, remarkable above the rest, and almost round, underpropping
the Pituitary Kernel, upon which another transverse and long one rests at the
sore and upper part, affording room for the Conjunction of the Optic Nerves,
and at the sides there is another to be seen less deep of each side.

VII. There are numbered seven Holes.
Bones in both sides of the Sphoenoides.

The first, which is round, and a^fords a Passage for the Optic Nerve to the
Eye, near the foremost Processes of the Ephippion. The second, which is long
and large, and transmits the second Pair of Nerves to the Muscles of the Eye,
and a Branch of the third Pair to the Forehead, Cheeks and Nostrils, as also a
large Branch of the Carotis Artery and Temple Vein. Ingrassias and other
Anatomists assert, that through the first, second and third Neck, the pituitous
Matter flows out of the Spitly Kernel, into the Spaciousness of the Nostrils,
and thence proceeds forth into the Muscles of the Eyes, and that Tears are also
generated by them. But this Opinion has been already refuted, Lib. 3. c. 15.
and Lib. 3. c. 6. and 8. The third, which is small and round, lies under the
second, and carries a Branch of the third and fifth Pair of the Nerves to the
Temple Muscle and Pterygoides, as also to the inner Membrane of the Nostrils,
and the upper Fore-Teeth. The fourth, called the Torn-Hole, which is large,
long and unequal, like a Ditch, seated in the outer side of the Orbit of the
Eye, and is common to the Sphoenoides, with the Bone of the Jaw, and sends
forth a Branch of the fourth and preceding third Pair of the Nerves to the
Temple* muscle and Palate. The fifth, which is long, but obvious to the hinder
Process of the Ephippion, admits a remarkable Branch of the Carotis Artery.
Vesalius also believes, that it sends forth a Branch also of the Jugular Vein.
The sixth, which is Oval, joins to the sides of the Preceding, and grants a
Passage to the fourth Pair of the Nerves. The seventh, next to the preceding,
small and round, sends forth a Root of the Jugular Vein from the hard Meninx.
VIII. The Sieve-like Bone, or Ethmoids, The Sieve-like Bone.
seated in the middle Basis of the Front between the Unequal Part o^ each Eye,
lies upon the Top of the Nostrils, and is joined with slight Harmonies to the
Bone of the Forehead, the second of the upper Jaw, and the Sphoenoides, which
riper years frequently abolishes altogether.

This is perforated like a Sieve, with many little Holes like a Sieve, some
straight, some winding and oblique, among which, the biggest are those which
join to the Cocks-comb. It is covered with the hard Meninx, which is vulgarly
said to be very porous in this part, and pervious with many little Holes, which
is not altogether true: For the Meninx, through those little Holes, sends forth
several little Pipes toward the spungy Bones, filling the upper Parts of the
Nostrils through which the Phlegm descending from the Ventricles of the Brain
may flow, but nothing can ascend upwards from the Nostrils. Vid. l. 3. c. 8.

IX. At the middle of this Bone stands The Cocks-comb.
an oblong, triangular, and sharp pointed Process, which from its resemblance,
is called the Cocks-comb; by Fern^lius, the Hard Wart, and by Sneider, the
Fence of the Spungy B^ne; and this divides the Sieve-like Bone like a Hedge into
two parts, and distinguishes the Mamillary Processes of the Brain. Therefore
some Anatomists will have the Sieve-like Bone to be double, and reckon the
Cocks-comb for a Bone. This Cocks-comb in the upper Part, has a Protuberance
somewhat unequal, with a certain hollow Asperity, to which, the upper
Hollowness of the Scithe is strongly fastened. In new born Infants this
Cocks-comb is not to be found.

To the Cocks-comb on the other Part another Process is opposed, thin and hard,
distinguishing the Nostrils at the upper part, whence it is called the
Plough-Share, or the Diaphragma of the Nostrils, or the Interstitium.

X. To the upper Cavity of the Nostrils The Spungy Bones.
the spungy Bones adhere, resembling a Pumice stone, furnished with innumerable
Labyrinthy Caverns, and winding little Holes filled with a very spungy sort of
Flesh. Of which, Hippocrates, In the Nostrils there is n^ Hole, says he, but
somewhat as spungy as a Sponge. However Hippocrates, Galen, and other
Anatomists, oft-times confound these with the Sieve-like Bones, and when they
name Bones, often times mean the Sieve-like. But we believe them to be distinct
Bones, of which, the spungy sort are pendulous, and adhere to the sides of the
Bones of the Nose, but yet are different from both.

XI. Galen, with others, will have the Their use.
use of these spungy Sieve-like Bones to be for the Evacuation of the flegmatic
Excrements out of the Brain; partly to carry the Exhalations to be smelt to the
Mamillary Processes; partly to stop the too sudden ingress of the cold Air, or
any ill Smell to the Brain. But this Opinion is refuted also at large, l. 3. c.
8. and 19.

CHAP. VIII. Of the upper Iaw.
THE Jaws are two, the upper and the lower, constituting the outer part of the
Face.

I. The upper comprehends the lower The upper Iaw.
and lateral Parts of the Orbit of the Eyes, the Nostrils, Cheeks, Palate and
the whole Order of the upper Teeth.

This in Men is short and semicircular for handsomeness sake. In Brutes long.
Moreover it is immovable in Man, as it is in most other Creatures, unless
Parrots, Phoenicopters and Crocodiles, unless there be any other Creatures
unknown to us that move the upper Jaw.

II. The Substance of it is solid, Its Substance.
but cavernous within, especially toward the Teeth; in which place, in Children
the Marrowy Juice is contained for the Nourishment, but that being consumed by
Age, the cavernous Bones remains. Highmore having diligently scarched into this
Cavernosity, found on each side, under the lower Seat of the Eye, where the
Bone jets forth for the Guard of the Eye, a certain Den, seated at the lower
sides of the Nose, remarkably hollow, spherical and somewhat oblong, and
covered with a thin bony Scale, in the bottom of which, certain Protuberances
rise up, wherein the slender Points of the Roots of the Teeth are included.
This Den is frequently empty, but sometimes found full of S^ime, which he
believes distills through a certain Cavity from the little Caverns of the
Forehead Bone and the Ethmoids.

III. It receives Blood for Nourishment Its Vessels.
through the Branches of the Soporal Arteries, and the remainder after
Nourishment, it sends through little Veins to the External Jugular. It is
composed of twelve Bones, six on each side, all joined together by Harmonies,
rather than thin Sutures.

The First, almost triangular, is seated at the outer Corner of the Eye. This
by means of its Apophysis, joined with the foremost Process of the Temporal
Bone, by an oblique Suture, forms the Iugal Bone, which being gibbous without,
and hollow within, covers the Temple Muscle. The second, which is small, thin,
pellucid and brittle, constitutes the Corner of the Eye, and in this the
Lachrymal Hole is pervious to the Nostrils, through which the serous Humor
distilling from the Ventricles of the Brain, causes Tears in the Eyes, Vid.
Lib. 3. Cap. 14. But to stop their continual flowing, there is a little
Caruncle which lies upon this Hole, which hinders the ordinary Efflux, but
gives way to it when more violent. Sometimes near this tender Bone, about the
Top of the Nose, and the bigger Corner of the Eye, certain Abscesses happen,
which the Greeks call Aegylopas, which if neglected, corrode the Bone it self,
and cause a Lachrymal Fistula. The Third is thin and pellucid, within the inner
side of the Orbit of the Eye, interposed between the rest, and more inward
continuous to the spungy Bones of the Nostrils. The Fourth is the least Bone of
all, which constitutes the most porous Parts of the Cheeks and Palate, and
receives the upper Row of the Teeth into its Caverns. It has a conspicuous
Hole, seated under the Orbit of the Eye, producing a Branch of the third Pair
of the Nerves to the Face; also another Hole at the hinder Part of the cutting
Teeth, in the middle bony Fence, again divided into two Holes toward the upper
Parts. Of which, one tends to each Nostril, and r^mits a little Vein thither
out of it. Some think that the Spitly Humors, descending this way to the
Nostrils, flow into the Mouth; which is not probable. Moreover, under the Orbit
of the Eye, at the lower side of the Nose, there is a remarkable Hollowness,
which however in Children is not easily found, but is hollowed by Age. The
Fifth, which is thin, little, long, and almost quadrangular, with its Pair,
constitutes the more eminent Part of the Bones of the Nose. The Sixth, which is
broad and thin, with its Pair, forms the Palate.
To these Fallopius adds one more, as does also Columbus and Laurentius,
interposed between the innermost Part of the Palate and the Sphenoides,
separating the lower Part of the Nostrils like a Fence, and thence called the
Plough Share. To which Vesalius adds the spungy Bones already described.

CHAP. IX. Of the lower Iaw.
THE lower Jaw in Man is moveable. This in Children till about seven years old,
according to Laurentius and Bartholine, but not beyond the second year
according to Riolanus, consists of two Bones, joined in the Chin by
Synchondrosin, which afterward in riper years unite into one Bone, thick, hard
and strong.

This Conjunction, as Galen writes, is afterward dissolved, as was also
observed by the French Chyrurgions, as Riolanus reports, and that the Jaw being
broken by a Stone, was often cut away in that Part where the Bones united
together. But notwithstanding all this, the said Coalescency has been observed
in Men grown to be firmer than the rest of the Bones of the Jaw, and that the
Jaw is sooner broken at the sides than in that Coalescency.

Eisson observes, that he has sometimes found another Division in Infants on
both sides, almost in the middle place of each side, where the Bone acquires a
thicker Protuberance, and endeavors to enlarge it self.

I. This Iaw is shorter in Men Its Figure.
and almost semicircular, thick and broad before, behind divided like a Greek
Hypsylon, or as Platerus will have it resembling a Fork, for handsomness sake.

II. On both sides at the end, it advances Processes.
two Processes, by some called Horns. The first of which being thin and broad,
terminates in a sharp Point, called in Greek (...); to this also a Tendon of
the Temple Muscle is strongly knit, and therefore the Laxation of this Jaw is
accounted dangerous. The hinder Process is obtuse, furnished with a Neck and a
long little Head, called Condylus, wrapped about with a Gristle for the more
easy Motion, by which it is joined into the Cavity of the Rocky Bone, smoothed
with a Gristle also, and is tied to it with a common Membranous Ligament.

III. More inward it has a Cavity Cavity.
containing a marrowy Juice for the Nourishment of the Bone. Which in Men
appears chiefly in the Forepart toward the Region of the Chin.

IV. It is furnished with four Holes, Holes.
of which, there is one internal on both sides, seated at the beginnings of the
said Processes, which admits a Nerve of the fourth Conjunction to be
distributed to the Teeth, together with a small Artery, and sends forth a
little Vein. So likewise the two other, which are lesser and round, are both
placed at the sides of the Chin on each side, and sends forth little Branches
of the foresaid Nerve outward to the lower Lip, its Muscles and Skin.

In the Forepart it is somewhat rough, having an unequal Excrescence in the
inner and middle Seat of the Chin, for the faster Insertion of the Nerves. It
has also superficial Cavities, both External and Internal, about the beginnings
of the Processes, for the Insertion of the Muscles.

It is also full of little Holes for the Insertion of the Teeth, of which there
is no certain number, in regard the number of the Teeth is not alike in all
Persons, but in some more, in some fewer.

These Holes sometimes perish, sometimes grow again. For upon the pulling out
of a Tooth, if another does not presently succeed, the Hole closes up so hard,
that it is able to supply the Office of a Tooth. On the other side, when the
Teeth of Wisdom break forth at fifty or threescore years of age, as sometimes
they do, you shall have new Holes made. In Children also, when they shed a
Tooth, it often happens that a new Hole is made, the other being quite stopped
up.

Below the lower Jaw, under the Tongue, the Hyoides Bone is sea^ed, of which,
Lib. 3. Cap. 23.

CHAP. X. Of the Teeth.
I. THE Teeth, by the Greeks The Desinition.
called (...) are small Bones, hard, white, fixed into the Holes of the Iaws,
by the way called Gomphosis, appointed for the chewing of Food and serving also
for Pronunciation.

I say they are Bones: though it has Whether they be Bones?
been greatly disputed whether they are Bones or no. But for the Affirmative,
Riolanus produces these Reasons. 1. Because they were formed out of the Seed
with the rest of the Bones. 2. Because they are nourished by the Blood; as the
rest of the Bones. 3. Because they are hard like the rest of the Bones. 4.
Because they do not feel in their own Substance, but only by the Periosteums of
their Roots, and by means of the little Nerves that enter into them, no
otherwise than all the rest of the Bones are sensible.

III. Now for the chewing of hard Their Substance.
things, the Substance of the Teeth is also very hard, and where they appear
above their Holes smooth and naked, without any Periosteu^, but within their
Holes rough, and enfolded with a thin Pellicle of a most quick Sense, having a
Cavity withinside, which is manifest in the grinding Teeth when broken, but
invisible in the Dog-teeth and Nibblingteeth, whereby they receive through the
little Holes in the Roots, besides a little Artery from the Roots, a little
Nerve also from the Branch of the fourth Pair, expanded through a most thin
little Membrane, which enfolds the said Cavity; by means of which, and the
Periosteum investing the Roots, the Teeth are so sensible of Pain, though their
bony Substance, which is destitute of the inner little Membrane and Nerve, is
altogether insensible.

IV. Now these three Vessels, Artery, Vessels.
Nerve and Vein, being first united, and wreath as it were into one small
Chard, begirt with a small Membrane, enter the inner Part of the Iaw, and in a
peculiar Channel different from the Caverns of the Marrow, run under the Teeth,
though how they enter the Teeth in Men, we must confess is not discernible to
the Sight; for that although the small Holes of the Roots, though they are
somewhat conspicuous in Infants, and seem to penetrate to the slimy Substance
of the Roots, yet in Men of riper years become so narrow, that they are not to
be discerned by the Eye. But Reason tells us however, that there must be some
ways, by means of which, those Vessels enter the inner Parts of the Teeth;
which is apparent by their continual Nourishment from the Arteries and Veins;
besides that, the inner Cavity of the grinding Teeth, especially the first
mucous Substance is seen to be somewhat discolored with Blood, and many times
there follows a Flux of Blood upon drawing the Tooth. That there is some little
Nerve that enters, is apparent by the quick Sense of the Tooth. Moreover,
though the Ingress of these Vessels in the Teeth cannot be so well demonstrated
in Men; yet if you open the lower Jaw of an Ox at the inside, presently the
Cavity containing the Marrow, and the Artery, Nerve and Vein, enfolded with
their peculiar Membrane, appear in their proper Channel. The Membrane being
cut, the little Nerve appears, consisting of several small Threads, between
which, the Veins and Arteries are carried, and the Membrane being removed,
certain Fibers like Cobwebs are seen to be stretched from thence to the Roots
of the Teeth. And upon the drawing of a Grinder or a cutting Tooth, you shall
perceive small Fibers sticking to the Root of the Teeth, which are extended
from the Hollowness of the Jaw. But this is to be wondered at, that the Dogs
Teeth and cutting Teeth, which are less and fixed with one Root, should have
large and conspicuous Branches openly coming to them, and that the Grinders,
which are larger, and fixed with four Snaggs, should only have capillary
Branches to attend them, and that in a kind of hugger mugger. Which, no
question, is no otherwise in Men, were it discernible to the Sight.

V. The Principles or Beginnings of Their Principles.
the Teeth, generated with the rest of the Parts in the Womb, lie latent
between the Jaws and the Gums, within whose Enclosures they are brought to
Perfection by degrees, wherein are first observed the Follicle, the bony Part,
and the mucous Part.

VI. The white little Bladder, not exactly The Folliculus.
membranous, but somewhat slimy, covers the whole Teeth, as the Cortex of the
Seed covers the Pith of a Plant, but never inseparably unites to the Plant.
This by degrees is perforated upwards and downwards, and then the Tooth it self
buds forth; in which beginning of it, two Substances are to be observed, the
one bony, the other slimy.

VII. The bony Part is the Basis of The Bony part.
the Tooth, which by degrees is hardened into a firm and white Substance, and
thrust forth without the Gums. The beginnings are more conspicuous in the new
born Infants in the cutting Teeth, less in the Dog-teeth, but in the Dogteeth,
it is long before they appear. Vesalius, Columbus and Sylvius thought this Basis
to be an Epiphysis; which Eustachius, Riolanus, and Fallopius with good reason
denies.

The slimy Part is the Root of the Tooth which is fixed in the Jaw, and
consists of a thin Pellicle less white, which contains that pellucid Slime,
somewhat hard, of a Color betwixt White and Red, wherein you may perceive the
small Rudiments of the Vessels to be intermixed. Which Slime being enfolded
within that Pellicle, continues so till the Age of two years, more or less, and
is so soft, that being squeezed with the Fingers, the Root of the Tooth sweats
forth Blood in the same manner as the Quills of Chickens or Pigeons Feathers;
of which the upper Part is hard, and as it were solid, the lower hollow and
mucous, and sweats forth Blood, being more vehemently squeezed. In progress of
time, this Mucous or Slime is first more and more hardened, and grows bony in
the Circumference, then by degrees it hardens in the middle, yet so that there
is a certain Cavity remaining at the middle of its thickness at the Root, in
the Grinders conspicuous enough, in others not; as being hardly extended to
that Part of the Tooth, eminent beyond the Gum; and is encompassed with a most
thin Membrane of an acute Sense, constituted by the Expansion of a small Nerve.
Thus this Slime being hardened by degrees, the Root increases, perforates the
little Bladder, and is fixed into the Jaw it self. Then the little Bladder
changing its use, becomes a Binding, or rather Soder to the Tooth; by means of
which, it sticks as it were glew'd and plaistered to the Gums.

VIII. In this manner are the The time of cutting.
Teeth perfected that lie hid under the Gums; out of which they do not break
forth till some Months after the Birth, at the time which is called the
Toothing-time. First break forth the upper and lower cutting Teeth, as of
which, there is greatest use; afterward the Dog-teeth, and lastly the
Grinders, and that with a great deal of Pain, in regard they perforate the
Flesh of the Gums; which if it be hard, makes the Passage more troublesome, and
causes Convulsions and Looseness of the Belly, especially when the Dog-teeth cut
the Gums. Now why the cutting Teeth break forth first, the Dog-teeth
afterward, Aristo^le gives us the Reason. Because their Office is the first,
for that the Food must first be bitten, before it can be chewed; besides that,
a lesser thing is sooner brought to perfection, than a greater, and the
Fore-teeth are less than the Cheek-teeth.

After the twenty Teeth are come forth above and below, then the Grinders
follow more l^isurely, and that not before the fifth, sixth, or seventh year,
till which time, they lie hid like small Points within the Jaws. Probably,
because the Jaws before were not grown to a sufficient bigness, so that it had
not room for twenty eight or thirty Teeth.

IX. About the seventh or eight The Shedding.
year, the foremost Teeth shed, and others come in their Place. However all the
Teeth do not always shed; but for the most part the Cutters and Dogteeth, and
of the Grinders those that stand next the Dog-teeth. Nay, I have observed that
some have only shed their Cutting-teeth, and no other, and some only two or
three of the Cutters, the rest remaining; so that there is nothing of certainty
in this Matter.

This shedding of the Teeth never happens but once, or very seldom. Thus once
in forty years I have known a Grinder to have shed, and another come in its
room; and I have observed some Children to have shed their Foreteeth twice,
which have come again. Which Variety Eustachius observes, where he tells us,
That some renew their Teeth in the thirteenth and fourteenth Year; others at
certain times, once after the seventh, and again after the fourteenth; and some
have had a Tooth come again at twenty years of age, instead of another pulled
out. And sometimes young Men, well tempered and lusty, have had their
Cheek-teeth grown again, and supply the Room of that which was pulled out
before.

X. This Change of the Teeth has A Controversy about shedding the Teeth.
caused a great Dispute, whether the first Teeth are true Teeth? and whether
those that succeed are new Teeth, or only new Branches from the same Root? It
being absurd to avouch a new Generation of the Parts after the first Formation.
For which reason, some aver that the first Teeth are no true Parts of the Body,
but only various Particles generated from superfluous Matter, and doing the
Office of Teeth till the true Teeth come to perfection. Others say that the
first and last Teeth are both generated in the Womb; but that the first Teeth
being soonest perfected, are soonest come forth; the latter, being more slowly
perfected, come out afterward, and thrust the former out of their Holes. It
being visible in Anatomy, that those Teeth which one shed in the seventh year,
are separated but a little way from those which break forth in the seventh, and
that there is no communion between them.

But neither of these Opinions come to the Point. For the first Teeth, about
the seventh year first grow loose, and afterward shed. Only it is to be
observed, that the Root it self does not shed, but the upper Part that is next
the Root. For we find by Experience, that if the Teeth be drawn Root and all,
it is very seldom that another comes in the Room, or if another Tooth does come,
then it is certain that the Root was not wholly drawn; but that the lower Part
being broken, remained in the Gum. And therefore great care is to be taken,
that in pulling out loose Teeth, you do not pull out Root and all, for then you
can never expect a new Tooth. For this Rolfinch reproves Columbus, avouching
that the Tooth sheds Root and all, and renews Root and all, which is contrary
to Reason and Experience, and therefore let it go.

We have observed in a tame Deer, every year or half year, a certain soft and
slimy Substance under the Foundation of the Horns, to rise like a Stoolball
from the Root of the Horns, upon which the loose Horns insisted, which, as
might be observed by the restlesness of the Beast, caused either Pain or some
extreme Itching in those Parts, till the Horns fell off, and that then, from
the same Root, new Horns grew again by degrees. So it is with the Teeth, in
which that mucous Substance rises from the Root under the Basis of the Tooth,
and loosens it with Pain, so that you may easily pull it out with your Fingers;
and that unless it be pulled out in time, the soft Substance being afterward
dried and hardened, it becomes strongly fixed again, and another Tooth grows to
the side of it from the same Root, which however is no new Tooth, but a new
Branch proceeding from the same Root. So that it is no wonder the former Tooth
is separated at some distance from the latter Branch, because it has no other
communion with it, than by one Root common to both. This deceived Eustachius
and Riolanus, who perceiving the beginning of the second Branch sprouting forth
under the former, write that they saw new Teeth lying hid under the first. Now
the Reason why the latter Branch thrusts out the former, is by reason that the
Hole is so narrow that it will not admit two Branches together, which however
sometimes it does, and then the latter Branch is joined to the former at its
beginning. Only because the first Branch grows out of order, and defaces the
Beauty of the Mouth, therefore generally it is either drawn or filled away. In
the same manner it has sometimes happened, that old Men have had new Teeth
spring up from the remaining Roots of the old ones. Of which, Ioubert produces
an Example in a toothless Lady of seventy years of age, most of whose Teeth
came again, but small and weak. And Sennertus also relates another Story, upon
the Authority of George Tithscard, a Silesian Physician, of an old Matron
almost seventy years of age, who bred twenty new Teeth with the same Pain, and
the same Symptoms as happen in young Children. At Utrecht, there lives an old
Woman at this time, of fourscore years of age, who having lost all her Teeth,
had four of her cutting Teeth grew again, but two years since. And you shall
find many other Examples of this nature in Pliny, Naevisanus, and Alexander
Benedictus.

However it is to be understood, that in these ancient People, the Roots of the
Teeth remain entire, though the Basis of the Teeth that advances it self above
the Gums, were quite eaten away and perished.

XI. About one, or six and twenty, The Dentes Sapientiae.
or thirty years of age, the two farthest Cheek-teeth break forth with great
Pain, the Materials of which, remain so long hidden in the little Holes of the
Jaw imperfect, before it could acquire Perfection of Substance. These are
generally called Double Teeth, or the Teeth of Understanding, because they
shoot forth at the time when a Man arrives to his most solid Understanding.

XII. The Teeth have also this peculiar Continual Growth.
above the Nature of other Bones, that their Growth and Increase is not
prefixed, but grow continually all a Man's Lifetime, so that what is daily
worn away by Mastication and Chewing, renews again, which is apparent, if the
Tooth, to which the opposite Tooth being drawn, upon which it usually lights,
be not worn away, for then it grows to such a length, as to fill the opposite
Hole. Or if the Tooth shooting forth out of its Hole transversly toward the
foremost or hinder Parts, exceeds the Row of the Teeth. For then if it shoot
forward, the Tooth will perforate the Lip it self, if backward, it will hinder
the Motion of the Tongue. Thus I knew two young Ladies, who had each a sharp
Tooth which shot forth from the inner Root of the upper Cutting-tooth, and grew
to that length, that it perforated the Tongue with an extraordinary Pain, and
hindered the Speech; for which Reason, I caused them both be to drawn. And thus
Pliny, Eustachius, and Alexander Benedict are to be understood, when they write
that they saw Teeth growing out of the Palate, as Meaning-teeth, which shooting
forth from the Root of some upper Cutting-teeth through the Membrane of the
Palate, extend themselves toward the inner Parts of the Mouth.

However there are certain Limits, beyond which the Teeth never grow;
notwithstanding that they are sometimes longer than ordinary.

XIII. The Teeth are placed in the The Order.
Iaws in one single Row: Seldom two Rows are seen, as Pliny reports of Laodice,
the Daughter of Mithridates, and Trimarchus the Son of Nicholes. But more
rarely three Rows, which Rhodiginus reports of Hercules, and Columbus observes
in his own Son Phoebus. In Tigers and Elephants, three Rows are common. In like
manner the Monster called a Manticora, and the Fish called a Moraxus, are said
to have three Rows of Teeth. Sometimes indeed it happens in Men that here and
there one of the Fore-Teeth may stand in a double Row; which comes to pass when
the Teeth shed, and that a new Spring grows from the same Root, which growing
upward, fixes it self before another Tooth, either not shed or not pulled out.

XIV. The Bigness of the Teeth is (...) (...)
of a moderate Size; yet some are broader, some narrower, some longer, some
shorter.

XV. The Number in all People Number.
is not the same; some^imes fifteen or sixteen in each Jaw; yet some have more,
some fewer, and they that have fewest, have generally the broadest.
Hippocrates, Galen, and Aristotle prefer the greater Number before the smaller,
as betokening long Life; perhaps denoting the Plenty of the first Matter, and
the Strength of the forming Faculty; or else because the Nourishment is better
prepared for Concoction, by the Mastication of more, then few Teeth. It rarely
happens, what Plutarch testifies of Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, and Pliny,
concerning the Son of Prusias King of Bithynia, and what others write of
Eryptolemus King of Cyprus, the Poet Pherecrates and Sicinius, that instead of
Teeth, they had one continued Bone, distinguished only with Lines, such a one
as Bartholin testifies he saw in a certain Barbarian; and Melanthon, in a
certain Virgin, at the Court of Prince Ernest of Luneburgh.

The Teeth differ both in Shape and Use.

XVI. Some are broad, sharp and The Incisorii.
cutting, therefore called Incisorii; by the Greeks (...), from (...) to cut,
the first that appear, seated in the forepart of the Mouth, and furnished with
one single Root, ending in a sharp Point. These are four above and below,
sometimes three, seldom two, where they are very broad, so that they fill the
whole Space between the Dog-Teeth.

XVII. Others are very sharp and The Canini.
strong, and deeply rooted, called Canini, or Dog-teeth, by Aristotle and Galen
(...), two in each Jaw, next to the Cutting-teeth on each side, which break
what the other cannot cut. These the Vulgar call the Eye-teeth, and account it
a dangerous thing to draw them, believing that their Roots reach to the Eyes,
whereas the uppermost hardly pass beyond the lower Brim of the Wings of the
Nose, with their Roots, and the lowermost are far distant from the Eyes.
Others, with Laurentius and Riolanus believe that some portion of the Nerve
moving the Eye is carried to these Teeth, which is nothing so. Riolanus and
Spigelius observe, that the Roots of the Fore-teeth and Dog-teeth, are
frequently observed to be crooked, and that such Teeth cannot be drawn without
pulling away some Part of the Case.

XVIII. Others are obtuse and large The Grinders.
as the Grinders, called Mollares and Molitores, which grind the Meat like
Grindstones. The Germans (and the English too) call them the Cheekteeth. The
number of which is not in all People the same; generally ten in each Jaw; five
of a side; to which if you add the Wisdom-teeth, their Number will be
increased. The two foremost that stand next to the Dogteeth, are less than the
rest, and prominent with two little Excrescences, the three hindermost are
bigger, and unequal with four Extuberances being broad at the upper Part and
almost four square. They are fixed with two three or four Roots; for herein
Nature sports her self. The two that stand next the Dog-teeth are also
furnished for the most Part with two, behind with three or four, and above with
more then below.

XIX. Concerning the use of the Their use.
Teeth we have already spoken. But their use in Pronunciation is chiefly
performed by the Fore-teeth, which they that want have a defect in their
Speech, and pronounce but badly some Letters, as C. D. L. T. X. Z. Hence it is
that Pliny rightly observes that the two Fore-teeth govern the Voice and
Speech, by a certain concert receiving the struck of the Tongue; and according
to their structure and bigness, maim, sosten and dull the Pronunciation, so
that being lost, Men lose their Pronunciation. Galen, ascribes them a third
use, to distinguish Savours and assist the relish of the Tongue; but the Bony
Substance of the Teeth alone is altogether insensible, only by means of the
Periosteum and little Membrane that invests the inner Cavity; but whether the
Teeth relish Savours by that means is much to be questioned; because there is a
great difference between the sense of Feeling and Tasting. vid. lib. 3. cap.
14. and so the Teeth seem to be sensible of heat, cold, austerity, and other
tangible Qualities, but not to distinguish Savors.

CHAP. XI. Of the Spine and its Vertebres in General.
IN the Second Part of the Skeleton are to be considered, the Vertebres or the
Spine, the Bones Sacrum and of the Coccyx, the Ribs, the Sternon, the
Clavicles, the Scapularies, and the Nameless Bones.

This latter Structure of the Trunk, The Spine.
like a Pillar sustains the Bulk of the Body, and extending it self from the
Head to the Huckle Bone, composed of Vertebres or Spondils, the Os Sacrum and
Huckle-bone, fixed one upon another, and firmly fastened by Ligaments, is
vulgarly called the Spine, as being in the hinder Part furnished with Thorny or
prickly Extuberances. The Greeks call it the Sacred Pipe, because it is
hollowed like a Pipe, and contains and defends the Principle Part. It is also
called (...) from (...) to break, because it seems to be a Bone Pillar broken
into many Parts.

Now it behooved this support not to consist of one but of many Bones, to the
end the Body might bend every way. However in Old men it happens, that the
Moisture of the Gristles being dried up, and the intervening Ligaments being
hardened, that many Vertebres unite into one Bone. Of which I have an Example at
home in the Skeleton of a certain hunch-back'd Person in which seven Vertebres
are grown together in one. Which Coalition Pavius and other Anatomists have
observed.

II. Each Vertebre in grown People The Substance.
consists of one Bone, and their Substance is thicker and more spungy, and
where they are joynted, invested with a Gristle, for easiness of motion: in
their Processes their Substance is harder and more solid.

In Children every Vertebre consists of several Bones. Which Fallopius has
accurately observed. In these Vertebres, says he, I have observed one thing,
that they consist of three Bony Parts; of which one is the Body it self, the
other two from the sides of the hole of the Marrow. These are fastened with a
Gristle to the sides of the Body on the right and left side, and where the
Spine is, one to another, which afterward becoming Bony, expunges the
Ioyntures, this is true in all except the Second, and the two hinder Parts
which consist of four Parts, the Body, which constitute the sides, and a fourth
Tooth, which though called a Process by all Anatomists, is really an Appendix
resembling a Nut, which is so fastened at length, all the Gristles being turned
into a Bone, that it seems to be a Part of the Vertebre, and rather a Process
than an Appendix. Beside the First, the Second is also to be expected, as being
composed not of three but two lateral Bones, wherein are certain hollownesses
that comprehend the Head, which is bound together before with a Gristle, near
the Tooth of the Second Vertebre, and behind extended from the one to the other
Bone. For that the first Vertebre in the new born Birth is destitute of that
middle bony Body, granted to the rest of the Vertebres, and in the stead of it
has the said Gristle which afterward in ripe Age become bony. However that
substance which divides the several Vertebres into diverse little Bones, rather
seems to be a true Gristle then that it is so; but a bony Part which has not
yet acquired a Bony hardness.

III. The Vertebres above and below The Figure.
are flat, within unequal, behind unequal with many Processes.

IV. In the middle they are hollowed The Holes
with a great hole provided for the safe descent of the Spinal Marrow. At the
sides of this on each side lie two Cavities; of which the upper are less and
the lowermost bigger; which concurring between the two Vertebres set one upon
another, form those holes on both sides, through which the Nerves proceed from
the Marrow, which are so broad as the thickness of the Nerve passing through
requires. To the forming of these holes in the Neck both these Vertebres
equally contribute. But in the Back and chiefly in the Loins, all the holes are
bored in the lower Part of every Vertebre. Besides innumerable little holes
conveighing the small Arteries carrying the Nutritive Blood to the inner
Substance of the Bone.

V. It has seven Processes. Two The Proceses.
upper ascending and as many lower descending; Two transverse, and one Postic,
which is the biggest of all, and which all the Vertebres have, except the
uppermost which is next to the Neck.

In new born Infants, the ascending and descending Processes have not yet
attained a Bony hardness, but are small, soft, and almost altogether wanting at
that time. And hence a certain Division or Cleft appears between every two
Vertebres, filled with a Gristle that conglutinates the two Gristles.

The Vertebres are knit together behind Connexio^.
by Gynglism; before, by harmony, and without side by the hard Membrane;
withinside by a hard and strong Membranous Ligament, extending it self from the
upper Vertebre of the Neck to the Os Sacrum; which many think to arise from the
Gristles of the Vertebres. Moreover they are conglutinated together with an
interceding Gristle.

The Spine being framed by the structure of these Vertebres, has a Figure
commodious for the Internal Parts and their Functions, and therefore it has a
streightness, that sometimes bends somewhat backward, sometimes bows forward.
From the first Vertebre of the Neck to the seventh it bows forward; for the
more commodious support of the Gullet and Asperia Arteria. From the first of
the Back to the twel^th it protuberates backward to render the Domicils of the
Heart and Lungs more capacious. The Loins bend inward, the better to support
the Trunk of the descending Aorta and hollow Vein. The Os Sacrum protuberates
outward to make the Hypogastrion more roomy, which is necessary for the
Distention of the Bladder, but more especially of the Womb.

CHAP. XII. Of the Vertebres in Specie, of the Os Sacrum and the Cuckowbell or
Huckle Bone.
THE Vertebres, by the Greeks are called Spondyls, by reason of their continual
Motion in bending the Body.

The Vertebres of the whole Spine are Number.
numbered twenty four, seven of the Neck, twelve of the Back, and five of the
Loins, which are placed upon the Os Sacrum as a Basis, with its Appendix the
Coccyx-bone.

The Vertebres of the Neck differ The Vertebres of the Neck.
one from another, and the rest of the Spine Vertebres, and their transverse
Processes are perforated, for the more commodious Passage of the Arteries and
cervical Veins and they are seated in the Extremities, at the Exit of the soft
Nerve. But the hinder Spines are bipartited for the more firm connection of the
Muscles and Ligaments.

Their Substance is harder, thinner and less porous then that of the rest of
the Vertebres; within side also they are less gibbous and less in bulk then the
rest. The two uppermost are fastened to the Head with strong Ligaments.

III. The first is called Atlas, Atlas.
bearing up the head like a little World, and strongly fastened to it. It is
thinner and tougher then the rest, and wants the hinder Spine, instead of which
there appears a Protuberant Semicircular Inequality. It has two Apophyses
ascending upwards, with two lateral somewhat descending and perforated. On the
fore-side it shows a Protuberancy very solid and hard, from the sides of which
two upper and as many oblique Eminencies bunch forth. More inward at the
fore-side of the great Hole, there is a Semicircular Cavity covered with a
Gristle, wherein it receives the Tooth of the following Vertebre.

IV. The Second, called (...) from Dentata.
Turning, sends upward from the middle of it a hard and round Process, long
like a Tooth, about which the head is turned with the first Vertebre. Whence by
Hyppocrates the whole Vertebre is called Dens, by others the Toothed Vertebre,
by us the Axle. This toothed Process is tied with a particular Ligament, and
fastened to the hinder Part of the Head.

Note that this Tooth in new born Infants is not firmly united, but seems* to
be separated from the rest of the Bone, and placed upon it. But is afterward
so united to it, as if it had never been parted from it; so that in grown
People it seems rather to resemble a Process than an Appendix.

On both sides the Tooth there is a small, smooth, flat place, under which lies
the lateral Apophysis perforated.

In the fore Part a broad descending Apophysis is received by the Cavity of the
Inferior Vertebre. At the hinder Part on both sides descends an Apophysis,
which the third Vertebre receives.

The hindermost Spine descending is bipartited.

The Third is by the Greeks erroneously called (...), being a Name more proper
for the second Vertebre, whose Tooth resembles an Axle both for its use and
form. This on each side from the sides backward sends a hollow Apophysis
upward, where it receives the descending Apophysis of the second Vertebre,
under this descends another, and to that another small one ascending upward
adheres, thrusting it self into the Cavity of the second Vertebre.

Below it has a Cavity, whereinto it admits the following Vertebre; and the
Spine growing forked is divided into two Extremities.

The Fourth is like the third, but wants a peculiar Name.

The Fifth differs little from the two former.

The Sixth somewhat bigger in Bulk, differs very little from the former, only
that it has two upper Apophy more ascending, and a larger Spine.

The Seventh which is the biggest of all, and its Spine longer and thicker, but
not divided, is obtuse with a round Head. The lateral Apophysis of this wants
the Eminency extended inward, with which the fourth, fifth and sixth are
provided.

Besides these Seven, Spigelius avouches, that there is sometimes, though
seldom an eight allowed, especially in those that have long Necks; but then
they have one Vertebre wanting in the breast, which for that reason is shorter.

V. The Vertebres of the Back are The Vertebres of the Back.
reckoned to be twelve; rarely one over or one under. These surpass the
Vertebres of the Neck in bigness and thickness, but are less solid, and
perforated with many holes for the passage of the Muscles; they are like one to
another, and provided with solid and continuous Apophyses.

The Bodies of these are Orbicular, Their figure.
slightly hollowed within side and behind, to the end the Ligaments may be more
strongly knit, least the Vertebres should slip out of their places.

The nine uppermost are almost equal Greatness.
in bigness, which decreases by degrees in the four lowermost. In like manner
the Spines of the nine uppermost are large, pointed at the upper part; below
somewhat broad; and the upper obliquely descend above the lower. But in the
three lowermost the Spines are straight, and carried outward, and become more
obtuse: the lowermost being hollowed at the end with a slight superficial
Furrow.

These Vertebres of the Back at this day are distinguished by no peculiar
Names; though Antiquity had several Apellations for them.

They are distinguished from the Vertebres of the Neck, for that the Dorsal
Spines are almost thick, long, solid and single, nor divided at the ends, as
are most of the Vertebres of the Neck: as also for that they have a Cavity on
each side, into which the Head of the Ribs is joynted; which the Vertebres of
the Neck want, though they have their tranverse perforated Processes which the
Dorsals have not. The Vertebres of the Loins also are destitute of those
hollownesses. Besides those Cavities in the Vertebres of the Back, there are
two other Cavities in the transverse Processes, not deep but superficial,
appointed to strengthen the Articulations of the Ribs, which nevertheless are
hardly conspicuous in the eleventh and twelth Vertebre.

VIII. The Dorsal Vertebres are Processes.
provided with seven Processes; four oblique, two lateral or transverse, and
one pointed, which is called the Spine. Of the oblique, two ascend and as many
descend. They thrust themselves into the descending Processes of the upper
Vertebres. These jet not forth very much, and are received by the small Heads
of the ascending Processes of the inferior Vertebres. The transverse Processes
of the three inferior Vertebres, the tenth, eleventh and twelfth grow lesser
by degrees, and the Processes of the eleventh and twelfth are somewhat forked.

Riolanus writes, that the eleventh and twelfth Vertebres differ from the rest
in the joynting, and are knit to the first Vertebres by Arthrody, whereas the
rest are articulated by Gynglism, which is a manifest Error; seeing that these
are no less connexed by Gynglismus then the rest, though the Articulation of
these be broader then that of the others, because that the Motion of the Spine
in bending Extention and Obliquation is first to be performed in that place. In
these Vertebres of the Back, we are to take notice of certain Cavities invested
with a Gristle which are wanting in the rest; two in the transverse Processes,
which the eleventh and twelfth however want; and two in the Body it self, to
receive the Processes of the Ribbs.

IX. The Vertebres of the Loins are The Vertebres of the Loy^s.
five; seldom more or less. Fallopius writes, that he has many times observed
that the number of the Vertebres of the Loins varies according to the number of
the Vertebres of the Back. So that if there be eleven Vertebres of the Back,
there are six of the Loins; if thirteen in the Back, then only four in the
Loins; if twelve, which is usual, then no more then these five. But that this
is no constant Rule appears by a Skeleton in the Custody of Dr. Pelt in
Utrecht, wherein there are twelve Vertebres of the Back, and six of the Loins
of a considerable bigness. These Vertebres surpass in thickness and bigness all
the rest; and are provided with many little holes for the ingress and exit of
small Arteries and Veins, and they are joynted together with an intervening
glutinous Gristle, yet so that the conjunction of these is looser then of those
of the Breast, for the more easy bending the Body. They have hinder Processes
shorter and less pointed but broader and thicker then those of the Breast, and
ascending somewhat upwards; but the lateral Processes are somewhat longer. In
the mean time they differ somewhat in joynting from the Vertebres of the
Breast; for that these are carried upwards with ascending Processes into the
Cavities of the upper Vertebres; those are joynted with lower Processes at the
side somewhat lower into the Processes of the next Vertebre. But the twelfth
Vertebre is not joynted into the upper Processes, as the other Vertebres of the
Breast; but into the lower, as the Vertebres of the Loins.

X. Certain Hebrew Writers have The Bone Lus.
feigned a certain Bone between the last Vertebre of the Loins and the Os
Sacrum, which they call Lus, of which they scribble Wonders; which Bauhinus has
Epitomized in these Words. The Hebrew Writers, says he, Assert, that there is
in the Body of Man below the Eight Rib a certain Bone, which cannot be
corrupted or annihilated either by Water, Fire, or any other Element, nor can
it be broken by any external force; which Bone God will at the last Judgment
water with Celestial dew, and then the rest of the Members shall unite together
into one Body, which being inspired with the Breath of. God, shall be again
enlivened. This Bone they call Lus, not Luz; which they say is seated in the
Spine of the Back, behind the eight Vertebre at the Bone of the Thigh. The
Author of this Fable is Rabi Uskaija, who lived in the Year of our Lord 210.
who wrote a Book entitled Be Reschite Rabba, being a Comment upon the
Pentateuch. But these are all Fictions and Fables, though Agrippa seems to
favor them in his Occult Philosophy.

XI. The Os Sacrum, remarkable The Os Sacrum.
for its thickness and strength, stands immovable under the Vertebres, and
like a Basis supports the structure of the Vertebres imposed upon it.

Within-side it is smooth and hollow, without-side unequal and hollow, of a
Triangular figure. Upon each side, at the upper Part, it has a plany place
rough and unequal, where it is fastened to the Illion Bones by means of a
Gristle.

It consists of five or six Bones, resembling the Vertebres, which being broad
at the beginning, grow narrow by degrees; and though in Infants and Children
they may be easily separated, in men grown they unite into one Bone. Fallopius
observes in Children new Born, that the Parts of this Bone consists of three
Particles, like the rest of the Vertebres, which are afterward so united, that
there is no more Division to be seen.

It is perforated with holes, not lateral, as the Vertebres, but transverse,
seated at the Exit of the Nerves forward and backward on both sides, to the
Conjunctions of the Parts, of which this Bone consists, which within are much
larger and bigger then without. It has small Processes, and Spines for the most
Part looking upwards, so that the lowermost hardly appears.

XII. The Bone of the Coccyx, so The Coccyx Bones.
called, because it resembles the Cuckows-bill, consists of three or four
little Bones, from a larger Base tending donward in a point by degrees, and
bending within for the convenience of sitting.

Fallopius observes that this consists of three Bones, whereas the Os Sacrum
consists of six; but when the Sacrum consists but of five, then the Coccyx
consists but of four.

In Children it is altogether Gristly, till the seventh year: afterward it
begins to be consolidated into a Spungy substance, and of four Particles to be
united into one Bone.

This Coccyx adheres to the Os Sacrum like an Appendix, and is joined to it
with a loose Connection by means of a glutinous Gristle; that it may be able to
give way in the delivery and the exoneration of thick and hard Excrements, and
to prevent its being injured by any violent Concussion. Spigelius and Riolanus
believe, that if the said knot happen to be over loose, it causes a falling of
the Fundament in Children; of which nevertheless there may be a more usual and
manifest reason given.

The use of it is to support the straight Gut, and the Sheath of the Womb in
Women, which is fastened to that Intestine.

A Pendulous Gristle grows to the Joint of it.

This Coccyx Bone, it being bent outward in length it grows dry, becomes a
Tail, as we saw it in the Year 1638. in an Infant new born half an Ell long,
like the Tail of an Ape; which was occasioned by the Mothers being frighted by
an Ape with a Tail, after she had gone but three Months. Thus Pliny tells us of
some men that have woolly Tayls in some Parts of India. And Paulus Venetus,
that in the Kingdom of Lambri, there are a sort of Savage People, with Tayls
like Dogs above a handful long. These Testimonies Harvey very much confirms by
the following Story. A Chyrurgion says he, a very honest Man my Friend,
returning from the East Indies, told me that in the Island of Bornea in the
Mountanous Parts remote from the Sea, there are a sort of Men with Tayls, of
which number he saw a Virgin that was taken with great difficulty, with a
fleshy thick Tail about a Span long, which she clapped between her Buttocks, and
covered therewith her Podex and Privities.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Ribs.
TO the Spine above, adhere the Ribs, the Os Sternon, the Clavicles and
Scapula's; below the nameless Bones.

I. The Ribs, that fortify the The Ribs.
Breast, are by the Greeks called Pleura.

II. These are reckoned to be twelve Their Number.
on each side, seldom more or less. Galen writes, that a thirteenth is very
rarely to be found, and more unusually eleven; which Number, Columbus once
observed. Also in the year 1641. we observed eleven in a certain French
Soldier that was slain with a Sword. Riolanus avouches that he has seen
sometimes eleven, sometimes thirteen of a side. Bartholine, eleven on the one
side, and twelve on the other. Fallopius has seen thirteen of a side, which
Picolhomini saw twice; once Bauhinus, and once Frederic de Ruysch. I have a
Skeleton by me, which wants the twelfth Rib almost, on both sides, I say
almost, for that it is so small, that it hardly exceeds a Thumbs breadth.

III. For their greater Strength, the Their Substance.
Ribs for the most part, where they are carried along the Back and Sides, are
bony, and within spungy; which is the reason that broken, they are more easily
consolidated by means of a Callus, then any other Bones. But in the foremost
and least part, where they proceed toward the Sternon, they are gristly, for
the more easy Motion of the Breast. These foremost gristly Productions in
Women, sometimes are harder, and as it were grow into Bones, perhaps the better
to sustain the Weight of the Breasts, for in Men there is no such thing.

In new born Infants, the Extremities, by means of which, they are joined with
the Vertebres, are gristly, but in a short time harden into Solidities and bony
Firmness.

IV. They are bent like a Bow, to Figure.
give the Breast more room; which Arching of the Ribs is more in these above
than below.

Their outward Superficies is somewhat unequal, especially about the Vertebres,
where the Ligaments are fastened but the inner Superficies where the Membranes
adhere to the Pelura is more smooth.

V. As to their Length and Breadth, Greatness.
there is great Variety. The middlemost are longer and broader, except the
first, which is broadest of all. Moreover they are sometimes broader in one Man
of the same Age than in another, though both of an equal Tallness. I my self
have two Skeletons, the one of a Man that was very tall, because he had narrow
and straight Ribs. The other of a Person of low Stature, whose Ribs are broad,
thick and very firm.

At their first Rise they are all narrow, and somewhat round, and the nearer
they approach to the Breast, the broader they are. They are thicker above than
below, but in the lower Part flat.

In the lower inner Part there is something of a Cavity, wherein they receive a
Nerve, an Artery, and an Intercostal Vein.

VI. This Cavity is considerable in Cutting for an Empy^ma.
the Incision of Empyics, for special care must be taken, least the said
Intercostal Vessels be injured, which as Bartholin directs, may be avoided if
the Incision, which is usually performed between the fifth and sixth, or
between the sixth and seventh Rib, be made from the top to the bottom. Thus
also Otto Heurnius taught us, who for that Incision required a Knife with a
keen Edge, but a flat Back; which he would have so held in operation, that the
Back should be toward the lower Part of the upper Rib, that is, the foresaid
Cavity, but the Edge-work downward toward the top of the lower Rib. But
experience tells us, that all this is one Imaginary Theory. For the Ribs in a
living Man, are not so sar distant, that a Knife can well be thrust in from the
lower part of the upper, to the top of the lower Rib. And therefore to avoid
injuring those Vessels, I order the Chyrurgions to make the Incision in the
upper part of the sixth or seventh Rib, at the full length of it, not ascending
to the Rib next above it. Some will say that this is the way to cut the Fibers
of the Intercostal Muscles athwart, as if they could escape by the first
Incision. The Fibers of those Muscles are all oblique, and the inner thwart the
outermost like a St. Andrews Cross. So that which way soever the Incision be
made, there is no way to avoid the hurting of the Fibers; neither is it much to
be feared, for that the Wound in this Case is not great, and as Experience
teaches us, easily consolidated again.

VII. The Ribs are joined behind Articulation.
into the Vertebres, by the means of some intervening Gristle, and are fastened
to them with strong Ligaments, of which, some proceed to the Sternon Bone,
others not.

VIII. The former are called true The true Ribs.
Ribs, of which, the gristly Productions are immediately fastened to the
Sternon, and are seven Superior, of which, the two first are called Retorted,
the two next solid, and three lower called Pectorals.

IX. The hinder and lowermost are The Spurious Ribs.
called the Spurious Ribs, of which, the first four, with their Cartilages
winding backward, and mutually cohering together, are fastened below to the
seventh Gristle of the true Ribs. But the last, which is the least, sometimes
grows to the Diaphragma, sometimes to the right Muscle of the Abdomen; in which
Connection, it sometimes associates with it the last Rib, save one.

X. The Use of the Ribs are, Their Use.


1. To keep the Breast dilated, and the upper Part of the lower Belly; least in
the one, the Heart, together with the Lungs; in the other, Liver, Spleen and
Ventricle should be oppressed by the Weight of the Incumbent Parts. 2. To
defend both them and other Parts therein contained from external Injuries. 3.
To support the Respiratory Muscles, and assist their Motions; for which reason,
the Breast ought not to consist of one Bone, as which would then have been
immovable; nor could the Act of Respiration have been conveniently performed,
which is the reason that the Ribs very rarely grow together, which Pausanias
reports of Protophanes the Magnesian, in whose Carcass all the true Ribs were
found connexed. This Protophanes was a famous Wrestler in the Olympic Games.
Now because a good Wind is necessary in Wrestling, which could not be by reason
of that Connection of the Ribs; it is very probable, that when he grew old, his
Ribs stuck together, after he had left off Wrestling. As many times some
Vertebres of the Back, Bones of the Skull, and other Bones become continuous
when Men grow aged.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Bone of the Breast and Sternon.
THE Bone of the Breast, in Greek (...), in Latin Sternum, is placed before the
Forepart of the Breast, like a Bulwark, to which the gristly Productions of
the true Ribs are fastened.

I. The Substance of it is spungy The Substance.
and less white than the rest of the Bones, which in Infants seems to be
altogether gristly, except the upper Part, which is sometimes more bony.
Perhaps because the Articulation of the Clavicle is there to be fastened.

II. In new born Infants, it seems Its Parts.
to be compacted of seven or eight Bones, joined together with a Gristle; to
the lowest of which, the Sword resembling-Gristle, the single Pairs of the true
Ribs are knit. But these after the Age of eight or ten years, unite together
into fewer Bones by Synchondrosis. So that in People grown up, only three are
to be found, rarely four, distinguished with transverse Lines; and these also
when Men grow into years, become one solid Bone. Riolanus saw at Rome this Bone
in a Girl of seven years old, consisting of eleven Bones; and the Sternon was
divided into six Bones; but the five lower Bones appeared every one divided
into two Bones, from the bottom to the top, all the length of the Bone. This
Scissure in the middle of all the Bones, except the uppermost and lowermost, is
frequently to be observed, as Eustachius, Bauhinus, and Bartholine avouch.

The upper Bone, surpassing the rest in largeness and thickness, resembles the
Pummel of the Handle of a Sword, having in the upper and middle Part, a Furrow
like a Half Moon, called the little Fork or Iugulum. At the Side of which, on
each side, stands another little Hollowness, to receive the Extremities of the
Clavicles, and to be fastened by a Gristle. In the inner Part there is another
Cavity, giving free Passage to the descending Trachea.

The second, or middle Bone, annexed to the first by means of a Gristle, is
narrower, but very long, and has five or six Cavities on both sides, at unequal
distances one from another, and receiving the Gristles of the Ribs.

III. The third Bone, which is lowest The Cartilagious Mucronata.
and least, ends in a Gristle, which resembling the Point of a Sword, is called
Cartilago Mucronata, by the Greeks, the Sword-resembling, and vulgarly the
Bucklar-like.

This Gristle is oblong and triangular, equal in the breadth of the Thumb in
length, and is seldom found double, but most commonly single; sometimes forked,
for the Convenience of the Vessels passing through; sometimes round and thin,
being perforated, it affords a free Passage to an Artery and a Vein. But if
both the Biforcation and the Hole be wanting, then the Sternon is perforated in
the middle, which is chiefly observed in Women, according to Riolalanus, who
found in a Hole in a certain Woman, so broad in the inner Part of the Sternon,
as to admit his little Finger. But the Breast of that Woman was fortified with
thirteen Ribs of a Side. Thus Eustachius and Sylvius observe, that the Sternon
is sometimes pervious in the middle, with a broad Hole for the Passage of the
Vessels. Massa ascribes to himself the Discovery of this Hole.

Frequently this Gristle is bowed back, sometimes outward, sometimes inward,
not without great prejudice to the Stomach and neighboring Parts, which causes
the Hickopping, and an Acrophy, the Source of several Diseases. Sometimes in
old Men it turns to a Bone, which Pavius observed in one that had been long
troubled with a Shortness of Breath. But it most rarely happens what Veslingius
observes, that this Muscle in a certain Person extended it self a whole Fingers
length to the Navel, and became stiff, to the great Inconvenience of the Body
in bending, and Prejudice to the Concoction of the Stomach, and Distribution of
the Chylus.

Folius takes notice of two small Muscles placed at the side, and moving this
Gristle outward and inward; which I could never as yet find out.

IV. Without side, in the Region of The Scrobicle Cordis.
this Gristle, here is a Cavity to be seen, which the Greeks call (...), the
Latins the little Scrobicle, or Hole of the Heart, because that the Heart
adjoyns to it within side, with its Bone included in the Pericardium, and
annexed to the nervous Center of the Diaphragma.

Riolanus sometimes found in fat Women with great Breasts, the Bone of the
Sternon acuminated by the weight of the Breasts; which has straightened the
Breast, and caused a Difficulty of Breathing in the Persons themselves.

CHAP. XV. Of the Clavicles and Scapulas.
THE Clavicles and Scapula's some refer to the Shoulder and Hand, because the
Arm is joynted to them; for which Articulation they seem to have been chiefly
framed; whereas they afford no remarkable use to the Breast. But others, by
reason of their situation, with more reason, number them among the Bones of the
Breast, which method we shall follow.

I. The Clavicles, so called, because The Clavicles.
that like a Lock, they fasten the Scapula to the Sternon, by the Greeks are
called (...), because they lock up the Breast. Celsus calls them Iugula, or
little Yoaks, as resembling the Yoaks of Oxen; and others call them Ligulae, or
little Tongues.

II. These are two Bones, of which, Number.
one of each side hangs athwart over the upper Part of the Breast, between the
Joint of the Shoulder, and the Top of the Sternon Bone.

III. Their Substance is thick and Substance.
Spungy, easily broken by the violent Shogs of external Bodies; but by reason
of its Laxity, the Callus soon unites it together again.

IV. The Shape of it is long, and Figure.
something like a great S; but more wreathed in Men than in Women, for the
stronger Motion of the Arm.

V. With one of their Extremities Connection.
which is round, they adhere to the top of the Sternon Bone; with the other
which is flatter, they are knit to the Process of the Scapula, where they
produce the top of the Shoulder.

Each extremity is covered with a Muscle, and by means of that unctuous
Gristle, they are both joined after a loose manner with strong Ligaments by
Diarthrosis.

They have both a Protuberancy, and two Superficial Cavities, from whence the
Subclavial Muscle, and part of the Pectoral Muscle derive their Original. And
on both sides near the ends they grow rough, that the Ligaments thence
proceeding may more firmly take hold of them. The moveable Gristle, called
Clausura, there conspicuous, does not grow to them, but is held fast with
Ligaments embracing the Joint, the more easily to yield to the Motions of the
Scapula and Arm.

VI. The Clavicles seem to be found The Use.
to render certain Motions of the Arm more strong and easy; which is the
reason that most brute Beasts are destiture of them. But they are to be found
in Apes, Squerrels, etc. that make use of their Fore-feet as of Hands.

VII. The Scapula, by the Greeks Homoplate, The Scapula.
of each side one, lies upon the Dorsal Ribs like a Target, and is a broad thin
Bone, in some measure triangular, somewhat hollow within, gibbous without,
designed not so much for the safety of the hinder Part of the Breast, as for
the secure Articulation of the Shoulder with the Clavicle, and the Insertion of
the Muscles.

It is seated between the first and fifth Vertebre of the Breast, seldom
reaches to the sixth.

Part of it being extended all the length of the Back, is called the Basis; of
which, there are two Extremities called the Angles, one above, the other below.

The Basis is called the sides of the Ribs, of which, the uppermost is the
shorter and thinner, the lowermost the longer and thicker. The whole breadth of
the Scapula is called the Table; of which, the External Part is Gibbous, the
Internal Concave, to receive the Muscle that dives into it.

VIII. Three Processes belonging to The Processes.
the Scapula.

The first, extended through the middle of its Body, and reaching the top of
the Shoulder, by reason it something resembles a Thorn, called the Spine of the
Scapula, and the Crest; the Extremity of which being connexed with the Scapula,
by the Modern Anatomists is called Acromion, or the Point of the Shoulder. I
say, the Moderns, for that the Ancients seem to differ something in the
Description of the Acromion. For Rufus Ephesius says, that the Acromion is the
coupling it self of the Iugular and Scapula-bone. Eudemus says, that it is a
small little Bone, which in Children is altogether gristly, and though this
Gristle hardens in time into a Bone, yet till the eighteenth year, contrary to
the Custom of other Bones, it retains much of its Gristly Substance, and
sometimes grows so slightly together with the Spine of the Scapula, that in the
middle Age it may be easily separated, as Galen reports, happened to himself,
and that he was a Witness of in another Person. Hippocrates also takes notice
of this Bone, and of its Luxation, in which place he adds, that in the Acromion
there is something in Man which is different from other Creatures.

From both Parts of the said Spine, a little Furrow extends it self, by
Riolanus called the Interscapuli^m, the one above, the other below.

The second is lower, less and sharp, not unlike a Crows-bill, and hence called
Coracoides; by others from its Form Sigmoides; keeps the Bone of the Shoulder
in its Place, and prevents it from sliping toward the Fore-Parts. For the
Actions of the Hand tending all toward the Fore-parts, the Shoulder would soon
be dislocated, unless the Bone were retained by the Coracoides; which
contributes so much security to this Joint, that there rarely happens any
Dislocation in the Forepart of the Shoulder; which Hippocrates observed once,
and Galen testifies, that he saw four times at Rome, and which I saw some years
in an old Man, that put his Shoulder out of joint by a fall, which I set again.

The third is the shortest of all, called (...) or the Neck within its own
Cavity, strengthened with a Muscle, receives the Extremity of the Shulderbone,
being enlarged with a thick gristly Brim, encompassing the Lips. This in new
born Infants consists of a more obtuse and shorter, but gristly Bone, which
grows longer, as the Child grows in years. To these there are some proper
Additions, as well as some peculiar Ligaments, with which the Scapula is
fastened to the Clavicle and Shoulder Bone.

According to the large or lesser Bulk of the Scapulas, the Shoulders are
either broader or narrower. Broadshouldered Men are thought to beget more lusty
Children. The narrowshouldered, more weakly. The uncertainty of which Opinion,
daily Experience teaches us. Therefore, says Peter Forestus, This is an
Observation among the Women, that broad-shoulder'd Men beget a great many
Children. And therefore my Sister-in-law, who had twenty Children by her
Husband, would never marry her Daughters to broad-shoulder'd Men.

Riolanus reports, that the French Virgins have generally the right Omoplate
higher than the Left; for which he says it is a hard thing to give a Reason. In
our Low Countries, I observe, that they who in their Childhood and Youth most
violently exercise their Right-arm, their Right-Scapula stands more out from
the Ribs than the Left.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Nameless Bones.
TO the Spine, at the lower Part, adhere the Anonymous or Nameless Bone; of
which, one of each side is knit to the sides of the Os Sacrum by the means of a
Gristle with a strong Ligament. They are called Nameless, because they alone
want a Name, whereas all the rest have Names given them.

I. Each of these are constituted of Their Construction.
three Bones; the Ilion, the Hip-bone and Share-bone, firmly knit together with
Gristles; which in Infants may be parted with a thin Knife, and the bounds of
those Divisions remain conspicuous till seven years of Age; afterward the
Gristle drying up, they unite into one Bone; which being joined on both sides
with the Os Sacrum, makes the Basin, or that Cavity, wherein the Womb, Bladder
and part of the Intestines is contained.

II. The Ileon-bone, so called from the The Os Ile^on.
Intestine next to it, is the upper and broadest Part of the Nameless Bone. It
has a remarkable Spaciousness, and somewhat concave, taking its Name from the
Rib. It is semicircular, but uneven, whose extreme Parts, before and behind,
are by some called Spines, Brows and Lips; but the outermost Part of the Bone
is called the Back. This Bone, besides the foregoing Gristle, is fastened with a
strong Ligament, membranous and common to the Os Sacrum.

III. The Hip-bone, or Ischium, is the The Os Coxendicis.
lower and outer Part of the Namelessbone, thick and firm. In this there is a
large, profound and smooth Cavity covered with a Gristle, called the Acetabulum
and Pyxis, into which the Globous Extremity of the Thigh Bone is fixed, out of
which if it happen to slip, it causes a Dislocation; which Nature willing to
avoid, has sasten'd these Bones with a double Ligament proceeding from the Os
Sacrum. The Gristly Process of this Cavity, enlarging the Acetabulum, is called
the Eyebrow, which is bigger behind than before; to the end that when we sit,
the Thigh may be the more commodiously bent into an acute Angle. But it fails
where the Cavity looks toward the Share-bone, by reason of a Blood-bearing
Vessel passing that way, which brings Nourishment to the Joint. But in the
inner Cavity, there is a Hollowness somewhat rough and unequal, to which that
Ligament obstinately adheres, which binds the Head of the Thighbone to the
inner Part of the Acetabulum. Also two Protuberances are to be observed; one,
internal, from whence the second or Right Muscle extending the Leg derives its
beginning: The other External, which is sharp, and into which the Ligament is
inserted, which rises from the fifth Process of the Os Sacrum.

IV. The Share-bone, called Os Pubis The Os Pubis.
and Pectinis, is the foremost and thinner Part of the Nameless Bone, which is
pervious with a large Hole seated between the Hollowness of the Hip, and its
own Fore-parts; and by means of a Gristle, is firmly knit with its own Pare,
and hollowed above for the Descent of the Crural Vessels. This Hole affords a
Seat to two Muscles of the Thigh; withoutside to the External, withinside to
the Internal Obturator, or to the second and third circumvolving Muscles, which
are distinguished one from another by a strong Ligament, that stretches under
the Hole; which Connection aforesaid of the Share-bones between themselves, with
a Membranous Ligament, Veslingius affirms, and Riolanus denies.

Now as to these inferior Bones, there is a difference to be observed between
them in Men and Women.

1. The Os Sacrum, in Women is hollowed much more outward, to give more room
for the Birth in time of delivery, for which reason the Huckle Bone adheres to
it with a looser Connection then in Men. 2. The lower Parts of the Hip-Bones and
Share bones in Women are produced farther outward, and make the Basin larger.
3. The Ilium Bones are much larger and more hollowed, and their Spine more
advanced to the Sides in Women than in Men. 4. The Gristle that fastens the
Sharebones, to the end it may be the better distended, in Women is twice as
thick and twice as loose as it is in Men, especially if they have brought forth
Children; moreover the Line by which the Share-bones are joined, is shorter in
Women than in Men.
Here two Questions arise: The first, Whether the Share-bones are moved? The
second, How it is possible a mature and large Birth should come forth in
delivery through the narrow Passages of the Basin, every way beset and stuffed
with Muscles and other Parts?

V. As to the first Question, Spigelius, Whether the Sharebone parts?
Cajus and Riolanus maintain the Affirmative, who avouch these Bones to be
moved upwards and downwards by the help of the Muscles, which they say is
apparent in venereal Congress and Leaping. But they should have said that these
Bones are moved either of themselves, by the help of the Muscles inserted into
them, or by accident, as in some measure they follow the Motion of the
adjoining Parts. The first is false; seeing these Bones are immoveably joined
together by Symphysis, except only at the time of Delivery, at what time the
Gristles being moistened and loosned, they become somewhat moveable, and give
way a little one from the other. The latter is true, for upon the Motion of the
Thigh, Back and Loins, it is certain that these Bones move with the whole
Nameless Bone, but not separately by themselves.

VI. As to the second Question, if the How the Birth gets out of the Pelvis?
Birth be but small, it may pass through those narrow Passages without any
great Trouble, as daily Experience evinces. For at the time of Delivery, the
general Parts through the plentiful Afflux of Humors, become so loose, soft and
slippery, that they will admit the whole Hand of the Midwife or Chyrurgion. But
if the Birth be large, and that the Woman's Parts are naturally straight of
themselves, then the Delivery proves tedious and painful, and the Share-bones,
the Ligaments and Gristles being moistened will open somewhat wider; nay, the
Gristly Connection of the Os Sacrum, with the Bones of the Ilium, will be so
loosned, that they manifestly give way one to another; which Dehiscency of the
said Bones, the first that observed among the Ancients, were Hippocrates,
Avicen and Aetius; among the Moderns, Pineus, and several other eminent
Physicians. Alexander Benedictus writes, that if the Birth be large, those
Bones open of themselves, and the Pecten and the Os Sacrum consent to the
Expulsion; also that those Bones after Delivery, return by degrees to their
natural Place, and that the resistance of one or more of these is the cause of
difficult Labor, though the rest answer the whole. Fernelius, among the Causes
of difficult Labor, reckons the firm Compaction of the Share-bones. Gortheus
asserts, that the very Hips of Women in Travel are divided, which causes
violent Pains in the Loins and Hips. However, though these Bones are divided
and gape, yet they are not dislocated, for they would never recover their
Pristine Estate. But this confirmed Opinion of the Ancients and Moderns,
Columbus, Rodricus a Castro, Volcher, Fuchsius, C. Stephanus, Cordeus, but
chiefly Laurentius endeavors to refel, contrary to all the Documents of
Experience, the most certain Mistress and Instructress in all things. Pareus
professes, he thought the Bones of the Ilion and Share-bones could not possibly
be divided in Delivery; but he was convinced by the Dissection of a Woman
hanged fourteen Days after she was brought to Bed, in whom he found the Ilion
divided from the Os Sacrum, and the Share-bones distant half a Fingers breadth
from one another. Bauhinus produces two remarkable Observations concerning this
Matter. And Riolanus reports, that he has thirty times observed in Women that
have died in Childbed, that the Gristle which binds the Share-bone, has been
divided the breadth of the Little-finger, and that you might by handling feel
the Gaping of the Share-bones, and that before Dissection, he has perceived the
Share-bones moveable by lifting up one Thigh; and observed that one advanced it
self above the other. Says Harvey, Upon my own Experience I assert, that the
Share-bones are often loosened in Labor, their Gristly Connection being softened,
and the whole Region of the Hypogastrion enlarged, to a Miracle; not from the
Effusion of any Watery Substance, but of their own accord, as the Baggs open to
shed the ripe Seeds in Plants. Spigelius asserts the same, upon the Experience
of several Dissections. And upon the Dissection of a Woman that died in
Childbed, I my self publicly showed the Share-bones so far divided one from
the other, that you might put your little Finger between them. Which is the
reason that Women in Labor frequently complain of sharp pains about their
Share-bone and the Os Sacrum, and that the said Gristles are thicker then
ordinary in Women that have often lain in; and that old Virgins in whom these
Gristles are dried if they happen to Marry and bear Children, have hard
Labors: Lastly, because that although the rest of the Gristles of the Body
grow dry, and in many Parts become Bony, yet in Women they never grow dry nor
harden into Bones. Riolanus writes, that this deduction of the Ilion, Os Sacrum
and Share-bone not only happens in difficult but also in the most easy
Labors; which however I believe is much to be questioned. For that I have
observed more then once, Women that have been suddenly brought to Bed of
little Children yet mature Births with little or no pain, either in their Beds
or sitting in their usual Chairs, and that without the help of a Midwife, in
whom I could not perceive the least Divulsion of the said Bones; which
otherwise by the Distension of the adjoining Membranes, must have caused great
Pains, nor is it probable, that these Bones can be parted asunder but by some
strong and violent Effect of a large Birth striving for Passage. For that same
Gristly Connection is too strongly knit to be easily distended.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Bones of the Arm, that is to say, of the Shoulder and Elbow.
THE Bones of the Hand belong either to the Shoulder, the Elbow, or the
External Part of the Hand.

I. The Shoulder Bone is one Bone The Shoulder Bone.
great, strong, round and uneven, in the hinder Part toward the Elbow somewhat
depressed, and flat.

The upper Part of the Bone has a great and Globous Head, fortified with a
Muscle, by means of which it is joynted with the Scapula by that sort of
Diarthrosis, which is call Arthrodie; but because the Cavity is not
conveniently proportionated to receive the Head; hence the Lips of it are
enlarged with a surrounding Gristle.

A little lower round about the Head are several manifest Holes, through which
the Blood-bearing Vessels penetrate inwardly for the Nourishment of the Marrow.
Riolanus writes, that there is a wide Hole in the Shoulderbone in all Men about
the middle and inner Part, penetrating the Substance of the Bone for the
Passage of the Vessels. But I do not find this Hole in any of my Skeletons; and
therefore I do not believe it to be in all, but only in some few.

The foresaid head of the Soulderbone is an Epiphysis or an Appendix, which in
Men grown b^omes a Part of the Bone, or else a Process of it.

This Shoulder Bone is fastened to the Scapula by the means of a thick and
nervous Ligament, which embraces the whole Joint. Moreover there are three
Muscles, the Spine above, the Spine below, and the Subscapulary, which with
their broad Tendons surround the Articulation: and under the Deltoides there is
a broad and remarkable Ligament which is extended from the Deltoides to the
Acromium, to prevent the Brain above from being dislocated into the upper Part.

At the head of the Shoulder Bone in the hinder Part stand two Protuberances
rough and unequal, to which very strong Ligaments are fastened: also two
Cavities, one Internal and orbiculated, the other at the side of the Head being
the Original of the Ligament: The other External and Oblong, distinguishing the
said Protuberances, and being the seat of the beginning of the two-headed
Muscle.

More below it is articulated with the Elbow by Ginglymus; which Articulation,
because it ought to be made with the harder Bones the Ulna and Radius; hence in
its Extremity which is covered with a Gristle, it has three Processes, the
upper indifferent, the second less, and the lowest, the largest of all; between
which there are two Cavities, so that together they resemble a little Wheel for
the twisting of Ropes; and about this Extremity of the Elbow the Bones are
rouled.

At the lowerside of the bigger Process, there is another large Process,
distinguished from it by an intervening Cavity, which in living People is
easily apprehended by External feeling, from whence the Muscles are produced.

Next to that Wheel-resembling Extremity, in the hinder seat, there is one
large and deep, in the foremost seat two larger Cavities appear, which receive
and curb the Bones of the Elbow, while they are moved forward and backward.

It has two little holes about the Heads, especially about the upper Head, to
give passage to the Vessels for the Nourishment of the Bone.

II. The Elbow is composed of two The Elbow.
Bones mutually resting one upon another, so that they are joined at the
Extremities, but in the middle are separated one from another, though coupled
with a Membranous Ligament. Partly for the more expeditious motion of the
Member, partly for a place of security for the manifold Muscles of the hand.

III. The first of these Bones, which The Ulna.
is the lower and longest is called Ulna; by the Greek Pechys; by the Ancients
Cubitus and Os Cubiti.

In the upper Part it is more large and thick; and toward the Hand by degrees
it is attenuated into an Edge; and to the end of it there grows a round
protuberance, with a lesser process somewhat sharp-pointed, which is called
Styloides, where it is knit by Arthrody with Ligaments, to the little Bones of
the Wrist, having a Gristle going between. Above it is joynted to the Bone of
the Shoulder by Glynglymus, and to that end it has two Processes; of which the
foremost, which is the less enters the inner Cavity of the Shoulder Bone; the
hindermost which is the bigger, longer and obtuse, enters the hinder Cavity of
the Shoulder bone, and is stopped therein, so that the Arm cannot be extended
beyond streightness, nor moved backward. Both these Processes in new born
Infants are Gristly, however the foremost soonest becomes Bony, the hindermost
not till seven years old. To these approach two Cavities covered with a Gristle
of which the lateral and lesser, receives the Head of the Radius, the other
which is the hindermost and larger, is roul'd about the Wheel of the Shoulder
like a Semicircle.

IV. The other Bone of the Elbow The Radius.
called the Radius. The upper Extremity of this is less, and being provided
with a round Head, is admitted by the Ulna at the side. But at the top it has a
round Cavity, which admits the head of the Shoulder, and is articulated with it
by Diarthrosis. The lower extremity which is the thicker, receives the Ulna, at
the side with a small Cavity fortified with a Gristle; and more below, with a
double Cavity covered likewise with a Gristle it admits the two first, and
uppermost little Bones of the Wrist.

V. These several Bones have all Their use.
their several uses. The Elbow, by the help of the Muscles causes bending and
extention; bending in an acute Angle, and extention only in straight Line,
which it does not exceed. The Radius turns the hollow of the Hand either upward
or downward.

VI. These Bones are knit one among Their Connection.
another with a different Articulation; for the Elbow at the upper Part where
it is broadest receives the Radius; and so they are bound together with a long
Ligament which separates the External from the Internal Muscles, and rises from
two acute Lines that mutually look one toward the other; the one being in the
inner side of the Elbow, the other in the inner Part of the Radius.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Bones of the lower Part of the Hand.
THE Hand is all that which depends upon the Elbow and the Radius, and is
distinguished into three Parts, the Carpus, Meta-carpus, and Fingers.

I. The Carpus, which is the upper The Carpus.
Part of the Hand consists of eight little Bones differing somewhat in bigness
and Figure, disposed in a double order; which in new born Infants not having
yet acquired a Bony hardness, seem to be Gristles; but afterward harden into
Bones somewhat Spungy, fastened together with a strong Ligament as well Spungy
as Gristly; as also with another common Ligament, appointed for the binding of
these Bones, and for the preservation and stretching of the Tendons of the
Muscles to the Fingers.

II. Of these little Bones the three The Articulation.
uppermost are fastened to the Elbow and Radius by Arthrody* The fourth out of
its order, stands outward next the Third; the other four placed more below, are
joined with so many Bones of the Meta-carpium by Synarthrosis.

They have two surfaces covered with a slippery Gristle. One outward which is
gibbous; whereunto they are admitted by the Cavities of the Neighboring Bones.
The other inward and hollow, into which they receive the Protuberances of the
adjoining Bones. Sometimes near the connection of the Eight Bone of the Wrist,
with the Bone of the Metacarpium, sustaining the Little-finger, there is found
a little Bone, which fills up the empty space in that Part. Which Vesalius
seems to number among the Sesamoides.

III. The Metacarpium consists of The Metacarps.
four long Bones, slender, hollow within, full of Marrow, parted in the middle
region for the more secure abode of the Inter-bony Muscles. The first of these
is annexed to the Forefinger, being the longest and thickest, the rest by
degrees become thin and shorter.

They have pretty broad upper Appendixes, the Cavities of which receive the
little Bones of the Wrist, and the lower which tack them to the Cavities of the
Fingers.

IV. The Phalanx of the Fingers, The Fingers.
the Thumb being numbered in, consists of fifteen Bones; for that three complete
every Finger, different in bigness of which the first and largest is covered
with the second, the second with the third, and the third with the Nail. It is
gibbous without, plain within, and somewhat hollowed, for the more commodious
comprehending the solid Bones.

They have Processes above and below.

The uppermost are round, and have one round hollowness, in each of the first
four Bones, receiving the Bone of the Meta-carpium. The rest are provided as it
were with a double Cavity distinguished with a small Protuberance.

The lower Processes put forth as it were a double head, distinguished by a
Cavity, with which they enter the double Cavity of the imposed Bone; except the
third and last Bone, which is only fenced with the Nail. All these Cavities and
Processes to facilitate motion are covered with a Gristle.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Bone of the Thigh and Leg.
THere are three Parts of the Foot, the Thigh, Leg and extreme Part of the Foot.

I. The Thigh called Femur, in Greek The Thigh.
(...), consists of one strong Bone, in length and bigness exceeding all the
rest of the Bones of the Body, round and somewhat gibbous before; behind
somewhat depressed and hollow, marked with a rough Line obliquely descending
toward the Knee.

II. The upper Part has a thick Process The Head of the Thigh.
prominent toward the Hip bone, with a round and large Epiphysis imposed upon
it, and so composes the gibbous head of the Thigh, underpropt with a strong
Neck, which being overcast with a Gristle is hid up in the Acetabulum of the
Hip, and there fastened with two strong Ligaments; one broad, thick and
Membranous which encompasses the whole Joint; the other round, which being
produced from the Cavity it self of the Acetabulum is inserted into the
received head of the Thigh, and fastens it most firmly to the Acetabulum; and
thus this Articulation is perfected by Enarthosis.

III. Concerning this Epiphysis, Rolfinch An Observation.
observes, that it adheres with a very loose connection to the Bone of the
Thigh; so that being boiled in Water it suddenly becomes soft, and is easily
separated from the Bone, especially in young Animals; for which reason it is in
Infants and Children easily separated from the Bone, upon any slight occasion;
as when Children are set to go too soon by their Nurses and then it is taken
for a Dislocation, and that Error prevents the Cure. This brings to my Memory
that once or twice I saw this Recess of this Epiphysis from the Thigh Bone,
which the Chyrurgions took for a Luxation, though the head could by no means be
perceived to be slipped out of the Acetabulum. Only the Thigh Bone was turned
back toward the hinder Parts, and the upper Part was perceived to ascend
without a head, and so one Thigh became shorter than the other. But no body
then thought of the Recess of the Epiphysis, which now I find was the cause.

Below the Neck, where the Bone begins to grow broader, two Processes are
produced, provided with their Epiphysis's, which are manifestly conspicuous in
Children, but afterward become Bony, and are united inseparably to the Leg,
without any seeming diversity of the Substance. One of these Processes, the
upper and bigger, bend upward toward the Exterior Parts: The other lower and
far less, having the figure of an obtuse Tubercle, looks backward toward the
inward Parts; which Riolanus believes to be rather an Apophysis, then an
Epiphysis. That is called the bigger Trochanter; this the lesser Trochanter: To
this lesser for the most part there joins toward the outer Parts, another
lesser Tubercle in a place somewhat lower. These Processes afford Insertion and
rise to several strong Muscles.

Below where the Thigh Bone grows thicker, by degrees with its Appendix, it
forms two large Heads, of which the outermost is thicker then the innermost:
These being overcast with a Muscle it enters the double Cavities under the Leg,
which are fortified likewise with a Muscle. Between those Heads it has another
Cavity, small before, large behind, through which remarkable Vessels are
carried to the Legs together with the fourth Nerve of the vast Pair. Between
these Cavities the Protuberancy of the Leg is admitted, and so that
Articulation is completed by Gynglymus, while they also receive these two
heads of the Leg.

Moreover there are two other little Cavities at the side of each Head, into
which the Tendons of several Muscles are inserted.

IV. More behind in the Ham, the The Sesamina Poplitis.
two Sesamoides Bones are placed to the lower Appendixes of the Thigh, which
grow to the Heads of the two first Muscles moving the foot; whereas otherwise
the rest of the Sesamines stick to the Tendons of the Muscles.

V. But because the Articulation of the The Patella.
Knee was not yet strong enough, but that through the motion of the Leg or by
any external violence the Bones might slip out of their place, therefore there
is a round and broad Bone placed upon the Joint, like a Circular Platter, by
the Latins called Molae, Patella, and by others Rotulae, of a Gristly
substance in Children, which afterward becomes Bony, and to facilitate its
motions is overcast within-side with a Gristle. This Bone adheres to the
Tendons of the Muscles, with a looser connection, it being requisite that it
should not be two straight tied, to prevent an easy Luxation, and yet not
hinder the Motion of the Muscles.

The necessity of this Office Galen observed in a certain Young Wrestler, whose
little Platter being dislocated, ascended toward his Thigh; whence happened a
dangerous bending in the Knee, so that he could not walk down a Hill without
the help of a Staff. The same thing I have also observed in my Practice upon
the like Accident. And though Paraeus asserts that he never saw any Man halt,
who had broken that Bone; yet I knew a Young German Nobleman, whose Platter was
shot away with a Musket Bullet, so that he could not so much as go. Yet a
Bone-setter here in Utrecht fitted a certain Iron Instrument to his Knee, which
bending the Thigh Bone in Conjunction with the Leg, in some measure supplied
the loss of the Kneepan, so that with the help of that Instrument he could walk
indifferently, but when that was off he could not move his Foot, nor stand a
moment.

VI. To the Thigh is annexed the The Leg.
Crus; being that Part which extends it self from the Knee to the Heel.

This is composed of two Bones very much differing in thickness and bigness,
cohering together above and below; but parted in the middle, by reason of the
Muscles of the Feet, yet connexed with a strong interceding Ligament.

VII. The first of these is by the The Tibia.
Greeks called (...), by the Latins Tibia; vulgarly Focile Majus; and is a
large and strong Bone, in some measure Triangular, in the Forepart at its full
length forming an acute Spine with the point of its foremost Angle; in which
Part it is also void of Flesh, only is covered with a Periosteum, a fleshy
Membrane, with a little Fat scarce visible, and the Skin. And this is the
reason that Contusions of the inside of the Skin, are painful in the Cure,
because of the wound in the Fleshy Pannicle and Periosteum, covered neither
with Flesh nor Fat to any considerable measure.

At each end it has a thick and remarkable Appendix.

The upper remarkable for its bigness, is divided behind with two heads; and at
the Top being hollowed with two long Cavities, fortified with a slippery
Gristle, receives the lower Heads of the Thigh; which said Cavities are
surrounded with a Gristle, thick, moveable and almost semicircular Limbus for
the strengthening of the Articulation.

Between these Cavities rises a little Hillock, as 'twere a Fence which is
received by the Cavity of the Thighbone, from the rough and hollow top of which
Hillock proceeds a strong Ligament, which is fastened to the hollowness of the
Thigh, and strengthens the Joint above all the other Ligaments

VIII. The lower Appendix is less The Mallectus internus.
then the other, Protuberating with a remarkable Process to the inner side of
the Foot, which is covered with no Flesh, and called the Internal Malleolus.

This is provided with two Cavities: one lateral and lesser, to which the Butto
joins; the other lower, but large distinguished with a slight Protuberancy into
two Cavities; and overcast with a Gristle, which receives the Heel-bone or
Talus that lies under, which receives the Shin-bone into its Cavity, and thus
Articulation is completed by Gynglimus.

IX. The other Bone of the Leg is The Fibula.
called Fibula, the Button, and is fastened outward to the Shin-bone, not
inferior to it in length, but much slenderer and weaker; hollowed all the
length of it with various Cavities for the Insertion of the Muscles, and rough
with many Prominent acute Lines.

It has two Heads, one above, the other beneath, to which the Appendix grows,
and they terminate in a Process acute and somewhat rough.

With the upper Part it does not rise so high as the Knee but stops below the
Appendix of the Shin-bone, and receives it into a slight hollowness.

More below the Button is received The Malleolus externus.
by the hollowness of the Shin-bone, and sends forth a Tuberous head with a
Process to the side of the Talus, conspicuous without, where it is called the
External Malleolus; and is lower then the Internal.

CHAP. XX. Of the Bones of the Extreme Foot.
THere are three Classes of the Bones of the Extreme Foot; the Bones of the
Tarsus, or Pedion, of the Meta-Tarsus, or Meta-Pedion, and of the Toes.

I. The Tarsus consists of seven The Tarsus.
Bones differing in shape and bigness.

II. First, the Astragalus or Talus, The Talus
which enters the lower hollowness of the Leg, with a Head somewhat unequal by
the Process of which constituting the inner Malleolus, it is comprehended
within, as by the Button without, and consists of six sides.

It looses its Prominency before, where it joins to the Bone of the Heel.

Moreover it has a large Cavity in the lower middle hollowness, to which a like
Cavity of the Heel is oppositely placed. In these little Cells an unctuous
slime is preserved, to moisten the Ligaments and Gristles.

III. The Second Bone is called The Calx.
Calx or Calcaneus, the biggest Bone of the Tarsus, oblong toward the hinder
Parts for the more firm fixing the Foot, and to keep a man from falling
backward.

To the hinder Part is fastened to a most strong Chord, made of the Tendons of
the three Muscles that extend the Feet. More upward it enters with a large and
flat Head into the hollowness of the Talus; and more forward admits the
Protuberances of the Talus into its own hollowness. At the inner side it has a
large hollowness through which the Tendons and large Vessels descend securely
to the lower Parts of the Foot. At the outer side it is uneven with little
swellings here and there, for the firmer Collection of the Ligaments and
Tendons.

IV. This is the Navicular Bone The Os Naviculare.
or Boat-resembling Bone, called (...). This behind receives the Talus into a
large hollowness; before with the flat Heads of three little Bones, it enters
the hollowness of the Talus, a thin Gristle going between these Conjunctions.

V. The fourth is called the Cuboides The Os Cuboides.
Bone, also Os Tessera, by the Greeks Polymorphus. This being bigger then the
rest of the lateral Bones, is placed before the Heel, and is joined to it with
an uneven superficies: on the other side it is joined to the third Wedg-like
Bone; but toward the Toes, it is fastened to the fourth and fifth Bone of the
Matatarsus.

The other three had no Names given them by the Ancients. However Fallopius
gives them the Names of Sphenoides, Calcoides, and Cuniform. The first of these
is bigger then the third; and the middlemost is the least.

Many times at the External side of the Articulation of the Wedg-form'd Bone
with the fifth Bone of the Meta-Pedion supporting the little Toe, a little Bone
is observed at the Insertion of the Tendon of the eighth Muscle of the Foot: as
also sometimes a bony Particle, joined to the Cube-fashioned Bone, somewhat
before, and filling up its Cavity, and adhereing to the Tendon of the seventh
Muscle of the Foot; which being both present at a time seem to strengthen the
Foot exceedingly. But Bauhinus reckons this among the Sesamoides Bones.

All those Bones of the Tarsus in new born Infants, are rather Gristly than
Bony: but in time require a solid Substance like a Pumice-stone, full of little
holes; which hardness some acquire sooner some later; and are joined together
and to the Neigbouring Bones, with strong Ligaments, and strengthened with
Gristles for their Connexions.

VI. The Metatarsus, called by the The Metatarsus.
Greeks Pedion, by Celsus and others Planta and Pecten, consists of five strong
fistulous Bones, differing in length and thickness, separated from each other
in the middle, to make room for the Interbone Muscles.

Above and below they protuberate forth with their Heads: Of which those that
are thicker and next the Pedium receive the four lower Bones of the Tarsus into
their hollownesses: the other, which are provided with round Protuberances, are
admitted into the hollownesses of the Toes.

VII. The Bones of the Toes are The Bones of the Toes.
numbered to be fourteen, among which the two Bones of the Great Toe excel the
rest in bigness. The rest of the Toes consist each of them of three Bones,
whose form and conexion agree with the Bones of the Hand, only that they are
less.

All these Bones of the Metatarsus and Toes, for the facilitating of their
Motion are overspread with a Gristle, about the Extremities where they are
joynted.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Sesamoides Bones and the Number of all the Bones.
THE Sesamoides Bones, resembling the Grains of Indian Wheat, are certain very
round small Bones, somewhat flat and spungy within.

They adhere at the Joints to the Their Situation.
Tendons of the Muscles that move the Fingers and Toes, and with them in the
boiling of dead Carcasses, and the Purgation and Denudation of the Bones are
utterly lost, unless great care be taken to preserve them.

In Infants they are Gristly, afterward by increase of years they grow bony,
and being overspread with a Gristle reaches to the seat of another Bone.

I. Their bigness varies, according Bigness.
to the difference of the Bones to which they stick. In the Hands they are
bigger then in the Feet; except in the great Toe, to which the biggest is
fastened at the head of the Metapedion Bone, which lies under the Tendon of the
Muscle moving the first Bone of the great Toe, having another much less joined
to it. But this biggest of all, which resembles the half part of a Pea, both
for shape and bigness, is by the Arabians called Albadaran. Of which the Jews
fain many Fables, as they do of the Bone Lus.

III. The Number of these Bones is Number.
not always the same; for sometimes twelve are found in each Hand and Foot;
sometimes fewer, sometimes more. Neither is it probable that their Number is
alike in all People; but rather that they are not all to be found, being so
very small, in all Carkases.

To these are to be added the Sesamoides lying hid in the Ham; of which this is
peculiarly to be observed, that they do not grow to the Tendons of the Muscles
as the other Sesamoides do, but to the Heads of the two first Muscles moving
the Feet.

IV. Now for the satisfaction of the The Number of all the Bones.
curious, as to the number of all the Bones as they are found in People of ripe
Years, they are reckoned to be Two Hundred Fifty Six.

Seven of the Skull; two Sieve-like Bones; eight of the Ears; eleven of the
upper Jaw; thirty two Teeth; in the whole Spine, twenty eight; Twenty four
Ribs; Three of the Sternon; Two Clavicles; two Omoplates; Three Hyoides Bones;
Two Nameless Bones; Six of the Shoulder and Elbow; Twenty four of the Hands;
Eight of the Thigh and Leg; Four little Bones in each Ham; Fifty two of the
Feet, and four great Sesamoides in each great Toe.

To which if you add the prefixed Number of the lesser Sesamoides twenty four
in the Hands and as many in the Feet; as also the little Bone in each Hand,
which is found at the connection of the Bone of the Wrist, with the Bone of the
Metacarp; and the little Bone in each Foot, at the side of the Cube-form'd
Bone; as also the two Spungy Bones of the Nostrils, the Number of all the Bones
will amount to Three Hundred and Ten. For I omit the subdivisions of the Bones,
which are rarely to be found in People of ripe years.

CHAP. XXII. Of the difference of the Bones of Men and Women.
THE Bones of both Sexes agree in most particulars; in some few things they
differ.

I. Generally the Bones of Women are The general difference.
less then those of Men, as well in their weight and thickness, as in their
length, breadth, solidity and hardness.

II. In the head the Sagittal Suture In the head.
more frequently extends to the top of the Nose in Women then in Men.

The Larynx is lesser in them, and the Thyroides Gristle Protuberares less.

III. The forepart of the Thorax in In the Breast.
Women is somewhat flat, not raised as in Men; for the more convenient seat of
the Breasts.

In Women that have large Breasts, the Thorax is often more narrow, and for the
most part accuminated by reason of the weight and bulk of the Breasts.

Women's Ribs are less broad, less hard, and less strong then in Men.

The Clavicles in Women are less Arched then in Men for the Beauty o^ the Neck
and Breast.

The Sternon Bone at the lower Part is also broader then in Men, and the lower
Bone which is somewhat split, together with the Sword resembling Gristle
fastened to it, forms a large hole for the egress of the outer Mammary Veins

VI. The Os Sacrum in Women is more bowed to the Exterior Parts, and shorter,
but broader then in Men.

The Huckle-bone is more moveable, and more loosly connexed, and sometimes
bowed more backwards.

The Ileon Bones are for the most Part larger, and more hollowed without-side,
for the Womb big with the Birth to rest upon; and this largness of these Bones
is the reason of the largness of the Woman's Buttocks.

Both Oval holes in the Sharebone are narrower, and a Part of the Share-bone
near the Simphysis is broader.

The Spine of the Share-bone near the Simphysis with the other of the same kind
is more produced in Women, and bends outward.

The Tuberosities of the Ischion stand at a farther distance one from another.
The Commissure of the Sharebone in Women, is filled with a Gristle three times
thicker and softer; and it is also made with a shorter Line, to the end that
the delivery approaching, the intervening Gristle being softened and loosened,
the Share-bones may the more easily open.

In the Joints the Structure of the Bones is alike in both Sexes.

Nevertheless these differences are not always to be found, nor in all People.
For sometimes effeminate or ill-shap'd Men have many Bones like those in Women;
and the Bones of a strong Virago differ very little from those of Men. However
this rarely happening does not overturn the general Rule.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Constitution of the Bones in Infants.
I. IN Infants all the Bones of the The Constitution of the Bones of the Head.
Skull are very thin and soft, so that a slight Compressure will make them give
way, nor are the two Tables with the Middlemost Diplois, to be discerned in
them till after the first year.

The Saw-toothed Sutures are not seen in them, but appear like loose Harmonies.

In the Top of the Head at the meeting of the Sagittal and Coronel Suture,
there is a gaping, which instead of Bones is closed with a thick and tough
Membrane, which is afterward dried up to a bony hardness. In this Part, the
Pusation of the Brain is both seen and felt. vid. cap. 6.

The Bones of the Forehead are thicker then the rest; and are two, provided
with no Cavities.

The Bone of the hinder Part of the Head is extremely thin, contrary to what it
is in Persons grown up, and may be separated into many Parts; vid. cap. 4. and
6.

In the Temple-bone, a lineal Harmony discriminates the Scaly from the Rocky
Part, being drawn beyond the hole of the Ear, between the Mastoides Apophysis.

The Auditory Passage, is Gristly till the sixth Month; afterward grows bony;
however it is fore-circle cannot be divided from the rest of the Bone, till the
seventh Year. But at the Basis it is found Gaping, and as it were, like a
Window, till thirteen years of Age and more.

The Cavity of the Ears are very narrow, and the wonderful Structure of the
Labyrinth hardly appears.

The inner Circle of the Tympanum, to which the Membrane is affixed is easily
divided from the rest of the Bone.

The Sphoenoides is manifestly distinguished into three or four Bones; vid.
cap. 7.

The Ethmoides is very slender, and almost gristly; and hardly any perforated
holes are to be discerned therein.

The Cocks-comb in Infants is not conspicuous.

The upper Fence of the Nostrils is very soft, and hardens long after the rest
of the Parts.

A certain Suture runs through the Orbit of the Eye, and remains discernable
therein to the tenth Year.

In the beginning of the Palate a Transverse Line appears, which is extended
from one Dog-tooth to the other, and comprehends the four Cutting Teeth.

No Teeth appear in the Mouth, vid. cap. 10.

The lower Jaw consists of two Bones, joined together in the Chin by Harmony.

The Hyoides Bones are gristly.

All the Vertebres of the Spine, except the first and second of the Neck,
consist of three Parts. vid. cap. 11. and their transverse Processes, together
with the Postic, are gristly, and so little that they can hardly be seen; the
ascending and descending very small and gristly, but more conspicuous.

The Os Sacrum consists of five Bones, as Cap. 12. and each of those divisible
into three Parts, as are all the Spines of the Vertebres.

These five Bones are separated one from the other by an intervening Gristle,
and the Postic spiny Sharpness is altogether gristly.

The Ribs at the Articulations of the Vertebres are gristly and quickly
hardened.

The Sternon-bone, except the uppermost Particle, is altogether gristly and
continuous, and seems undivided; first, the upper Parts become bony, then the
rest by degrees, and then it consists of eight Parts, which in a short time are
reduced to seven, the last two uniting into one Bone. Afterward they become
fewer, and six only appear till the seventh year, after which Age, they unite
by degrees, till only three or four remain.

In the Omoplate, the Epiphyses and Apophyses are gristly. The Neck also with
the glenoides Gristle is of the same Nature. The Coracoides Eminency is an
Epiphysis. The Acromium is first an Epiphysis, consisting of much Gristle,
which after three or four years, degenerates into an Apophysis.

II. The upper and lower Appendixes Of the Arms and Hands.
of the Shoulder are gristly, and afterward grow bony.

The upper Part of the Elbow is an Epiphysis, which after one year hardens, and
is united to the Bone.

The Bones of the Wrist seem to consist of an undivided Gristle. These at first
being spungy, and divided one from another, then harden by degrees, and grow
firm.

The Extremities of the Bones of the Metacarp and Fingers are gristly, and
within a year grow bony.

III. All the Nameless Bones, till Of the Legs and Feet.
the seventh year, consist of three Bones, v. c. 16.

The little Pan of the Hip-bone is gristly, and so remains for several months,
but then hardens into Bone.

The upper and lower Processes of the Thigh Bone for some time remain gristly.

The Knee-pan continues a long time gristly.

The upper and lower Appendixes of the Shin-bone and Button are gristly, and
when they are hardened, cannot be parted till the tenth year.

The Bones of the Tarsus remain gristly for some months, except the Bone of the
Heel, which is bony within and gristly without.

The Sesamoids remain gristly till years of Maturity. Whence it appears, that
the Bones of Infants differ very much in Number from the Bones of grown People.

But what has been said is chiefly to be understood of Infants newly born: For
as for the Condition of the Bones in the Womb, their Generation, and the
Progress of their Formation Month by Month, etc. See Theodore Keckringius, Lib.
de Osteogenia faetuum, accurately described with Cuts.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Nails.
THough the Bones are not Nails, yet by reason of their Remarkable hardness,
and consequently Similitude to the softer Bones or harder Gristles, we shall
add them to this Discourse of the Bones.

I. The Nails are horny Parts fixed The Definition.
at the Extremities of the Fingers and Toes.

II. By the Greeks they are called Their Names.
(...); the Root of the Nail (...); the upper white Part, or little whitish
Half Moon (...); the Pellicle growing over the Root (...)

III. Julius Pollux divides the Nails Parts.
into the Parts under the Nail, the upper Parts, the Parts on both sides, the
Parts next to them, the White next the Roots of the Nails; the Clouds in the
Nails, and the Ends within the Fingers.

IV. Their Substance is indifferent Substance.
hard, and without any Sense of Feeling; in the middle between a Bone and a
Gristle, which is the reason they are flexible.

V. Their Color is transparent, Color.
or else, according to the Disposition of the Flesh that lies underneath,
sometimes ruddy, sometimes pale, sometimes livid, or of any other Color. From
Hippocrates and several other Physicians they take their Indications of
Sickness and Health.

VI. They grow very fast to the Connection.
Flesh that lies underneath and about the Roots, are bound with a strong
Ligament, to the end they may stick the firmer, and the Skin embraces them in
their full Compass, in the same manner as the Gums environ the Teeth.

VII. There is one at the Extremity Use.
of each Finger and Toe, for the Security of the Sensible Parts that lie under
them; for that Nerves and Tendons are carried to their very utmost Extremities,
and are dilated under the Nails, and contribute a most acute Sense to those
Places; so that unless those extreme Parts were guarded by the Nails, the
general Uses to which they are put, would cause a continual Extremity of Pain,
and render the ends of the Fingers altogether useless, and this is their
primary Office, their secondary use is for scratching, and several other
Employments.

VIII. Vulgarly they are said to be Whether they be Parts of the Body?
produced from the thicker and more viscous Excrements of the third Concoction,
and are numbered among the Parts of the Body: Which Opinion Galen seems to
favor, who says that no Vessels are bequeathed to the Nails, but that they
take their Increase from the Roots like the Hair; though in another place he
asserts, that there is a Vein, an Artery and a Nerve extended to the Roots of
the Nails, from whence they receive Life and Nourishment.

But to resolve this Doubt in short* three things are to be considered. First,
that the Spots in the Nails are never obliterated, until the Part in which they
appear growing beyond the Flesh, come to be pared off with the rest of the Nail.

Secondly, that though the Color of the Nails seems to be changed in several
Distempers of the Body, yet that is no real Change of the Color in their
Substance, but only of the Humors that lie under; for that the Nails are
transparent, so that the Color of the Blood or any other Humors underneath
appears through them. And therefore in a Syncope, or the beginning of a Quartan
Ague, by reason of the little Blood that comes to those Parts, they look pale.
In Plethories, by reason of the great quantity of Blood, they look red; and in
Cacochymies they look of an ill Color.

Thirdly, the Nails live and grow after Death; which as Aristotle asserts, so
is it not to be questioned upon common Experience.

Which Considerations being premised, it will sufficiently appear.

1. That they do not live a Life common with the Animate Parts of the same
Body; but a peculiar vigitable Life. 2. That they are not nourished by the
Blood alone, but by other Nourishments, which remain after the Decease of the
Body, after the Blood has been long wasted and putrified, therefore it is not
probable that any Arteries or Veins enter their Substance, though perhaps they
may extend to their Roots, to be distributed to the Parts underneath. 3.
Thirdly, that they do not grow in their whole Substance but only by Apposition
of Parts to the Root, which the Parts before by degrees thrust forward to the
Root.
From whence we must conclude, that they are to be called Parts of the Body, as
they make toward the Perfection of the Whole, for no man can be perfect without
his Nails, but not as they enjoy a common Life with the rest of the Parts, for
that we find they live a peculiar Life after the Death of all the rest of the
Parts, Vid. l. 3. c. 2.

IX. But then there is another question, The manner of their growth.
whether they grow in length, breadth and depth; which Spigelius denies. But
Bauhinus and Hoffman will have them to grow rather in length, than in breadth
and depth. Lindan admits them all the Dimensions of Growth, and confirms it by
that of a Woman at Enchysen, so careless of her self, that she let her Nails
grow to that prodigious length, that she could not go. A Chyrurgion was sent
for to pair them, and my Father, says he, carried away the Parings along with
him. The Paring of the Thumb was two Thumbs long, a Fingers breadth thick,
solid about the Roots, and thence compacted of several Slates. The pairing of
the middle Finger was as long as the first, but not so thick, yet very thick.
None shorter than a Thumbs length; that of the little Toe, thicker than usually
the thickest Nail of the great Toe. What grew in breadth, was seen to be
crooked within. Plat^rus tells a Story not unlike this, of a Girl whose Finger
Nails were a Fingers breadth in thickness, and jetted forth extremely, so that
they rather looked like Hoofs than Nails. So I knew a Man, the Nail of whose
second Toe of his Right Foot was grown to the thickness of a Finger, solid
about the Root, but toward the Forepart consisting of so many Slates, like so
many Hoofs, which very much hindered his Going, though the same Deformity were
not in the rest of his Nails.

THE TENTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the GRISTLES and LIGAMENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the Gristles.
I. A Gristle is a similar cold Definition.
Part, moderately dry and void of Sense, generated out of the glutinous and
earthy Part of the Seed, for the strengthening of many soft Parts, and
frustrate the violent Attacks of outward Accidents.

II. To this end their Substance is Substance.
smooth, polite and flexible, harder than a Ligament, softer than a Bone; which
when the earthy Particles exceed the glutinous, acquire a greater hardness, and
easily become bony. But when the glutinous exceed the earthy Particles,
sometimes become bony, as in the Joints of the Arms and Thighs, etc. But the
Particles are equally mixed, if any remarkable dryness happen by Age or diet,
sometimes they become bony, beyond the common Custom, and as in the
Buckler-like Gristle, and that of the rough Artery. And therefore Cardan cites
an Example of a Thief that could not be hanged at Millan, because his rough
Artery was become bony.

The Gristles have three remarkable Cavities like the Bones; neither are they
nourished with Marrow, but their Nourishment easily penetrates their softer
Substance, and broader Pores.

They differ in Bigness, Shape Situation, Connection, Use and Hardness of
Substance, some make the Heads of the Bones slippery; others constitute the
Parts, as in the Ear and Nose; others are spread over the principal Parts, as
in the Gristles of the Ribs and Sternon-bone.

III. The use of the Gristles is various Their use.
and singular.

1. To render the Motion of the joynted Parts easy, for that in living
Creatures they abound with plenty of slippery Humors. 2. To join several Bones
by Synchondrosis. 3. To withstand the violent Pushes of solid Bodies. 4. To
defend the various Parts from External Injuries; such are the Gristles of the
Ribs annexed to the Sternon. 5. To make several Parts either prominent or
hollow, as the Ears, the Nose and rough Artery. 6. To enlarge the Cavities of
the bigger Joints.
To these we may add the peculiar use of the Epiglottis, which serves instead
of a Cover, and the Gristles of the Eyelids, to which they serve as Props.

All Bones that are Joynted are overspread in the Joints with a Gristle, and
they are more slippery which perform nimble and violent Motions; those more
viscous that perform slow and easy Motions.

CHAP. II. Of the Ligaments in General.
I. A Ligament, in Greek (...), Definition.
in Latin, Vinculum, is a cold Similar Part, dry and firm, but loose and
flexible, appointed for the fastening together of several Parts.

II. They are said to be generated Substance.
out of the clammy and tenacious sort of the Seed, which is the reason their
Substance is both solid and white, between a Membrane and a Gristle, least they
should easily burst; softer than a Gristle, to be more pliant to the Motion of
the Muscles. And as they approach nearer to the Nature of one than the other,,
hence a Ligament is said to be either Gristly or Membranous. Besides these
Differences taken from the Substance, many more are taken from their Rise,
their Insertion, their Strength, their Shape and Hardness.

Those that bind the Bones are void of Sense, that they should not make the
Life of Man uneasy by continual Pains through the Motion of the Parts; yet
some that rise from the Periosteums, and are therefore somewhat Membranous, are
thought to be something sensible, as are also some other Membranous Ligaments,
that fasten the Liver, Womb and Bladder to the adjoining Parts.

III. The Ligaments are nourished Nourishment.
with Blood, not Marrow, as Columbus believes, which passes to them through the
undiscernable Capillary Arteries.

IV. Their Figure is broader and Figure.
narrower, round, flat, shorter or longer, according to the variety of the
Parts that are to be bound, their Situation outward or inward, and the
Convenience of their Use.

V. They rise from a Bone, a Gristle, Their rise*
or a Membrane, and are inserted into the same.

VI. The Ligaments fasten the Parts use.
after a twofold manner; either for Convenience of Motion, and to prevent their
slipping out of their Places; or else to keep the Parts fixed in their
Stations, without any Violent Motion.

Their first Connection is common to all Joints, according to the swifter or
slower Motion of which, some are fastened with slenderer and looser, some with
thicker and stronger Ligaments, and those environ the whole Joint, and grow
either to the Bones that constitute the Joint, or to the Bones of the Cavities
and Circumferences of the Heads, or to the Gristles running between the Joint.
If more Joints meet together, then they are overspread with more Gristles
outward.

Besides that, they environ the whole Joints, there are also peculiar Ligaments
that belong to some Parts which require a stronger Connection, thick, thin,
round and broad, of which, some proceed transverse from one Bone to another,
others run between the Joints, as between the Vertebres, and between the
Interstitium of the Thighbone and Acetable of the Hip; and these are called
gristly Muscles.

The hinder Connection, which only keeps the Parts fixed in their places,
without any remarkable Motion, is conspicuous in the Ligaments of the Liver,
Bladder and Womb, and the Annulary Ligaments which environ orbicularly, the
Tendons of the Muscles of the Hands and Feet; as also in those that fasten the
Radius to the Elbow, and the Button to the Shinbone, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the Ligaments of the Head, Iaws, Hyoides-Bone and Tongue.
THE Head being fixed upon the first Vertebre, in regard it moves over that and
the second Vertebre, requires to be fastened with very strong Bonds, and here
three very strong Ligaments fasten these Parts. The Ligaments of the Head.


I. The first, which is the biggest and broader, orbicularly environs the whole
External Joint, and extends it self to the Internal Membranous Portion of the
Vertebre. This fastens to the Head the first Vertebre in the hinder Part of the
Head, from whose Basis it arises, and to the end it may take the better hold,
the hinder Part of the Head is rough in that place* and in Children sunder'd
into many Divisions.

The Second, which fastens the second Vertebre to the Head, is round and very
strong, and growing partly from the External Seat of the Tooth, partly from the
top of it, is fastened to the Bone of the hinder Part of the Head, at the great
Hole, and so, together with the Tooth, forms an Axle, about which the Head is
turned.

The Third, which is of a gristly Nature, is spread over the Tooth itself,
transverse, and environs the Cavity which receives the Tooth. It proceeds from
the side of the first Vertebre, and is fastened to the other side of the same
Vertebre, thereby preventing the Tooth from slipping out of its Cavity, which
would cause a Luxation and Compression of the Spinal Marrow.

II. The Ligaments of the Iaw, Of the upper Iaw.
between Sutures and Harmonies, are thin and Membranous, provided for the
Insertion of the Muscles.

The whole Joint of the lower Jaw, with the Bone of the Temples, is wrapped about
with a common Membranous Ligament.

Various Ligaments belong to the Of the O^ Hyoides and the Tongue.
Hyoides-bone and the Tongue. Two from the larger Processes of the Hyoides, to
which the lowest part of the Tongue is fastened.

Two adhere to the Horns of the said Bones, and are fastened to the Apophyses of
the Styloides, which keep the whole Bone with its Muscles mixed, for the Tongue
to rest more securely upon it.

One strong Ligament under the Tongue, and proper to it, extends it self to the
Fore-teeth; which if it bind the Tongue too hard in the lower Part toward the
Teeth, is a hindrance to the Sucking of Infants, and the Speech; and therefore
is usually clipped with a Pair of Scissars.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ligaments of the whole Trunk.
BY reason of the various Motions (...) the Spine, it was necessary that the
Vertebres should be fastened with strong Ligaments, which are of three sorts.

I. The Bodies of the Vertebres The Ligaments of the Vertebres.
themselves, chiefly before and at the sides, are fastened with Ligaments
resembling a Half Moon, thick, fibrous and strong; which environ the Vertebres,
and knit them strongly together all the whole length of the Back, so that they
may the more easily endure violent Motions.

II. The Bodies of the Vertebres, where they are joined, strongly cohere by a
gristly, fibrous and slimy Ligament, thick without side, and thin toward the
middle, answerable to the largeness of the Vertebres, and resembling them in
Shape, and detaining a Gristle in the middle between the Vertebres, from whence
a Ligament is thought to arise.

III. The Processes of the Vertebres, as well transverse as acute, are fastened
by common Membranous Ligaments; which in pointed Processes arising from a
certain middle Channel of the upper Spine, and inserted in a certain kind of
Line of the Spine, underneath, and uniting with the following Spines, in order
from one Ligament, drawn all the length of the Species, and so continue the
Vertebres together, as if they were but one Bone.

II. The Ribs are coupled to the Of the Ribs.
Vertebres by strong and almost Gristly Ligaments, which rise from the
transverse Ligaments of the Vertebres; but are joined to the Sternon by slender
Ligaments, the Gristles going between.

III. The Bones of the Sternon are very Of the Sternon.
tough, by means of a Gristle going between, and being enveloped with a double
Periosteum, are most firmly bound together.

IV. The Ilion-bone, besides that, it adheres Of the Os Ilion.
most obstinately to the Os Sacrum, by means of a tenacious Gristle interposed,
is also fastened by a common, broad and strong Ligament.

V. The Os Sacrum is fastened to the Of the Os Sacrum.
Ilion-bone with a thick Gristle, and by a double and round Ligament, which
springing from one Part of the Os Sacrum with one end, is inserted into the
pointed Process of the Hip, with the other into its hinder Appendix, and so not
only firmly binds these Bones, but also sustains the Right Intestine, with its
Muscles.

VI. The Share-Bones are fastened together, Of the Os Pubis.
partly by an intervening Gristle, partly by a double Ligament, of which, the
first circularly environs them; the other, which is membranous, possesses the
Hole it self, and sustains the Muscles of that Place.

The other Ligaments, see in their proper Places.

CHAP. V. Of the Ligaments of the Scapular Arm and Hand.
THE Scapula is jo^ned to the Shoulder Bone and the Clavicle with five
Ligaments, which chiefly seem to consist of the Tendons of the Muscles of the
Omoplate, environing the Head and Neck of the Shoulderbone, and so united, that
they constitute one strong orbicular Ligament. Of which,

The First, which is broad and membranous, rising from the Brows of the Neck of
the Scapula, environs the whole Joint, and is inserted into the foremost and
inner Region of the Head of the Shoulder. The Second, which is round like a
Nerve, but thicker and bigger than the preceding, rising from the top of the
inner Process of the Scapula, is fixed into the interior Parts of the Head of
the Shoulder. The Third, which is round and thicker and bigger than the
preceding, rising from the Coracoides Process, terminates in the Head of the
Shoulder on the outer Part. The Fourth, which proceeds with a large beginning
from the same Place with the former, is implanted into the hinder and outer
Seat of the Head of the Shoulder. The Fifth, which rises from the inner Seat of
the Scapula, and proceeds obliquely upward to the top of the Shoulder.
I. The Ligaments of the Elbow are The Ligaments.
double, of which, the one is strong and membranous, the other is encompassed
with all the Muscles, all the length of the Shoulder, and keeps them fixed in
their Seat, to which, the proper Membranes of the Muscles stick very close.

The rest of the Ligaments bind the Bones together. For the Ulna and the Radius
are fastened to the Shoulder by common and strong Membranous Ligaments; to the
Wrist, not only by common, but also by two peculiar and round Ligaments. Of
which, the first, which is more gristly, proceeds from the Styloides Process,
to the fourth Bone of the Wrist, and joins the lower Arm-bone, called the Ulna
to the Wrist; the other growing from the top of the Radius, receives the Wrist,
and joins the Radius to the Wrist, which is yet more strengthened by the
nervous Ligament environing the whole Joint.

The Ulna-bone is fastened to the Radius above and below by a common Ligament;
as also by another peculiar and strong membranous Ligament, seated between the
Intervals of the Bones all their full length; which rising from the sharp Line
of the Ulna, is implanted into the Line of the Radius.

II. In the Wrist there are two Of the Wrist.
Ligaments; of which, one only joins the Bones together; and both together
strengthen the two Tendons that are to be transmitted farther.

The first rising from the lower Process of the Radius and Elbow, enfolds the
Bones of the Wrist, and binds them ^tely together, terminating in the Appendix
of the Bone of the Metacarp.

The two others are carried from the Bone of the Wrist, looking toward the
Thumb, reaching to the Little-finger transversly, the one outward, the other
inward like a Ring; and therefore by those that take these two for one
Ligament, called the Annular Ligament, and contain the Tendons of the Muscles
extending and bending the Fingers. Laurentius and Bauhinus believes the
Exterior may be conveniently divided into six Ligaments.

III. The Bones of the Metacarp Of the Metacarpium.
are joined to one another, and to the Bones of the Wrist by common Ligaments.

The Internodes or Knuckles of the Fingers are fastened by common Ligaments. But
in the Hollow of the Hand the Phalanxes of the Fingers are fastened to the Bones
of the Metacarp with a transverse Ligament. Moreover, every single Finger has a
Ligament running out at the full length of the Fingers, and rising from the
Internal Part of the Bones, which resembles a Channel, and keeps the Tendons
bending the Fingers firm in their Places.

To these may be added a slimy Membrane, which is overcast with Tendons,
transmitted to the Hand and Fingers instead of a Ligament.

CHAP. VI. Of the Ligaments of the Leg and Foot.
THE Thigh is fastened to the The Ligaments of the Thigh.
Isehion with two Ligaments. One which is the Exterior, environs the whole
Joint, and is broad, hard, thick and strong. The other, which is more inward,
and cannot be seen, unless the other be cut away, proceeding from the bottom of
the Acetable, is inserted soon after into the middle Head of the Thigh, and is
oblong, round and hard, and hence by some called the Gristly Nerve.

II. These Ligaments, if they be overmuch loosned by the Defluxions The
Luxation of the Hip.
of Phlegmatic Humors, cause a Luxation of this Joint, which upon returning the
Bone into its Place, is cured by drying and corroborating Medicaments, and
commodious Swathings. But if they happen to be corroded by any sharp Defluxion,
the Cure is not to be hoped for. Or if the Luxation happen by any outward
Violence, then the inner round Ligament is for the most part burst, for that
the hardness of it will not suffer Extension, which is the reason that such a
Luxation is incurable. For though the Bone may be reduced into the Acetable,
yet it will slip out again for want of the burst Ligament. And therefore
Chyrurgeons are to be careful how they attempt the reducing such a Dislocation,
which will cost the Patient a vast deal of Torment to no purpose.

III. Six Ligaments fasten to the Of the Tibia.
Shin-bone and Button to the Thigh;

Of which,

The First, is Membranous and common, which environs the whole Joint, except
the Region of the Kneepan. The Second strong and Nervous seated in the inner
Part of the Knee, rising from the Process of the Leg, is inserted with two
heads into the Head of the Thigh. The Third, which is gristly and strong rising
out of the higher Part of the Shin-bone, among its Cavities, enters the middle
Cavity, which is behind within the heads of the Thigh. The Fourth which is
thick and almost round, adheres to the outer side of the Knee, and binds the
Bones of the Thigh, Shin-bone and Button. The Fifth, somewhat more slender and
softer then the former, growing to the Inner-side, is carried obliquely into
the Fore-parts of the Thigh. The Sixth, which is slender and soft, is found in
the middle of the Joint of the Knee, and carried from the Shin-bone into the
Thigh. However this is not always to be found with the two preceding; and
therefore some acknowledge only three Ligaments in this place one common, and
two interposed, and those bloody.
The Shin-bone is fastened to the Of the Tibula.
Button with three Ligaments.

The First and Second are common Membranous Ligaments; One which at the upper
and outer Part enfolds the Connection of the Bones: the other which proceeding
at the lower Part from the Shin-bone, approaches the Button. The Third is the
peculiar Membranous Ligament, which growing all its length to the Shin-bone, is
carried to the Button, and expanded through the Interval between the two Bones,
and so conjoyns the Bones, and also distinguishes the Muscles of that Place,
and to some of them gives their Original.

VI. The Ligaments of the Foot Of the Feet
are twofold; some that fasten the Tendons from slipping out of their places:
others which bind the Bones together.

Those are three; of which,

The First is seated before at the joynting of the Shin-bone with the foot. The
Second proceeds from the Inner Melleolus to the Bone of the Heel, and
constitutes as it were three little Rings for the Tendons to pass through;
because there are three Cavities there. The Third, springing from the outer
Mallelous, is implanted into the Bone of the Heel, and is spread over two
Holnesses.
Besides these already mentioned in the inner Region of the Toes, you meet with
transverse Ligaments, as in the Hand, which fasten the Tendons binding the
first and second Internode of the Toes.

VI. Those that fasten the Bones, Of the Talus.
are either of the Talus, or Pedon, or Metapedon or of the Toes.

Three Ligaments fasten the Talus of which,

The First, which wraps about the Bone of the Shin and the Talus, is
Membranous, whereas the rest are gristly. The Second, springing from the inner
Part of the Talus, is implanted into the Bone of the Shin looking toward the
Talus. The Third, fastens the Exterior of the Talus to the Button.
Five Ligaments fasten the Talus to the Pedion.

The First is common, which wraps about the Joint of the Heel and Talus; this
is Membranous whereas the rest are gristly. The Second, proceeds from the lower
Seat of the Talus to the Heel. The Third rising from the Neck of the Talus, is
implanted in the Navicular Bone. The Fourth, joins the Bone of the Tessara,
with the Neck of the Talus. The Fifth couples the Bone of the Heel with the
Tessara Bone, and environs the Joint.
VII. The Bones of the Pedion Of the Pedion.
are fastened one to another, and to the neighboring Bones, with very hard and
gristly Ligaments; to which at the lower Part for the more strenuous
Coroboration, is added a strong peculiar Ligament, which binds the middle Parts
of the Bones together.

The Ligaments of the Metapedion and Of the Metapedion of the Toes.
Toes differ little or nothing, either in Structure, Insertion, and Form from
the Ligaments of the Hand. Under the Sole of the Foot, the Skin and Fat being
taken away, occurs a broad and strong Ligament, which fastens the the Bones of
the First Phalanx, and comprehends its Sesamoide Bones.

THE END.
AN INDEX OF THE Chief Matters IN THE TEN BOOKS OF ANATOMY.
A.
ABortion, the Causes of it, 279 The Alantoides or Pudding Membrane, etc. 244.
Whether in Women. ibid. The Amnios, 246. It Is Original, 247. In Twins how
disposed, 247. A Mikie Liquor within it, 250 Analogon to the Rational Soul,
what it is, 298. Whether the same with the Rational Soul, ibid. Anatomy
defined, 2 The Subject of it, ibid. Animal Spirits how separated from the
Brain, 390. Where generated, 422, etc. Of the Animal Spirits, 428, etc.
Difference between them and Vital, 433. Twofold use, 434. What they contribute
to nourishment. 435 Annate Tunicle, 457 The Anthelix, 463 The Anvil of the Ear,
467 Aorta Artery, 326 Apoplexy, the cause of it, 426 Appetite decayed, the
causes, 35 Apple of the Eye, 459 Architectory Virtue what, 222, etc. The
vegetative Soul, 229 The Arm, 493, 525 Armpits, 372 Arteries, whether they
enter the Substance of the Brain, 391. Of the Arteries in general, 522.
Arteries proceeding from the Aorta, 530 Artenoides Muscle, 369 Ascites, Dropsi^
the cause of it, 77 The Aspera Arteria, 355, 366 The Auditory passage, 464 The
Axillary Veins 543
B.
Bartholines Error, 262 The Bee-hive, 465 Birth, whether it may be formed ont
of the Womb, 170. How formed, 216. How nourished in the Womb, 264, etc. Birth
natural, unnatural, 174. Expulsion of the Birth, the Cause of it. ibid. Blood
defined, it is substance, juices, etc. 333 How the Parts are nourished by the
Blood, 341. Whether it lives, 343. What Blood nourishes, 344. Differences of
it. 350 Bodies Human, 2 Their Differences, ibid. Bones in general, 564. Their
Conjuction, 569. Bones of the Cranium, 571. Of the whole Head, 575. Of the
Skull, 576 Common to the Skull and upper Iaw, 580 Of the upper Iaw, 582. Of the
lower Iaw, 583. Of the Arm, Shoulder, Elbow, 599. Of the lower Part of the
Hand, 600. Of the Thigh and Leg, 601 Of the Extreme Foot, 603 A Bone in the
Heart. 326 Bones, four small (...) in the Eur, (...) by whom discovered, 466
Bottom of the Womb, 174 Brain, whether a Bowel, 387. It Is formation, shape,
substance, fibers, etc. 388, 389. It Is Arteries, 391. Vein^, 392 It Is Motion,
425. The Breast in general, 280. In particular, 281 The Bridle of the (...),
152 The Bronchial Artery, 357 Bubble Christaline, 218. Observations concerning
it, 219, etc. It proceeds from the Man and Woman's seed, 220 Bu^s of the Eye,
457
C.
The Carotides, 527 Catarrh, Rolfinch's mistake concerning the Cause of it, 399
Cavities of the Brain, 385. Their use 386 Cavities of the Ear, 463 The Caul,
22, etc. The Cerebel, 402. It Is Vermicular processes, 403 The Chaps, 479
Charlton's opinion of the Blood, 344 Refuted, 345 Cheescake, see Utrine Liver.
Children, how born after the death of the Mother, 173. Whether they can
procreate, 197. In the Womb, whether they sleep or wake, 222. Born the sixth
and fifth Months, 271 Choler, whether generated in the Stomach, 38 Choler
defined, 342 Choler, whether two sorts, 89. What it is, 92. Color and taste,
95. It Is motion, 88, 89. The Choler Vessels, 86. It Is use, 108 The Chorion,
245. It Is Original, 247 In twins how, 247 The Christiline humor of the Eye,
461. It Is use, ibid. Chylification, 33 The Chylus, 27. whether it enter the
Gastric Veins, 41. Whether any parts nourished by it, 16. It Is recepticle, 61.
The Chyle-bearing Channel of the Creas, 16. How to discover it, 63. Whether all
the Chylus ascend to the Subclavial, 67. Whether through the Mesariac Veins to
the Liver, 68. Whether carried through the Arteries to the Breasts, 284. How
changed into Milk, 290. What forces it to the Breasts, 292. Whether it
circulate, 322. Whether the whole Chylus be changed into Blood, 337.
Circulation of the Blood, 317. The Cause, 318. The manner, 319. The ^se 322 The
(...) of the Cerebel, 403, 404 The C^vicles, 506 Cleft of the female Pudendum,
181 Clitoris, 181. It Is Substance, Muscles, Vessels, ibid, Its Bigness, 182.
Irregularities, 183. Whether the Seed pass through it, 183 The Cobweb (...),
461 Commissures of the Craninum, 573 Conception and the progress of it, 208,
etc. The Concha of the Fare, 463 Copulation, whence the pleasure of it, 163
Coroides Tunicle, 456 C^tytedons; what, 240 Coverings external of the Head,
383. Internal, 384 Crico-thyrodes Muscle, 368 Crico-Artenoides Muscle, 369 The
Crural Arteries 531 Crying in the Womb, all in an Error that have wrote
concerning it, 278 Curveus's mistake, 253, 258
D.
The different Vessels belonging to Generation. 140, Whether they communicate
with the Seminary Vessels, 141. Their progress, 142. Their Substance, etc. 143.
Experiment of Reyner de Graef, 140. Rejected by Swammerdam, 140. In Women
called Tubes, 159 Of Delivery, 271. Reason of the variety of the time, 273.
What happens near the time of it, 274. Some things admirable to be observed in
delivery. 275 Deusingius mist^ken, 255 The Diaphragma, its Substance,
Membranes, Vessels, motion, etc. 300, 301, etc. Difference of Scen^s, 473.
Difference between the Bones of Men and Women, 605 Dorsal roots of the Birth
260 The Drum of the Ear, 466 Dura Matter, vid. Meninx. Dwarfs, 3
E.
Little Ears of the Heart, 323 Eggs in Women for Conception, their Matter, 158.
Their Membranes, ibid. Three things to be considered in them, 163 Emulgent
Arteries 118 Emulgent Veins 118 Emunctories of the Serum, 116 Dr. Ent his
Opinion refuted 253 Epididymes's, vid. Parastates, The Epiglottis, 368. No
conspicuous Muscles in it, 369 Epomos, vid. Neck Error in Woman's reckonings,
274 Eyes in general, 442. Whether contagious if Diseased, 443. Their holes, 445
Their Vessels, Muscles, 446, 455 The Eyebrows, 448
F.
The Face, 440 Fat, 13 Fat folk less fit for Venery, 207. Why less active, 334
The Feet and the Parts of them, 493 Females, whether begot by the Left Stone,
148 Fermentation, 27 The Fibers in general, Flowers in Women, the cause of
them, 168 The Tendril Fold, 132. The Net-resembling Fold in the Womb, 176. The
Choroides Fold, 398. Its progress and use, ibid. The Forehead, 441 The Fornix,
397, 398 The Frog-Distemper, 486 Frontal Muscles, 441 Function of the Brain,
420 Function of the Parts, 3
G.
Gel^ Animals grow fat, 207 Genitals of Men and Women how they differ, 185
Glandules of the Kidneys, 120. Of the Mesentery, 49. How passed by the Milky
Vessels, 59. Of the Breasts, 282. Of the Larynx, 369. Of the Gullet, ibid, Of
the Tongue, 483 Glissons Experiment, 82 Gonorrhea, the Cause of it, 143.
Gonorhea simplex, the Cause of it, 192 The Gristles in general, 610 Gristle
Scutiform of the Larynx, 367 Angular and Guttal of the same, 368 The Gristle of
the Ear, 464 Growth, 341 The Gullet, its Connection, Vessels, Substance, 370,
etc. Its Motion, 371 Gums, 478 The Guts, 42
H.
Hare of the Eyelids, 447 Hair, its generation, 374. The roots of it, a
Heterogeneous Body; its form, efficient Cause, 375. First Original, 376.
Variety of Colors, whence, 377. Whether part of the Body, 381. Whether it
contributes to the strength of the Body, 383 Hanged People how killed, 358 The
Hand, 493. And the Parts of it, 494 Dr. Harvey's Opinion touching Conception,
213, 215, 217. Concerning the Uterine Liver, 236. His Opinion and two questions
concerning the Birth, 276 The Head in general, 373 Heart in general, 305. etc.
Its motion, 312, etc. The true Cause, 316. Unnatural things bred therein, 324.
The Office of the Heart, 329. Glissons new Opinion, ibid. The Helix, 463 Heat
of the Blood, 335 Hermophradites, 183 Hernia varicosa and Carnosa, 133
Herophiius's Wine Press, or the For^ular 385 Histories of Conception, 217, etc.
The hollow Vein, and Veins united to it above the Diaphragma, 540. Below the
Diaphragma, 54^ The Horny Tuincle, 45^ The Huckle-bone, 589 Humors, whether
Parts of the Body, 4. The four Humors always in the Blood, 342 Humors of the
Eye, 459. Whether sensible, 462 Hunger, what and whence it proceeds, 29 The
Hymen, whether or no? 177. Whether a sign of Virginity, 178 The Hyoides-bone,
480 Hypothyroides Muscle, 368
I.
Ideas, how imprinted in the Seed by Imagination, 197 Jejunum Gut why Empty 110
Imagination of the Face of it, 292 Indications of the Ancients taken from the
Ear, 463 Infants Bones, how constituted, 606 The Infundibulum or Funnel. 413
Jugular Kernels, 376
K.
The Kidneys, 116. Their Vessels, 117 Their Substance, 119. Malpigius's
Discoveries, ibid. Their use, 120. Observations three, 121. Whether they
concoct Blood, 125. Whether Wounds in the Kidneys be Mortal, 126. Deputy
Kidneys what, 127 Kicking of the Infant in the Womb, the Cause of it, 275, 276
L.
The Labyrinth, 468 The Lachrymal Kernel, 415 The Lachrymal points, 417 Larynx,
its Figure, Vessels, Bulk, Substance, Gristles, 367 Laurentius Bellinus's
fleshy Crust, 482 Learned men deceived by Old women's tales, 273 Ligament
Ciliar, 459 Ligaments in general, 611. Of the Head, of the Iaws, Hyoides Bone
and Tongue, 612. Of the whole Trunk, ibid. Of the Scapula's, Arm and Hand, 613.
Of the Leg and Foot, 614 Likeness of Features whence, 198 Liquor in the Amnion,
what it is, 250, etc. The Liver, 78. Whether a Bowel, 79. Worms and Stones in
it, 85. The functions of it, 108, 109, 112. The Office of the Liver, 83.
Sometimes joined with the Lungs, 185. Glisson's Experiment, 82 The Long Marrow,
406. Its difference from The Spinal Marrow, ibid. The Lucid Enclosure 397 Lungs
their bigness, substance, etc. 350. Preternatural things in them, 351. The
color in a Child before it is born, 352 Division, Lobes, 353. Several
Observations concerning them, 354. Their motion, 362, etc. Lympha, what, 74,
75. Difference between it and the Serum, 76. Whether nutritive, 348 Lymphatic
Vessels, 69. Of the Liver, 81. Lymphatic Juice, the use of it, ibid. Lymphatic
Vessels in the Testicles, 137 Of the Lungs, 357
M.
Males, whether begot by the Right Stone, 148 Malpigius's Observations of
Blood, 349 Materials of the Hair, 378 Maxillary Kernels, 376. Processes, 408
The Mediastinum, 303 Melancholy, 342 Membranes in general, 519 Membrane of the
Muscles, 17. Of the Drum, 465 Meninxes of the Brain, Dura Matter, its Holes,
Vessels, etc. 384, 385. Pia Matter, 387, 407 The Mesentery, 48 The Mesenteric
Milkie Vessels, 58 Milk what, 285, etc. Whether Animal Spirits, the matter of
it, 291* Mesue's Story concerning Milk, ibid. Observation concerning it, 293.
Why dried up upon Weaning, 294 Milkie Vessels to the Bladder of the Womb, 122.
To the Vice-Kidneys, 123. Milkie Utrine Vessels, a question concerning them,
252. Milkie Vessels of the Breasts, 283 Monstrous Births, the reason, 247
Mother Fits, the cause of them, 171 Whether from the Sweetbread juice, 172 The
Mount of Venus, 179 Muscles, 17. etc. Of the Eur, 464, 466. Of the Cheeks, Lips
and lower Iaw, 477. Muscles in general, 497. Of the Head, 503. Of the Arms and
Shoulders, 505. Of the Scapula, 506. Assisting respiration, 507. Of the Back
and Loins, 509. Of the Abdomen, 510. Of the Radius, 511. Of the Wrist and
hollow of the hand, ibid. Of the Fingers and Thumb, 512. Of the Thigh, 513. Of
the Leg, 515. Of the Foot, 516. Of the Toes, 517 The Mirtle-form'd Caruncles in
Women's Privities, 178
N.
The Nails, 607 The Nameless Bones, 597 The Nameless Tunicle, 457 Navel string
what? Its Situation, 256. Its use, 257 The Neck, 372. Strength of the Body
judged by it, 372 The Nerves in general, 548, etc. Of the Neck, 557. Of the
Breast and B^ok, 559. Of the Loins, 560. Proceeding from the Os Sacrum, 561. Of
the Arm and Hand, 561. Of the Thighs and Feet, 563 Nerves within the Cranium,
410. Second, third, fourth, fifth Pair, 414, 415. Turn-again Nerves, ibid. Of
the Nostrils. 472 Net. The wonderful Net. 413 Nose. Its Figure, Bigness, Bones
and spongy Bones. 470 Nostrils. 471 The Nut of the Yard, 151. Of the Clitoris,
181 The Netform'd Tunicle. 459 The Nymphe. Their Substance, Vessels, Use, and
Observation concerning them. 180
O.
Oesophagus, vid. Gullet. Old Men, whether they grow shorter? 342 The Orbicular
Bone in the Ear. 467 Order* to be observed in Dissecting the Brain. 419 Organs
of Hearing. 463 Organs of Smelling. 470 Original of the Principles of the
Blood. 337 The Os Sacrum. 589 Oval Hole in the Heart* 327 The Oval Window in
the Ear. 468 Ovaries in Women first discovered, 156. How the Eggs descend from
them to the Womb, 159. Women's Stones to be rather called Ovaries. 158
P.
The Palate. 478 The Perastates. 139 Pannicle fleshy. 16. 383 Parenchyma of the
Liver. 84 Part of the Body, what. 3 Net Organs. 4 Principal, which. ibid.
Subservient, which. 8 Noble, which, ibid. Ignoble, which. ibid. Parts
containing. 17 Parts contained. 21 Parts of the Face in general. 475 Parts
serving for Generation in Men. 130 Parts adjoining to the Yard. 154 Parts
secret of Women. 154 Parts of the Body, in what Order formed. 220 Parts of the
Birth in the Womb, how they differ from a Man grown? 269 Parotides Kernels.
376. 464 Particles Salt of the Arterial Blood, how separated from the White
particles in the Stones. 137 Passage from the Tympanum to the Jaws. 467 The
Pericardium. 304 Pericranium. 383 Periostium. 384 The Periwincle or Cochlea of
the Ear. 468 Pia Matter, vid. Meninx. The Pincal Kernel. 401 The Pipe of the
Navel-String. 263 The Pituitary Kernel. 412 The Pleura. 302 The Porta Vein,
536. And Veins united to it. 537 The Preputium. 152 Pre-eminency of the Brain.
398 The Prostates, 143. Their Liquor, and how to be discerned, 144. Their Use.
145 Psalloides, or the Brawny Body. 397 The Pudendum of Women; the Lips of it.
179 Pulmonary Artery and Vein. 326* 355 Pulses, 317. Their Use. 318
Q.
Quality of the Blood. 336 Qualities of Spittle. 487 Quantity of the Blood. 336
R.
The Rainbow of the Eye. 458 Refrigeration of the Lungs; Mauro Cordatus,
Malpigius and Thraston's Opinion concerning it. 360, 361 Respiration in the
Womb, all deceived that have wrote of it, 278. What it is, 357. Charltons Error
concerning it, 359. Whether a Man might live without it. 364. Stories relating
to the Question. 365 The Ribs. 592 Riolanus Mistaken. 256, 268
S.
The Salival Channels, 485. Other Salival Vessels. 486 Of Savours. 290, etc.
Sclerotic Tunicle. 456 Scapula Bones. 596 The Scyth or Falx. 385 The Scrotum,
138. Signs of Health taken from it. ibid. The Seed, 138. Whether threefold,
146. How it passes the invisible Pores, 146, 149. The Matter of it, 188, etc.
When well made, 191. Two Parts of it, 193, etc. Seed-bearing Vessels. 135 Seed
of Women, various Errors concerning it. 159 The Serum, what. 115 Seminal
Vessels, 142. Their Substance, etc. 143 Serous Humors between the Chorion and
Urinary Membrane. 255 Sesamoides Bones. 664 Sheath of the Womb, 175. Its Use*
176 Shoulders. 372 Sight defined. 462 Skin defined. 11 Its Substance,
Difference, Temper, Figure, Motion, Nourishment, Vessels, Pores, Hair, Color,
Use, ibid. Whether the Instrument of Feeling. 11 Smelling defined, 472. The
Cause, ibid. Where it lies. 473 Snakes taken out of the Brain. 398 Soul,
whether in the Woman's Seed, or in the Man's only, 225, etc. Not ex traduce, 226.
Not present at the first Delineation of the Parts, 227. A vegitable Soul in Men
as well as in Beasts, 228. The Seat of it, 229. What it is, 231. Whether the
Soul be nourished, 234. We are all at a loss concerning the Soul. 235 Sound,
the Generation of it. 469 Spermatic Vessels, 131. Their Progress, 132. Error of
Anatomists concerning them, 133 Spermatic Vessels in Women. 155 Spirits,
whether Parts of the Body. 4 Double Spirits raised out of the Blood. 334, etc.
Spittle defined, 487. Its strange Composition, 488. Its Use. ibid. Spleen, 97.
Its Vessels, 99. Why not quick of Feeling, 102. Its Substance, ibid. Unusual
things found in it, 103. Whether it separate Melancholy from the Chylus, 104.
Malpigius's Experiment, 105. The true Action of it, 106. The Functions of it.
108 The Sternon Bone. 594 Sternothyroides Muscle. 368 The Stirrup of the Ear.
467 The Stomach. 23 Stones in the Stomach. 27 The String of the Drum. 465
Subclavial Arteries. 526 Subclavial Veins. 542 The Sweetbread, 51. Three
Observations, 49. Its Office. 53 Sweetbread Juice, the Use of it, 54. The
Generation of it, 57. Its Effervescency, 58
T.
Taste defined, 489. The primary Organ of it, ibid. Where Taste lies. 189 Tears
discoursed of. 448, etc. Teats in Women, their exquisite Sense. 282 The Teeth.
584 Temper of the Blood. 336 Temperaments of the Body, whence they proceed. 343
Temper of the Body judged by the Hair. 378 The Testicles in Men, 134. Their
Vessels, 135. Their Use, 136. Their Tunicles, 137. Their Action. 146 Testicles
in Women, 156. Their Figure, Tunicles, Difference from Men's, their Substance,
157. Preternatural things therein. ibid. The Thymus. 303 Thyro-artenoides
Muscle. 369 The Tongue, 480, etc. Its Motion, 483. Its Vessels, Nerves,
Muscles. 482, 483 The Tonsils. 369. 485 The Torcular. 385 Tubes in Women, what?
159. Their Membranes, Figure, Vessels, Valves, 160. Births conceived and formed
in them, 162. The same demonstrated* by Observations. 163
V.
Valves treble pointed, 325. Valves Sigmoides, 326. Half Moon Valves. ibid.
Varolius's Bridge. 403 The Veins in General, 533. Veins of the Head, 542. Of
the Arms, 543. Opening into the Iliacs, 545. Of the Thigh and Foot. 546 Venters
three. 8 Venture Lowermost. 9 Ventricles of the Brain. 397 Ventricle, vid.
Stomach. Ventricles of the Heart, 325. Their Vessels, 325. Right Ventricle of
the Heart. ibid. The Use of it, 327. Left Ventricle of the Heart. 326 The
Vertebres in Specie. 589 Vessels of the Ear, 464. For sundry uses of Hearing.
469 Vital Spirit. 335 The Vitrious Humor of the Eyes. 461 The Vitrious Timicle.
ibid. Vivific Spirits, whether in the Blood. 331 Umbilical Arteries, their Use.
259 Umbilical Vein, its Use. 257 Union of the Vessels in the Heart of the
Birth. 327 The Urachus, 261. Observation concerning it, 262. The Urine flows
from the Birth through it. 262 The Ureters. 128 The Urethra, 150. Its Nervous
Bodies. 151 Urinary Membrane in Women. 247 Urinary Passage in Women. 182 The
Urine Bladder. 129 Urine Ferment, what it is. 168 The Uterine Liver or
Cheeskake, 235. Its Substance, Color, Shape, Vessels, etc. 237, etc. Use, 242
The Uveous Tunicle. 458 The Uvula, 479. Its Use. ibid.
W.
The Watery Humor of the Eyes, 460. The Use of it. 461 Wharton's Error
concerning the Tonsils of the Larynx. 370 The White Line. 18 Willis's Opinion
of the Soul, 232, etc. His Absurdity. 234 Wind-Eggs in Women, a Question
concerning them, 161. The Opinion of Wind-Eggs confirmed. 162 The Wirtzungian
Channel. 52 The Womb and its Motion, 164. Situation, Substance, Membranes,
ibid. Bigness, Weight, Shape, Hollowness, Horns, 165. Connection, Ligaments,
whether it can fall, 166. Whether inverted in the Fall, 167. Its Vessels, ibid.
Its Office, 169. Its Motion. 170, 173 Women that have Conceived without
Immission of the Yard, 153. Whether they may be turned into Men? 185.
Observations upon this Question, ibid. and 186. Whether they have Seed, 189.
Whether they Cause Formation, 201. Whether necessary for Generation. 204, etc.
Women, whether they may be castrated. 164 The Writing-Pen within the Skull. 407
Y.
The Yard, 149. Whether a living Creature, ibid. Its Vessels. 152
FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE SMALLPOX AND MEASLES.

A TREATISE OF THE SMALLPOX AND MEASLES.
CHAP. I. Of the Small Pox and Measles in General.
FOrmerly the Arabians and most famous Physicians annexed to their Discourses
of the Pestilence and other Contagious and Epidemic Diseases their Treatises of
the Small Pox and Measles; we therefore led by their Authority are of opinion
that the Small Pox and Measles are Contagious Diseases.

But in this first Chapter before we speak in Particular of these Diseases, it
will be necessary by way of Preface to say something in General of the Names,
Original, Nature, Subjects and differences of both Diseases.

As to the Names, we meet with some variety among the Writers of Physic. Among
the Greeks, the words (...) and (...) were most in use (both which the Latins
comprehend under the single Name of Papulae; and Alzaravius in his own Language
calls Algigram, and Alasmom, and Mercurialis, Efflorescencies) by which they
did not always understand two distinct Diseases, but frequently one and the
same. Others make two sorts of (...); The one when the Wheals break through the
Skin and rise up in Powks; the other, when the Color of the Skin is only
changed. The First of these some call more particularly (...), and the Latins
have called Variolae, as it were little Warts; to which some have added the
other Name of Papulae, small Teats or Pushes. The latter are by the Greeks
called (...), and by the Latins Exanthemata and Morbilli. We are to take notice
however by the way, that Exanthemata are properly those little Purple spots,
called the Tokens, which appear upon the Skin of the Persons infected with the
Plague (of which we have spoken in our Treatise of the Plague) but afterward
this word was by many Physicians given to the Morbilli Measles. However it
were, at this day there is no question to be made of the Signification or
Ambiguity of the Words, seeing that by (...) and Variolae, all Physicians
generally understand those Wheals or Powks that break forth through the Skin
and Suppurate, being conspicuous over all the the Body: and by Exanthemata or
Morbilli, those little red Spots which do somewhat corr^de the Skin, and are
sometimes full of small Pimples like Millet Seed.

As to the Original of these Diseases there is great variety of Opinions among
the Physicians. For some will have them to have been as ancient as the Original
of the World; and that they were well known to Hippocrates, Galen and others of
the Ancient Greeks. But Mercurialis, Liddelius and others affirm, that they
were altogether unknown to the Greeks in former times, and were first
discovered in the Age of the Arabians, and that therefore their first
description was set forth by them; whereas the Greeks have left behind them
nothing in particular written about those Distempers. But the latter Opinion
seems to be less probable, seeing that the Descriptions of the Greek Ecthyma^a,
and Exanthemata differ very little from our Variolae or Pox, as appears out of
Hippocrates, lib. 3. Epid. in his Cure of Silenus. And because the Arabians
also do not describe those Diseases, as new ones, which they would have done,
had they either known or thought to be unknown to the Greeks. Add to this that
though the Greeks in their Writings do not treat particularly of these
Diseases, as the Arabians do, but intermix them in the Description of those
Epidemic Diseases, which are understood by the manner of their Crisis, yet it
cannot thence be concluded, that they were to them unknown; in regard the
contrary to that appears from hence, that they write many things common among
us, as well in reference the Nature, as to the Cure of those Diseases.

These Diseases are not one and the same, but of a distinct Nature: For they
are the Diseases of an ill Temper, which is known by a Preternatural heat and
Fever; as also Diseases of a depraved Conformation, as being accompanied with
Tumors, and a dividing of the Continuum.

They are referred to acute Malignant, Contagious, Epidemic and Pestilent
Fevers (though not so deadly as the Pestilence) because they are determined for
the most part within fourteen days, or at least never surpass the fortieth.
They participate of Malignity, are propagated by Contagion, like the
Pestilence, and are frequently Rise and Epidemical.

They only wage War with Mankind, in regard it has not been observed by any
Physician, that ever any other Creatures are afflicted with these Distempers.

Moreover they are not only common to Men, but to all Mankind; insomuch, that
there are very few Men or Women living, that has them not at one time or
other. Hence it was the saying of Avenzoar, that it was a Miracle, if any
living Mortal escaped these Diseases, and that it was rather to be ascribed to
the goodness of God, then to any other cause. Which Thomas Willis also seems to
intimate, lib. de Feb. cap. 16. where he says, It is no more then what every
man is to expect once to be afflicted with the Small Pox or Measles: if by
chance any one live free from them all his Life, or if another have them more
then once* they are rare and unusual Events of Nature, that no way contradict
common Observation. For it is certain that all Mankind and only Mankind is
Subject to the small Pocks and Measles, and if they escape them once, they never
have them again.

The Parts which are affected in these Distempers, is either the whole Body in
respect of the Fever, or the External Parts in respect of the Wheals and Spots
conspicuous in it: or sometimes the Internal Parts, as the Stomac, Guts, Lungs,
Liver and Kidneys; for that those Parts are many times full of the Pox, is
frequently seen by the Dissections of Bodies cary'd of by that Distemper.

But these Diseases though they share of the same Malignity yet they differ in
these things. 1. That in regard there is a double Excrement of the Blood
infected with that Malignity, of which the one is thick, the other thin; the
Pocks proceeds from the thicker Excrement, and from the thinner the Measles. 2.
That in these by reason of the Diversity of the Matter, there rises up Wheals
which are full of Matter; in the other only Spots appear, with a small
elevation of the Skin, but without any Mattery Substance. 3. That the first
after the Patient is cured, leaves Pits and Scars behind them; the other cause
no Deformity.

But because that Spots also break forth in a Pestilential Fever, by which a
Physician may be lead into an Error* we are to observe the difference between
those Spots, and the other which break for at the beginning of the Small Pox
and Measles. 1. That the Spots which first appear at the beginning of the Small
Pox and Measles, are of a florid red Color, and very small, but afterward
dilate, and chiefly appear in the Face and Hands. But the Spots in Pestilent
Fevers are of a more dark Red, oft-times inclining to a Purple, and at the
beginning somewhat broader, but exactly round, and never appear upon the Face
and Hands, but upon the Breast and Back. 2. That the Spots in the Small Pox and
Measles, appear by way of Crisis much about the third or fourth day after the
seizing of the Fever, and with ease to the Patient; whereas the Spots in
Pestilential Fevers, that appear about the seventh day, are Symtomatical for
the most Part, and render the Patient worse. 3. That the Fever-spots, appear
first like the Bitings of Fleas, but the Spots of the Small Poxs and Measles
have not the least resemblance to Flea-bites.

CHAP. II. Of the Small Pox in Specie.
THE Small Pox are little Wheals full of Matter, breaking forth in the upper
Part of the Skin, and conspicuous (seldom seizing the inner Parts) accompanied
with a continual Fever, and proceeding from a Peculiar Malignant, Fermentaceous
Effervescency of Humors.

They are most common to Children; Young men have them not so often; and Old
men are seldom troubled with them.

They subsist for the most Part in the Skin only; and break forth upon the Jaws
and Nostrils, Nature thrusting forth the Malignant Humor from the Center to the
Periphery.

In which Operation, if she be hindered or hesitate either by reason of her own
weakness, either through the abundance of the Morbific Matter, or the
insufficient or two slow Progress of the Specific Fermentation; then not only
the Gullet, Stomac, Liver, Lungs, Spleen, Womb, and other internal ^wels are
beset with filthy little Ulcers like the Skin, as we have seen in several dead
Bodies after Dissection, and appears by the Writings and Testimonies of
Paraeus, Fernelius, and many others.

In the mean time, as to the Skin, we are to take Notice by the way, that
although the Wheals are dispeirs'd up and down in several Parts of it, yet they
do not break forth in all places equal in quantity: for that many times they
are more abounding and bigger in the Face, Hands and Feet then in other Parts.
The Reason of which effect Lazarus Riverius ascribes very plausibly to the
Liver, by whose more fiery temper occasioned by this malignant ebullition, he
believes the corrupted and putrid Humors are driven with greater violence to
these Parts, which he calls the Emunctories of the Liver, than to any other
Parts. In the same manner as they who have a hot Liver, are used to be troubled
with red and pimpled Faces; and feel a glowing heat in the Soles of their Feet,
and the Palms of their Hands. Mercurialis brings other Reasons for this Effect,
but much farther fetched. lib. de Morb. puer. But the foresaid Reason of
Riverius seems to be very probable. Nevertheless we are to understand, that
sometimes it may happen, that the Pox may be thought to come out in greater
abundance in those Parts then in others by mistake, as not being really so, but
because in those Parts they are continually in view, and more troublesome then
in other Parts.

No Age can be assured to escape them, but Children are more frequently troubled
with them then People of riper Years. Because her weaker Constitutions are less
able to resist the Specific malignant Matter, and seems more apt to that
peculiar Ebullition which happens in that Disease. Old Age challenges a greater
immunity from them, then other Ages. Moreover those Bodies are more easily
infected which have any Analogy with the Bodies which are infected: and
therefore Kindred more easily infect one another, which we have already
observed in our Book de Peste.

They are very rife all Seasons of the Year, but more especially in Spring and
Autumn, chiefly if the preceding Winter was warm and moist, or the Summer
rainy, and the Wind Southerly, attended with plenty of early Fruit.

Sometimes the Disease dispeirses it self, sometimes it is Epidemic, and
sometimes it ceases for a time: But when it is Epidemical, then it happens to
be accompanied with other Distempers, in such as never had the Small Pox before.

They arise from the thicker or more viscous Matter, to which that Malignity
adheres, with the Blood fermenting after a Specif^c Manner, and hence they rise
up into large, mattery Pusles.

Thomas Willis believes that in this Fermentation, some Portions of the Blood,
are coagulated with the Poison, and so expelled forth together with it. But
this does not seem so very probable, for though they are corrupted, yet they
are not coagulated; seeing that portions so coagulated, would not so easily be
expelled forth, by reason of their extraordinary thickness. But this Ebullition
is performed after the same manner as in Beer that works; wherein there is no
coagulation of the Humor; but many spirituous Particles being strongly agitated
in the Ale by the Fermentaceous Effervescency, and involved and intermixed with
more viscous Particles tend upward and swim upon the top of the Ale, or else
burst forth in froth out of the Vessel, but are not coagulated; for they are
very subtle and spirituous; as appears not only by their strong Savor, but also
by this, that out of that same strong flower of Ale being distilled, are drawn
Spirits almost as strong as the Spirits of Wine.

A Fever always accompanies the Small Pox, sometimes gentle, sometimes higher,
sometimes more remiss, and that Putrid also, as appears by the critical
Evacuation by Wheals, which could never be done without a putrid Ebullition.
For where corrupt and putrid Humors are separated from the good, there of
necessity must be either some Putrefaction, or putrid Effervescency: Some there
are who write that the Small Pox may come without a Fever, but it is not true.
And their mistake proceeds from hence, because in Infants and little Children,
that Fever is so gentle before the Pox come out, that it hardly does them any
observable Prejudice. For if they appear a little more froward then ordinary,
or sleepy, or refuse their meat, or are less cheerful then they use to be, the
Nurses readily ascribe that to their Breeding their Teeth, or to the Worms; so
that when the Small Pox comes out, they are apt to say, they came out without
any Fever attending them: whereas that small Fever was not sufficiently taken
notice of by themselves.

Which sort of Fever can be referred to no sort of Fever more truly then to
that purtrid continual Fever, called Synoche. For during that sort of Fever
there is a putrid Ebullition of the Blood in the Vessels with an equal heat
through the whole course of the Disease, and at length a Critical Expulsion of
the Vicious Humors.

There are different sorts of the Small Pox, of which few Physicians have taken
notice. For some are bigger and more full of Matter, and come out thick, which
the Dutch call (...), de Pocken. Others Less, which the sam^ Dutch call de
Steen Pocken. And these are certain small Wheals without much matter, that come
out in the Skin scatteringly, and in no extraordinary quantity, without any
grievous or violent Symptoms. The others are clear and large, transparent like
Water or Crystal, and containing a certain Watery kind of Liquor, which the
Dutch call Wint-Pocken, and some Water-Pocken. Besides these there are other
differences of the Pox, as they are either great or small, thick or few, deep
or superficial, contiguous or disjoined, white or ruddy, livid, violet or other
colored, soft or hard, high or low, quick or slowly coming forth, External or
Internal.

CHAP. III. Of the Causes of the Small Pox.
THE Causes of the Small Pox are External or Internal. Concerning which there
are various and great Contentions among the most Eminent Physicians, so much
the more vainly eager, because of little or no use; in regard that whatsoever
be the cause of the Distempers, the cure is still the same.

Avicen and most of the Arabians, the first most accurate Describers of these
Diseases, refer the material Cause to the Impurity of the Mothers Blood,
slagnant in the Woman with Child, and with which the Birth was nourished in the
Womb. Which Corruption, they write, lies dormant so long in the Body, till by
virtue of some specific efficient Cause, it be provoked to a fermentaceous
Effervescency, and being powered forth into the Mass of the Blood, it sets it
all in a boiling Condition, and by that means separates that Defilment,
adhering from the Birth to some minute Particles of the Body, and being so
separated, pushes it forward, together with the Particles of the Blood so
defiled by it, to the Extreme Parts of the Body, and there raises up those
Wheals, as in new Wine the Heterogeneal Parts are separated from the Homogeneal
Parts of the Wine by Fermentaceous Ebullition. Avenzoar seems to differ
somewhat from Avicen; for observing that the Birth in the Womb; without hazard
of Life, can hardly be nourished by the impure menstruous Blood restagnant
therein; but with some other Blood good of it self, only by reason of its
Fellowship with the menstruous Blood, defiled by its Superior Corruption; and
farther, that Men in the Womb must be nourished either with some such
menstruous Blood, or some other impure Blood, and for that reason contracted
that Impurity from the first Nutrition of the Parts. Hence it was that the
Arabians believed, that all Men were subject to the Smallpox, in regard that
Impurity was again to be separated from the Parts. So that if that Specific
Fermentaceous Effervescency be strongly and efficiently performed at the first
coming of the Smallpox, then that Impurity becomes totally evacuated; and then
the Person to whom that Disease happens, lives free from that Distemper all the
rest of his Life (as when Butter is once by a strong Churming separated from
Milk, turning sour, no Churming, how violent soever, can separate any more
Butter from it.) But if that Effervescency be not violent enough, that Impurity
happens not to be totally expelled, and so the same Person, when the Relics
of that Defilement ferment again, upon some other Cause, may happen to have the
same Distemper a second and third time, but rarely a fourth.

Duncanus Liddelius stoutly defends the Opinion of the Arabians; which is also
followed by Fracastorius, Amatus, Forestus and several other Physicians, and
among the rest, by Thomas Willis, Lib. de. Feb. c. 15. Where, among other
Reasons, for greater Confirmation, he adds these Words.

In the Womb of Woman, says he, as in most other Creatures, there is generated
a certain Ferment, which being communicated to the Mass of Blood, gives it
Vigor and Spirit, and causes it to swell at certain Periods of Time, and
procures an Expulsion of the Superst^ous Blood. But at the time of Conception,
when the Flowers cease to ^low, the chiefest Part of this Ferment is expended
upon the Birth, and the Particles of it heterogeneous from some of the rest, as
it were somewhat of foreign Substance, are confused with the Mass of the Blood
and Humors, where they lie dormant a long time. Afterward, being stirred and
provoked by some evident Cause, they ferment with the Blood, and make it first
boil, and then congeal, from whence various Symptoms of this Disease arise.

Gentilis rejects this Opinion of the Arabians, not believing the Birth to be
nourished in the Womb with any Impure Blood; nor that so much Impurity could
abide for so many years in Men grown up, and old People, when they are seized
with the Smallpox, after so many Purgations by Sweat, Fevers, Itches, and
other intervening Diseases, besides the Cure of the Great Pox; nor can he think
but that Women must be cleared of those Impurities in so long a time by their
monthly Evacuations.

Mercurialis complies with Gentilis, who also asserts, that the Small Pox is a
Hereditary Disease, and consequently, that there is hardly any Man who can
escape them, because all Men are born of Parents vitiated by this Distemper;
and he endeavors to confirm this Opinion of his by several sinewy Reasons,
which however Daniel Sennnertus overthrows by others much the stronger.

Fernelius observing something occult in the Productions of the Small Pox,
besides the various Reasons propounded by Gentilis and others, affirms, that
they are produced by some Celestial and hidden Causes, which when Infants and
Children, are less able to withstand than People grown up: Hence he says it
happens that the one are much more Subject to this Disease than the other. But
this Opinion of Fernelius, is notably refuted by Mercurialis, Lib. de Morb.
Puer.

Sennertus grants the Small Pox to rise and be thrust forth by some certain and
determined putrid Ebullition of the Humors, but he will have this Ebullition to
arise from three Causes; from the Malignant Air, from the Mothers Blood, and
vicious Nourishment; and labors in a large Explanation of his, this his own,
and the Opinion, of the Arabians, and Fernelius.

But to speak the truth, none of these Opinions please me. Not that of the
Arabians, because besides the Reasons alleged by Gentilis, there is this one
more. For that seeing that Defilement contracted from the Mothers Blood, is
asserted to be common to all Men, there would be no Man excused from this
Disease; which is contrary to Experience, when several that have lived to an
extreme old Age, never had the Smallpox in their Lives, as we have known
several in our own Family. Besides, if the Impurity of the Menstruous Blood
communicated to the Birth, were the Cause of the Smallpox, why are not those
Women themselves subject to it, whose Flowers stop beyond the Course of Nature;
especially they who never had their Courses in all their Lives, yet for all
that were fruitful and had several Children; of which Women, there are several
Examples to be found in Trincavellius, Guainerius, Bertinus, Marcellus,
Donatus, Ioubert, Fabricius, and several others. Besides, that private
Defilement of every Woman could very hardly infect others by Contagion, or
excite a latent Contamination in the Bodies of others to a like Ebullition. If
you say it may, then give me a Reason, why all they that fit by and attend upon
People when the Pox is come forth, and endure their Stenches, are not infected
with the Small Pox, though they never had them before? Why has not that
Contagion infected me, that am near seventy years of Age, who have visited
thousands in the height of that Distemper, endured their Stenches, and handled
their Ulcers? Why some, upon the Sight at a distance of a Person that has newly
had the Smallpox, are presently seized by the Distemper? It being a thing
almost incredible, that the Contagion or infecting Contamination flowing from
the Sick Patient, should fly at such a distance from the Sick to the Sound and
Healthy, and so infect him, and leave those untouched that are always
conversant in the Room. Nor do I understand that which Thomas Willis adds for
the Confirmation of his Opinion, that that same private Contamination being
provoked by some Cause, serments with the Blood, and makes it first boil, and
then coagulate. For since Ebullition always causes a greater Attenuation, I do
not comprehend how that can cause Coagulation. Moreover, if such a spontaneous
Coagulation were necessary after Ebullition, Physicians at the beginning of the
Distemper would ill apply attenuating Diaphoretics, as being a hindrance to
that Coagulation, and afterward they would as erroneously prescribe thickning
things, as Lentils, Tragacanth, Figgs, etc. which would cause too great a
Coagulation. Both which are repugnant to Experience, when both the one and the
other are successfully made use of in the Cure of this Distemper.

Nor does the Opinion of Fernelius please me; for he, according to his Custom,
deduces occult Celestial Causes in occult Diseases from the Influences of the
Stars. But how uncertain and how frivolous all those things are which are
deduced from those Influxes, either by Astrologers or Physicians is apparent
from what we have wrote in our Treatise De Peste, Lib. 1. Cap. 8.

Neither can I approve the Opinion of Sennertus. For he proposes three Causes
of vicious Fermentation, yet by means of that Specific Malignancy which remains
in the Smallpox cannot be explained; and why, by virtue of that vicious
Fermentation, procured by those three Causes, the Smallpox should be
occasioned, rather than other malignant, putrid and pestilent Fevers, or the
Itch, St. Anthonies-Fire, Cancers, or such like Diseases.

As to the External and Primary Causes of the Smallpox, by which the Internal
Humors are moved, Physicians agree the chief of them to be. 1. A peculiar
Disposition and depraved Quality of the Air, to which belong the more
remarkable Mutations of the Seasons, as the hot and moist Constitution of the
Spring and Autumn, the Southern Winds, and warm Constitution of the Winter. 2.
The Perturbation of the Blood and Humors; to which belong immoderate Exercise,
frequent Bathings, Anger, Fear, and Over-eating, etc. 3. Contagion; for
Experience tells us, that this Disease is caught by Contagion: For out of an
infected Body continual Steams flow forth, which being received by other
Bodies, presently like Poison ferment with the Blood, and excite the latent and
homogeneal Seeds of the same Distemper, and dispose them into the Idea of this
Disease, and thus those Contaminations flowing forth, are not only communicated
by immediate touch, but at a Distance. But by all these Causes, whether good or
bad Disposition or Quality of the Air, perturbation of the Humors or Contagion,
that Malignant Specific which we observe in the Smallpox, is not sufficiently
made out, nor wherefore it operates more in these, than upon those Subjects,
and in these, than at those Seasons. For many times we have observed hot or
moist, and hot with moist Seasons and Constitutions of the Air; many times bad
Diet, as in Famines and Sieges, which has occasioned a^ vast Corruption of
Humors in the Body; many we find continually indulging their Appetites; which
Willis numbers among the Primary Causes of this Distemper, and yet no Smallpox
ensued. On the other side, in temperate Seasons, and in cold Winters, they have
raged Epidemically among those who have used moderate Diet, and fed upon the
best of every thing, and have seized upon Bodies replenished with good Humors,
and that many times first of all, before any other Body has been ill to
communicate the Contagion, merely upon some Fright, and by the Force of
Imagination.

Seeing then that notwithstanding all the Causes propounded by Physicians, the
true and Specific Essence of the Malignity which is in the Smallpox, nor the
peculiar and determinate Corruption of the Blood, nor the Cause and Manner of
Specific Fermentation can be explained, I think we are rather to conclude, that
the next Causes of the Smallpox, as well the Internal as the External, which
move the Internal, are occult (as are also the Causes of the Pestilence it
self) and cannot be unfolded by Us. And therefore it is better to acknowledge
the Weakness of our Knowledge, then to betray our Ignorance by so many Disputes
and various Conjectures, that are grounded upon no Foundation. For who can
pretend to give a true and perceptible Reason of so great a Matter? For these
are in the Number of those Mysteries, which the Chief Creator is not pleased to
let us know exactly.

CHAP. IV. Of the Didgnostic Signs.
THE Smallpox are not easily discerned before the Wheals themselves betray the
Distemper. But they appearing never so little, then the Sight is easily Judge
of the Disease. Seeing therefore it is of great moment in reference to the
Cure, to know before the breaking out of the Wheals, whether it be the
Smallpox or no, the Signs of their coming out are first to be inquired into
and observed.

The Signs foretelling the Smallpox to be at hand, are various. A Fever
sometimes more intense, sometimes more remise, with a low Pulse, quick,
unequal, and a Heat for the most part not very violent. An Oppression of the
Heart, with Melancholy; and a Palpitation often returning, and sometimes a
fainting Fit, Headache, Deleriums or Ravings; sometimes Epileptic Convulsions,
frequent Sneezing, Sleep more heavy than usual and unquiet, Dreams of Thunder,
Fire and Flames, Waking with a Fright, difficult Respiration, with frequent
Sighs; continual Gaping, Pain in the Back and Loins, and Pulsation in the
Spine, Heaviness and Weariness of the whole Body, a Pricking, and as it were
Itching in the Skin and in the Nostrils; a Red Face, Dimness of Sight, yet
Brightness and Itching of the Eyes, Tears without any force, sometimes Bleeding
at the Nose, Swelling of the Face, Dryness of the Mouth, Hoarsness, with a
little dry Cough; trembling of the Extreme Parts, small Red Spots in the Skin.
But these Signs are the more certain, the more rife the Smallpox are, or if
there be any suspicion of having caught them; as if the Person has been to
visit any one that was Sick of that Disease, or had been frighted with the
Sight of any one newly recovered: But there is no certain Sign of the Smallpox
at hand to be taken from the Urine. For that in this Distemper, the Urine for
the most part resembles that of sound People.

If the Smallpox, besides the outward Skin, have seized the Inner Parts, then
you must judge which Parts they are, by the Disturbance of those Parts. For if
the Stomach be infected, it will appear by Vomit and Pain in the Heart. If the
Guts, by their being griped, and a purulent Looseness withal: if the Lungs, by
difficulty of Breathing; if the Kidneys, then the Urine will be bloody, and so
of the rest.

CHAP. V. Of the Prognostic Signs.
THE Smallpox, because they are reckoned in the Number of acute Diseases, have
their four Times like other more acute Diseases. For if the Course of the
Disease proceed conveniently, they are determined within fourteen days; which
if they exceed, it is a Sign either of the Weakness of Nature, or of a great
quantity of Morbific Matter; or both. Of these Days, the first is the
Beginning, the second the Augmentation, the third the State or Condition, and
the fourth, the beginning of the Declination, at what time the Fever and
Symptoms are wont to remit. The same fourth Day, which is the Declination of
the Ebullition, uses to be the beginning of the coming out of the Smallpox.
The Augmentation continues till the seventh Day; the State and Vigor of the
Distemper appears upon the eleventh Day; from which till the fourteenth, is the
Declination, and at that time the Pox are dried up, which Exsiccation of the
Matter sometimes continues till the twentieth Day. If the Disease proceed
without Interruption, according to this Order, we may hope for a good Issue,
but if it do not observe this Order, there is no reason to expect other than
the worst. But the Event of the Disease, whether Death or Recovery is
conjectured, by comparing the Strength of the Patient, with the greatness of
the Distemper. The Strength of the Patient is collected by his bearing the
Oppression of the Disease, and by the Actions of his Body. The Greatness of the
Distemper is gathered from the Greatness of the Fever and the Symptoms, and the
Pustles themselves. If the Strength of the Patient be such as to weather all
the four Times of the Disease, he is happy: But if his Strength be vanquished
by the force of the Fever and the Symptoms, that it will hardly suffice to
grapple with the State and Vigor of the Disease, the Event will prove very
dubious. Therefore we are to judge of the Event by those things which accompany
and follow the Smallpox. Such as are the Quality, Bigness, Number, Figure and
Color of the Pustles, the time of their coming forth and Place, the Violence
of the Fever, the various Symptoms, and the easiness or difficulty of the
Patience to undergo the Disease.

The good Prognostic Signs are these. At the beginning, before the coming forth
of any Spots, Bleeding at the Nose, a speedy coming forth, and soon after, a
Remission of the Fever and other Symptoms. The Pox themselves at first red,
then whitish, soft, high raised, round, moderately full of Matter, distinct and
not contiguous; a free Speech, and Easy Respiration. From these two latter,
Eustachius Rudius promises much toward Recovery. That we may be able, says he,
to conjecture Life or Death, it behooves us to consider well the Voice and
Respiration. For while those two things are in a good Condition, all is safe.
For they demonstrate the Matter to be expelled far from the Noble Parts,
especially from the Vitals.

The bad Prognostics are these. A Fever, with grievous Symptoms remaining after
the breaking forth of the Smallpox. The Pox slowly coming forth and slowly
ripening. Small and few, hard, depressed, and vanishing or sinking again after
coming forth: Livid. Violet Color, Purple, Blackish, double in the middle,
marked with a black Spot, and seated within the Flesh. And these presages of
great Evil, are much augmented and ascertained, by a great failing of the
Strength, Pain in the Heart, Vomiting, Hickoping, extreme Drought, great
Sadness and Disturbance of Mind, with frequent Faintings, Raving, dead Sleeps,
or too much Watching, Epileptic Convu^sions; a streightning of the Breast and
Chaps, difficulty of Breathing, Hoarsness, a Loathing of Food, Inability to
Swallow, Looseness and Pains in the Belly, a Flux of the Courses out of order,
bloody Urine, the Extreme Parts cold. To which we may add two things more. 1.
If many have died of the Smallpox out of the same Family. 2. If they were old
when they caught the Distemper.

Now they that dye of the Smallpox, for the most part are suffocated, the
Passage of the Spirits being shut up by the Pustles, or else go away in a
fainting Fit, or else are carried off with a Looseness of the Belly, either
bloody or without Blood.

If the Smallpox have seized the inner Bowels, they cause a Peripneumonie,
Consumption, pernicious Exulcerations of the Liver and Kidneys, and other
deadly Mischiefs.

If they have seized the Eyes, they frequently cause a lasting Ophthalmy, a
Lachrymal Fistula, corrosion of the corner Caruncles, Dimness and Mist, a white
Film, and many times Blindness.

If after the breaking of the Pox in the Ears or Nostrils, there happens a
Hyposarcosis, the Patient frequently looses his Hearing and Smelling.

In the Face, if they cause an entire Crust like a Vizor, it is a Sign, that
when they fall off, they will leave behind them Spots of an ill Color, and
deformed Pits withal.

CHAP. VI. Of Prophylactic or Preservative Physic.
IN this Disease, as well as in the Plague, there is required a double Cure;
Prophylactic, and Therapeutic. Of the Prophylactic Cure, but few Physicians
have wrote, either because perhaps they thought it not so necessary, or because
so very few consult the Physician when they are in Health. Nevertheless, since
that famous Physician Avenzoar, not without good reason, adjudged it no less
necessary than in the Plague, and for that there are several who are so
terribly afraid of this Distemper, as well for that it hazards their Lives, as
for the Pits and Deformed Scars it leaves behind, we shall here say something
briefly of the Prophylactic Cure, before we proceed to the Therapeutic, in
ingard it is more safe and more noble to keep off a Disease, than to expel it
out of Possession; and therefore Preservation is very necessary, more
especially since Contagion and Corruption of the Air are two of the chiefest
Spreaders of this Disease.

In the Method of Preservation, the Constitution of the Air is chiefly to be
observed, the Corruption of which, extremely conduces to the Propagation of
this Distemper, as being many times the Medium to conveigh contagious
Contamination to others. This Air, if it be vicious, is not to be corrected by
great Fires, as is usual in the Plague, (for fear of overheating the Body,) but
by Fumigations of Juniper Berries, Frankincense, Mastick, Benjamin, Amber,
Rosemary, Citron and Orange-peels, Juniper-wood, Laurel, and the like. But
nothing is more conducible than to sprinkle the Chambers with Vinegar, or
Oximel, and to receive the Fume of them into the Head, by pouring them upon a
red hot Prick; or often to smell to a Sponge dipped in Vinegar, and carried
about in a perforated Ivory Box. For as all sweet Smells that are very
fragrant, so neither are all stinking Smells to be here admitted, only Vinegar
is to be preferred before all Suffumigations, because it not only corrects the
Corruptions of the Air, and extinguishes the Contaminations that adhere to it.
Moreover, to the end the contagious Contaminations flying about in the Air may
be the better avoided, Children and others that never had the Smallpox; are to
be warned from visiting, not only People that lie sick of the Smallpox or
Measles, but also those that attend them in their Sickness, or converse with
them upon any occasion whatever, nor will it be safe to come near the Houses
where they lie sick.

The next thing requisite is a good Diet, and Meats of wholesome Juices and
easy of Digestion: to which are most agreeable for Sallets and Sauses, Sorrel,
Vinegar, Juices of Limons and Oranges, green Grapes pickled, red Goosberries,
sour Cherries, and the like. But on the otherside, abstain from Meats of hard
Digestion, and bad Nourishment, from tart Meats and much seasoned with Spice,
Salt, and dried in the Smoke, Garlic, Onyons, early Fruit; also use Moderation
in Eating, Overfulness being no less prejudicial than too much Fasting.

For Drink, use Ptisans, or small Ale, and for them that drink Wine, they must
be allowed to drink small Wines moderately. To the more Delicate, it will not
be amiss now and then to give Juleps of Decoctions of Barley, Juice of Citron,
Sirrup of sour Cherries, Violets, Limons, and such like things, that have a
pleasing and acceptable Taste. On the other side, abstain from strong Wine,
Brandy, strong Hull and Margaret-Ales, and from all other strong and spirituous
Drinks.

Let the Exercises of the Body be moderate, avoiding those that are too
laborious and overheat the Body, and such as are too easy.

Sleep moderately likewise.

The next thing to be considered, is going to Stool, in which respect, besides
the usual goings to Stool, Care should be taken to purge the Body gently from
superfluous Humors, at least once a Week, and that with Pillulae Russi, or
Pills of Aloes Rosatum, Leaves of Senna, Rhubarb, Tamarinds, and such like
Medicaments, for grown People; but let Children take Syrup of Cychory cum Rheo,
or laxative Syrrup of Corrents, and the like; but avoid strong Purges, which
disturb the Humors and the whole Body. Care also must be taken that the monthly
Evacuations of Virgins and Women that are not with Child, observe their exact
Periods; and that there be no Stoppage of the Blood, as to those who are
troubled with Hemorrhoids at certain Intervals, take care that such Blood have
its due Evacuation.

As to Plethorics, and such who have an abundance of Blood, Blood-letting will
be very requisite, if the Age of the Person will bear it, and there be no other
reason to forbid it.

Tranquillity of Mind and Courage are also in this Case of great Importance.
More especially, let a Man take care to avoid violent Commotions of Mind, as
Anger, Fear, Frights, and fixing the Thoughts upon the Smallpox and it is
Deformity.

CHAP. VII. Of Therapeutic Cure, and first of Diet.
IN the Cure of those that are sick of the Smallpox, the Physician must aim
chiefly at two things. The first is to assist Nature in the Expulsion of the
Morbific Matter, and to remove all Impediments that hinder her Operations in
that Particular. The other is to remove Accidents, and to take care, least by
that Expulsion, the Internal or External Parts receive no prejudice; and for
the obtaining of these Ends, we must have recourse to the three Instruments of
Physic, Diet, Chyrurgery, and Pharmacy.

There is a most exact Diet to be observed in this Disease, in regard that many
times by that alone the Cure is effected, and Errors committed in that, are
often punished with Death.

Here also the Air is greatly to be considered; let the Patient lie in a little
Chamber close shut, and free from any Wind, to the end he may the more easily
breath, and that the stinking Vapors being the more easily discussed, may the
less offend him. Let the Air be tepid, and as little of Cold come in as may be;
if it be Winter or a cold Season, the Air is to be corrected with lusty Fires.
More especially, take care that no Cold get into the Patients Bed. For should
the least Cold come to him while he is in a Sweat or a moist Breathing, or if
the Patient himself, by tossing and tumbling should throw of the Clothes and
check his Sweat, it frequently happens that the Pox fall in again and vanish,
or sink into the Skin, to the great Hazard of Life. For which reason, the
Patient must not be shifted till after the fourteenth Day, for fear of striking
in the Pox again, to the irrecoverable Ruin of the Patient. Far better it is
to suffer the Shifts of the Patient, moist with Sweat, to dry of themselves
with the Heat of the Bed, and for the Patient for some Days to bear with the
Stench of the Sweat, and the Pustles coming forth, than to change his Linen
and be the Cause of his own Death. But if there be an urgent Necessity for the
Patient to change his Linen, then let him have the same fowl Linen that he
put off just before he fell sick, or that have been worn before by some other
sound Body. For I have often observed clean and newly washed Linen to have
been very prejudicial to sick People, which I am apt to believe proceeds from
the Smell of the Soap, which the Linen in some measure retains. Moreover great
Care is to be taken that the Shift be well warmed by the Fire, and that no Cold
comes to the Patient while he puts it on. However, this is certain, it is better
not to change Linen at all; but to change before the fourteenth Day is a thing
not to be done without extreme Hazard. Nor is there any reason for any Man to
be afraid of any bad Smell which the Linen contracts from the Sweat and broken
Pustles, for that we never found it to be prejudicial to any that were ever
sick of the Distemper.

Lastly, we thought fit to observe here that the Heads of those that are sick
of the Smallpox are not to be bound and wraped up in Linen Caps, either too
hard or too warm; for from thence arise two Inconveniences. 1. Because the Heat
of the Head being thus increased, the Pox break out thicker in the Face and
Head, than if it be more slightly covered. 2. Because that under Caps bound
hard to the Head, the Pox rise larger, flatter, and very broad, nay, many times
under those straight Caps, they are so ulcerated, that after a troublesome Cure
they leave very ill-favored Scars behind. For which reason, I always order the
Head to be slightly covered, with just Linen enough to keep it from the Cold,
and by no means to bind it on hard.

Convenient Administration of Diet avails also very much to the Cure of the
Distemper. At first a very slender Diet, more especially from the beginning of
the Disease to the seventh or fourteenth Day, chiefly of a little Barly-broth,
or an Emulsion of Sweet Almonds, and the four cold Seeds boiled in Barly-water,
or slender Chicken or Mutton-broths, endued with a cooling Quality, by the
Addition of Lettice, Endive or Purslain, etc. But let him abstain from all
manner of Flesh, as also from Eggs and Fish, and all other Meats of ill Juice
or hard Concoction; also from all acid, salt, sharp things; from all Spices,
Garlic, Onions, and all such things as are very hot. If the Patient be a
sucking Infant, then the same Diet is to be prescribed to the Nurse. But after
the Pox are come out, that the Fever ceases, and that the Pustles are ripe, and
the Scabs begin to fall, then more solid Diet is to be allowed; as Chickens,
Lamb, Veal, Potch'd Eggs, etc.

For Drink, the Patient must make use of Ptisans, or else a Decoction of rasp'd
Hearts-horn; let him abstain from Wine, unless in case of fainting Fits, and
from all other strong, hot, and heady Drinks. Now how prejudicial it is for
such a Patient to drink Wine, Forestus observes, Some idle and unskilful Women
and Nurses, says he, there are, who will give Claret to Children lying ill of
the Smallpox and Measles, though at the same time having a violent Fever,
vainly persuading themselves that such Drink will bring out the Pox with more
ease. Whence it comes to pass, that many after they have drank that Astringent
Wine dye of a sudden, the Motion of Nature being checked, and She thereby
disabled to ex^el the Distemper forth. Others, the Fever being heightened, have
been tormented with Headache, and fallen into raving Fits, and soon after dye
Mad; very few, and they not without great hazard, escape.

Here by the way, let us take notice what Mercurialis observes, concerning
sweet things in Diet. But, says he, more especially take care to abstain from
all sweet things in Meat and Drink. To which he adds, what Avenzoar writes,
that they who use sweet things at that time, are hardly to be recovered. But
this Opinion does not agree with common Practice, by which we are taught, that
Licorice, Figs, Jujubs, Raisons, Sugar, common Syrrup, and such like sweet
things, do the soonest concoct and expel the Morbific Matter to the outward
Parts, and therefore sweet things cannot be hurtful in this Distemper. Only
sweet Wines are to be excepted, which being strong, offend the Head, augment
the Heat, and increase the Fever. Besides that, Mercurialis at another time
confesses, that he was wont to prescribe dry Figs for one sort of Diet in this
Distemper.

Moderate Sleep will suffice, and let the Patient lie quiet in his Bed.

If he void his Excrements freely and naturally, it is very well. But if his
Belly be hard bound, and full of Excrement, it will not be proper to move his
Belly before the seventh Day, and not then neither, unless upon some
extraordinary and urgent necessity. For the Belly being bound, does not hinder
the coming forth of the Smallpox; but if it be provoked, there may easily
ensue a pernicious Looseness.

Avoid all careful and anxious thoughts, and all vehement Perturbations of the
Mind, as Fear, a Fright, Sadness and Anger. Though as for Anger, Mercurialis
seems to be of another Opinion, and believes it may be profitable, For, says
he, Nor is it a thing to be regarded, if Patients in this Distemper are
sometimes angry, for Anger many times is useful to expel noxious Humors to the
Superficies of the Body. But I wish it may not contribute to increase the Heat
and the Fever.

CHAP. VIII. Of Chyrurgical Helps.
THE Primary Assistance of Chyrurgery is Blood-letting: concerning which there
arises a notable Question among the most Eminent Physicians; whether it be
convenient in the Cure of this Distemper or no?

Avicen persuades Blood-letting before the Pustles come forth, as also after
they are come forth if they be very full. Rases allows it only before they are
come forth; before they break forth, the Physician may let Blood, if there be
no other reason to the contrary, either by opening a Vein, or by means of a
Cupping-glass with Scarification. For the Quantity is of necessity to be
diminished. Forestus writes, that this Remedy is of wounderful use, especially
in a Plethory, so it be made use of at the beginning and before the Pustles
begin to rise; and farther he writes, that such as are let Blood in Season, are
soonest cured. Amatus the Portugueze produces several Examples of Children that
escaped by seasonable Blood-letting and Cupping, when others died, that would
not admit that way of Cure. Nicholas Fontanus writes, that he has always let
Blood with success in the Small Pox. Sennertus believes that Blood-letting is
not to be used in Children; for that their strength will not bear it. But where
the Persons are of maturity, so that they be very Plethoric, he deems it proper
to be used, at the beginning and before the fourth day, or at least before the
Pustles come out; while the Party is yet in full strength; to the end that
Nature being eased of some Part of her bur* then she may with more ease
overcome the rest. But after the fourth day, or when the Spots begin to appear,
then he believes it ought to be altogether let alone. With this Opinion of
Sennertus the Learned Willis agrees. Nevertheless there are some Eminent Modern
Practitioners, who judge Blood-letting proper not only before but after the
coming of the Pox, especially in Plethorics; and this, in some measure to check
the Ebullition of the Blood.

To decide this Controversy, in the first place, there are two times of this
Disease to be observed, the first before, the second after the coming forth of
the Pox. In the second place we are to consider with what success Nature
operates of her self at both those times by spontaneous evacuation of the
Blood, to the end that the Physician who is but Natures Minister in the
Artificial evacuation by Phlebotomy, may be able to follow her in her
successful Actions, and avoid her improsperous Efforts. Now this is most
evident to all Physicians by long Experience, that if there happens a free and
spontaneous bleeding at the Nose before the Pox come forth, it proves
fortunate, and to the great ease of the Patient; for that then the Fever
remits, and the Pox come forth with more ease and in lesser number. But if such
a spontaneous Bleeding happen after the coming forth of the Pox, it generally
proves unfortunate and pernicious to the Patient. The reason is because that
before their coming forth, Nature being eased of Part of her burden, more
easily expels what remains. And thus by this Operation of Nature the Physician
is taught what to do in Artificial evacuation, that is to say, that
Blood-letting may be advantageous before the coming forth, but of ill
consequence after the coming forth of the Distemper: And thus I have observed
for the most part that by a seasonable opening a Vein in Plethoric Persons, the
Pox come forth not only more easily and with less trouble, but are also more
suddenly ripened, which Forestus has also observed long before us. But if
Phlebotomy be made use of after the Pox come forth, nature being then employed
in concocting and expelling the Morbific matter, is very much debilitated and
called off from that Employment, with so much prejudice to the Patient, that I
have observed that most People have died who have been thus let blood. For
which reason it is always my custom to inculcate into my Scholars, that if they
be called in time to any Patient, before any signs of the coming forth of the
Distemper, that if it be necessary they may open a Vein: But after the least
signs thereof appear, and that the red Spots begin in the least to show
themselves, that they forbear to let Blood, and endeavor to help Nature in her
expulsion begun, by Antidotes, Diaphoretics and other proper Medicines.

This Blood-letting also I am willing to admit if there be a necessity in
Persons of grown years, and that are able to bear it; but in Children, before
the seventeenth or eighteenth year, I do not approve Blood-letting
notwithstanding that Avenzoar, and Averroes boast their successes in that sort
of Practice, and and that many Italian, French, Spaniards, and among the rest
Amatus the Portugueise are of the same Opinion. For though in those hot
Countries of Italy, France and Portugal such Practice may have proved
successful, I do not think it so safe to let Children Blood in our cold
Countries.

In like manner neither does Trincavellus approve of this letting Children
Blood, in regard the event proves often Fatal; or if it succeed, it is rather
to be attributed to Fortune then Reason.

Eustachius Rudius, Duncan Liddelius and Bauderon order that if the Small Pox
do not suddenly break out in Children, to lay House Swallows to the Back,
Buttocs and Hips of such Children, or else to apply Cupping-Glasses with a
slight Scarification to the same Parts, the first or second day. But this
advice I do not like for two Reasons. First, Because it is very prejudicial to
lay the Body open the first days (which must of necessity be done in the
application of Swallows and Cupping-Glasses) and so give admittance to the cold
Air, which checks the coming forth of the Small Pox. Secondly, Because it is
very dangerous to wast the strength of Children, which is apt enough to decay
of it self, by drawing away the Blood.

CHAP. IX. Of Pharmaceutic Remedies, and first of Purgations.
PHarmaceutic Remedies are twofold, either Purgative or Expulsive.

As to Purgatives, there is not a little dispute among Practitioners, whether
they ought not to be first prescribed in the Cure, and whether at the
beginning, part of the Matter ought not to be evacuated, that Nature being
eased of part, may more readily expel the rest. These Purgations many approve,
and many reject. They that approve them, unanimously consent in this; that all
strong Purgatives are to be forborne. But milder Purgatives they hold may be
safely made use of, As Pill. Ruffi. Sena-leaves, Aloes Pills, Manna, Cassia,
Tamarinds, and such other things as gently move the Belly, more especially such
as are somewhat cooling. Others with Averroes will allow no Lenitives to be
taken at the Mouth; but only that the Body may be gently moved upon urgent
necessity with Glysters and Suppositories. These therefore differ but little
from the Opinion of the other, who are absolutely against purging the Belly; of
which number is Nicolaus the Florentine, who by the Appearance of the Pox,
denis the use of Glysters. On the other side, Willis, I know not upon what
grounds, is not contented with Purgatives only, but adventures to proceed to
Emetics.

To decide this Controversy, we say, that a Physician in this particular ought
to be guided by Reason and Experience. Reason teaches us, that Nature when she
has once begun her work well, ought not to be disturbed, nor to be hindered by
any other contrary Motion, or to be called away from the business, which would
be done, if that Motion which Nature endeavors from the Center to the
Periphery, should be inverted by Purgatives from the Periphery to the Center.
Experience tells us, that always in this Distemper, the Morbific Matter moves
with success from the Center to the Periphery, ( but where Nature tends,
thither we ought to lead by the common ways agreeable to the Law of Nature) and
that a Motion contrary to this is very unfortunate, whether voluntary or
artificial, and that all Perturbations of the Belly whatever, and Vomitings are
greatly prejudicial, nay for the most part pernicious; for that they presently
check the Expulsion of the Pox, and strike those in again that were expelled;
So that the Patients overwhelmed with pains and miseries, upon the failing of
their strength, are brought to the period of their lives in a short time. It
teaches us also, that all Lenitive Medicaments whatever though never so gentle,
in this Disease procure a pernicious looseness (as we have observed in the
Plague) and that the Small Pox is sooner expelled, if there is little or no
Motion to Stool for the first day, then if there should be a looseness either
Spontaneous or Artificial, and a frequent dejection. Therefore Avicen orders
that in the Progress and end of the Distemper, the Belly should be stopped with
moderate Astringents. Of the same Opinion also are Rases and Avenzoar, and
among the Moderns Fracastorius, Mercurialis, Holler and Lazarus Riverius, who
thus writes upon this Subject. When the Small Pox begin to appear, says he,
ensuing Purgation is pernicious; especially if the Malignity be in its full
vigor, and at an Epidemic conjuncture, when most Children dye of the Distemper.
And therefore it is better to forbear all manner of Purgation; for that in
Malignant and Pestilential Diseases, Purgation at the beginning is extremely
prejudicial. And therefore I would advise Physicians, that for the first few
days they would think no more of loosening the Belly. Or if they judge it
necessary for some extraordinary cause, that they give no Purgatives or
Lenitives at the Mouth, but for grown People make use of Emollient Glysters,
and for Children and Infants of Suppositories only made of Honey. For long
practice has taught me that this is the safest way of Cure; and that others,
who pretended another way of Cure, have unfortunately killed several, nay the
most of their Patients.

CHAP. X. Of Medicines Diaphoretic, and Expellers of the Small Pox.
OMitting therefore Purgation for a time, and using Phlebotomy with great
caution upon urgent necessity, the next thing for a Physician to consider, is
whether Nature do her duty in Expulsion sufficiently or no?

In the first Case there is no necessity to assist her with much Physic,
especially if there be no grievous Symptoms, for slight ones will easily vanish
of themselves, and the Small Pox will come forth sufficiently, if there be care
taken against the External cold, and keep the Patient in a gentle Sweat for the
first three or four days. But if the Patient happen to be of the Number of the
great Personages, or one of their Children, who will not be satisfied with such
plain and ordinary words of the Physician, then you may prescribe a small
quantity of Bezoar Stone, with Magistry of Pearls, or Crabs Eyes, or Essence of
Corral, adding thereto some few Grains of Saffron, or some such thing that will
not disturb Nature in her work and satisfy the importunity of Friends or
Parents.

But if Nature seem insufficient in the performance of her Duty, so that she
requires Assistance, we must have recourse to other remedys, that may succor
Nature in her Endeavors.

Now among those Expulsives, that are to be prescribed upon the first coming of
the Physician, are most of those Diaphoretics and Antidotes, which we have said
are to be prescribed at the beginning of the Pestilence. lib. 3. cap. 5. out of
which the Physician may choose those that he thinks most proper for his
Patient. For some are most proper for Infants and Children, others for grown
People, others for the robust, some for the feeble, others for such as have but
slight Fevers, and others for those whose Fevers are more violent. For the
robust, the most generous Medicines are Treacle and Diascordium, with Salts of
Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus and the like. For Children and Nice Persons make
choice of such things as have a grateful Taste, composed of the Species of
Heartshorn, coral, Pearls, Saffron, Alkermes, Hyacinth and such like. But above
all the rest I never found any thing more effectual then our Treacle-water,
which we have described in our Treatise of the Pestilence. lib. 3. cap. 5.
which has no ungrateful Taste, and therefore may be given alone, or with some
pleasing Syrup to Children and Infants.

If the Small Pox do not come forth freely, in the first place let the Patient
take some Sudorific, prescribed after the following manners.

. Treacle of Andromachus j. Salt of Carduus Benedict. j. s. Water of Carduus.
Benedict. ij. Mix them for a draught.

. Diascordium of Fracastorius, Treacle, of each s. Extract of Carduus Ben. Salt
of Wormwood, of each j. Decoction of Carduus Ben. q. s. Mix them for a draught.

. Diascordium j. Hearts-horn burn^, red Coral prepared of each j. of our
Treacle-water j. s. Syrup of dry Roses s. mix them for a draught, if there be
any fear of a looseness.

. Of our Treacle water j. or j. s. double refined Sugar j. mix them for a
draught for very nice Children.

. Confect. Hyacinth, Diascordium, Hartshorn burnt of each j. Mix them for a
Bolus.

. Pulv. Liberants ij. Saffron gr. iiij. Hartshorn burnt j. Mix them for a
Powder.

. Pearls, red Coral prepared, Hartshorn burnt of each j. Man^s Christi j. Mix
them for a Powder to be taken in some Cordial Liquor.

. Seed of Columbines and Turnip-seed an. j. s. of Nosesmart seed j. make a
Powder for ordinary People.

. New Sheeps dung vj. or j. small VVhite-wine, Decoction of Barley an. j. s.
Mingle them together, and let them stand two or three hours, then strain them
gently, and give the Liquor strained for one draught, which powerfully expels
the small Pox.

After these and such like other forms, Sudorifics may be conveniently
prescribed and exhibited. There is it requisite in this Case to prescribe many
laborious Compositions as the same Physicians (especially the Scholars of
Paracelsus) with great Ostentation will be studying to do: in regard that a few
are sufficient for this Indication.

When the Patient has taken his Sudorific, he is to be well covered with
Blankets and other Coverings, and so be provoked to Sweat. Nevertheless care is
to be taken, least being covered too hot, or lying in a hot Stove, he do not
fall into a Swoon, for as in all other things, so there is a Moderation to be
observed in this sort of swoonding.

Here by the way we are to take notice, that Fracastorius, Io Paschalis,
Forestus, Riverius, and many others recommend for the better provoking of
Sweat, that the Patient should be covered with red Coverlets; whether they
believe that there is something of a Singular property in red, which
contributes very much to the Expulsion of the Small Pox; or that a Sweat
provoked by such red Coverlets, is more Efficacious to bring out the Small Pox;
or that the looking upon red provokes the Colors outward, as Velescus de
Taranta and Duncan Liddelius write. But they all seem to be under a great
mistake, who expect any thing particular from the red Color of the Coverlets.
For it is not the Color, but the heat provoked by the Coverlets which causes
the Expulsion of the Small Pox. But this same Error seems to have derived its
Original from hence, that formerly in the time of our great Grandfathers, the
best and thickest Coverlets were died of a red Color, the thinner and courser
Sort were died of other Colors; and hence it was that when the Physicians of
those times, saw it necessary for their Patients to be well covered, they
ordered them to be covered with the best and thickest Blankets, which the
succeeding Physicians not really observing, thought the preceding Physicians
had ordered their Patients to be covered with red Coverlets, as if they had
Experienced something more notable and singular in a red, that in any other
Color to provoke the Small Pox.

After the Patient has Sweat well, according to the proportion of his strength,
the Clothes may be somewhat lightened, to relieve him in his great Sweat.
However he is to be kept still in a moisture, or gentle Breathing Sweat for a
day or two, till the Pox are well come forward; taking great care nevertheless
that his strength be not wasted with two much heat. Thus Forestus orders the
Patient to be kept in an Air moderately warm, and to keep him so covered with
Clothes and Coverlets, that he may still lie in a kind of Breathing Sweat,
taking care above all things that the heat of the Body be not too much
augmented by heaps of Coverings, or heat of Stones, and so the Fever getting
strength, the Patient come to be stifled with a Syncope. This Duncan Liddelius
also rightly admonishes.

Now to the end that during this same Breathing-Sweat the Expulsion of the Pox
may have the more swift and better success, our Country Folks are wont to boil
sliced Figgs in small Ale, and give the Decoction lukewarm to the Patient with
good success. And Forestus highly extolls this Simple Decoction of Figs, and
gives it all Children. However Leonellus does not boil the Figs in small Ale
but in Whey, and very properly u^es that Decoction. Some will give the more
sprightly sort of Children Figs to eat: nor do they do amiss, so that their
Stomacs will bear them. For Figs, which way soever they are used, are very
wholesome in this Distemper. And this is the reason, why being boiled and mixed
in Cataplasms, and laid upon Tumors to ripen them, as they concoct crude Humors
and hasten Suppuration, so being taken in Decoctions or eaten, they drive out
the Small Pox, and cause a swift Maturation of them, as daily Experience tells
us. Only when you use them, this one thing is to be observed, that neither
they, nor their Decoctions must be given to them, whose Bellies are Laxative or
over-loose, or where a Looseness is feared; for they may excite a pernicious
Flux, where the Patient is subject already to Looseness. Frequently therefore
Physicians will not prescribe the simple Decoction of Figs, but a Composition
for the same purpose, somewhat of this nature.

. French Barley cleansed j. Licorice sliced ij. Red Vetches j. s. Turnep-seed,
Fennel-seed an. ij. Figs no. xvij. Water q. s. Make a Decoction according to
Art to two Pints.

To this Decoction some add Carduus, and Water Germander, others Lentils and
Raisins of the Sun, Parsleyseed, Culumbine-seed, Turnep, and others other
Ingredients

These two Decoctions are taken from Avicen and Rases, much used and approved
by succeeding Physicians.

. Lacca washed v. Lentils peel vj. Gum Tragacanth iij. Water q. s. make a
Decoction to a Pint and half.

. Figs vij. Lentils peeled iij. Lacca. ij s. Tragacanth, Fennel-seed an. ij.
Water lb s. Boil this to the remainder of the third Part.

Such a Decoction also may be somewhat otherwise prescribed.

. Raisins of the Sun stoned ij. dry Figs no. x. ^entils peeled iiij. Lacca j.
s. Fennel-seed iij. Parsley-seed j. s. Saffron j. Water lb iij. Boil them to
two Pints.

Garcias Lopez prescribes a Decoction of the same nature after this manner

. Dry Figs no. x. Iujubes without Kernels no. xv. Lentils peeled ij. Seeds of
Fennel, Dill, Parsley, Quinces an. ij. Lacca, Tragacanth, Roses, Saunders an.
ij. Water q. s. Boil them according to Art; and to the strained Liquor add
Saffron powdered s.

But Cardan, Io. Baptist. Sylvaticus, Amatus of Portugal, Septalius, and some
others disallow Lentils and Tragacanth. Sennertus approves those compounded
Decoctions only upon the score of Experience, because many Physicians have been
successful in the use of them, not that he gives any reason for it. But I will
give my reason which is this, because they somewhat thicken the Boiling Blood,
and dispose it to a quicker Maturation of the Blood: and therefore I think them
fit to be made use of, not only at the beginning of the Distemper, to drive out
the Pox, but a little after the beginning to hasten their Expulsion and
Maturation as we said, but now concerning Figs.

There are some who distill these Decoctions, and give the distilled Water to
the Patients. But these are Fools in Chemistry, not knowing that Lac, Figs,
Lentils, Tragacanth, and such other primary viscous and sweet Ingredients, do
not pass through the Lembec in Distillation, whence of a good and effectual
Decoction they make a Water altogether ineffectual.

If the Heat be not very intense, you may to very good purpose add to the
Decoction of Figs the Roots of Elecampane, which prosperously promote
Expulsion. Others add the Flowers of Marigolds.

Instead of these Decoctions, when the strength of the Disease, and great
necessity does not urge them, these pleasing Emulsions may be aptly prescribed
for nice and curious Palates.

. Sweet Almonds peeled j. of the four Cold seeds peeled an. j. s. Seed of
Navews, Columbines, Carduus Benedict. an. j. Barley water q. s. make an Emusion
to a pint; to which add refined Sugar, or for the richer sort Manus Christi
very clear s. or q. s. to render it gratefully sweet. Mingle all together and
make an Emulsion.

. Seed of Carduus Benedictus peeled, of Columbines, of Navews an. ij. Melons
iij. Fennel and Carduus Waters an iij. adding of Manus Christi q. s. for
sweetness, mingle all together for Infants and Children.

All the Germans make these Emulsions with the Distilled Waters of Sorrel,
Borage, Carduus, and Scabious, etc. But we ascribe little strength to them, and
value more the Decoction of Barley, which may in some manner promote Maturation.

If there be any who with more discretion think fit to use Sweetmeats, they
may be prescribed after this manner.

. Root of Elecampane Condited, Conserve of Borage and Violets an. j. Syrup of
Elecampane q. s. mix them and make an Electuary.

. The pulp of large Raisins of the Sun, and Figs, preserved Orange-peel,
Conserve of Roses an. vj. Syrup of Orangs q. s. mix them for an Electuary.

. Pulvis Liberans j. Hartshorn burnt s. Citron rind condited, Wallnuts
preserved, Conserve of Marigold slowers an. vj. Syrup of Wallnuts q. s. mix
them for an Electuary.

The Chemists applaud their dissolutions, Magistery's and Essences of Pearls,
Coral, Hartshorn, and the like, rather to be magnified for their hard Names
then the benefit of their Operation: as by which great effects are promised to
be done, but very little performed, and which seem rather to aim at the gain of
the Seller's, then the Recovery of the Patient.

To all the foresaid Medicines, if there be any Intense heat of a Fever, some
cooling things may be added; as if you should add to the Decoctions Borage,
Succory, Lettice, Violet leaves, Endive, Bugloss, Roses, the four Cold seeds,
etc. or to the Electuaries, Conserve of Violets, Roses, Water Lillies Powder of
Diatragacanth, or Cold Diamargarit, Trochises of Spodium or Ivory calcined, and
the like.

Besides Internal Medicaments, Bauderon prescribes for the quick driving out
the Pox and provoking of Sweats, Epithemes which are a sort of Decoctions,
Fomentations, Emplasters, Oils to anoint the Pulses, and the like to be
outwardly applied. But these do all more harm then good, and by means of the
Ventilation of the Air, rather hinder then promote the provocation of Sweat.

However in the use of all these things a common Error of many Physicians is
here to be taken Notice of, who intermix with their Medicaments Sorrel, green
Grapes, Barberies, Ribes, Apples, Juice and Syrup of Limons, Tamarinds and such
kind of sour things, and this as they say to mitigate the heat, and stop the
Ebullition. Certainly these Gentlemen are altogether out of the way. Let them
if they please, by means of Acids mitigate the heat in Inflammations, burning
and tertian Fevers, and such like Vicious Fermentations of the Blood; but not
in this Distemper, which is to be brought to a Crisis and Expulsion and
ripening of the morbific matter by some excess of heat and Ebullition, and so
to throw off the Disease. For Acids, because they quell the heat and
Sulphurous Ebullition which attends this Disease and hinder the necessary
Concoction as also the Expulsion and Maturation of the morbific matter, and are
hurtful to the Breast, are so prejudicial, that hardly any thing can be
prescribed more dangerous.

CHAP. XI. Of the Cure of the Parts of the Body more Afflicted then others, and
first of the Internal.
AFter General Curation which regards in the first place the Preservation and
Life of the whole Body, some few things are to be said concerning the special
Cure of some parts, which in this Disease are more Afflicted then others.
Because that the Morbific matter either is more especially troublesome to them,
or falls upon them with greater force and in greater abundance.

Now the Parts more then others Afflicted are either Internal or External.

The principal Internal Parts are the Lungs, the Stomach, the Guts, the Liver
and the Reins: and that they are Affected and greivously Prejudiced is
discerned by the bad Performance of their Functions.

But although when these Parts, whether one or more be particularly afflicted,
the danger of the Patients is so great, that very few so seized, recover from
the Disease and escape, nevertheless because all do not dye but some are saved,
it behooves the Physician to Devise what Cure may be done in these desperate
Cases, and as much as may be to lessen the cause of the Disease, and assuage
the Symptoms, that so he may either restore the Patient to Health, or procure
him a more easy Death.

In General the Decoctions of Lentils, Lack, and Tragacanth relieve all these
Parts and Bowels so Afflicted. For Lack preserves the Liver, Spleen and
Kidneys; Lentils Corroborate the Intestines, and Tragacanth defends the
spiritual Parts.

Particularly sweet things are proper for the Lungs, Laboring under Sickness,
as being those things which promote Maturation, assuage Coughing, and
facilitate Spitting.

Such are Syrup of Coltsfoot, Licorice, Jujubes, Wild Poppies, Violets, Roses,
cold Diatragacanth, Diapendium, Powder and Juice of Licorice, Conserves of
Roses, Borage, Violets, and the like, of which as occasion requires, sometimes
Loches, sometimes Trochischs, sometimes Electuaries are made. Or else Pectoral
Decoctions of Barley cleans'd, Coltsfoot, Althea, Violet Leaves, Figs,
Raisins, Jujubes, etc. are sweetened by their mixture.

Treacle at the beginning powerfully asswages Vomiting of the Stomach and Pains
of the Heart. Afterward some such kind of Emulsion is to be Administered.

. Sweet Almonds cleans'd j. four greater Cold seeds an. j. s. Lettice and
Columbine seed an. j. s. White Poppy seed ij. s. Barley water q. s. make an
Emulsion for one pint. To which add Syrup of Poppies ij. Syrup of Borage s. Mix
them.

Outwardly a Fomentation may be applied to the Region of the Stomach, of a
Decoction of Mallows, Althea, Mint, Sage, Thyme, Marjoram, Flowers of Roses,
Camomil and Melilot, seeds of Anise and Cumin. After Fomentation for the
greater Corroboration of the Part, anoint with this Liniments.

. Oil of Mint and Anise. an. j. Expression of Nutmegs j. s. Oil of Spike and
Bricks an. j. Mix them for a Liniment.

After Unction, let this little Bag be laid on, sprinkled with hot Wine, or
else boiled a little in Wine, and gently squeezed.

. Ledves of Majoram, Rosemary, Sage, Flowers of Melilot and Roses an. half ^
handful, Seeds of Dill, Lovage, Cumin, Nutmegs an. j. Clove Gilliflowers ij.
make a gross Powder* and sow it in a little Linen bag according to Art.

Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, Hart's-horn burnt Crabes, Eyes Powdered,
Terra Sigellata or sealed Earth, red Coral, conserve of red Roses, or else the
first Decoction of Avicen in the foregoing Chapter assuage the Gripings of the
Guts, and stop the Flux of the Belly. Or else some such kind of Almond
Composition.

. White Poppy seed iij. Sweet Almonds cleansed ij. Decoction of Barley, q. s.
make an Emulsion to a Pint, to which add, Syrup of Poppies and dry Roses an.
iij. mix them together for an Almond composition.

When the Liver is affected the same Amygdalate will be very proper, adding the
four cold Seeds. Or else a Decoction of Barley with red Roses and red Saunders
sweetened with Syrup of wild Poppies, Roses and Violets. Or else an Electuary of
Citron Rinds condited, Conserve of Roses, Borage, Violets, and Powder of the
three Saunders, with an addition of Syrup of wild Poppies.

For the Kindneys, if the Patient makes Bloody Water, the following Emulsion is
to be prescribed.

. Sweet Almonds cleansed j. s. the four cold Seeds an. j. White Poppy seed iij.
Decoction of Barley q. s. make an Emulsion to a Pint. In which dissolve
Tragacanth powdered ij. Syrups of Wild Poppy, dried Roses and Cumphry an. s.
Mix them together for an Almond composition.

Liddelius in this case commends powder of Amber Trochischs of Yellow Amber, or
Alkakengy, with an Emulsion of the four greater cold Seeds.

These are the primary and chief things which can be prescribed and administered
in these most dangerous cases when the inner Bowels are greivously affected,
according to which method Physiclans may and ought to devise many others of the
same Nature. For a Patient is not presently to be abandond as uttterly lost in
the pangs of extremity and danger of Death (which would be an uncharitable act
in Christanity) but it behooves a Physician to try his utmost and leave the rest
to God, who has many times restored to Health such as have lain in a desperate
condition.

CHAP. XII. Of the Cure of the External Parts.
THE External Parts which are usually most afflicted by this Distemper are the
Hands and Feet, the Mouth and Chaps, the Nose, the Ears, the Eyes and Face.

At the coming forth of the Smallpox, or when they begin to ripen, many times
an extraordinary Pain and Itching afflicts the Persons diseased, in the hollow
of their Hands, and the Soles of their Feet, because the thickness of the Skin
in those Parts prevents their coming forth. You shall cure this symptom by
somenting those Parts in warm water, or in warm water mixed with Sweet Milk, or
in a mollifying Decoction.

If the small Pox are come out very thick about the Mouth and Chaps, they cause
a difficulty of Respiration and swallowing. In this case the Mouth is
frequently to be washed, and the Throat also frequently gargl'd with the simple
Decoction of Figgs, or if there be any Inflammation or violent heat, the same
Decoction may be thus prescribed.

. Barley cleansed j. s. sliced Figs no. xvij. Raisins of the Sun stoned j. s.
Leaves of Althea, Violets, Endive, Lettice, an. one handful and a half, flowers
of pale Roses one handful, of Elder one handful, Water q. s. make a Decoction
of two pints to wash the Mouth.

When the Pox are ripe, to render the act of swallowing more easy, and cause a
swifter breaking of the Pox, let the Patient frequently swallow a Pill about
the biggness of a filbeard, of new Butter without any Salt, wrapped up in Sugar,
for this wonderfully dissolves the Swelling Pox of the Jaws. But if this happen
to fail, and that the Pox remain whol^, and that the difficulty of Breathing
and Swallowing still increases, then take a small Sponge fastened to a little
stick, and having dipped it in Syrup of Violets, squeeze it strongly against
the Jaws, to the end thereby the Pox may be forcibly broken, and the narrowness
of the Passage opened. So soon as the Pox are broken, gargle with a Decoction
of Barley, Plantain, and Red Roses, sweetened with Honey of Roses and Syrup of
Cumfrey. To defend the Nostrils from the Pox, let the Patient very often smell
to Venegar. Thus also Forestus writes, that Benedict. Faventinus, before
breaking of the Pox, ordered their Patients to smell to Vinegar, wherein they
had boiled a quantity of Roses. Liddelius, also and Riverius approve the
smelling to Vinegar. But if the Pox happen to be very thick in the Nostrils,
anoint them often with a Feather dipped in Oil of Sweet Almonds. But if they
are grown into hard Scabs, and obstruct the Nostrils, and so procure a
difficulty of Breathing, then stuff into the Nostrils new Butter without Salt,
by which means the Scabs being softened, fall off, and the Obstruction ceases
The advice of others is, that the Patients should snuff up into their Nostrils
these and the other Decoctions; but that Children cannot do; nor can grown
People do it by reason of the Obstruction. Only Butter thrust up often into the
Nostrils does the business, so that there is no need of other troublesome
Remedies. But if there be any Exulceration in the Nostrils, that is to be cured
with a Liniment made of the Oil of the Yolks of Eggs and juice of Plantain well
mixed together in a Mortar. To which, if there be an occasion of drying up the
Matter more than ordinary, you may add a little Tutia Ointment.

If the Ears ache and itch; let not the Patient handle them with his Hands: or
if they run, let the Matter go, and take care that they continue open. But if
the Pain be very much, dip a Sponge in the Decoction of the Leaves of Althea,
Flowers of ^amomil, Melilot, and Roses, Seeds of Fengreek, Dill and Cumin, and
drop it lukewarm into the Ear.

The Medicinal Part that concerns the Eyes, consists partly in Preservation,
partly in the Cure. To preserve the Eyes from being overrun with the Pox, some
wash the Eyelids with Plantain and Rose water, wherein a little prepared Tutia
has been infused, or mixed with a little white Self and Camphire. Bauderon
prescribes to this purpose the following Collyrium.

. Leaves of Black-thron-Bush, Plantain, red Roses an half a handful, Boil them
in Smiths water to iij. In the straining dissolve Saffron j. Camphire gr. v.
The white of one Egg, and mix them together. Of this drop some few drops into
the Eyes every hour, and lay little Rags dipped in the same upon the Eyelids,
and keep the Patient dark.

Liddle prescribes this,

. Rose Water ij. Plantain-water j. Powder of the Seed of Sumach ij. warm them
over a gentle Fire, and strain them with a good force. Add to the straining
Camphir j. Saffron gr. v. Mix them for a Collyrium, and let the Eyes be often
moistened with a Linen cloth dipped therein.

Mercurialis administers this,

. Rose Water, Plantain-water an. j Sumac s. let them steep a whole night, and
make a mixture with as much white of an Egg as suffices.

Or else he takes ^halybeat, Milk mixed with Rose Water; with which sometimes he
mingles a little Mirrh, to assawge the pain and itching. For my part I find
nothing better then Saffron powdered and mixed with Cream of sweet Milk. With
which mixture let the Eyes be anointed with a Feather, touching with the same
now and then the Caruncles in the larger corner, which I use with success; when
the Eyes are damnified, only adding thereto a little white Sief.

If the Eyelids cannot be preserved from the Small Pox, then it frequently
happens, that they swell very much; so that the Eyes are closed by reason of
the swelling. In this case observe, that the Eyelids, notwithstanding that
swelling, are to be opened with the Fingers once or twice every day, to the end
the humor abiding therein may be let out, which otherwise thickning within the
Eyebrows begits a Whitshot. But if by reason of the largeness of the swelling
the Eyelids cannot be conveniently opened, they are first to be fomented with
a soft Spung dipped in Mutton broth; or a lukewarm Dec^ction of Leaves of Althea,
Flowers of pale Roses, and Melilot, and Seed of Fengreek, and after the use of
this Fomentation for some time, then try again to sunder the Eyelids with your
Fingers. If after the swelling is abated, and consequently the Eyelids freely
open, any white Clouds like the white of an Egg, appear in the Eyes, dimming
the sight, blow a little white Sugar Candy finely powdered, through a quill
into the Eye; with which and nothing else I have successfully removed those
little Clouds. But if they chance to grow harder, and absolutely blind the
sight, then add to the said Sugar Candy a fourth or sixth part of Lapis
Calaminaris finely powdered together with the Sugar Candy. That powder
wonderfully takes away those Clouds and restores the sight. But if the Eyes are
Ulcerated by the Pox, they must be cured with this Collyrium.

. Ceruse washed iij Sarcocol. j. Gum Tragacanth j. Opium gr. ij. make
Trochischs of this with Muscilage of Tragacanth extracted in Plantain-water,
which when use requires, are to be dissolved in Woman's milk, or Rosewater.

The care of the Face, like that of the Eyes, consists partly in Preservation
partly in Cure.

Preservation is not intended, to prevent the breaking forth of the Pox in the
Face (for if that should be hindered, the Distemper would seize the inner Parts,
as the Brain, Meninx's, Eyes, and other Parts which would be a greater
prejudice) but that the Small Pox being dried and falling off, may leave as few
Scars and Pits as may be. To which purpose several Topics have been invented.
Some, while the Pox are coming forth, frequently foment the Face with a
Decoction wherein Pease have been boiled to an Extraordinary softness, as we
say to mash. Others anoint the Face twice a day with a Feather dipped in Oil of
Navews with great success. Forestus recommends Oil of Sweet Almonds, Riverius
Oil of Nuts. Others Bacon tosted at a hot Fire, and the dripping received into
Rosewater, and so made into a soft Ointment, which does well; and was generally
used by that great Practitioner Timannus Gesselius. Others roast the Caul of a
Boar-Pig at the Fire upon a Spit, letting the Fat drop into a Receptacle filled
with Rose Water, and smear the Face all over with that mixture, and then cover
all the Face with the Fat of the same Hog cut into thin slices. This they do
twice a day, taking off the Old, and laying on fresh, till perfect Maturation
of the Pox which happens sooner by that means, till they fall off: and this is
a great secret among the Court Lady's. Certainly none of these ways are to be
contemned, but excellent in their kind; and I believe they are many times to be
made use of. Especially among the Richer sort and great People, that think the
Physicians care do them more good by some notable Exploit, then Nature, by her
own endeavors. However I generally give this advice to my Patients, that at
the beginning they anoint the Face with a Sponge dipped in Mutton Broth after
the Mutton is boiled from the Bones, having first taken away the fat which
discolours the Face, and to use this several times in a day, till the
Maturation of the Wheals; but after that to leave the rest to Nature. Nay I
persuade many not to tamper at all but to leave the whole to Nature, especially
if the Pox do not come out very thick. Moreover I chiefly recommend this to
their care, that the Patient do not scratch and dig off the Wheals with his
Nails. For Experience teaches us, that where the Pustles dry and fall off of
themselves, without opening, they escape with sewest Pits or Scars: Which
Gracias Lopez and Forestus also observe.

But here the Custom of the Courtiers may not improperly be examined, who more
solicitous to preserve their Beauty then others, use to open the Wheals with a
Golden Bodkin to let out the Matter, before it corrode, as they pretend, more
deep into the Skin, and so make deeper Scars and Pits; which the Arabians and
many Modern Physicians also prescribe. But we must tell them that we have
always found this opening very prejudicial, and that the Pits and Scars have
been the deeper for that Operation; and Riverius is of the same Opinion. And
this Experience is supported by two Reasons. First, That Perforation ought not
to be attempted, but when the Wheals are ripe and white: But in regard that
when the Matter is white and concocted, it is a sign that all that sharp
servour, and power of corroding the Flesh or Skin is quite gone, especially the
Wheals drying up of themselves, that Operation of the Golden Needle is
altogether superfluous, seeing there is no fear of any farther Corrosion.
Secondly, The matter being drawn forth by that same opening Operation, the
Cavities are presently dried up by the ambient Air and grow hard; whence it
comes to pass that the Flesh that lies underneath, cannot grow up to fill the
vacances. On the other side, if the Wheals are not opened, but the matter be
permitted to dry up of its self, then the Flesh underneath is preserved soft,
and so much grows up again, that before the Matter is fully dried up, the place
of the Wheals are filled up again, so that when the Scabs fall off, there are
hardly any Pits to be seen. This latter Reason therefore teaches us, that great
care is to be taken to prevent the Patients from scratching off the itching
Scabs with their Fingers, or pulling them off before they are dried. For
certain experience tells us, that nothing causes deeper Pits or Scars than that
unruliness. And therefore as to Infants and Children I always advise that
their Hands be so tied and swathed up, that they may not be able to lift them
to their Faces, and scratch off the Wheals that are upon it. And this is the
Advice of the Author of the Book Entitled; Of the property of things, For,
says he, let the Nurse or Physician take care, whether they be Children or
grown People, that the little Bladders of the Pustles be not broken, either
because they itch, or for any other Reason; nor opened, specially those about
the Face: For if the Wheals are once perforated and pricked, the Scars will be
deep and lasting. And this is confirmed by the Experience of Forestus also.

The Arabians were wont to wash the opened Wheals with Salt Water, which
Paschal, Rudius and others approve. And many, with a Decoction of Saunders, red
Roses, Plantain, Myrtils and Sanicle. But such Lotions are to be rejected;
because they dry up too quickly the Pits of the Pox, and so hinder the Flesh
from growing up, so that the Pits remain as deep as they were before.

Sometimes it happens that the Small Pox leave behind filthy Exulcerations
which corrode the Skin; but these Amatus washes first with this Decoction.

. Flowers of Red Roses and Myrtils, Leaves of Lentisc, Oaken tops, and Tamirish
an* equal Parts. Water q. s. make a Decoction to wash the Ulcers, and after you
have wiped them with a Cloth strew on this powder.

. Frankincense, Mastick, red Roses, Sarcocoll. an. equal Parts, make them into
a very fine Powder.

Forestus in the same Case, besides the Camphire Ointment, uses also the
following Ointment of Lead, which Duncan Liddelius highly commends.

. Burnt Lead ij. Litharge j. Ceruse washed, vinegar an. s. Oil of Roses iij.
Honey of Roses j. Yolks of Eggs no. iij. Mirrh. s. Wax q. s. make an Ointment
according to Art.

After the Small Pox is cured, sometimes red Spots remain; for the more speedy
taking away of which, some there are that wash them twice or thrice a day with
a Decoction of Lupines and Beans, wherein some also boil the Roots of
Bull-rushes, and Southernwood leaves. Others use the distilled Water of Flowers
of Beans and Solomon's Seal, mixing therein a little juice of Limons. Others
wash the Spots with Water of Cows-dung Io. Paschal commends the Lotion of Water
of Rosemary. Mercurialis extolls the the Distilled Water of two Calves-Feet, as
many Limons, and a small quantity of Dragons. Others anoint them with the Oil
of Roses or Pomatum mixed with Tartar. But I have observed by long Practice that
they wear away sooner, if nothing at all be done to them, for the External Air,
after the Exulcerations of the Small Pox is over, drys and hardens by degrees
the new Skin, by which means the Color of those Spots wears off, and at length
wholly vanishes, when the new Skin has acquired an equal hardness with the
former. And therefore I never prescribe any Lotions or Ointments to that
purpose, in regard they do but retard the hardening of the Skin, and removal of
the Spots; and for that I find the External Air to be the only Remedy against
those Spots. But If I meet with any Court Ladys that will not be satisfied
without a Topic remedy, I recommend to them a Lotion of Bean Water, mixed with
a little Water of Tartar and juice of Limons, or else a Lotion of Virgins Milk.

To take away the Pits and other Foot Steeps of the disease many use Man's
Grease, or Mutton Suet; and many prescribe several other Ointments and
Linements. Bauderon in his prescriptions, to this purpose says he, very much
conduces Water of Honey distilled with Turpentine. Also Asses Fat melted with
Oil of Lillies: as also Oil of Eggs and Bricks. The Blood of a Hair or Bull
applied hot fills up the Pits. Also that which they call the Sword or Rind of
Pork or Bacon if the Pits be rubbed therewith, smooth the Skin and fill up the
Pits. Goose, Ducks, and Hens Grease work the same effect, as also the Ashes of
a Rams or Goats Hoof, if it may be so called, or of Egg-shells serve to the
same purpose; and to smooth the little risings in the Skin he prescribes.

. Oil of Lillys, Goose Grease, and Asses Grease an. j. Citrine Ointment s. mix
them and anoint the Tubercles going to Bed for several Nights together.

The next day wash the Face with their Decoction.

. Roots of white Lillyes ij. Cuckoo pint or Dragons i. One Citron, thin Bran
one Handful, Water q. s. Boil them for a Lukewarm Lotion every day.

Forestus among other things excels the following Ointment.

. Oil of Sweet Almonds, white Lillyes an. j. Capons Grease iij. Powder of
Pyony, and Florence, O^ice Root, Lithurge of Gold an.. s. Sugar Candy j.

All these being well mixed in a hot Mortar, and pressed through a Linen
Cloth, anoint the Places Morning and Evening, afterward wash with Distilled
Water of Calves-Feet, or Water of Cow Dung.

But all these things signifies little, for when once the Pits of the Small Pox
are dried, and that the Scars are either too hollow or too high raised, the
Skin is fixed, then all Topics are in vain. But if the Color of them be too
red and unseemly, the Color perhaps may be taken off by Virgins Milk, or else
some of those other prescriptions for taking away the Spots; but as to the
filling up of the Pits, there is nothing to be done. Add to this that Grease of
Men, sheep, Asses, Geese and the like do so darken and smut the Skin, that they
cause a greater deformity, then the Pits and Scars themselves.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Measles.
THE Measles are Spots or small red Tubercles, breaking forth in the Skin, but
never suppurating, arising from a peculiar Fermentation of the Blood.

They differ accidentally, or according to the more or the less from Small Pox;
Because the Small Pox rise up high and suppurate; but the rising of the Measles
is hardly conspicuous, and never suppurate: And therefore they sooner go off
and with less danger then the small Pox; and most frequently seize Children,
very rarely People of ripe Years or Old Men, or such as have had the Small Pox
before: For they that have had the Small Pox, are generally if not always,
exempted from the Measles, though it is true they can Challenge no, absolute
Immunity.

They generally seize the Skin and the Epidermis, where they come forth and are
seen. But whether like the Small Pox, they seize the Internal Parts or no, is
much to be Questioned, nor do I indeed believe it, in regard I do not find that
hitherto any Physician has ever found it to be so.

They rise from the more subtle, hotter, and dryer Sanguineous Humor,
inclining to Choler, fermenting after a Specific Manner, which is the reason
that they quickly come forth, and never rise into Wheals, like the Small Pox,
nor into any other considerable swellings, but coming forth small at the
beginning, they become red, broad Spots, with a slight roughness of the Skin.
After the Seventh day, and many times sooner, they vanish without any
Exulceration, not the least Footsteps remaining nor any deformity left behind.

The cause of them is the same as the cause of the Small Pox; but the
difference of the two Diseases consists in this, that the matter out of which
they are generated, in the Small Pox is thick, Sanguineous and moist, which is
the reason why they rise into Whealks: but in the Measles thin, dryer and
somewhat Choleric.

For the most Part they seldom seize the same Person above once; nor do they so
frequently as the Small Pox return Twice or Thrice, because the matter of these
being much thinner, upon the first seizure is generally dissipated and consumed.

They are accompanied with a Fever, like the Small Pox; nay, they arise from a
Fever, of which they are a kind of critical Evacuation.

The Diagnostic Signs that show the Measles to be at Hand, are the same which
portend the approach of the Small Pox, and when they are come forth, the Sight
is the Judge.

The Prognostics are, if they quickly appear, with a Diminution of the Fever,
Anxiety and other Symptoms, and persisting in their height for Three or Four
days, afterward vanish by degrees. The Evil Prognostics, if they come forth
slowly, are accompanied with bad Symptoms and disappear again the first day.
Moreover they have many other Prognostics common with the Small Pox which are
described. cap. 5. before.

The Cure at the Beginning differs nothing from the Small Pox, for that the
Patients are to be put into a Sweat by the Sudorifics prescribed cap. 10.
before, and kept in a gentle Breathing Sweat till they are wholly come forth:
No cold must come to them; but the Decoction of Barley, Licorice, Vetches and
Figs is frequently to be given them; for that expels the Measles as
successfully as the Small Pox; and their Method is to be observed till they
disappear again of their own accord, and with all the Signs of Health.

There is no need of Topics here. However sometimes it falls out, that there
will be a vehement, most troublesome and intolerable Itching and Prickings in
the Soles of the Feet, and Palms of the Hands; for the mitigation of which
Symptom, then to hold the Hands and Feet for some time in cold Water; For by
that means that Pricking is asswag'd, and the Measles in the Soles of the Feet
and the Palms of the Hands break out more easily. This Experiment was formerly
a Secret of Nicolas the Florentine, from whom Basius Astarius of Pavia borrowed
it. Concerning this matter Forestus has a Singular Observation. lib 6. Observe.
42.

Next akin to the Measles is that Distemper, which arising from the same Cause,
and requiring the same Cure, is called the Purples. Of which Haly Abbas thus
speaks, There is, says he, a sort of Distemper called Rubeola, which arises
from a hot, subtle, and not very much bad blood; and this sort when it comes to
its height, is like the Grains of Millet, or somewhat bigger, and the Color of
it Red; nor are the Pustles to be opened, but insensibly dissipate and vanish.

In this Distemper red, and as it were fiery Spots, intermixed with small
Tubercles like Millet seed, with a swelling hardly worth speaking of, break
forth over all the Body at the beginning of the Disease, as it were a kind of
St. Anthonies fire, that is the first, second, third, or fourth day. In the
height of the Distemper the whole Body seems to be red, as if it were under a
general St. Anothonies Fire. But in the Declination the redness is diminished,
and the broad Spots, as at the beginning again appear, which at length upon the
fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth or ninth day vanish, the upper Skin peeling off
like little Scales.

This Disease for the most part infests Infants and Children, very rarely
People of ripe years, and like the Measles for the most part seize upon the
Skin and Epidermis, and is easily cured, if you take care of keeping the
Patient warm. Nevertheless it happens that sometimes the Internal Parts are
seized by this Distemper, to the great hazard of the Patients Life. Thence an
Intense Fever, violent heat and extraordinary thirst; many times Inflammations
of the Chaps, Lungs and other Bowels, with diff^culty of Breathing, extreme
heaviness, deliriums, tension of the Hypochondriums, and other evil Symptoms.
In reference to which Subject Sennertus tells a remarkable Story of such a
Patient, l. 4. de Feb. c. 12.

A TREA*TISE OF THE SMALLPOX AND MEASLES.
FOR the greater Perfection and more solid Confirmation of what has been said
before, we will add the Histories of some Patients, which we have met within
our Practice, not common, but such wherein there may be something singular
observed.

HISTORY I.
IN the Year 1640. After a moist and warm Winter, followed a hot and moderately
dry Summer, wherein Fevers Tertian, Quotidian and Intermitting seized abundance
of People. About the middle of July the Small Pox and Measles began to be very
rife. In August they greatly increased, especially the Small Pox: and so
continuing to the end of that Year carried off a great many to their Graves.
More then that, they who in those two Months fell sick of other Diseases, were
also in a short time after seized by the Measles, but chiefly by the Small Pox.

At that time we saw several, who having had the Small Pox very thick, have
afterward had them a second time; and that second time they break forth in
greater quantity than the first. Nay, it has been known, that some have had the
Small Pox, and been very full too, three times within the space of six Months.
Though it be a thing that rarely uses to happen, especially in so short a time.

These Diseases took their Rise from a continual Fever, which in some is more
intense, in others more remiss, with a Pulse for the most part oppressed, weak,
thick and unequal. For the most part the Symptoms were very bad; an extreme
heaviness, oppression of the Heart, dryness of the Mouth, tremblings of the
extreme Parts, Deliriums, etc.

In many the Small Pox come forth after the first or second, but in most not
before the third fourth or fifth days; where they appeared later the Patients
were in great danger, and many died; for oft-times the strength of the Patient
was so wasted by the violence of the ^istemper, that at length, when the red
Spots, the Harbingers o^ ^e Small Pox appeared, Nature was so feeble that she
could not expel them with that vigor as she ought to have done.

They that vomited or coughed up Blood, or Pissed bloody, they generally died,
not one in six hundred escaping. For their internal Bowels being seized with
the Small Pox, were so corrupted that they could never be restored to Health.

Such as had the Small Pox very thick in their Mouths, Tongues, Palate, Chaps,
Asperia Arteria, and Gullet were very much troubled to fetch their Breaths, and
to swallow before the maturation and breaking of the Wheals; which was the
reason that many were stiffled.

They who were Purged by unskilful Physicians at the beginning for the most
part died; In regard the Small Pox come forth more Naturally, when the Belly is
bound then when it is loose.

Our Treacle water was much more prevalent to provoke Sweat in Children, then
any other Diaphoretic.

After breaking, the Decoction of Figs drank very much assisted to expel the
Pox, especially if Sycory, Carduus Benedict. Scabious, red Vetches, and other
such things were added. However it was not to be administered if the Belly were
loose.

The common People and Country folk, steeped Sheeps dung and Horse dung in Wine
or Ale, and then straining it through a Linen Cloth, gave it lukewarm with
good success to their Patients.

But the greatest part of the Cure consisted in keeping all manner of Cold from
the Patients.

ANNOTATIONS.
1. OF the Use and Virtue of Figs, and their Benefit in the Cure of these
Diseases, and the Decoctions usually made of them, we have discoursed at large
cap. 10. before. Avicen also thus speaks of their Virtues. The water of Figs,
says he, is good; for Figs are vehement expellers to the outward Parts, and
that is one way to escape the Disaster of the Small Pox.

2. This very advice concerning Cold has Avicen also taken notice of, when says
he the Small Pox begin to appear, then the catching Cold will be the occasion
of a great mistake, for that it detains the superfluity within, and carrys it
to the Principal Members, and for that it is impossible for the Small Pox to
come out and appear; thence proceeds restlesness, narrowness of the Throat, and
sometimes swoonding Therefore the superfluities are to be assisted with such
things as make them boil, and open Oppellations, as Fennel and Parsley with
Sugar and their Juices, or some Decoction of their Roots and Seeds.

HISTORY. II.
THE Daughter of John Crasselt eight Years of Age, fell sick of the Small Pox;
which for the first three days came out very thick over the Skin of the whole
Body. The fourth day she had a Hoarsness with a little Cough and pain in her
Belly. The Fever also from the beginning till this time continued in the same
degree. The sixth day a purulent Diarrhea, with griping of the ^estines
followed, and she coughed up much purulent bloody Matter. No Remedies availing,
and her strength being wasted, she died the Eighth day.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN this Patient, there is no question to be made but that the Small Pox had
seized the Internal Bowels, the Guts and Lungs, and perhaps the Liver, and
other Bowels, the affections of which in this Distemper are Mortal. Now that
the Internal Bowels may be seized by the Small Pox, our own Eyes will convince
us, as Fernelius tells us. It is often found says he, tha several who have
been Dissected after their Deaths have had their Liver, Spleen, Lungs, and all
their inner Bowels all over covered with Mattry Pustles like the Skin. Paraeus
also observes the same thing. This says he, Richard Hubert the Chyrurgion and I
saw in two Girls the one four the other seventeen years of Age; who both dying
of the Small Pox were both Dissected, at what time their internal Bowels
appeared covered over with Scabby Pustles like those upon the Skin.

HISTORY III.
THE Wife of James de Clear, a Woman of thirty years of Age, was taken with a
Fever not very violent, together with a kind of Drowsiness, pain at the Heart,
a heaviness of the Head, and a ^light intermitting Delyrium. Now because the
Small Pox were then very rife, I suspected the Small Pox would follow these
Symptoms, because she had never had them before. For the Cure therefore having
first loosened her Belly with a Glister, I gave her this Sudorific.

. Treacle, Diascordium of Fracastorius an. s. Salt of Wormwood j. Treacle water
ij. mix them for a Potion.

This taken she fell into a good Sweat; but the Disease continuing in the same
state, the same was given her again the next day, with like success, for all
that sweating would not move the Disease. Then I prescribed her to drink this
Decoction; and ordered her to be kept three days in a gentle breathing Sweat,
which she easily endured; as being a Woman of good discretion, and very
obedient to her Physician.

. Barley cleansed, Fennel Roots an. j. Elecampane Roots s. sliced Licorice ij.
red Vetches j. s. Scabious half a handful, Fennel seed j. s. Figs no^. xvij.
Water q. s. make a Decoction to two Pints.

When still no signs of the Small Pox appeared, again I loosened her Belly with
a Glyster, and the next day ordered a Vein to be opened in her Arm, the third,
taking the Decoction she sweat moderately, and so continued for ten days using
the said Decoction; afterward because the Fever and Heaviness seemed again to
increase, and for that she waxed more drowsy and restless, I again gave her the
Diaphoretic above mentioned, adding, Extract of Carduus Benedict. s. which when
she had taken and sweat violently, the forerunners of the Small Pox began to
appear up and down upon her Skin, that is to say, the red Spots: then she
continued in a gentle breathing Sweat for two days, still drinking the
Decoction before mentioned, and in that time the Small Pox were very much
risen, and the Fever with other Symptoms vanished by degrees. All the time of
the Disease she took no other Food then thin Broths; and every other day she
had once a day a Stool voluntarily.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN this Patient I almost despaired of any coming forth of the Small Pox, and
thought I had been deceived in my judgment, for I could not believe they would
have come forth so late, that is to say upon the twentieth day; neither did I
ever see them break forth so late in any other Person* Hence it appeared that
Hippocrates was in the Right, where he says, that Remedies when they are truly
administered are not to be changed, so long as there is no other urgent
Indication that requires an Alteration.

HISTORY. IV.
THE Son of Edward Wilmer ten Years of Age, so soon as the Fever had seized
him, and that the Small Pox began to appear in several Parts of his Body, one
Edmund an English Chyrurgeon was sent for, who to free the Patient from the
Heaviness that oppressed him, gave him some Purging Medicine; this in a short
time increased his drowsiness; a terrible Looseness followed, together with an
extraordinary wast of the natural strength. Presently the Pox fell, and the
Child died the next Night.

ANNOTATIONS.
HIppocrates says thus, Where Nature leads, there we ought to follow, if she
lead by ways agreeable to the Law of Nature. But in the Small Pox Nature leads
from the Center to the Periphery, and that this is the most convenient way for
the Evacuation of the Malignant Matter fermenting and boiling, the Experience
of many Ages has taught us; therefore in the Cure of this Disease, a Physician
ought in the first place to observe Nature, either to let her do her own work
of her own accord, or if she be feeble, to assist her in her Action: But he
must not disturb her true Motion, with a Motion contrary to it, and when the
Malignant Matter is wholsomly and regularly driving to the Exterior Parts recall
it back to the Innermost and more Noble Bowels. For, says Hippocrates, such
things are to be fetched out of the Body, which coming forth of themselves are
conducible to Health; but those things that come forth violently are to be
restrained, stopped and retained. But such things as we ought to fetch out are
not brought forth by Evacuation through the Guts, neither do they come forth
according to the regular Motion of Nature, nor by ways agreeable to the Laws of
Nature; therefore in this Disease Evacuation by Glysters is not to be provoked
through the Intestins by Glysters, or if it come forth of its own accord it is
to be stopped as soon as may be. Hence, says Rhases, great care is to be taken,
after the coming forth of the Pustles whether high or broad, least the Belly be
loosened with Medicaments; for they presently cause a Disentery, especially
where the Pustles are very high; thus also Avenzoar never prescribes any
Purging Medicaments to those that are Sick of the Small Pox, and forbids the
Belly to be loosened, unless by the help of a Suppository, if the Patient be to
hard bound. This Egmund the Chyrugeon never understood; and so by his Ignorance
killed the Patient; as it happens to several others, who slighting the Learned
Physicians, had rather purchase Death with Gold from ignorant Mountebanks and
Homicides then buy Health with Copper from prudent and knowing Physicians.

HISTORY. V.
TWO Sisters, Young Gentlewomen both, the one of Twenty Four, the other of
Twenty Six Years, at a Season when the Small Pox were very rife, were extremely
afraid of the Disease. It fell out by accident, as they were going to Church, a
Young Lad, newly cured of the Small Pox was got abroad, and coming along in the
Street, at least thirty Paces distant from them, having his Face all spotted
with red Spots, the remainders of the Footsteps of the Disease; with which
sight they were so scared that they thought themselves infected already:
Thereupon I being sent for to visit the Young Ladies, endeavored by many
Arguments to dispel these idle fears; and for the better satisfaction of both,
prescribed them a gentle Purge, which after they had taken* the next day but
one, I ordered a Vein to be opened in the Arm, and desired them to pluck up a
good heart; and to the end they might believe themselves to be the more
certainly secured from the Distemper, I forbid them the eating of all such diet
as might contribute the procuring of this Disease, prescribed them certain
Apozems of Succory and other cooling things to Drink; and ordered them to walk
abroad, visit their Friends, and by pleasant Discourse and Conversation, and
all other ways imaginable to drive those vain conceits out of their Minds. But
all that I could do signified nothing, so deeply had this conceit rooted it
self in their Imagination; For after fourteen days of Health, wherein they
continually walked abroad and were merry with their Friends and Acquaintance,
yet all the while the Small Pox ran in their Minds; at length, without any
occasion of Infection, they were both together seized with a Fever, and the
next day the small red Spots appeared in their Face and Hands, which after I
had given them the Decoction of Figs, in a short time after coming farther out,
terminated in the Small Pox, which came forth very thick as well upon the Body
as the Face, and so the Fever, the Heaviness, and other Symptoms ceased by
degrees, and they themselves, forbearing to shift their foul Linen in fourteen
days, and committing no Error in their Diet, but observing my Prescriptions
exactly, without scratching off the Pox with their Nails, were both cured with
very little or no prejudice to their Beauty.

ANNOTATIONS.
HOw wonderful the Strength of Imagination is, we have experience in many
Persons, for that by the Motions of the Mind it frequently works Miracles. And
thus in these two Gentlewomen through a continual and constant Cogitation
caused by the Preceding Fear, that Idea of the Small Pox so strongly Imprinted
in their Minds, and thence in the Spirits and Humors, begat therein a
disposition and Aptitude to receive the Small Pox. I remember the same Year, I
went to Visit a Noble German, who Dream^ that he was drawn against his Will to
visit one that was Sick of the Small Pox, and was very much Disfigured; which
Dream made such an Impression in his Mind, that he could by no means drive it
out of his thoughts. He lived free for three Weeks, but then falling into a
Fever was peppered with the Small Pox.

HISTORY VI.
A Certain Apothecary that was a strong Man about Thirty Years of Age, going
into a Citizens House, when he found and saw of a sudden his Patient all over
covered with the Small Pox upon his Face, he trembled a little at the sight of
so much deformity, and so departed. A little after to drive the Whimsey out of
his Head he drank very hard; nevertheless all he could do could not put that
Fancy out of his thoughts, which the sight of such an Object had imprinted in
his Mind; though he were otherwise, a Man of an undaunted Courage: So that the
sixth day a Fever seized him with an extreme Heaviness, a restless sleep, and a
kind of slight Delirium; which after twice taking of a Sudorific Decoction, was
attended with the red Spots that usually fore-run the Small Pox, which within
the space of twenty four hours came forth very thick, upon which eruption the
Fever and all the Symptoms vanished, and the Patient being restored to his
Health, went abroad again in three weeks.

ANNOTATIONS.
I would not advise any Persons that are timorous to come near those that are
Sick of the Pestilence or Small Pox; for if the Sight of one that lay Ill of
the Small Pox, could move a Man of that courage as this Apothecary was, how
much more would it have affected a timorous Person, now it may be questioned
whether this Apothecary might not be touched with any Infection, or whether he
might not contract the Distemper from some other cause? Now that there could
not be any thing of Contagion appears from hence, that the same Person was of
such an undaunted Spirit that he Visited at other times, several Persons that
had lay Sick of the same Distemper, without any prejudice; and therefore the
cause seems rather to be that sudden conturbation of his Mind and Spirits,
with which he was stricken upon the unexpected Sight of this same Sick Person,
and which continually ran in his thoughts; from which Idea such a disposition
arose in his Body, which at length produced the Small Pox. Now if any man can
more clearly unfold how such an Accident should happen, he shall be my great
Apollo.

HISTORY. VII.
A Young Maid of two and twenty Years of Age, full body'd, fresh colored, and
somewhat fat, being seized with a mild Fever, besides extreme Heaviness and
some slight interveneing Deliriums, suffered under frequent and strong
Epileptic Convulsions, and very terrible swooning Fits, so that the standers*
by thought she had been troubled with the Mother, and that she would presently
dye. I being sent for, when I understood that she had had her Monthly
Evacuations eight days before, loosened her Belly with a Glyster, and the same
day ordered her to be let blood in the Arm; about the Evening I gave her this
Sudorific

. Theriac. Androm. j. Hartshorn burnt, Extract of Carduus Benedictus, Salt of
the same an. j. Treacle-water and Carduuswater an. j. Oil of Amber three drops.
Mix them for one draught.

Having taken this, she sweat soundly that Night with great relief, neither did
her swooning Fits, nor her Convulsions return: The next day the red Spots,
forerunners of the Small Pox began to appear up and down all over her Body.
Thereupon we gave her this Decoction to drink.

. Elecampane Root, Licorice sliced an. iij. Barley cleansed j. Red Vetches j.
s. Fennel Seed ij. Figs no. xvj. Raisins stoned j. s. Water q. s. Make a
Decoction to two Pints.

Upon this the Small Pox broke out very thick; and all the Symptoms presently
ceasing with the Fever, she was restored to her health in four Weeks, and as it
were rescued from the Jaws of Death, went abroad again about her business.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN this Disease such Epileptic Convulsions and Swoonings are very band
presages; and unless the Small Pox appears very quickly, the greatest danger is
to be feared; for that they may be easily the Death of the Patient before the
Pox break forth. Nor is it any wonder, in regard this malignant Mischief
grievously effects the Heart, as appears by the Fever, the Swoonings, and the
heaviness of the Mind, and therefore greater danger is to be expected, if the
Brain the Primary Bowel of Life, be equally afflicted.

HISTORY VIII.
RUtger Schorer a Lad of Fourteen Years of Age, and Eldest Son of Isaac Schorer
a Lodger of mine, was taken in September with a Fever and Small Pox, and had
them very thick, when he began to grow well about the fourteenth day, his
Brother Isaac Schorer was taken in the same manner. When he had lain sixteen
days, his Sister Mary Schorer about Ten Years of Age, fell sick of the same
Distemper; and when she was pretty well at the fourteenth day, the other and
Youngest Daughter Maud Schorer, had the Small Pox come out very thick upon her.
In the mean time, the two Sons that were first seized, were recovered and went
abroad. But when the Youngest Sister Maud Schorer had kept her Bed about twenty
days, Rutger Schorer was taken again with a Fever and the Small Pox, and he
being recovered, Isaac Schorer took his Bed again upon the same account; and
being almost cured, Mary Schorer was taken a second time, and the third week
after Maud Schorer was again seized as the rest had been. And as the first time
the Disease had descended in order from the Eldest to the Youngest, so likewise
in so short a space of time, it observed the same order a second time; and yet
two at once were never seized with the Disease. And which is to be wondered at,
all these four were so little prejudiced by the Distemper, that not one of them
happened to be disfigured in the Face either with Pits or Scars, which is in
great part to be attributed to the great care which we took in the Cure, in
regard we were all of one Family; so that we had the opportunity to see them
every hour.

ANNOTATIONS.
THe Small Pox seldom seize the same Person twice or thrice; for that generally
upon the first seizure all that Specific Malignant Contamination, inherent in
the Blood and several Parts, being separated by the Fermentaceous Ebullition,
is quite expelled; which Effervescency, if it be not strong enough, then it
happens that the Blood is not sufficiently purified from that defilement, and
hence that after some Years, the Small Pox comes again by reason that the Old
remainders are by some new occasion provoked to Action. But that the Small Pox
should seize in such an Order four Children of the same Man, and that in so
short a distance of time, and every time come out so thick, is that which never
before we knew in all our Practice. If perchance some few had only come forth
the first time, it might have been probable, that some of the Relics of the
Contamination not sufficiently separated through weak Fermentation, might break
forth again; but in regard that Conjecture vanishes by reason of the great
quantity coming out over the whole Body, both the first and second time, I
would fain know to what other cause we can attribute such an accident as this,
then to some occult and unexpressible cause, that lies no less latent in the
Small Pox then in the Pestilence: and how it should come to pass, that I my
self, who am now about seventy Years of Age, and was not only conversant with
these but a Thousand others, yet never should have the Small Pox, since that
contagion does so easily infect others.

HISTORY IX.
A Virgin of Three and Twenty Years of Age, Plethoric and Strong, being taken
of a sudden with a Fever, accompanied with an extraordinary heaviness, of her
own head took a Dram of Treacle in a little Wine, which causing her to Sweat
soundly, presently the Small Pox came out very thick over all the Body; but her
Fever and heaviness were so far from slackning, that they grew more violent.
Then my advice, but too late, was asked; for the strength of the Maid was so
far spent, that there was hardly any thing to be given her. However I gave her
twice a Dram of Crab's-eyes, prepared with a little Decoction of Barley, and
prescribed her a pleasing Julep. But the sixth day, her Monthly Evacuations
came from her, out of the Order of time, and the same day the Pox that
continued high raised till then, suck down again; So that the Fever and
heaviness increasing, the Maid, all her strength failing her, died the next
Night.

ANNOTATIONS.
AT the same time, two other Young Maids, their Evacuations bursting out
unexpectedly, and unseasonably, in a short time died. And this has been
observed by us several times in this disease, when there is a violent
Ebullition of the Blood, and that the Small Pox come out thick, without any
Diminution of the Fever and Symptoms, then it is a very bad if not a mortal
Sign; if the Monthly Evacuations break forth out of Season. For such Patients
seldom or never escape, though that Eruption happens upon the Seventh or any
other Critical day. Moreover we have observed this, that if during the
Ebullition of the Blood in the Small Pox, the Monthly Evacuations also break
forth, at the usual Period of time, such Patients are then also in great
danger, and many of them dye, though some ease might be expected from such an
Evacuation.

HISTORY X.
ANN of Durenburch, a Young Maid of Twenty Years of Age, was taken with a Fever
and Heaviness, accompanied with a Dosiness of the Head, and an inclination to
sleep, and oft-times a slight interveneing Delirium, affrightment in her sleep,
and a moderate Thirst. Having taken a Diaphoretic, and Sweat soundly, soon
after the Small Pox appeared. Afterward she drank of this Decoction four,
five, or six times a day.

. Barley cleansed s. Root of Elacampane v. sliced Licorice ij. Orange-peels
iij. Scabious a handful and a half, Fennel seed j. four greater Cold seeds an.
iiij. Fat Figs no. xv* Raisins stoned j. s. Water q. s. for an Apozem of two
Pints.

When the Small Pox were now sufficiently expelled by the use of this
Decoction, I ordered that her face should be often fomented with a soft Sponge
dipped in lukewarm Mutton Broth: but because it fell out that the Broth could
not be had, and she was importunate for some Topic to preserve her Face, I
ordered her Face to be anointed twice a day, with old Oil of Turnips, which
done the Pox in her Face were not so big as those over the rest of her Body,
they ripened also sooner, and the Scabs at length falling off, no Pits at all
remained in her Face: Only the Ointment was continued till she was perfectly
cured.

ANNOTATIONS.
IF the Small Pox are not large and Contiguous, for the most part we administer
nothing to prevent Piting, but leave Nature to do her own business, in regard
she does it better of her own accord then the Physicians can do by Art, so that
the Patients themselves do not dig off the Scabs with their Nails, but suffer
them to dry and fall off of their own accord. This daily Experience tells us:
For that Thousands are better Cured without Pits or Marks left behind, to whom
no Topics are administered: and many to whom Topics have been administered
without Judgment, have had deeper Pits, then if they had left the Work to
Nature without Topics. But if the Pox are very large and Contiguous in the
Face, or if they be such Patients that will not be satisfied, unless the
Physician ascribe them Topics, which is frequent among Young Ladys that are
afraid of their Beauty; then such things are to be prescribed, as mollify the
Scabs of the Pustles, and bring the matter therein contained to quickest
Maturation. To that purpose I have frequently prescribed the Oil of Turnips
with good success; by which means very few or no Footsteps of the Small Pox
have been seen; which was once imparted to me as a great Secret by on Harscamp,
a Famous Practitioner. Forestus anoints the Scabs with Oil of Sweet Almonds
till they are dried up, which prevents, as he says, all Piting and Scars, and
so highly approves that remedy, that he cannot think of any better, as being
that which has no Smell, and is no way noisome either to Children or grown
People. However great care is to be taken of making use of dryers at the
Beginning; for these prevent the farther Maturation of the matter, and by
drying up the Scabs and Pits, hinder the Generation of new Flesh; of which
Error committed, Forestus gives us a terrible Example. For, says he, when a
Young Gentleman of Thirty Years of Age, having had the Small Pox, by the advice
of his Nurse made use of Butter Fried to Blackness in a Drying Pan, and
besmeared all his Face over with it, the Scab became so very nasty,
exulcerating all his Face, that he lost one of his Eyes, and but for the
application of timely remedies, had lost the other too. And therefore it is
that we so often inculcate, that many People escape better that use no
applications at all; so that whatever Authors write that Maturing Medicines are
to be applied, I say, it is to be done with great Caution.

HISTORY XI.
A Noble Lady of Eighteeen Years of Age, finding her self not well, ordered me
to be sent for: She had a slight Fever and complained of Melancholy at her
Heart (which caused her frequently to sigh) and heaviness of her Head, with an
inclination to sleep. Now in regard the Small Pox was then very rife, I had
presently a suspicion of her Distemper. Thereupon when she told me that she had
been at Stool that day, and that it was a good while before her Monthly Period
would be up, presently I let her Blood in the Arm, and took away eight Ounces
of Blood; for she was Plethoric: after which she found her self as she said
somewhat better. Ten hours after Blood-letting, certain red Spots began to
appear upon her Breasts and Hands, but few and small: Thereupon about the
Evening I prescribed her this Diaphoretic

. Treacle of Andromachus, Diascordium of Fracastorius an. s. Salt of Wormwood,
Confection of Hyaci^th an. j. Treaclewater, and Water of Carduus Benedict. an.
j. Mix them for a draught.

When this had caused her to Sweat moderately all Night, the next day the
Pustles came forth higher, and the Fever together with the anxiety vanished
altogether: Thereupon we gave her a Decoction of Figs in Ale to drink; and thus
in a few days she reovered with these few Remedies, not having had above three
or four in her Face, and very few upon the rest of her Body.

ANNOTATIONS.
WHat is to be thought of Bloodletting in this Disease and when it is to be
made use of, we have sufficiently Explained. cap. 8. And I have particularly
observed, that if in Plethorics it be timely made use of, before any Eruption
of the Small Pox, then it comes forth more easily and not so thick, and the
Patient recovers sooner. And therefore when you meet with Young Girls that are
nice of their Beauty, I think it very beneficial to let Blood in time, seeing
that then fewer and lesser Pox come out in the Face: But because the Physician
is seldom sent for till the Pox begin to come forth, hence it is that
Blood-letting cannot be made use of.

HISTORY XII.
A Little Son of Nicholas ab Harvelt, began to grow ill in August; but in
regard that I was sent for at the beginning, and had presently a suspicion of
the Small Pox; I gave him a little Treacle-water, with a little Bezoar-stone
and Saffron (for the Child was not above three Years old, and other ungrateful
Tastes would not have gone down:) and to preserve his Eyes, I ordered his
Eyelids to be anointed with Saffron mixed with Woman's Milk. The Aunt who had
the care of the Child, in my absence mixes a greater quantity then is usual
with the Milk, and not only anointed his Eyes but all his Face twice a day.
Which caused a strange Disfigurement of the Child, whose Face was all over
yellow with the Saffron: In the mean while the Child sweat very well, and still
took now and then three spoonfuls of Treacle-water, which preserved him in a
moderate heat, and drank for his drink the simple Decoction of Figs. The next
day some very small Spots began to appear here and there upon his Skin; but the
third day the Small Pox came out very thick over all his Body, except his Face;
where none at all, nor the least sign of any were to be seen; yet the Child was
never the worse in regard they came out so thick over all the rest of his Body.
The Fever then went off, and so the Child was perfectly recovered, without
having his Face so much as touched.

ANNOTATIONS.
The Saffron gently astringent repels and drys, but whether being outwardly
applied it hinders the coming out of the Pox; or whether through any other
Specific and occult quality it has that effect, I am uncertain, and much
question. But we saw the effect of it not only in this Child, but also in three
or four more: For the Child's Aunt, when she had told what had happened up and
down to other Women, there were several that would needs try the Experiment
with the same good success. And whether it will have the same success always at
other times, when occasion offers we shall try our selves?

HISTORY XIII.
THE most Noble the Lady Lucas, an English Woman, bred up in her House a Young
Lady, her Brothers daughter, about six or seven Years of Age: So soon as she
began to be Fevourish, anxious and drosie, by my advice she had given her a
little Powder Liberans, Hartshorn burnt, Bezoar-stone and Saffron, with an
ounce of Treaclewater, which caused her to Sweat well with some ease. For her
drink, she drank the Decoction of raw Hartshorn, as it is prepared for
Gellies, and frequently the simple Decoction of Figs: In the mean time the Lady
Lucas, every day twice or thrice washed the Face of our Patient with that same
sort of Cinnamon Water which our Apothecaries generally sell, which is made of
Cinnamon distilled in Borrage-water, and diligently kept the Young Lady in a
continual breathing heat. The second day toward Evening the red Spots began to
appear, the third day the Small Pox came out very thick, every where except
upon her Face, where there was not one to be seen: So that the Lady continued
the Lotion of the Child's face for some days. In the mean while the Fever going
off, our Patient was perfectly cured, without the least Sign of the Small Pox
upon her Face.

ANNOTATIONS.
THe same Lady gave the same advice also to the Lady Couper, who having washed
the Faces of three of her Children that lay Sick of the Small Pox with
Cinnamon Water, not one of them had any Sign of them in their Faces. Whether
the same success will always attend upon others, will be manifest by the
frequent Trial upon others. In the mean time it is to be considered, whether
upon hindering the Small Pox from breaking out in the Face, there may not be
some danger least the Menixe's and Brain should receive some prejudice.

HISTORY XIV.
THE Lady Ruchabor, about twenty four Years of Age, so Beautiful, that she was
the Admiration of many, in the Month of August was taken with a Fever and the
Small Pox, so that her Head was wonderfully swelled; when she had made use of
several Remedies by my Advice, and the Small Pox came out very thick over all
her Body, and had peppered her Face, at length after the Fever went off, and
that the Swelling of her Head was quite fallen, I ordered her Face to be
frequently fomented with Mutton Broth. But she not contented with that, to
preserve her Beauty, by the advice of some Ignorant Women, caused the ripe
Pustles to be opened with a Golden Needle, and the Matter to be squeezed out;
but mark the Event, she that persuaded her self, she should have no Pits, when
she recovered, had her Face so disfigured with Scars and Pits, that of one that
was most Beautiful she became very deformed, and a Thousand times bewayl'd that
Foolish act of pricking the Wheals.

ANNOTATIONS.
THo many Physicians to preserve the Face from Scars and Pits, order the ripe
Wheals to be pricked with a Golden Needle, yet we have found a Thousand times
by Experience, that it occasions the leaving of several Pits, and that it is
fat more conducing to the Cure not to touch them either with Needle or Hand.
Hence Senertus, The safest way, says he, when the matter appears white and
consequently Concocted, is to commit the whole management to Nature, since
Experience teaches us, that where the Pox dry up and open of themselves, those
People escape with less Disfigurement, and less Footsteps of the Disease.

But how dangerous it is to make use of the hands, and Topics, Forestus tells
us, by the Example of a Young Maid. When the Distemper says he, was going off,
and I was desired to prescribe drying Liniments to the Face, I advised the
Patient to forbear them and commit the whole Cure to Nature, when a white
Concocted Matter ran out of the broken Pox, and I ordered her not to touch the
Scabs with her Fingers, though they Itched never so much. But because she could
forbear Scratching the Wheals, some of which were not yet ripe, and by the
advice of Idle Women made use of Fat and Cream to dry them up, her Face was
overcast with a deformed Scab, and the Scars remained; besides a Redness arose
in her Eyes, that could never be cured, but continued as long as she lived.

HISTORY XV.
A Noble Young Lady about twenty Years of Age, having sat a while with her dear
Companions that lay Sick of the Small Pox seemed to have received some
Infection from it: That very Evening her Head grew heavy, and she lost her
Stomach which was accompanied with a slothful weariness of the whole Body. The
next day she grew Feverish: upon which I foretold her, she must expect the
Small Pox: Thereupon I gave her a Sudorific Draught, and ordered her to be kept
in a gentle Breathing Sweat all the next Night. The third day in the Morning I
found her well covered over all the rest of her Body, only her Legs out of the
Bed, and her Feet up to the Ankles in a Vessel of warm Milk. This she had by
the Advice of the silly Women, who had persuaded her that if she bathed her
Feet in warm Milk she would have no Pox in her Face: So that she continued in
that Milky Bath all the day till the Evening. In the mean time the Small Pox
came out that very day, but no where so thick as in the Face; and so the
Invention of Bathing the Feet in Milk was found to be useless: However in other
things the Patient followed my Advice, and being well Cured, without many Pits
in her Face, laughed many times afterward at the silly Milky Counsel that was
given her.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis Patient had good Luck that her Bathing did her no more harm, for though
she were well covered, yet by that Ventillation some Cold might easily have got
to her, and have done her much Injury; I remember afterward I saw the same Bath
made use of in the Court of the Baron of Brederode to a young Lady that then
lay sick of the Small Pox; but still with the same Success: So that this
Bathing in Milk lost all its Reputation in that Court, though it never had any
with me, notwithstanding that I have heard it commended by several Women.

HISTORY XVI.
IN October two Sons of N. Romburch a Vintner, were taken with a Fever. The
next day the Parents gave to each half a dram of Treacle, which caused a
moderate Sweat; and for Drink they gave them the simple Decoction of Figs in
small Ale. The third day some Red Spots appeared; and afterward the Small Pox
came out very thick over the whole Body and many also seized the Eyelids. Then
my Advice was desired. Now because the Children were Indifferent well,
proportionably to the time of the Disease, I did not think it necessary to
prescribe any Physic, only I ordered the Parents, to wash the Eyelids three or
four times a day with a soft Sponge dipped in a Decoction of Althea, Flowers of
Melilot, Roses and Fenigreek, and to open the Eyelids with their Fingers once
or twice a day, to let out the Humor gathered underneath: But the Parents
neglected that Advice, foolishly tender, and fearing to hurt their Children by
handling their Eylids. Upon the fourteenth day the Pox being ripe, the Swelling
of the Eyelids fell, and the Eyes opened; but it was observed that both the
Boys were perfectly Blind, and that there was a Skin grown over the Sight and
the Iris, which Skin was generated out of the Humor, so many days detained
within the Eye, and became viscous, and now covered the whole Eye like a veil.
This unexpected accident greived the Parents; thereupon I prescribed the
following Powder.

. The whitest Sugar Candy ij. Lapis Calaminaris j. make a very fine Powder.

This I caused to be blown into their Eyes through a hollow Quill: and the
slight pain which it caused, quickening the motion of the Eyelids, those little
Films were in a short time rubbed off, and washed away, by the Tears that dropped
from the Eye; by which means the Boys were cured of that Impediment.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis we have often happened to see in Practice, that by reason of the Eyelids
being swelled and shut up by the Small Pox, littles Films have grown in the
Eyes, but we have easily rubbed them off with this Powder, because they only
stick to the outside of the Sight of the Eye; if it be presently used at the
beginning, when the swelling falls, and the Eyes begin to open; but if you stay
till they are dried and hardened by the External Air, then they will not easily
give way to so slight a Remedy, but sharp Medicines must be used; and the
mischief is to be removed with more trouble and pain. Two things are therefore
to observed. 1. That the swelled Eyelids, let the Patient be never so
unwilling, must be parted one from the other with the Fingers; and free Egress
given to the Liquor contained in the Eye. 2. That if those Films are grown*
that their Cure be not delayed, but that care be immediately taken to remove
them before they are hardened by the external Air.

HISTORY XVII.
BEing sent for together with a Chyrurgeon to the Village of Bemmel to see a
Country Man that was wounded in the Breast, by accident we found a Boy in the
same House that was taken with a Fever and under great Anxiety; and therefore
because we had no other Remedies at hand, we persuaded the Man to get an ounce
of new Sheep's dung, and steep it three hours in small Ale, and then Straining
it give it Blood warm to the Boy and cover him up close. The next day I went
again, and found that the Boy had Sweat very well after his Draught; and when I
looked nearer upon him I perceived that the Measles were come out very thick
upon him, upon which the Fever was almost gone off with a great part of his
heaviness. I ordered them to keep him in a Breathing Sweat for three or four
days, and to be sure not to let him take Cold.

ANNOTATIONS.
I Expected this Body should have had the Small Pox, but the Measles came
forth, of which the first Cure is the same with the Small Pox. New Sheeps-dung
with equal Efficacy expels both the one and the other, and therefore in both
cases is very advantageously administered, especially in those places where
other things are not to be had, some there are who prefer Horse-dung
administered after the same manner, before it. But that Sheeps-dung is much
more prevalent, the Savor tells, in which we find there is much more Salt of
Niter or some more specific Diaphoretic Salt.

HISTORY XVIII.
A Young Man of twenty four Years of Age, strong and Plethoric after his
violent Exercises of Tennis, and Fencing, and hard drinking of Wine between
while, fell into a violent Fever, accompanied with great thirst, dryness of the
Mouth, and extreme Anxiety and restlessness, with other very bad Symptoms. This
Young Man we ordered first to be let Blood and then prescribed him a Glister,
together with Julips, cooling Apozems and Electuarys to quench his thirst. The
third day he was Purged with an Infusion of Senna-Leaves and Rhubarb mixed with
Electuary Diaprunum; which gave him six Stools, but the heat remaining together
with the Fever, he was let Blood again the fourth day. The fifth day he
continued the use of his Julips, Apozems and cooling Electuary. The Night
succeeding the sixth day he was so very heavy and drowsy, that there was
little hopes of his Life, and we thought he would have dyed. The seventh day
the Measles came out all over his Body by way of Crisis. Then the Fever and all
the pressing Symptoms somewhat remitted, so that the Patient slept a little the
next Night: but by the two next days both Fever and Symptoms were quite gone
off by degrees. The tenth day the Measles began to lessen, and upon the twelsth
quite vanished. And thus the Patient who seemed to be at Deaths Door, contrary
to the Expectation of many was restored to his former Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
THE beginning of the Disease was such, that no Man could well have any
suspicion of the Measles; and therefore the Patient was dealt with by us, as
laboring under a Burning Fever* which Fever at length you see, ended
nevertheless in a Critical Evacuation of the Measles.

HISTORY. XIX.
A Strong Young Man was seized by a Violent Fever accompanied with a thick,
weak and unequal Pulse, an Extreme Anxiety, heavy Pain his Head, drowsiness,
restless sleep, and a slight kind of Delirium. I would willingly have let him
Blood, but because he would not permit me, I gave him the following Sudorific
toward the Evening.

. Treacle ij. Diascordium of Fracastorius i. s. Confectio Alkermes, Extract of
Carduus Benedictus, Salt of Wormwood an. j. of our Treacle Water, Carduus
Water an. j. mix them for a Draught.

Though upon this he Sweat very well, yet finding the Disease to continue in
the same State: the next day he took the same Sudorific again, and Sweat very
well; but then the red Spots that fore-run the Small Pox began to appear up and
down in the Skin. Nevertheless the Fever and other Symptoms seemed to be
somewhat abated, yet did not go off: Therefore I ordered the Patient to be kept
in a gentle breathing heat, and that he should take a Draught of the following
Decoction lukewarm several times a day.

. Red Vetches j. s. Barley cleansed j. Scabious one handful s. fat Figgs no.
XVI. Raisins Stoned, ij. Water. q. s. make a Decoction to two Pints.

By this means the Small Pox came forth every where very thick, and rose very
high, the Fever and Anxiety still continuing; so that the Patient seemed to be
in great danger of his Life: For which reason I thought it necessary to give
him the former Sudorific again; putting him into somewhat a greater Sweat, and
the Decoction of Figgs being continued over and above for two days, the seventh
day, contrary to all expectation, the Measles came out over the whole Body
between the Small Pox, and then the Fever and other Symptoms abated very much;
and by degrees went off, all together, and the Patient being happily recovered
the fourth week from the beginning of the Disease, went abroad again.

ANNOTATIONS.
I Do not remember that ever I saw this Accident above twice or thrice in all
my Practice; that is to say that the Small Pox and Measles should come both
together. However by this Observation it appears, that although both these
Diseases in respect of Infection have somewhat in common, yet in respect of the
Subject to which that Infection adheres, there is something of difference and
distinction between them. Otherwise what should be the reason that in this
Patient, the whole Infection should not be Evacuated with the Expulsion of the
Small Pox? Then again it is to be admired that why the Measles, adhering to the
more subtle and thinner Matter, did not break out first, seeing that the
thinner Matter is quicker in coming forth than the thicker.

HISTORY. XX.
A Noble Batavian, was seized by a Fever, accompanied with a strong Pulse but
very unequal, an extreme Anxiety, Thirst, restlessness, a slight Delirium, and
some little convulsive Motions of the Extreme Parts. Having loosned his Belly
with a Glister, I ordered him to be let Blood. Toward Evening having taken a
Sudorific he Sweat very much, but the Disease remaining in the same State, the
next day the Sudorific was repeated, he Sweat very well. All this while the
Symptoms nothing abated, but the Patient began to complain of a Pricking in his
Skin quite all over his Body. Soon after it was observed that great red Spots
appeared in his Skin, some as broad as a Dollar, some half a Hands breath, some
more, some less, which seemed to be all fiery, sown all over with little
risings like Millet Seeds. These Spots in a days time closed all together, and
spread themselves all over the Body. So that it was all over of a red florid
Color. In the mean time the Fever and Symptoms abated. Three days after, that
general redness abated also, and the Spots returned to be as they were when
they first appeared, and so within three days vanished quite away, and so the
Patient, after the Skin of his Body was all peeled off, was restored to perfect
Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis Distemper, which Forestus calls Purpurae, or the Purples is very near
akin to the Measles; and the Cure of both is almost the same; only the Subject
to which this Infection adheres is hotter then that of the Measles; but it is
as easily dissipated; nor are those little Pustles suppurated, but dissipated
by heat.

MEDICINAL OBSERVATIONS AND CURES OF Isbrand de Diemerbroeck.
OBSERVATION. I. An Inflammation of the Lungs.
MOnsieur La Fontaine, a Noble French Man, about thirty Years of Age Plethoric,
no great Drinker, yet a Lover of unmixed Wine, upon the Tenth of November,
going to Bed, began to complain of difficulty of breathing, yet without any
pain in his Breast: soon after a redness seized his Face, especially his
Cheeks, and his Eyes also appeared swelled and inflamed. This difficulty of
breathing, within two hours was so increased, that he could hardly draw his
Breath; insomuch that he was afraid of a Suffocation. Wherefore about Midnight
he sent for me, bidding the Messenger tell me withal that he should dye, unless
I could help him with some present Remedy. By the redness of his Face, and his
little frothy and flowery spitting, as also by his difficulty of Breathing,
which was without any pain, yet with a kind of heaviness in his Breast, I
judged this Distemper to be an Inflammation in his Lungs, so much the rather
because I found by his Pulse, that he was in a strong Fever. Thereupon I
ordered a pint of Blood to be taken from the Basilic Vein of his right Arm: by
which he felt very much ease. To drink (for he was very thirsty) I gave him a
Ptisan of Barley cleansed, and Licorice boiled in Water. In the mean time the
following Glister was prepared, and given by six a Clock the next Morning.

. Em^llient Decoction x. Elect. Diacatholici Diaphoenici an. j. common Salt j.
Oil of Violets ij. for a Glister.

This gave him two sufficient Stools: But because the difficulty of breathing
still continued very oppressive, about ten o Clock we took away a pint of Blood
out of his left Arm. The Blood appeared indifferent good, only that it had a
great deal of Yellowish froth at the top. Then besides the Ptisan, he drank of
the following Apozem now and then every day.

. Barley cleansed ij. (...)-Licori^e j. ^. Endive Sorrel, an: one handful,
Violet Leaves two handfuls, Flowers of Poppy Rheas two little handfuls, the
four greater Cold-seeds, and Lettice-seeds an. ij. Currants ij. Common-water q.
s. Boil this according to Art to two Pints. In the straining dissolve Syrup of
Poppy Rheas, Violets and Limons an. j. mix them for an Apozem.

For his nourishment I prescribed him Broths with Chervil, Endive, cleansed
Barley and the like boiled therein. The next day because the Patient would
admit no more Glisters, I gave him a Laxative Medicin, which gave him four
stools with great ease. In the mean time he breathed much more freely, and his
Fever very much abated. The following days, the foresaid Apozem was five times
repeated, the seventh day of the Disease, he fell into a very great Sweat of
his own (...) and so the force of the Disease being broken by a Crisis; the
^ever, with the difficulty of breathing went off, and the Patient was restored
to his former Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
SAys Gallen, when an acute Fever happens with difficulty of breathing,
accompanied with streightness and heaviness, that Distemper is an Inslammation
of the Lungs. Now this Inflammation sometimes happens of it self, sometimes it
succeeds a Squinancy, or (...), when a Humor is carried from the Chaps or side
into the Lungs by way of Mutation. Whence Hippocrates, An Inflammation in the
Lungs from a Distemter in the sides, is bad. For it is a dangerous thing for
one acute Disease to accompany or follow another. But an Inflammation of the
Lungs that does not proceed from any other Distemper, but grows of it self,
proceeds from a thin and Choleric Blood flowing in a greater quantity then can
be circulated into the Substance of the Lungs, and there inflamed. This
Inflammation of the Lungs Fernelius asserts to be the less frequent of the two.
And it is much less frequent then the Pleurisy, from which it differs, because
the one seizes with a most acute pain, the other with a little pain, but an
oppressing heaviness; for that the one inflames and distends the Pleura
Membrane, which is endued with an Exquisite Sense; the other inflames and
dilates the Lungs, which are nothing so Sensitive. In other things, as
acuteness of the Fever, difficulty of breathing and other signs, as also in the
Cause and Cure of the Disease they both agree. But besides the foresaid
Inflmamation of the Lungs, there is another sort more frequent which differs
very much from the other in the excess of the Symptoms and the Cause, as
arising either from Phlegm collected and putrified in the Lungs; or from a thin,
sharp, and copious distillation falling down upon the Lungs from the Brain, and
there preternaturally glowing and causing a Fever, and by degrees wasting the
Patient with a Cough, difficulty of Breathing and a slow Fever, without any
spitting of Blood.

An Inflammation of the Lungs therefore is an acute Distemper, which, as Celsus
testifies, is more dangerous than painful.

Now this Distemper does not always seize the whole Lungs, but sometimes one
particular Lobe, which Iacotius testifies he has seen in the opening of a
Peripneumonic Body. So says Iouber^ also. In a Peripneumony, there is no
necessity that the whole Lungs should be always enflamed, but many times some
one of the Lobes only suffers, as we have found by the Dissection of an
Infinite number of Bodies. This Hippocrates, plainly declares where he teaches
us how to know the differences of this Distemper in these words. In an
Inflammation of the Lungs, if the whole Tongue be white and rough, both parts
of the Lungs; are vexed with an Inflammation; but where but half the Tongue is
so effected, on that side where it is discolored and rough, there the
Inflammation lies. A pain under one Clavicle, denotes an Inflammation of one of
the upper VVings of the Lungs; but the pain extending under both Clavicles
denotes that both the upper Wings of the Lungs are inflamed; if the pain lie in
the middle of the Ribs, the middle part of the Lungs suffers; but if the pain
comes to that part to which the Lungs extends it self, the lower wing of the
Lungs is effected. Where one whole Part is affected, there all that answer to
that Part must of necessity suffer.

The most certain and proper sign, besides others, of a true Peripneum^ny, is a
redness of the ^aws (according to the Testimony of Galen, Paulus Aegineta and
Avice^) with an acute Fever, and extreme difficulty of Breathing, if
accompanied with none or very little oppressive pain. All which, when they
appeared so manifestly in our Patient, there was no question to be made of the
Distemper; which Disease went off the seventh day upon an extraordidinary
spontaneous Sweat: which Forestus observes to be customary in a true
Peripneumony. Though sometimes as Aetius tistifies, in young People it uses to
go off with a violent Bleeding at the Nose or Flux of the Monthly Evacuaations;
which nevertheless I find that Riolanus denies.

Gregory Horstius has observed, that a Peripneumony has gone off the seventh
day with a Critical Flux. Which however seems to be contrary to Reason, when a
Flux of the Belly, according to Hippocrates, is very prejudicial to this
Disease, as being that by which the Morbific matter contained in the Breast
cannot be evacuated, there being no Passage from the Bowels included in the
Breast to the Intestines. It may be said that Nature seeks occult ways for her
self unknown to us, by which she Evacuates that filth which is noxious and
troublesome to her, as when in an Empyema, the Matter in the Breast is voided by
Urine; which she may also do in a Peripneumony, and so the Matter in the Lungs
may be conveyed to the Guts, but this rarely falls out.

The Cure of this Disease is very like the Pleu^isie; for in this Cure
Bloodletting has always the greatest share, many times repeated according to
the strength of the Patient, and prevalency of the Distemper, using at the same
time (...) Remedies or Glysters, and other Medicaments, as well to expectorate,
as extinguish the heat of the Feve^. But there is no delay to be made in the
Cure; for unless this Disease be opposed with all speed, in a short time it
either suffocates the Patient, or turns into an Empyema or Consumption, for it
corrups the substance of the Lungs. Thus Iacotius reports, that upon opening
the Body of a Peripneumony he found the upper Part of the Lungs gangreen'd; and
the Medrastinum full of a bloody Serum.

OBSRVATION. II. The Toothache.
THE Daughter of N. complained of an Intolerable pain in her Teeth, which had
lasted for some Months together, nor could be assuaged by any Topics or other
Medicaments taken. I advised her for some Nights together, when she went to
Bed, to swallow two Pills of Transparent Aloes, about the bigness of a Pea, and
not to drink any thing afterward; which when she had done three or four times,
the pain ceased and never returned.

ANNOTATIONS.
IT so happens that sometimes the upper Orifice of the Stomac being stuffed with
Viscous, Cold or Choloric Humors is the Cause of the Toothach; partly, because
of the great consent there is between it and the Brain, by the Nerve of the
Sixth Conjugation; partly, because that then being loosened with over much
moisture, it sends up many Crude and Cold, or Choleric and sharp vapors to the
Brain. In such a Case, those Cold and Viscous Choloric Humors are best expelled
by strong Vomits or Bitter detersive Medicaments, that will adhere long to the
place affected. And therefore I ordered her toward the Evening to swallow two
dry Pills of Aloes; sometime after she had Supped, and to drink nothing after
them, to the end that staying in the Oesophagus, and being there melted, they
might stick the longer to the Orifice of the Stomac, and have more time to
cleanse it. For Medicaments that are taken upon a fasting Stomac, presently
^ink down to the bottom of the Stomac, and signify nothing in the Distempers
of the upper Orifice. Thus Avicen orders all Pills that Purge the Head to be
taken at Night an hour after Supper.

OBSERVATION. III. A Pestilential Fever.
A French Merchant came to an Inn; and not finding himself very well, presently
went to Bed, believing it to be nothing else but the weariness of his journey;
the next day the Disease augmenting, the Woman of the House desired me to see
him, and try whether he were not infected with the Sickness which was very rise
in many Places. He was very weak with a little Pulse thick and unequal. Yet the
Fever did not offend so much by it is heat as by it is malignity. I understood
also by the Sick Person, that he found himself ill the day before he came, and
that this was the third day of the Disease. But when I found neither
Carbuncles, nor Bubos, nor any other Signs of the Pestilence; I Judged his
Disease to be rather a Pestilential Fever, then the Pestilence it self;
thereupon I began with Blood-letting, after I had first given him a Glister,
and took away fifteen or sixteen Ounces of Blood out of the Median Vein of the
Right Arm, which Blood (a thing to be wondered at) was for the most part
whitish; so that it hardly seemed to be Blood: When it was cold, that which
first came out, first like Milk, was all coagulated like a Muscilage, and was
of a greenish Color, only some very few red Clods were to be seen at the
bottom: That which flowed out last, was for the most part between green and
white, but at the bottom there was a Settling of Blood of a dark red Color,
that was scarcely curdl'd. This Bloodletting gave him great ease. In the mean
while for his Drink I gave him a Ptisan, wherein Citron Rinds and the Fruit of
Tamarinds were boiled. Then, because of the extraordinary Corruption of his
Blood I ordered him to be let Blood again, which the Patient hearing, impatient
of the Anxiety that oppressed him, he earnestly desired me it might be done
that day. Thereupon toward the Evening we took out of his other Arm about a
Pint of Blood, that which came out first was very white, that which came out
last very red: and to repair his strength we gave him Chicken Broth with Sorrel
and a Pome Citron boiled in it. All the next Night he was very pensive, weak
and restless, so that it was thought he would have dyed. But Nature, being now
discharged of her burden, the next day which was the fourth day of the
Disease, strongly and successfully expelled the remainder of the Malignity, by
a critical and spontaneous Sweat, which about Noon breathed out in great
abundance from the Patients Body: at the same time also small red Pustles, like
Millet Seeds, came forth very thick, so that the Skin of his whole Body was
covered with them from Head to Foot. After this lucky Crisis the Fever went
off, and then the Patient falling again to his Broths, and Drinking his Ptisan,
recovered his former Health and lost Strength. But all the Cuticle of his Body
became new; the former peeling off not without an extraordinary Itching.

ANNOTATIONS.
CErtainly it was a very great Malignity that had caused such a Corruption of
Humors, by which the Blood was so strangely changed in so short a time, as to
loose its Natural Color and grow white. It Is true I once saw at Beauvais Blood
which came out at first white like Milk, and afterward somewhat red from the
Arm of one that was Sick of a Malignant Fever; which Blood was then showed to
several that looked upon it with admiration. These Malignant Fevers too, were at
that time very rise in most Parts of France, and were caused by the common and
great Infection of the Air. The Nature and Cure of which see Obs. 24. where we
shall describe the Story of a Fever like to this that seized one of our Country
Men.

OBSERVATION IV.
JOhn de Laurier, a Merchant of Poitou, about threescore Years of Age, asked my
advice concerning a Gonorrhea, which he had for some Months, accompanied with a
heavy pain in the Loins. Upon Examination of the case, I found by many Signs
that there was no Virulency, but only a Mischief contracted by the more violent
use of Venery, which had weakened the seminary Vessels. Wherefore I prescribed
him a diet moderately heating and drying, meats of good juice and quick
nourishment, to drink unmixed Wine moderately and to take some other
corroborating and nourishing things. Then after I had purged his Body twice
with a gentle Purge, that the Viscous humors might be first expelled the
seminary Vessels, before the use of other Medicaments, every Morning and about
five a Clock in the Afternoon, I gave him ^ij. s. of Salt Prunella in a Draught
of red Wine; which when he had taken for eight days together, he was perfectly
Cured, without having need of any more remedies, which I had ordered him to
use. All this while I ordered his Loins to be anointed with the following
Ointment.

. Martiat Ointment ij. Oil of Foxes s. Oil of Turpentine ij. Oil of squeezed
Nut-meg^ j. make an Ointment.

ANNOTATIONS.
A Gonorrhea according to Galen, Aetius and others, is an unvoluntary Excretion
of the Seed; of which some make two, others three, we four differences.

First, by reason of the heat of the Reins, and plenty of Seed, and this is
called Pollution. It happens with some Pleasure and Erection wherein it differs
from other Gonorrheas, because they are accompanied with neither. It is cured
by Blood-letting, slender Diet, refrigerating Medicaments and Nourishments, as
also drying and gentle Astringents.

The second is caused by the falling down of evil and corrupt Humors and Phlegm
from the Brain and Liver, and other Bowels to the Spermatic Vessels, the
retentive faculty of which is thereby endamaged, and so those putrid Humors
flow forth with the Seed. This as it seldom happens to Men, so is it very
frequent among Women, and hard to be Cured; nor is it to be Cured, until you
can first remove the vicious Distemper of the Bowels, which sends those humors
thither.

The third proceeds from the excessive use of Venery, by which the Spermatic
Parts being wearied and extinguished are refrigerated and grow languid, and
gather together crude and cold Humors, by which their concoctive and retentive
faculty being loosened, they can neither concoct nor retain the Seminal matter.
This is easily got by Elderly People, less used to Venery, who not meeting so
often with Opportunities to delight themselves, force all their Nerves so
strenuously when they come to it, that they weaken the strength of the whole
Body, and having wasted the strength of the Seminal Parts, such a Gonorrhea
ensues, accompanied with a weakness of the Loins. This is Cured by
corroborating Medicaments and Nourishment, hot and gentle As^ringents, having
made use before of Purgatives and Diuretics, to free the Urinary and Seminary
Passages, from the Crude and Viscous Humors collected therein; which done the
Cure easily proceeds.

The fourth which they call virulent, is contracted by coition with those that
have the Pox: of which Infection, it is often a forerunner, and as often a
most faithful Companion, as being derived from the same Cause, and which cannot
be safely cured before the perfect Cure of the Pox. In this there is a stinking
Poison of a White and Greenish color, that distills insensibly from the
Seminary Vessels, and frequently corrods the Pipe of the Yard, which causes
sharp pains upon Erection and making Water, and thence also Ulcers and
Caruncles grow in the Urinary passage. And besides if this virulent Running be
stopped unskilfully for the most Part it occasions Aposthumes either about the
Testicles, which then begin to swell very much, or else about the Seminary
vessels, and thence Veneral Buboes. Many times also the Venom ascending inward,
and infecting the Liver and other Bowels, communicates the Contamination to the
whole Body.

OBSERVATION. V. A Scald.
WIggerd Simonis was melting a good quantity of Rosin upon a quick Fire; which
being too hot, the Flame got hold of the Kettle; now as he was going to put out
the Flame and cover the Kettle with a Pillow, unwarily he thrust both his hands
into the scalding and boiling Rosin; and the same thing happened to him, that
went about to help him to put out the same Flame: so that both most greviously
complained of the pain that their hands were in. A present remedy was
requisite, but having none at hand, I bethought my self of a whole Bottle of
Ink that I had in my Study: this I powered forth into a Pot, and bid them both
plunge their hands into it, and for some time to wash and foment with it; which
when they had done for half an hour the Heat and Pain ceased; nor did any
Blisters rise, nor did they receive any damage by so terrible a Scald.

OBSERVATION. VI. The closing of the Eyelid by reason of a Wound.
A Young Country Girl had fallen from a high place, and with the fall had
received a great wound in the right Eye-brow, that is to say, in the inner part
next the Eye; by which wound the Bone of the Cranium was laid half bare, and
the Eye-brow being cut crossways, the upper Eyelid hung over the lower. A
certain Chyrurgeon had quickly Cured the wound; but after the Cure of the wound
the upper Eyelid would never rise of it is own accord; nor could the Maid open
her Eye, but by the Assistance of her Fingers; many Topics were applied by
several Chyrugeons to remedy this defect; but none of them availing, after some
Months my Assistance was desired. When I had viewed the Place affected, I
perceived the Mischief was incurable, and therefore advised them to forbear any
further Applications. However the Maid, by the advice of others, who put her in
great hopes, for a whole Year together, applied sometimes one thing sometimes
another, till at length receiving no benefits he quite gave over.

ANNOTATIONS.
HEre the straight Muscle of the Eyelid was cut. Moreover the unskilful
Chyrurgeon at the beginning had not sufficiently closed the Lips of the wound;
so that afterward a thick Scar being grown over it, the Muscle could no longer
preform it is Duty; so that there was no Man that understood Anatomy but might
perceive the Wound to be incurable.

OBSERVATION VII. A Dysury or difficulty of making Water.
A Young Son of N. a Domestic Servant of the Lord Dolre, a Boy of five Years of
Age, made Water for some Months with great difficulty, and in extreme pain and
misery; and which also many times stopped at the time it should have Evacuated.
The Parents had taken the Advices sometimes of Chyrurgeons, sometimes of Old
Women, and sometimes of Strowling Mountebanks: but at length in December, my
advice was desired. Thereupon after I had gently Purged his Body with Powder of
Diacarthamum, and Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, ordered him to take a Draught
several times a day of the following Apozem, which the Boy impatient of the
pain greedily sucked up.

. Roots of rest Harrow or Cammock, Sea Holly, sliced Licorice an.. s. Flowers
of Cammomil two handfuls, Seeds of Lettice, Parsley, Dill, an. ij. Fat Figs.
no^. vij. new Milk and Water an. (...). ij. boil them to the Consumption of the
third part, then strain them.

After he had used this Apozem two days, he voided every day much viscous and
tough Matter together with his Urin; and after he had made use of two of these
Decoctions, he was quite freed from his troublesome Distemper.

ANNOTATIONS.
THere are various Causes of the difficulty of making water, Inflammation,
Imposthume, Stone in the Bladder, the Flesh grown over, a cold Distemper of the
Bladder and Sphincter, thick and viscous humors either mixed with Urine, or
sticking close to the Bladder and it is Sphincter, with several others of the
same Nature; of which the two latter are the most frequent. But all in
particular do not only cause a difficulty of Urine, but sometimes absolutely
stop the Urine, as it happened to the Boy before mentioned which they who cut
off the Stone had viewed, and thought he had the Stone, and judged him to be
cut. But I believing his Distemper arose not from the Stone, but from a thick
and tenacious Phlegm that stopped up the Bladder and the passage of it, as I had
observed had frequently happened to younger Children, rather chose to begin the
Cure with attenuating, lenifying, and Diuretic Medicaments, seeing that many
times such Medicaments expel little stones also. But in this case, when
Children cannot swallow ungrateful Medicines, I have known flowers o^ Camomil
boiled in new Milk with Figs^ do a great deal of good, especially, i^ after the
boiling and the straining, the said Flowers be laid to hot to the Region of
the Hair, and the Decoction at the same time given to drink. Forestus in the
same case commends Pellitory and Chervil boiled, and applied hot to the Region
of the Hair, with Butter, and Oil of Scorpions. Mercurialis applauds Garlic
bruised and applied to the Bladder. Amatus of Portugal, extols a Turnep
hollowed, and filled with Oil of Dill, and then roasted in the Embers,
afterward bruised and laid on.

OBSERVATION VIII. Suppression of the Courses.
JOan Elberty, a strong Maid of about twenty four Years of Age, complained that
her Purgations had stopped for four Months, so that she was in a very bad
Condition, tortured with pains in her left side and Head, sometimes troubled
with Suffocations, and her Stomach quite gone. After I had ordered her an
attenuating and heating Diet, and forbid her all things that generate tough and
viscous Humors, the sixth of January I Purged her with Electuary of Hiera
Picra, then I prescribed her this Apozem to drink three times a day.

. Roots of Lovage, Master-wort, Fennel, stone Parsley, Valerian an.. s.
Sassafrass-wood iij. Nep, Mag-wort, Peny-royal, white-Mint, Fever-few an. one
handful. Flowers of Camomil half a handful, Seeds of Lovage, wild Carrots,
Gith, an ij. Laurel Berry j. s. Tartar of Rhenish-wine vj. stoned Raisins ij.
common Water q. s. boil these for an Apozem of two pints.

The 11th. of January I Purged her again with an Infusion of the Flowers of
Senna and Agaric, with a mixture of Hiera Picra. The next day I prescribed her
another Apozem to drink like the former.

. Root of Master-wort j. of Elecampane, Valerian, Parsley an.. s. Dittany,
round Birth-wort an. iij Mug-wort, Nep, Savio, Foverifew, Rue, Peny-Royal, an
one handful. Southernwood, Flowers of Camomil an. one handful, Seeds of
Parsley, Gith, Lovage, wild Carrots an. j. s. red Vetches j. s. common Salt and
White Wind, an. equal parts; make an Apozem for two pints.

Fourteenth of January I prescribed her this Electuary, of which she was to
take the quantity of a Filberd, before she drank of her Apozem.

. Specier. Diacurcume, Cremor Tartar, Trochists of Myrrh, Hoglice prepared,
Steel prepared an j. seeds of Parsley, Nep, Venetian Borax an.. s. Salt
Prunella, Eastern Saffron an. j. reduce all these into a very fine Powder, to
which add, Oil of Juniper, Amber an j. of Dill drops vij. Electuary of Hiera
Picra. s. Syrup of preserved Elecampane Roots q. s. make an Electuary.

Moreover because she felt a hardness at the bottom of her Belly about her
Navel, I prescribed this Sere-cloth.

. Gum Opoponax, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, Emplaster de Cumino, of Melilot
an. ij. of Castor Pulverized j. mix them and make them into a Roll to be spread
q. s. upon red Leather.

The nineteenth of January she was let Blood in the Saphena Vein of the left
Foot, and bled indifferent well. The last Apozem was repeated again, which she
took together with her Electuary till the twenty eight of January, at what time
her courses came down very copious, after that she was very well in Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
A Long suppression of the Courses is oft-times the Cause of very great
Distempers. For from hence arise Suffocations of the Matrix, and the pale
Colors of Virgins; hence Palpitations of the Heart, Vertigo's, terrible pains
in the Head, Joints, Back and Loins, Fevers, Swooning Fits, Coughs, difficult
breathing, Cholic and Nepheretic pains, and lastly, the evil continuing long,
Melancholy Passions, swelling of the Bowels and Dropsies. Therefore the Cure is
not to be delayed; for the longer the Courses stop, with so much the more
difficulty are they provoked to come down. The Cause of this Distemper is the
Narrowness of the Vessels of the Womb; which again are accompanied with several
other Causes, as Obstruction, Constipation, Coalescence, or growing together,
Compression and Settlement. But the most frequent Cause is an obstruction
occasioned by thick and viscous humors: Which thickness and viscousness is
either in the Blood it self, when it is too cold or viscous; or else when
Excrementitious, Flegmatic and Melancholy Humors are mixd with the good Blood;
and with that good Blood carried to the Veins of the Womb where they cause the
Oppelation. But this Obstruction and Viscousness of the Humors, as it is more
or less, or has been of longer or shorter Continuance, so the Cure is performed
by gentler or more violent Medicaments, with more ease or more difficulty. But
in the Cure of our Patient, we were forced to use the stronger Medicaments, as
well in regard of the cold season of the Year, as the greatness of the
Obstruction. For she was wont to eat green Fruit and course Meats, that beget a
viscous and cold Nourishment, which had gathered together a great quantity of
the thick and crude Humors.

OBSERVATION IX. An incurable Hoarsness.
A Holland Boor in a quarrel between Carters, had received a wound with a Knife
in the right side of his Neck near his Throat. The wound was soon cured by a
Chyrurgeon. After some Months he came to me to prescribe him something for an
Extraordinary hoarsness, with which he began to be troubled so soon as he had
received the wound, and which the Physician, who had had him in Cure, together
with the Chyrugeon, could no way remove with all the Looches, Lozenges and
Decoctions which they could give him. His voice was so small and hoarse that
you could hardly understand what he said; but I observed that there was a Nerve
which run back athwart from the Wound which was cut, through which the virtue
of forming the Voice is conveyed; whence it came to pass that half the
Vocality was defective, which when it could not be restored by any Remedies, I
refused to meddle with him as one that was not to be cured.

ANNOTATIONS.
THE Vocal Nerves, which conveigh the Virtue of forming the Voice, by Galen
called the Recurrent Nerves, rise from the sixth Conjugation, and creep through
the Throat to the Larynx. Galen extols their admirable Virtue in forming the
Voice with a large Encomium. And Laurentius, Columbus and Bauhinus give us a
curious Demonstration of these Nerves in their Anatomical Treatises. Both these
Nerves being cut, the Creature becomes mute; but if only one, but half his
Voice remains. This Boor had but one Nerve cut, and so kept half his Voice; for
had he been cut in the same manner on the other side, he would have been quite
Dumb. Columbus, in the Dissection of a living Dog, has elegantly demonstrated
the wonderful Efficacy of this Nerve toward the forming of the Voice. But Galen
was the first that made known the Use of these Nerves, and confirms the same
with this History. A certain Chyrurgeon, says he, having cut out the King's Evil
out of the Neck, that lay deep in the Flesh; as he drew the Scroffles out with
his Nails, out of Ignorance, he also tore out the Recurrent Nerves along with
them; by which means, he freed the Boy from the Scroffles, yet he took away his
Voice and left him quite mute. Another Chyrurgeon having made an Incision in
another Boy, took away half his Voice, by cutting one of the Nerves, which made
all the People stand amazed, how it should come to pass, that neither Aspera
Arteria, nor the Throat being touched, the Voice should be prejudiced; but so
soon as I showed them the Vocal Nerves, they ceased admiring. Avicen also has a
Story like this, of the Scroffles ill cut, a certain Person, says he, mistook,
when going about to perforate certain Scroffles, he met with a Branch of the
Turn-again Nerves, by which means, he cut away half the Voice of his Patient.
In like manner, Amatus of Portugal, tells us a Story of a Woman that had the
King's Evil in her Neck, to eat out the Roots of which, the Chyrurgeon put in
Sublimate, by the Acrimony of which, one of the Recurrent Nerves was corroded,
and the Woman almost lost her Voice. Nor is it only the Incision of this Nerve,
but the Refrigeration of it, that uses to spoil this Nerve, which Galen
confirms by this Story. I remember, says he, a Voice so prejudiced, that it was
almost lost, and the recurrent Nerves being refrigerated to excess, by an
Incision made in the Winter time; which when I understood, by the Application
of hot Remedies, restoring the Nerves to their natural Temper, I restored also
the Patient his Voice. In like manner says Avicen, There was a Person whose
Turn-again Nerve was overcool'd, there being a Necessity of long applying cold
Iron to his Neck, and so he lost his Voice. Gentilis affirms, That there was
some Apostume in that Part which was to be cut. So that the Apostume being cut,
and the Nerve laid bare, in regard it was Winter, and the Air was very sharp,
the Cold got into the Nerve and spoiled the Patients Voice.

OBSERVATION X. A Palsy.
WE saw a strange and wonderful Cure of a Palsy in Susan Smacht, a most noted
Woman, the Sister once of the Sexton of the Church of Montfort. This Woman,
when she was a Girl of about six years of Age, being terribly frighted by an
Accident, presently fell into a Palsy of her whole Body, except her Head. She
was under the Hands of several Physicians and Chyrurgions, eminent at that
time, who, by the Application of several Medicaments, reduced the Distemper to
that pass, that all the rest of the Parts being recovered, only both her Thighs
and Legs remained paralytic, from the Loins to the Feet, so that she could
neither stand nor go; in this Condition she lived a miserable Life, till the
forty forth Year of her Age, at what time she was miraculously cured of her
Distemper, after the following manner. In the Month of June, about Midnight,
arose a most terrible Tempest, with Thunder and Lightning, with which she was
so dreadfully and unusually frighted, that at the same time she was delivered
from her deplorable Disease. The next Morning, to the Admiration of all that
beheld her, she was seen walking before her own Door, giving Thanks to God for
her unexpected Cure. Thousands of People, not only in the Town and Places
adjoining, but also from Cities remote, crowded to see her, and all admired her
miraculous Recovery. By others, being asked how this Cure was performed, she
answered, that she was extremely terrified by the Thunder and Lightning, and
prayed to God continually, but that during the terrible Tempest, her Brother
the Sexton knocked at her Chamber Door, and while she was thinking to creep, as
she used to do, and to that end was feeling for her Crutches, that always stood
by her Bedside, but could not find them where she thought she had set them, a
vast Flash of Lightning discovered them to her at the other side of the Bed.
Whereupon the prepared her self to creep along upon her Arms to reach her
Crutches: But when she was about to put her Legs out of the Bed, (at what time,
she said she heard and saw something, but what that was, she never would
discover to any Body) she found that she could stand, and so, without any help,
went to the Door and opened it. And this very Relation she gave to Us more than
once. Her Brother the Sexton, who had known his Sister to be paralytic for
forty Years together, when he saw her open the Door and walk briskly about the
Chamber, was so astonished, that for fear he fell into a Swoon. The next day,
and the days following, the said Susan exposed her self to be publicly seen. I
my self also knew her for many years, and have seen her a thousand times in
that miserable Paralytic Condition, and afterward saw her alive for fifteen
years or more, a sound Woman, and free from so dreadful a Misfortune.

ANNOTATIONS.
THere may be given a manifest natural Reason for so miraculous a Cure; that is
to say, that the Humor which fastened upon the Nerves, upon her first Fright,
was again loosned from them by this more vehement Terror. As for the Patients
saying she saw and heard something, I know not what, I leave that to the
Judgment of the Reader; perhaps she imagined something in her fear that was not
really so. In the mean time, that there have been other unexpected Cures of the
Palsy, is certain, by the Testimony of several Authors. Thus Valleriola tells
us a Story of a Citizen of Arles, affected with a Dissolution of both Sides,
and destitute of all Humane Assistance, as one whom neither the Industry of the
Physicians, nor seasonable and proper Applications, nor Observance of Diet
could relieve, who at length, upon a vehement dread of Death, and being burnt
in his Bed, the House wherein he lived being on fire, was of a sudden delivered
from that deplorable Disease; Sense and Motion being restored to the Languid
Parts. The same Author relates another Story of a Cousin German of his, who had
been Paralytic six years of both his Thighs, who nevertheless, being provoked
by one of his Servants into a vehement and sudden Passion, recovered his Limbs,
and lived a found Man to his dying Day. And thus sudden and exorbitant
Commotions of the Mind have cured not only the Palsy, but other Diseases
incurable by Art. Thus Herodotus testifies, that the Son of Croesus born Dumb,
when he saw a Persian running upon his Father to kill him, became vocal, and
cried out, Friend, do not kill Croesus, and ever after that spoke like other
Men. The same Valleriola reports, that he saw a Person cured of a Quartan Ague,
through the vehemence of a sudden Passion, when no manner of Physical Remedies
could cure the Distemper before.

OBSERVATION XI. Bleeding at the Nose.
CHarles N. an Ale-Brewer, in the Month of October, drinking and dancing to
Excess at his Sister's Wedding, of a sudden, in the midst of a Dance, fell flat
to the Ground upon his Face, and by the Vehemence of the Fall, broke a Vein in
his Nostrils, which caused such an abounding Flux of Blood, as if the Median
Vein in his Arm had been cut. Presently Clothes dipped in Water and Vinegar
were clapped about his Neck and applied to his Nostrils, Ligatures fastened about
his Extreme Parts, but nothing would prevail. Insomuch that the Patient, as
well because he was heated with Drink, as by reason of the Pain of the Fall,
swooned away. Thereupon, seeing nothing would do, and because there was no
Chyrurgeon at hand to open a Vein, I ordered a Towel four times double to be
soaked in cold Water, and applied to his Testicles, which being twice repeated,
contrary to the Opinion of the Standers by, not only stopped the Blood, but
recovered him to his first Sobriety.

OBSERVATION XII. The Itch.
Cornelius Iohannis was troubled with a dry Scab, or running Itch, with dry
Crusts, and little Scales upon his Skin, that itch'd intollerably, especially
in the Night, when he grew warm in his Bed. The Crusts being scratched off, by
reason of the Itching, with his Nails, under them the Skin being a little
raised, appeared very dry, red, and rough, and then came Crusts and Scales like
the former, so that the common People thought him to be infected with the
Leprosy. This Distemper seized the lower part of his Belly, his Thighs and
Legs, in such a manner, that by reason of the dry Crusts or Scales, the bare
Skin was not to be seen in any of those Parts. His Arms also and Breast were
infected in some places, Two years before, upon the Crisis of a Quartan Ague
(for the Cure of which, for fifteen Months together, by the Advice of that
famous Physician, D. Gallius and others, who judged his Distemper to proceed
from a vitiated Spleen, several Medicines, both inward and outward, had been in
vain made use of,) the Disease not only abating, but rather increasing; at
length I was sent for to a Consultation, and seeing the Person of a strong
Constitution, and in good Health, excepting only the aforesaid Distemper, and
observing there was no Sign, either of Spleen, Liver, or any other Bowel
affected, I judged by that same Crisis of the Quartan Ague, that all the
noxious, sharp, and vicious Humors were expelled out of the Spleen to the Skin,
and so his Spleen recovered its former Soundness, but that the Skin was deeply
infected with that dry Scab, and that the Cause of the Distemper lay no longer
in the Spleen, but only remained deeply fixed in the Skin; and that the Skin so
infected, contaminated also the Juices and Humors flowing thither every day for
its Nourishment; as a Vessel that has contracted any Filth, infects the best
Wine that is poured into it. And indeed the Event of the Cure proved the truth
of my Judgment. For then I resolved to tame this obstinate Distemper, not so
much by Internal, as by Topical Medicaments, and those not gentle ones, but
strong Remedies answerable to the Greatness of the Evil, and the Pertinacy of
the Matter, since many other things, which others had tried, would do no good.
To this purpose, his Body being well purged before hand, in March I prescribed
a Fomentation, with which, being lukewarm, to foment the Parts infected twice
a day, for five or six days together.

. Roots of Briony iij. Wormwood, White Hore-hound, Pimpernel, Plantain,
Centaury the less, an. Handfuls iij. Oak-leaves Handfuls iiij. Elder*flowers
Handfuls ij. boil them in common Water q. s. to ten Pints, adding at the end
Roman Vitriol j. Al^m j. s. for a Fomentation.

After Fomentation, the Parts being dried with a Linen Cloth, I ordered them
to be anointed with our Ointment against the Shingles. After six days
Fomentation was discontinu'd, and only the Ointment used, which in a few Weeks
carried off a great part of the Distemper. This Ointment the Patient used all
the Summer, till September, by which time he was almost cured, excepting only
three or four places about the breadth of a Dollar, which would not submit to
this Ointment, but still produced new crusty Scales. Wherefore, the sixteenth
of September, I prepared him the following Ointment.

. Quicksilver j. s. Turpentine iij. To these well mixed add the Yolk of one
Egg, Unguent. Papuleum vj. of our Ointment against the Shingles j. s. mix them
for an Ointment.

These Remainders were very hard to be extirpated, and therefore I was forced
to continue the Use of this Ointment a little longer, augmenting afterward the
Quantity of Quicksilver; also I again applied the foresaid Fomentation; and
thus at length this nasty troublesome Deformity of the Skin, which others
despaired of ever curing, was at length abated and vanquished, so that about
the second of November it vanished quite and the Patient continued free from
the same all the rest of his Life.

ANNOTATIONS.
THE Itch, by the Greeks called Lichen, by others Serpigo, from Serpo to creep,
is a hard Asperity of the Skin, with dry Pustles, and a violent Itching,
creeping and extending it self to the adjoining Parts. Galen asserts two kinds
of this Distemper. There are two sorts, says he, of the Itch, that molest the
Skin. The one tolerable and more gentle, the other wild, and diffi cult to be
removed. In these the Scales fall off from the Skin, under which, the Skin
appears red and almost exulcerated. Celsus, who by the Word Impetigo, seems to
have understood some other Distemper, describes this Itch of Galen under the
Name of Papula, and makes also two sorts of it. The one, says he, is that the
Skin is exasperated by the smallest Pustles, and is red, and slightly corrodes,
in the middle somewhat lighter, and creeps slowly; it begins round, and dilates
in a Circle. The other, which the Greeks call (...), or the wild Itch, is that
by which the Skin bec^mes more rough, is exculcerated, and vehemently corroded,
looks red, and sometimes fetches the Hair off, which is less round, and more
difficultly cured.

As for the Cause of the Disease, Galen Aetius, Aegmeta affirm it to be
generated out of certain mixed Humors, that is to say, serous, thin and sharp,
mixed with thick Humors. But in my Judgment, Galen writes better, and more
perspicuously, that this Distemper is generated out of a salt Phlegm and yellow
Choler, which is the reason, that as in earthen Vessels corroded by Pickles,
the Scales fall off the Skin. Now these Humors being transmitted to the Skin,
putrify it, as Avicen says. To which I add, that this Corruption afterward is
intermixed with the good Humors, carried to the Skin for its Nourishment, and
so the Mischief becomes diuternal. Thus also Mercurialis writes, that the Skin
only having acquired a depraved Habit, corrupts all its Nourishment, and
converts it into increase of Impurities. And in the same manner, discoursing of
such a kind of scabby Patient. In the whole Circuit of the Body, there is a
vicious and itchy Humor implanted, by virtue of which, whatever good
Nourishment is carried to it, is presently converted into a nasty salt
corroding Humor, which occasions that continual Itching, together with those
little Ulcers, and the roughness of the Skin. Now these Humors corrupting the
Skin, must of necessity be hot and salt, from which proceeds that Heat and
Itching of those Scales. This Distemper however is not so dangerous as it is
troblesome, which if it continue long, gets that deep footing, that it is a
very difficult thing to extirpate it; and sometimes it hardens into a dry Mange
and Leprosy.

The gentler sort is cured at the beginning with gentler Medicaments, as
Fasting-Spitle, tosted Butter, Oil of Eggs, of Tartar, or Juniper, boiled
Honey, liquid Pitch, or Juice of Citron. But that which is of longer
continuance and wild, requires stronger Remedies, as Sulphur, Minium, Lytharge,
Ceruse, Vitriol, Pit-salt, Rust of Brass, Limeallum, Niter, white Hellebore,
etc. To which we may add Quicksilver, Sublimate, and precipitate, Mercury
having a peculiar occult, yet apparent Quality, to kill the Malignity that
accompanies this Distemper. Thus Peter Pachetus, in his Observations
communicated to Riverius, when no other Remedies could tame a wild Itch, cured
it with this Ointment.

. Unguent. Rosaceum iij. White Precipitate iij. Mix them for an Ointment.

OBSERVATION XIII. A Mortification of the Legs and Thighs by Cold.
MAny times severe Mischiefs attend the Imprudence of Persons given to drink;
which a certain lusty young Man, sufficiently made known by his own woeful
Example. For he in a most terrible Winter, when it freez'd vehemently hard,
coming home about Midnight well Cup-shot, without any body to help him to Bed,
went into his Chamber, where falling all along upon the Floor, he fell asleep,
and neither remembering himself nor his Bed, slept till Morning. But when he
awaked, he could feel neither Feet nor Legs: Presently a Physician was sent
for. But there was no feeling either in his Legs or Feet, though scarified very
deep. Hot Fomentations were applied, of hot Herbs boiled in Wine, adding
thereto Spirit of Wine; but to little purpose. For half his Feet, and half his
Legs below the Calves were mortified, the innate Heat being almost extinguished
by the Vehemence of the intense Cold. The Fomentations were continued for three
days. Upon the fourth day, the mortified Parts began to look black, and stink
like a dead Carcass. Therefore for the Preservation of the Patient, there was a
necessity of having recourse to the last Extremity, namely, Amputation, and so
upon the sixth day both his Legs were cut off a little below the Calves in the
quick part; by which means, the Patient escaped without his Feet, from imminent
Death, and afterward learned a new way to walk upon his Knees.

ANNOTATIONS.
AN Example of the same Nature we saw at Nimeghen, in the Year 1636. of a
Danish Soldier, who having slept, Drunk, as he was, upon a Form, in a bitter
frosty Night, when he walked in the Morning could not feel his Feet. But by
heating Fomentations, the native Heat, at most extinguished by the Cold, after
two days so menting, was restored to his Feet, tho his Toes could never be
brought to their natural Constitution; but remaining mortified, and beginning
to putrify, were all cut off by the Chyrurgeon. And therefore I would advise
all hard Drinkers not to take their Naps too imprudently in the Winter, unless
they have first laid themselves in a warm Place, and well fortified themselves
against the Injuries of the Air, least their being buried in Wine, bring them
to be buried in Earth.

OBSERVATION XIV. Obstruction of the Spleen.
KAtharine N. a Woman of forty four years of Age, had been troubled a whole
year with an Obstruction of her Spleen; much Wind rumbled in the Region of her
Spleen; she was tormented with terrible Pains of the same Side, by reason of
the Distention of the Bowels and the neighboring parts; so that she went
altogether bowed toward the Side affected, till at length, grown as lean as a
Skeleton, with continual Torments, she could go no longer. You might also
perceive by laying your Hands upon the Place, that the Spleen was very much
swelled; and more than all this, her Stomach was quite gone. In March, being
called to the Cure of this Distemper, I first purged her Body with a gentle
Purge; upon which, when she found but very little Relief, I prescribed the
following Apozeme for two days, to open the obstructed Passages, and prepare
the Morbific Matter, and withal, to keep her Body open.

. Roots of Polypody of the Oak, Dandelyon an. j. Roots of Fennel, Elecampane
Stone Parsley, Peeling of Capery roots, Tamarisc an. s. Baum, Fumary, Water
Trefoil, Tops of Hops, an. Handful j. Centaury the less, half a Handful. Fennel
seed ij. Damask Prunes ^o xi. Currants ij. Boil them in common Water q. s. In
the straining, macerate all night, of Spoonwort, Winter Nasturtium an. Handful
j. Leaves of Senna cleansed ij. Anise-seed vi. Make an Apozeme for two Pints.

After she had drank two Mornings a Draught of this Decoction, she went to
Stool twice or thrice a day, but the Ease which was expected did not follow.
Wherefore, after she had drank up her Apozeme, I gave her a purging Medicine
somewhat stronger, which I thus prescribed.

. Leaves of Senna cleansed s. White Agaric j. Roots of Black Helle^ore s.
Rhenish Tartar, Anise-seed an. j. Fumary Water q. s. Make an Infusion all
night, and add to the straining Elect. of Hiera Picra, Diaphoenicon an. ij. for
a Draught.

After she had taken this, at first she voided common Excrements. Soon after
she felt an extraordinary Pain in her Left-side, which presently removed from
thence to the Guts; which Pain weakened her to that degree, that she went away
sometimes in a Swoon. Not long after, she voided a certain black Water, like
Ink, in so great quantity, that she filled three whole Chamber-pots to the top.
From hence she felt an extraordinary Ease, and the Pains of her Left
Hypocondrium went almost quite off. Four days after I gave her the same Purge
again; upon which, she voided again a great quantity of black Water, but not so
black as before, neither was it so black as the former, as not being much
unlike the Lie in which our Country-women boils their Linen Spinnings. After
this Evacuation, she was terribly griped in her Belly, wherefore, about
Evening, I prescribed her Methridate Democ. j. with five Drops of Oil of
Aniseseed, in a Draught of heated Wine. After the use of these Medicines, the
Patient grew indifferent well, and in regard she began to loath Physic to that
degree, that she could not endure to hear the Name of Physic, we were forced to
defer the rest of the Cure till May, only ordering her to observe a proper
Diet. But in May she drank three Apozemes again, was three or four times
purged, and took her Electuary, and so was restored to her pristin Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis Woman, for two years before, had lost her monthly Evacuations, and from
that time the Distemper of the Spleen began to seize her more and more, till
she became altogether Melancholy. Whence it is very probable, that the failing
of her accustomed Evacuations, that fling off many other Excrements of the
Bowels, was the Cause of the Accumulation of this Melancholy Humor in the
Spleen and Neighboring Parts, which now wanted the usual passage of Evacuation
through the Womb. Therefore says Sennertus, The accustomed Evacuations of the
Hemorrhoids and Courses being suppressed, conduce very much to accumulate
vicious Humors in the Spleen.

Thus we have seen in our Practice, that Women after their Purgations have left
them, have fallen into several Diseases, because the noxious Humors that were
evacuated with the menstruous Blood, were then retained in the Body. And
therefore when Women's Purgations fail through Age, they ought to purge often,
to the end the excrementitious Humors that want to pass through the Womb may be
drawn to the Guts.

As to the black Evacuations, it is indeed a Wonder how these melancholy Humors
heaped together in our Patient, could be retained in the Body without doing any
more harm, and could be changed into a Blackness like Ink. Besides, Hippocrates
tells us, that black Stools are dangerous and mortal. Tho Petrus Salius well
advises the Physicians not always to fear those black Stools, wherein there is
nothing many times of dangor* For if the Spleen be out of order, this Matter
gathers together about the Bowels in great abundance, and in those Veins which
are common to them; which if it be in great quantity, it gathers also about the
Mesentery and Sweet-bred, which are, as it were, the Sink of the whole Body,
and then when it grows burdensome to Nature, is expelled, to the great Ease of
the Patient, by the Expulsive Faculty, excited either of its self, or by
Medicaments, the Evacuations of which are black. However, that Melancholy
Matter so collected, is not always expelled through the Guts, but also to the
great benefit of the Patient, sometimes by Urine, which Mercurialis also
testifies. Nor are you to wonder, says he, that Diuretics are by me preferred
above other Medicines, since Reason tells, that Melancholy and Splenetic
Persons have black melancholy Blood. With which agrees the Authority of
Aristotle, in his Problems, but chiefly of Hippocrates, who gives us the Story
of Byas the Fisty-Cuffer, who was cured of a Swelling in his Liver, by a Flux
of Urine. For which reason, they that undertake the Cure of the Spleen, must
make it their Business to provoke Urine: for which, we have a remarkable Story
which Valetius relates in Holler. I knew, says he, a Religious Person, whose
Liver swelled three or four times a year, but chiefly at the beginning of
Spring and Fall; and while that bunchy Tumor lasted, he was infested with
Hypochondriac Pains, black and blew over his whole Body, and growing worse and
worse by degrees. But at length, coming to make black Water, like to Ink, for
five or seven days, he recovered his former Health, the Tumor and Pain of the
Hypochondrium vanishing. And now for these twelve or fifteen years, he has had
these Profluvium's of black Urine, whereas before he had the Hemorrhoid, which
though they swelled indeed, were n^r so open.

OBSERVATION XV. A Wound in the Leg.
ANdrew Ioannis, a Cook, hapening to be drunk, and finding his Chamber Door
shut, set his Foot to the Door with all his force; so that after he had broke
it, his Leg past through the Slit with the same swiftness, and raked the middle
of his Leg withinside toward the Calf to that degree, that though the Solution
of the Continuum were not very broad, yet it reached to the very Periosteum,
and by reason of the Contusion in the Part, swelled very much. A certain
ignorant Chyrurgeon had had him in hand for some days, but his Pains
increasing, my Advise was desired. By this time his whole Leg was swelled very
much, and began to look of a greenish Color among the Black and the Blew, with
most acute Pains, and the Color sufficiently demonstrated that the Forerunner
of Mortification would soon contract a Gangrene, which I found to have been
occasioned by the Ignorance or Mistake of the Chyrurgeon; for he having thrust
in a hard Tent into the Wound as far as the Periosteum, had stopped it so close,
that no Moisture could come forth. For he had laid a defensive Plaster over
it, as broad as my hand, composed of Bole Ammoniac, and other astringent
things, then had wrapped his Leg, from the Knee to the Foot, in a Linen Roller
dipped in Water and Vinegar, and had swathed all this extremely hard,
pretending, by this means, to prevent a Tumor and Inflammation. To say truth,
the Wound was plainly raw and ill colored, without any Digestion; so that upon
drawing forth the Tent, only a little watery Corruption came forth. All these
things I threw away, and to prevent a Gangrene, took care to have the Wound
washed with Spirit of Wine, that no Tent should be put in, but only that a
Linen Cloth four double, should be laid upon it, and that the whole Leg should
be fomented with the following Fomentation.

. Betony, Thyme, VVoorm-wood, Sage, Hissop, Rosemary, Flowers of camomil,
Elder, Melilot, Roses, an. Handful j. Seeds of Cumin and Lovage, an. j. s.
Laurel Berries ij. VVhite-wine q. s. Boil them to three Pints, add to the
Straining Spirit of Wine lb j.

This Fomentation being wrapped warm about his Leg, the next Night his Pain was
much abated, and much of the watery Corruption run out of the Wound. Within two
days after, the Swelling of his Leg palpably fell, and returned to its natural
Color, and threw out the Corruption well concocted, and so being dressed as it
ought to be, the Cure was easily completed.

ANNOTATIONS.
THings put into a Wound that ought not to be, are utter Enemies to Nature,
endeavoring Consolidation, especially if they compress any nervous Body,
Membrane or Tendon, or the Periosteum. Hence terrible Pains, Tumors,
Inflammations, and other Mischiefs proceed; and therefore all such things as
are foreign to Nature, are to be taken away, as Paraeus, Pigius, and other
Chyrurgeons tell us. Thus hard and thick Tents, which inwardly offend and
distend the Wound, or else stop it quite up, or compress the Nerves, Membranes,
or Periostea, are not to be thrust into Wounds, as being those things that
hinder the Operation of Nature, Suppuration, Erection of the Matter and
Consolidation, and beget Pains, Inflammations, and other Mischiefs. Thus we
have seen, by the Ignorance of Chyrurgeons, some Men tormented with Pains,
others thrown into Fevers, Syncope, Convulsions, Mortifications and Gangrenes.
As it had like to have befallen our Patient; who, beside other ill Simptoms,
was very near a Gangrene; and had it not been in time prevented, upon the
Approach of the Mortification, he had hazarded the loss of his Limbs, or his
Life. Hence Felix Wirtius, in Wounds of the Hands and Joints, rejects the Use
of Tents; which Opinion Hildan refutes, who says, that Tents are necessary in
the nervous Parts, to keep the upper Lips of the Wound open, and give passage
for the Corruption. By which Doctrine it appears, that he praises those Tents,
which do not offend the inner Part of the Wound, but only keep the upper Parts
open. But the Chyrurgeon, as to our Patient, had committed a great Error in
this very Particular, for he had distended the inner Parts of the Wound with a
thick and hard Tent, and had compressed the Periosteum, and prevented the
Concoction and Efflux of the Corruption.

OBSERVATION XVI. Suppression of Urine.
THE Wife of Gerrard Anthony, a Tailor, had layn in, in May, and in three days
after* she was brought to Bed, had not made Water, which was an extraordinary
Pain to her, and had brought her so low, that she could hardly speak. The
Midwife declared that she was very well laid, but that presently after her
Evacuations were stopped, that something hard was to be felt on the other side
in the lower part of her Belly. Hence I guessed that there was some
Superfoetation or Mole, which remained behind. For the Cure of which, and to
provoke her Urine and Purgations withal, I prescribed this Apozeme.

. The Roots of Stone Parsley, Masterwort, Valerian, Sea-holly, Cammock an. s.
Round Birthwort, sliced Licorice an. ij. Leaves of black Ribs, M^gwort,
Peny-Royal, Water-Nasturtium, an. one Handful. Water-Parsly with the Whose, two
Handfuls. Savine, Flowers of Camomil, an half a Handful. White Wind q. s. Boil
them for an Apozeme to a Pint and a half.

. Of the said Apozeme iij. Oil of Amber distilled by descent, Drops xx. Make a
Draught.

This she took hot the first time. This she took after three hours again, upon
which, several Motions of Childbearing supervening, she brought forth a round
Mole, about the bigness of a Child's Head, which had the perfect Eyes of a Man.
This being thus luckily expelled, her Urine and Purgations followed, and she
was presently delivered from the imminent danger she was in.

ANNOTATIONS.
MOles are of different kinds, some within, others without the Birth; some very
dangerous and troublesome to the Woman, others less hazardous; some without any
Form, others resembling some Shape or other; some having Life, others without
Life. Sometimes they presage something of Good; for though they do not hinder
the Birth, yet they are very prejudicial both to the Birth and the Mother Which
our Patient confirmed by her own Example, who had certainly died, had not the
Mole, expelled by Medicaments, made way for her Urine and Purgations.

OBSERVATION XVII. A Dysentery.
GErard Vossius, our Neighbor, had been troubled with a Dysentery for some
days; he was miserably tormented with cruel Pains in the Guts, and many times
he voided Excrements that were all bloody, and mixed with a tenacious Slime; he
slept not at all, his Stomac was gone; he was very thirsty, and he had a Fever,
which though not vehement, yet was continual. Though the young an were not
above thirty years of Age, and very strong, yet he was brought so low by these
Mischiefs, that in a few days he was reduced to an extreme Imbecility. The
sixth of February, I gave him the following Purge, which brought away much
Choleric Matter.

. The best Rhubarb somewhat burnt ij. Mirobans Indian, Citrine an. j. Leaves of
Senna cleansed iij. Ani^eseed j. White Poppy ij. Plantain Water. q. s. Let them
boil for half an hour. Add to the Straining Elect. Diaphanicon j. s. Mix them
for a Draught.

In the Evening, after his Purging, I gave him this Bolus.

. Terra Sigillata, Nicholas's rest an. j. Mithridate Damoc. ij. Mix them for a
Bolus.

The next day the following Apozeme was prepared, of which, he took three times
a day, and once at midnight.

. Barley cleansed j. Roots of Snake-weed, Tormentil, Pomegranate Rinds an. s.
Leaves of Oak, Plantane, Sanicle, Pimpernel, Great Sanicle, Snake-weed an. one
Handful. Seed of small Roses vj. Heads of white Poppies noiij. Raisins with the
Stones v. Common Water (...) iiij. Boil them to the Consumption of the half,
for an Apozeme.

In the Hours intervening, he took often in a day a small quantity of this
Electuary.

. Nutmegs, Trochischs of Terra Sigillata, an. s. Hartshorn burnt, red Coral
prepared, Lapis Hematitis, Mastich. an. j. To these being pulverized, add
Conserve of Red Roses j. s. Miv. ci^on. Rob. Acaciae an. iij. Nicholas's Rest
j. s. Syrrup of sower Pomegranates q. s. Mix them for a Conditement.

I ordered him to bear with his Thirst as much as he could, which he the more
ready yielded to; in regard, that after drinking, especially of Ale, he found
himself most cruelly griped, and therefore instead of Ale, I prescribed him
this Amygdalate for his usual Drink.

. Barley cleansed j. s. Seed of the smallest Roses j. Of white (...), Plantain
and Lettice an. s. Common Water (...) iij. boil them to the Consumption of the
Half.

. The Straining aforesaid, sweet Almonds blan^h'd, v. white Poppy Seed iij. The
four greater Colt-seeds j. s. Make an Amygdalate according to Art, to which add
Syrup of Poppies j. Of Red Roses j. s.

The ninth of February I gave him iiij. of Rhubarb a little burnt and powdered,
in a little Ale; the tenth and thirteenth I repeated the Apozeme, and the
twelfth the Conditement. And thus by the use of these Medicines, the Flux
ceasing, the Patient regained his Health by degrees, and by the help of
convenient Diet, recovered his lost Strength: However, for a long time after
his Cure, he was ill, and coveted after any sort of Drink, which ill Habit,
however afterward vanished, so soon as his Guts, by the use of good Diet, were
again fortified with new Slime, which had been corroded away by the Acrimony of
the former Humors. This Patient thus cured, the same Distemper seized three or
four others in the same House, who were all cured in the same manner.

ANNOTATIONS.
AT the same time, at Montfort, Dysenteries were very rise over the whole Town
among the Common People, and killed several, which therefore many judged to be
Malignant and Contagious; but erroneously, for that it was not rife, as it was
contagious; but in regard of the Season of the year, and the Diet then in use,
for the Autumn of the Year before was hot and moist, and had multiplied many
Humors in the Bodies of People; then followed a dry and intensly cold Winter,
which intense Cold lasted a long time with a most terrible Frost, and thickened
those Humors. But at the beginning of February, that rigid Cold changed of a
sudden into a mild Warmth, by which means the Humors condensed by the Cold,
were dissolved again and became fluid. Now during the Frost, because there was
no bringing of fresh Flesh or Fish, or any other fresh Diet, the Common People
fed upon old Flesh and old Fish, salted and hardened in the Smoke, Turnips, much
Spice, and the like Food, that sharpen the Humors; which being again dissolved
and rendered fluid by the sudden Heat, occasioned that great number of
Dysenteries; yet no where but among the vulgar People, that made use of such a
sort of Diet; for the wealthy sort, that eat well, were not at all troubled
with the Distemper. Hence also it came to pass, that because three or four in
the same House fed alike, they had all the same Disease; not that the Disease
was common upon the score of Contagion, for then it would have infected those
that came to them, as well as themselves.

OBSERVATION XVIII. A Dysentery.
PAn^ras Collert, a stout young Man, about two and twenty years of age, at the
same time also was seized with a Dysentery, and in regard he could not endure
to take Physic; perhaps because he was very Covetous, he refused to take the
Advice of any Physicians, but would needs be his own Physician. He had observed
that I was wont to purge Dysenteries at the beginning, and therefore he
resolved to follow my Course in his own Disease; yet willing to spare Cost, he
prepared himself the following Purge; Tobacco small cut s. this he steeped in
small Ale all Night; the next Morning he boiled it a little, and strained it,
and drank of the whole Straining at a Draught. After which, he was taken with
an extraordinary Faintness, even to Swooning, so that the People of the House
thought he would have died: Presently followed a prodigious Vomiting, and
Purging downwards, so that he voided an Extraordinary quantity of various
Humors, especially yellow and green Choler, upwards and downwards; by which
means, the Cause of the Disease being violently and altogether evacuated, he
was cured of his Dysentery by that one Draught.

ANNOTATIONS.
SAys Celsus, Often times those whom Reason will not recover, Rashness helps.
This is apparent by the Example of that young Man, whose Rashness, had any
other weaker Persons followed, they had perhaps cured their Dysentery by the
Flux of their Soul. For Tobacco that way taken, is a most vehement disturbing
Medicament, against the Violence of which, there is no resistance. And
therefore I would not advise all People to use this Experiment. If the rash
taking of such a violent Medicine succeed well with some young Persons that are
of a robust Constitution, the same Success is not to be expected in all People.
Nevertheless, that this Tobacco thus taken by a very strong Man, should heal
his Dysentery, is no way repugnant to Reason; for by its extraordinary
Violence, it evacuated altogether the whole Cause of the Distemper. I heard
also, that two other country Boors, being troubled with a Dysentery, made trial
of the same Experiment.

OBSERVATION XIX. Suppression of Female Purgations.
ANtonia, a Plethoric Woman, very strong, about three and twenty years of age,
lying in of her first Child, rising the third day after her Delivery, too
venturously trusted herself to the cold Air; upon which, her Purgations
immediately stopped, yet she was well enough till the third Week of her Month,
at what time a violent Pain seized her Right-side toward the Region of the
Spleen, as also her Loins, and extended it self from the Huckle-bone to the
true Ribs. The Pain had brought her very low, and taken away her Appetite; yet
by her Pulse I found she had no Fever, and therefore upon the twentieth of
September, I ordered her to be purged with this following Potion.

. The best Rhubarb j. Leaves of Senna cleansed iij. Rhenish Tartar, Anis^seeds
an. j. s. Mugwort water q. s. Make an Infusion according to Art. Adding to the
Straining Elect of Hiera Picra j. s. for a Potion.

After this Purge, she loathed Physic to that degree, that we must have here
given over, but that upon the twenty second of September, she was seized with a
violent Suffocation from her Womb; by which, the Passage of her Breath being
stopped, she was almost stifled, and sometimes swooned away. Then, tormented
with her Pains, and afraid to dye, she promised to take whatever we gave her,
though never so ungrateful to the Palate, so there were any Hopes of Ease.
There to abate the Uterine Suffocation, I gave her this Decoction, of which she
was to take one, two or three Ounces several times a day.

. Leaves of Rue, one Handful, seed of Lovage vj. Down of Nuts ^. Seed of
Caraways and Bishops-weed j. Decoction of Barly-water q. s. Boil them to a Pint
and strain them.

By the use of this, the Suffocation was almost vanquished, only the Pains of
her Side more and more increased, and extended themselves to her very Shoulder,
so that I began to be afraid of her Life; therefore the twenty fourth of
September, this Apozeme was made.

. Roots of Fennel, Valerian, Stone-Parsly, an. s. Of Briony vi. Of round
Birthwort, Dittany an. jj. Of Sassafras-wood iij. Herbs, Mugwort, Rue,
Peniroyal, Feverfew, Savine Nipp, an. Handful j. Flowers of Camomil, half a
Handful. Seed of Lovage v. Common Water q. s. Boil them to two Pints. In the
straining, steep for a whole Night together, Leaves of Senna cleansed ij. White
Agaric j. s. Aniseseed v. In the Morning let them simper over the Fire, and
then strain them by Expression for an Apozeme.

Of this Decoction she took twice a day, in the Morning, and at four or five a
clock in the Afternoon, each time four or five Ounces lukewarm, which brought
away every day, three, four or five times, putrid, nasty, tough, black and very
viscous Excrements besides an extraordinary deal of Wind. In the intervening
Hours, because of the Suffocations frequently returning, she sometimes took her
first Decoction. By the use of these Medicines, within four days the greatest
part of her Pains ceased. The twenty ninth of September, I ordered the Saphena
Vein in her Left-foot to be opened, and a good quantity of Blood to be taken
away, which gave her ease; and the same day she took her last Apozeme again, of
which the following days she drank no more than once a day. And thus by the use
of these Remedies, she escaped a dangerous Disease, and recovered her Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
Childbearing Women, in their Lyings in, frequently commit very great Errors,
afterward, the Causes of great Mischiefs. Among which, this is not the least,
that they are over confident of their own Strength, and trust themselves in the
Air sooner than the time of their Lying in will permit; whence arise those
dangerous Diseases, Suppression of the Courses, Fevers, Suffocations, and many
others; of which, there are several Examples to be found in Authors, besides
what we see every day. Thus in our Practice, we have seen through this Error
committed by Childbearing Women, most terrible Diseases brought upon them, some
of whom have died, others ran most terrible Hazards; others have go^ those
afflictions of some particular Part, which they could never claw off as long as
they lived. They do not all escape so luckily as our Patient before mentioned,
for sometimes extreme Weakness, or loathing of the Taste, or a Fever, or some
other thing hinders the taking of the Medicaments, or inverts or hinders the
operation of the Medicines, and then all the Art and Diligence of the Physician
signifies nothing. Thus, the same year that I had this Woman in Cure, the Wife
of a Kinsman of mine at Utrecht, a strong Woman, fell into the same Distemper,
but not to be cured by all the Prescriptions of the most learned and prudent
Physicians.

In these Cases I have observed this, that the Courses, suppressed a little
after Delivery, unless they be stirred within three or four days by
Medicaments, can very hardly or not at all be moved by the help of the
Physicians, but are the Causes of very desperate Diseases, which Diseases do
not presently appear, sometimes not till after some days; sometimes not till
after the third or fourth Week. And in the Cure of these Diseases, I have
farther observed this, that the greatest Relief is given at the beginning,
before the Strength of the Patient is abated, partly by attenuating Apozems,
and loosning withal, to provoke and evacuate the Matters peccant, both in
quantity and quality, partly by Blood-letting in the Feet; which way of Cure, I
have with success experienced more than once.

OBSERVATION XX. The Nephritic Passion.
THE Young Lady Cals^ager was so cruelly tormented for three days, with a Pain
a little below her Loins, that she knew not where to turn her self; these Pains
were also accompanied with Vomiting, and an extraordinary Restlessness. It was
the Nephritic Passion, and the Gravel or Stone descending through the Ureters,
caused this Pain: Wherefore, to expel the Gravel with more speed and ease, I
prescribed this Decoction.

. Sliced Licorice s. Herbs, Stone-parsly, Althea, Chervil, Mallows,
Water-parsly, Leaves of black Ribs an. one Handful, Flowers of Camomil, one
Handful and a half, fat Figs no ix. New Milk, common Water, an. q. s. Boil them
to the Consumption of the third part for an Apozem.

That Day she drank almost all the Decoction, and about Evening, voided some
small Stones, with a good quantity of Gravel, and was freed from her Distemper.

ANNOTATIONS.
MEdicines that break the Stone, sometimes crumble the little Stones that stick
in the Kidneys, as Experience tells us. But when they are expelled out of the
Kidneys, and stick in the Ureters, they are not to be crumbled by the force of
any Medicaments whatever, which Reason, besides Experience, teaches us, since
no Medicaments can reach thither with their Virtue entire; for that the great
quantity of Serum running thither, and there settling, hinders and abates the
Strength of the Medicaments; so that they are disabled in their Operation. And
therefore, to force the Stones out of the Ureter, lenifying and molifying
Medicaments must be mixed with the Diuretics, to smooth and mollify the
Ureters, and to prepare a more easy Descent for the Stone. Such is that
Decoction which I, and such is that Prescription of Io. Baptist Thodosius,
which he, boast never failed him in driving out the Stone, though he had made
use of it several and several times.

. Leaves of fresh gathered Althea one Handful and a half, New Butter iij. Honey
lb j. Boil them together in Water q. s. to the Consumption of the third part.
Take of the Straining a warm Draught Morning and Evening.

Such is also that celebrated Secret of Forestus, which most Physicians highly
approve, and which I have successfully made use of, only now and then with some
Alterations and Additions; of which, Forestus himself thus writes. This, my
Secret, I will no longer conceal, for the common Benefit of the Sick; that it
may not be laid to mine, which was laid to the Charge of the wicked Servant,
who hid the Talent, which God had given him, in the Earth. And therefore I will
no longer, to the Prejudice of Posterity, keep this Secret by me, which is this.

. Seed of Mallows, Althea an. iij. Red Vetches iij. The four greater Seeds an.
ij. Barley cleaned ij. Fat Figs no ix. Sebeston no vij. Licorice sliced j.
Rainwater (...) iiij. Boil these to the Consumption of half, and reserve the
Straining for use, which the Patient continually using, always voided Stones.

OBSERVATION XXI. The Worms.
A Little Boy, the Son of Antonius, about three years of age, had the lower
part of his Belly extremely swelled, and stretched like a Drumb, so that he
seemed to be Hydropic; his Stomach was gone, with a slight Fever, accompanied
with Frights in his Sleep, and he would be always rubbing his Nose with his
Fingers. I guessed them to be either Worms or crude Humors sticking in the
first Region of the Belly, that caused all those evil Symptoms. Wherefore,
because the Child would take nothing, but would be always drinking, I ordered
new Ale to be given him for his Drink, with which I only mixed a little Oil of
Vitriol, so much as sufficed to give it a gentle Sowrness. This Drink being
continued for a fortnight or three Weeks, the Swelling of his Belly fell, but
he voided no Worms.

ANNOTATIONS.
Oil of Vitriol given after that manner, does not only remove all Putrefactions
and Corruptions, but kills and consumes the Worms in the Stomach and Guts, and
those that are infested with such like evils; and we have seen it recover those
that have been despaired of, contrary to Expectation. Thus my Sister Cornelia,
when she came to be seven years of Age, and was miserably tormented with the
Worms in her Belly, and had taken several Remedies to no effect, when she was
despaired of, and nothing but Death expected, at length, by taking Oil of
Vitriol given in Ale, she was recovered in a short time. The same thing
happened to Margaret Dobre, the Daughter of the Marshal of Montfort, and
several others. Therefore it is not without reason that the Chemists cry up
this Oil so highly as they do. Concerning which, and the Oil of Sulphur,
Mindererus thus writes, There is no Corruption, the Strength of which they do
not break; no Infection which they do not overcome, no depravation of Humors,
which is not vanquished by them.

OBSERVATION. XXII. A Burning.
PEter Abstee, going to shoot off a Musket, by chance the Breech of the Gun
broke, and though the Splinters of the Iron did him no harm, yet his Face was
all over burnt with the Flame of the Powder, and several of the Corns of Powder
stuck in his Skin. The Corns being presently picked out, we applied to his
Eyes, Linen Rags doubled and dipped in very Salt Butter; and over his Face we
laid raw Turnips bruised in a Mortar with Salt Butter, which we changed thrice
the first day, and once the next night. This Cataplasm drew out the Fire
remarkably, nor did any Blister rise upon his Eyebrows, which the Butter had
prevented; so that after one or two Anointings afterward with Ointment of
Roses and Pomatum, he was perfectly cured.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN a Burn, the greatest Care to be taken, is to fetch out the Fire, and to
prevent the rising of Pustles and Blisters; for the effecting of which, various
Remedies are commended. In a slight Burn, the Cure is perfected by holding the
Part which is hurt to the Fire, or by putting it into hot Water, or Water as
hot as you are able to endure it. But Burns of more Concernment, raw Turnips
beaten with Salt, are a most certain Remedy, by which, I have done strange
things in very terrible Burns. Common People, says Pareus, find by Experience,
that the Heat of the Part slightly burnt, vanishes, and the Pain ceases, if
they hold the Part affected to the Flame of a Candle, or to quick burning
Coals; for Similitude causes Attraction. Therefore the outward Fire draws out
the inner, and so Fire becomes the Cure of the Mischief which it caused. It is
also a tried Remedy, and easy to be had, if presently after the Burn, you clap
raw Turnips bruised with Salt to the part aggrieved.

Nevertheless, Hildan says, that Turnips do not agree with Burns in the Face,
because they prejudice the Eyes, which would be true, if the Turnips were put
into the Eyes; or if the Eyes, before the Application were not guarded with
other things, which we think is best done with Linen Rags four doubled, and
dipped in very salt Butter; for that the Salt Butter draws out the Fire, by
reason of the Salt; and by its fatness, lenifies and guards the Eyelids. But
distilled Waters are far less convenient, as are also Woman's Milk, or Whites
of Eggs, or any such like things, which are presently dried up, and stick so
close to the Part affected, that they can hardly be pulled off without
excoriation. In Burns of the Face, Hildan rather uses this Ointment.

. Venetian Soap j. Oil of Sweet Almonds and Roses an. s. M^scilage of the Seeds
of Quinces extracted with Rosewater, a small quantity. Mix them for an Ointment.

In other Parts, he writes, the following Ointment powerfully draws out the
Fire.

. Raw Turnips j. s. Salt. Venice Soap, an. s. Mix them in a Mortar, and make an
Ointment with Oil of Roses and Almonds.

Besides these, there are many other things which powerfully draw out the Fire.
Among the rest, Writing-Ink, as we have already showed, and Pickle, Linen Rags
being dipped therein, as also Limewater do the same. Concerning Pickle or
Brine, Lemnius thus writes, Pickle or Brine, by a present and peculiar force,
draws the Fire out of Burns, and asswages the most intense Pains, whether the
Burns be of Gunpowder, or the Scaldings of Oil, Pitch, Scaldingwater, or fiery
Coals; especially if the Parts affected be but fomented with a Rag dipped in
the Pickle; this is confirmed by Matthias Pactzerus. Butter also mixed with a
great deal of powdered Salt, and laid upon the Scald, does Wonders. But these
things are to be used at the beginning, before the Wheals and Blisters rise,
and that there be any Excoriation, else these things are not so proper, but the
Cure must be ordered another way.

OBSERVATION. XXIII. The Toothache.
COrnelia Iacobi, a strong Woman, was troubled with a terrible Pain in the
Teeth, together with a Pain in half her Head; whereupon I gave her this Vomit.

. Glass of Antimony powdered gr. xii. White Wind v. Let them sleep all Night,
in the Morning filter the Wine through a Sheet of brown Paper, and give it for
one Draught.

This brought up Choleric, Flegmatic and tough Matter in abundance; and besides
she had some Stools; the next Night she slept well, the Pain of her Teeth
ceased, and she never had it more.

OBSERVATION XXIV. The Gallic Fever, Epidemic.
IN the Year 1635* the Summer was extreme hot and dry; at what time, the King
of France's Army being joined with ours, besieged Lovain, where the Soldiers
were in great want of all things, especially of Bread and Water, and for that
reason they fed upon the Fruits of the Season, unripe and crude, Flesh newly
killed and never salted, without Bread, and other Food that bred ill
Nourishment; so that at length, almost consumed with Hunger and Thirst, they
raised their Siege, and by reason that Schenk-Fort was at that time betrayed
into the Spaniards Hands, they were forced to come into our Country. Hither
when they came, besides our own, the greatest part of the French Foot quartered
for some time at Nimeghen (where I lived at that time, and began to practice)
and among those Soldiers, a certain Pestilent and Malignant Fever began to be
very rife some few days before their coming to the Town. Here the Soldiers
overjoyed, found Plenty of all things, and were well refreshed; but within a
few days this malignant Fever swept away great Numbers of the whole Army, more
especially of the French; for not to reckon our own, within two or three months
this dire contagion laid in their Graves, at least three thousand of the French
at Nimeghen; nor did it rage less in the Camp before Schenk Sconce, and in
other places it made the same Destruction, both of our own and the French
Soldiers, and from them the Infection spread it self among the Citizens and
Inhabitants at Nimeghen, where above a thousand were devoured by the Earth in a
few months. Nor was the Havoc less among the Inhabitants of the adjoining
Cities; nay, it penetrated even into the very Heart of our Country. Now,
because this Fever first infected the French, and afterward the rest, it was
generally called the French Fever, and by many also the Gallic Disease.

There is not a small Contagion in this Disease, which is chiefly communicated
to others by Contact and Attraction of putrid and most nasty Vapors, of Sweat,
of Ordure, etc. and therefore they who attended the Sick, or staid any while
with them, were sure to be infected with the Distemper; but the Contagion was
first spread all over Nimeghen, more especially for this reason; because the
whole City, by reason the Army was so vast, was all full of Soldiers, insomuch
that all the Streets and Lanes were filled with Soldiers, some in Health, and
some sick, lying every where at the Sides of the Streets: and hence the Filth
and Excrements, as well of the Sick as Healthy, were thrown into the public
Passages in great Heaps; nor was there any avoiding them, because of the
extraordinary Multitudes of People passing to and fro. And thus it came to pass
that the malignant and corrupt Vapors rising from those nasty Dunghills,
infected the whole City with Contagion and Disease.

The Cause of this Disease did not lie so much in the malignant Corruption of
the Spirits, as of the Humors, and therefore it might be very properly called a
Pestilence in the Humors; but it differed from the Pestilence in this, that in
the Pestilence, the vital Spirits, in this Fever, the Humors, are corrupted
after a malignant manner. Moreover the Contagion of the Pestilence hangs in the
Air, and infects more at a distance; but the Contagion of this Fever is
communicated by the Immediate Contact and Attraction of malignant Vapors.
Lastly, the Pestilence is a Disease more acute and dangerous, and of which more
die than escape; but in this Disease more escape than dye.

This Fever, at the beginning seized some sharply, but most People gently; some
without, and others with a slight Cold and Shivering. A little after the
beginning, in many followed a very great Heat, accompanied with a vehement
Thirst; which Burning sometimes intermitting by slight Intervals, continued for
the most part till the seventh day or longer. In many also this intense Heat
was not perceived; and in such Persons the Heart was more affected by the
malignity of the Humors than the heat, for in them the Vital Faculty was more
endammag'd. At the beginning of the Distemper, there appeared a very great
Debility and Dissipation of the natural Strength. Deliriums in some, in most
Faintness, in many Head-achs and want of Sleep; in all Thirst, with a great
dryness of the Tongue; many also presently after the Disease, were troubled
with malignant Dysenteries and Diarr^ea's, very difficult to be cured. The
Pulse was also very thick, but weak and unequal.

Upon the days of Crises's, the Patients were generally worse, nevertheless
very few Crises's that were good. Nature seemed to endeavor and attempt
Crises's; but in regard of the great quantity of malignant Humors, and the
wasted strength of the Patient, she was not able to accomplish them. Crises's,
by Sweat or bleeding at the Nose, or coming down of the Courses, sometimes
alone vanquished the Distemper, but very seldom; for they were for the most
part imperfect, b^t by looseness of the Belly they were dangerous, and to many
mortal. In some, little red Spots breaking out over all the Body upon the Skin,
changed the Disease sometimes for the worse, and sometimes for the better. Some
that lay long sick had critical Abscesses in some sound part. But Carbuncles
never appeared. I never saw any that had either Kernels in their Groins, behind
their Ears, or under their Armpits, or that Nature ever voided any thing
through those Emunctories.

Some that had been cured of this Fever, easily relapsed into as dangerous and
mortal a Distemper, especially if they exposed themselves abroad too soon, or
committed the least Error in Diet.

In the Cure of this Distemper, the primary and chief Relief was given by
Blood-letting three or four times, and in some six or seven times repeated. I
have seen Frenchmen, whom their Physicians have let Blood in four days space,
no less than twelve times, and have taken great quantities of Blood from them;
for the Patients found great Ease after Blood-letting; and because so known a
Remedy, at length, that many, without the Advice of a Physician, would order
themselves to be let Blood, by which means, some cured themselves of their
Distemper. More than that, this seemed a greater Wonder, that when
Blood-letting decays the Strength so much, yet in this Disease, after great
quantities of Blood taken away, Nature gathered new Strength, and was relieved
from the burden of malignant Humors; and all the Patients, even they that were
in the weakest Condition, were able to endure Blood-letting. These Fevers
submitted to no Remedies so easily as to Blood-letting. The Blood which was
drawn forth for the two or three first times, was very Corrupt in all Men. Nor
do I remember that among all those Multitudes of Sick People I ever saw one
that had good Blood taken from him at the beginning: but for the most part
whitish, often between livid and greenish, wherein there was a little mixture
of red Blood. It was Muscilaginous like the Decoction of Calves-feet. In most
it was Coagulated: In some also it would hardly Coagulate, the Fibers being for
the most part consumed by the Corruption; and those were in most danger. After
the third or fourth Bleeding the Blood proved tolerable.

Being called therefore to Patients, after loosening the Belly with a Glyster,
we ordered Blood-letting as soon as possibly we could; and if the Patients
strength would permit, we repeated it the next day; taking away every time from
half a pint to a pint of Blood, and the same we did again after three or four
days intermission, according to the strength of the Patient and the excess of
the Fever. Nevertheless in the mean time we Administered Purging Medicines, and
sometimes Glysters to keep the Body open, and because there was a Malignity in
the Disease we made frequent use of Diaphoretics and Antidotes, Juleps, and
Cooling and Cordial Electuaries were very Beneficial, mixed with Diuretics,
more especially if they were opposite to the Malignity. When the Patient could
not sleep, we anointed his Temples with some gentle Opiate, and gave him
sometimes Narcotics to swallow.

ANNOTATIONS.
MAlignant and Pestilent Fevers how they may be allowed without a true
Pestilence, we have shown at large in our Treatise of the Pest. But these
Fevers are various, as not proceeding always from the same Cause, nor seizing
the same manner, nor admitting the same Cure. Sometimes the Infection of the
Air alone, sometimes extraordinary Corruptions of the Air by bad Diet, or
otherwise, sometimes hurtful Exhalations of things Corrupt and Putrid:
sometimes dispositions of the Temperaments of the Air and Bodies; either single
of themselves, or some or all of them conjoined together, create these Epidemic
Fevers, and therefore as the Causes are various, so is there great varieties in
the Cure. And therefore it is that these malignant Fevers seldom appear twice
altogether one like another. Fracastorius describes a Pestilential Fever, which
differed very much from ours, which came from a certain Infection of the Air,
and chiefly preyed upon the Spirits, and not upon the Humors, and was chiefly
cured with Antidotes; whereas Blood-letting did harm: On the other side, our
Fever more an Enemy to the Humors then the Spirits, was cured by Blood-letting.
Wierus makes mention of a Malignant and Pestilent Fever, which was very rife
about the Countries lying upon the Rhine, and very different from ours, which
the Cure informs us: for he writes, that he found Blood-letting very dangerous.
From our Fever also differ very much those Fevers which Forestus describes,
wherein there were neither the same Symptoms, neither would the Cure admit
repeated Bloodletting. Lazarus Riverius produces one Example of a Malignant
Fever, which in many Patients agreed with ours, and was cured by five times
Blood-letting. To which there was one very like that we saw in France in the
year 1632 already mentioned, Observe. 3. But that it may be the better
understood. How Patients afflicted with this same Malignant Fever are to be
ordered, I shall produce one or two Examples of a thousand in the following
Observations.

OBSERVATION XXV. A Malignant Fever.
HErman Thomas, a Baker, was seized with the foresaid malignant Fever the fifth
of September, with a very great Heat and Consumption of his Spirits; at the
beginning, his Pulse beat thick, yet not very unequal; this Thirst was
vehement, with a very great dryness of the Tongue. All the Body seemed to be
equally affected, and therefore he never felt any Pain, only complained of a
great Faintness and Dejection of his Heart, the first day coming to him about
the Evening I ordered him an Emollient Glister, which gave him three Stools,
and to quench his Thirst, I prescribed him this Julep.

. Carduus-water, Borage and Sorrel-water an lb j. (...) of Citron newly
squeezed out of the Fruit, Syrrup of the ^owre part of the Citron, of Violets,
Rob of red Rib^s an.. Oil of Sulphur q. s. to make it gratefuly sharp mix them
for a Iulep.

The sixth of September in the Morning we took away a pint of Blood out of the
Median Vein of the right Arm; which gave him great ease. The Blood was very
bad, the upper half between livid and green, and like a Muscilage, the lower
half black and coagulated; the Serum also was Green. The next day he felt a
Pain in his Throat, which was without any Tumor, for the asswaging of which, I
ordered him a proper Gargarism. In the Morning he took a gentle Purge which
gave him five Stools. To quench his Thirst he took small Ale, and sometimes his
Julep: the eight of September his Fever continuing in the same state, we took
away ten Ounces out of his left Arm, which was as bad as the first: the ninth
this Sudorific was given him.

. Diascordium of Fracastorius j. Confection of Hyacinth, Extract of Carduus,
Salt of Rue an j. Treacle and Carduus water an. j. Oil of Vitriol ix. drops,
mix them for a Draught.

Upon this he sweat well; nevertheless the Continual Fever, his weakness, his
Pain in his Throat, his Thirst and dryness of his Mouth continued still;
besides that he could not sleep hardly at all. Therefore in the Afternoon he
drank two Draughts of the following Apozem, and took it also the next day.

. Roots of Succory, Grass, Asparagus an. j. of Elecampane, Sea Holly, and stone
Parsley; an. s. Herbs, Sorrel, Carduus Benedict. Borage, Centaury the less,
Scordium, Scabious an. one handful. One whole Pome Citron cut in slices, the
four greater Cold-seeds an. j. s. Fruit of Tamarinds, Rhenish Tartar an. vj.
Curants j. s. Boil them in common water q. s. to (...). ij. add to the
straining Syrup of Limons iij. mix them for an Apozem.

The eleventh, after an Emollient Glister first given, we took away seven
Ounces more of Blood out of his right Arm, which very much abated the Fever;
the twelfth, after he had taken his former Antidote in the Morning, he Sweat
very much: and in the Afternoon he took his Apozem. The next day because his
Belly did not answer our Expectations I gave him this Powder to take mixed with
a little of his Julep, which gave him three Stools.

. Rhubarb the best j. Cremor Tartar s. for a Powder.

This Powder he took again the sixteenth in the Intervening days, and the three
days following he took the foresaid Apozem and a small quantity of this
Conditement.

. Pulvis Liberans j. s. the three Saunders ij. Confection of Hyacynth j. s.
Candy'd Orange Peels, Rob of red Ribs Pulp of Tamarinds an. s. Syrrup of Limons
q. s. mix them for a Conditement.

Upon the twelfth his Fever abated every day more and more, neither was he
molested any more with Anguish or Thirst; but his Stomach began to come to him;
but then through a slight Error in his diet, he fell into a Relaps, and his
Fever returned with great violence: Therefore after we had Glistered him first,
we took half a pint of Blood out of his left Arm, which gave him so much ease
that the Fever was almost totally quenched with that one Bloodletting. The next
Morning taking his Antidote again, he Sweat soundly, and then taking his Apozem
and his Conditement, both that day and the three or four next days, he was
presently delivered from his Fever. During the Cure we kept him to a slender
diet of Broths, wherein were boiled Sorrel, Borage, Pome Citrons, Barley
cleansed and unripe Grapes. To drink we gave him small Ale, and sometimes
Juleps, and sometimes he quenched his Intolerable Drought with Pulp of
Tamarind, or by chawing a slice of Pome Citron dipped in Sugar: or else by
laying upon his Tongue a Leaf of the bigger Sempervivum, steeped in water, and
the outer Skin pulled off.

OBSERVATION. XXVI. A Malignant Fever.
GErtrude Coets, a Young Maid of about twenty four Years of Age, was seized
with the same Pestilential Fever. Upon the eight of September I being sent for
(which was the fourth day of the Disease,) I found her so weak that she could
hardly speak; she swoonded away every moment, by reason of the Malignant
Vapors that oppressed her Heart; her Pulse was very weak, thick and unequal:
the heat not very intense, in regard the Morbific Matter infested her more by
it is Malignity then it is Heat; presently I gave her this Sudorific.

. Oriental Bezoar stone s. Diascordium of Fracastorius, Mithridate Damoc.
Confection of Hyacinth an. j. Carduus water j. mix them for a Draught.

Though she did not sweat long, by reason of her weakness, yet she had very
much ease; to quench her Thirst, I prescribed her this Julep.

. Carduus, Baum, Sorrel and Scabious waters an. lb. s. Cinnamon j. Citron juice
newly squeezed j. s. Syrrup of Limons, Violets an. j. s. Oil of Sulphur q. s.
mix them for a Iulep.

The ninth her Belly was moved by a Suppository: and two hours after we took
from the Median Vein of her right Arm half a pint of Blood, which was very
corrupt, Muscilaginous, between Pale and Greenish, with a green Serum
containing a little good Blood at the bottom, notwithstanding the great
Consumption of her strength she endured her Blood-letting very well, which gave
her great ease; she also often took a small quantity of this Conditement.

. Pulvis Liberans. j. Salt Prunella j. Rob of red Ribes, Pulp of Tamarinds,
Conserve of Roses. an s. Confection of Hyacinth j. s. Syrrup of Limons q. s.
mix them for a Conditement.

The next day she continued the same Medicines; and for her ordinary drink she
drank small Ale with some few drops of Oil of Vitriol. The eleventh of
September she took again her last Sudorific, and found some ease by it. The
twelfth her Anguish and Weakness seemed again to increase; wherefore we drew
six Ounces of Blood out of her left Arm; which was as bad as the former. This
Blood-letting gave her very great ease, I would willingly have prescribed her
Apozems and some other things, but because she was nice, and had a very
nauseous Stomach by reason of her Disease, she could take nothing. The
thirteenth we mixed j. of Rhubarb Powdered and s. of Cremor Tartar, in a little
small Ale and deceived her, which gave her three Stools; the next day she was
much better, and taking the foresaid Conditement, her Fever became very remiss.
The eighteenth she relapsed into an extraordinary weakness; then I ordered her
this mixture in a Spoon, which somewhat releived her.

. Oriental Bezoar stone s. Confection of Hyacinth. j. Cinamon-water j.
Carduus-water ij. mix them.

The nineteenth we again drew out of her right Arm five Ounces of Blood; which
very much abated her Fever that day and the next day, she continued the use of
her Conditement and Julep; at this time D. Gilbert Coets chief Physician of
Arnheim, was called to consultation who recommended for a tried and most proper
Remedy his own Treacle-water, which he called Carbuncle-water, and concealed as
a great Secret; by his advice one Spoonful of this water was given twice or
thrice a day to the Patient; but the twenty first her Fever growing more upon
her, I gave her this Antidote.

. Salt of Wormwood, Confection of Hyacinth an. j. Oriental Bezoar gr. xii.
Carbuncle-water, Carduus water an. s. mix them.

This was again repeated the twenty second and twenty third, the twenty fourth
by the help of a Suppository she had a Stool; in the Evening she took this,

. Bezoar stone Oriental gr. xii. Pearls prepared j. Carbuncle water s. mix them
and give a Spoonful at a time.

The next day she swallowed xii. grains of Pill. Ruffi in two Pills; which
toward the Evening gave her two Stools. The twenty eight of September she took
them again as also upon the second of October, in the Intervening time she
continued the use of her Conditement, Julep and Cordial-water, and fed upon
Broths, and thus she was restored to her former Health.

OBSERVATION XXVII. A malignant Fever.
HEnry ter Koelem, being taken with the same Malignant Fever, the fourth of
September sent for me, I found him full of Anguish and weak; his Pulse weak and
unequal, yet without any intense beat; we let him thrice Blood, used proper
Glisters, loosening Medicaments, Sudorifics, and such as resisted Corruption
and Malignity, together with other Cordial Remedies, and so recovered him. But
going abroad too soon, and being careless of his diet upon the twenty eight of
September he relapsed into a more dangerous Fever then his first. After twice
letting Blood, and several other Medicaments exhibited, red Spots, and some
Purple ones came forth over all his Body upon the Skin, upon which the Fever
went off, and within eight days he recovered much of his strength; but then
ignorant of his weakness and trusting too much to his strength, upon the twenty
eight of October going but once a little abroad, he fell into a second Relapse
more dangerous still: by reason of his strength debilitated by his former
Sickness. The Fever harrass'd his Body already much weakened, with great
violence, nevertheless after Blood-letting, we gave him several Remedies with
that success, that at length upon the tenth of November he fell into a very
great Spontaneous Sweat; but as he lay in his Sweat; a certain Ruddy Tumor
began to appear in his left side, above the fifth, sixth, and seventh Rib;
which the next day bunched out as big as a Man's Fist. Thus the Fever went off,
and the Crisis of the Disease was performed by Sweating and an Impostume; but
the Tumor was very hard, which because we could not bring to a head in five
days with mollifying and ripening Cataplasms; and for that the Party complained
of the Pain of the inner part affected, I was afraid, least some matter
sticking between the Ribs near the Pleura Membrane should have already ripened,
which might occasion some greater Mischief, should the Impostume break within,
before the outward Maturation, and so the Matter fall down to the inner parts,
to prevent this Inconvenience though I could neither see nor feel any sign of
outward Maturation, I ordered a Chyrugeon to open the Tumor half a Fingers
breadth above the Ribs, which done, it appeared that my judgment had not failed
me for there came forth at the same time matter both white and Mature; and thus
the Patient escaped the danger threatened by the Impostume, to that so soon as
the Tumor was cured he recovered his former Health.

OBSERVATION XXVIII. A malignant Dysentery.
AT the same time that the foresaid Malignant Fever so cruelly raged, Malignant
Dysenterys fatal to many, were very rife, after they had voided the slime of
the Guts, they presently voided Blood, not alone and pure, but mixed with a
certain white, Viscous and Tenacious Humor; which like Pitch or Bird-lime
stook close to every thing it touched; and might be drawn out into long
strings. The Patients were cruelly griped in their Bellys; and besides a
continual Fever, Anguish of the Heart, extreme Weakness, vehement Thirst, loss
of Stomach, want of Sleep, and something of heat in the Urine were the
Concomitants of this Distemper; and as for them that voided that viscous and
white slime, mixed with Bloody Dejections, if it were very tough, the most of
those People died; and the less tenacious it was, the better they escaped. They
who brake wind during Exoneration, gave great hopes of recovery. They that were
conversant with the Sick or tended upon them, were infected with the contagious
Stench of the Disease; these Fluxes were very difficultly cured, in regard that
Blood-letting avails nothing in the cure; and many times neither Purges nor
Astringents, nor Sudorifics nor other Remedies usually administered in this
Distemper were given with any success.

ANNOTATIONS.
THIS same Contagion, at this very time carried off vast numbers of our Men in
the Camp before Schenk-Fort. And when the Physicians to the Army had tried all
the Remedies they could think of for the Cure of this Distemper, but very few
did any good, at length there was a Remedy found out by certain Italian
Physicians, who came hither with the French Army, by which afterward great
numbers were cured. First they Purged the Patients with Rhubarb. Then they took
white Wax j. s. or ij. and cut this very small into iiij. or v. of New Milk,
which they boiled till the Wax was perfectly melted, and then gave their
Patients that Milk as hot as could be to drink; for it must be taken very hot,
because of the Wax, that else would thicken, so that it could not be drank; if
the Lask did not stop the first time, then they gave it a second and a third
time. But in regard there were a great number of Soldiers that lay sick of
this Distemper, there was such a vast quantity of white Wax consumed in a short
time, that the Apothecaries of Emeric were quite exhausted; so that they were
forced to send for it to other Places. Now though Wax seldom is given to
swallow, yet it is no new thing. For Diascorides writes, that it is of great
Efficacy to fill up wounds, and is given in Broths to those that are troubled
with Dysenteries. Thus Valleriola speaks of a Dysenteric recovered by such a
Remedy. He cut an Apple hollow, and filled it with Citrin colored Wax, and
then covering it laid it in the Ashes to roast, till the Wax was melted and
mixed with the substance of the Apple, and then gave it the Patient fasting to
eat for some days together; though he believes it better to roast and melt the
said Wax in a Quince, as being more astrictive and glutinous. Quercetus
prepares the same Remedy by cutting an Apple hollow, and filling it with white
Wax and Gum Arabic an. j. Solenander stuffed a Turtle with an Ounce of white Wax,
and boiled it in Water, and then gave both the Flesh and the Broth to be eaten
with Bread. Others prescribe a Young Pidgeon stuffed and boiled after the same
manner.

OBSERVATION XXIX. A Dysentery.
MArcellus Bor, a strong Man of about forty Years of Age, was taken with a
Dysentery of the same Nature. The ninth of October I Purged him with Rhubarb,
then I gave him Juleps, Conditements, Powders cooling, thickning and Astringent
Apozems, Sudorifics and other proper Medicaments in convenient manner and time;
so that the Patient being reduced to extremity of weakness I began to give him
over, not beleiving he could live two days in that condition, but in regard he
was very thirsty and called for cold Water, I ordered in a desperate condition
that he might have as much cold water as he would drink, to the end that by
drinking such a quantity of water, the Morbific cause, if it were possible,
might be washed off from the Guts, and the Acrimony of it blunted by the force
of the cold. All that Night the Patient drank as much as he would of
Well-water; which at first past swiftly through his Guts and with wonderful
griping flowed down to the lower parts; afterward not griping so much, toward
Morning the Pains of the Guts were almost ceased, and the Stools less frequent;
about noon the Patient falling a sleep, slept quietly for some hours, before
the Evening the Flux stopped, and so the Patient refreshed with proper diet, when
every one thought he could not have lived, was unexpectedly recovered from a
most desperate Disease.

ANNOTATIONS.
COncerning the Drinking of cold Water in a Dysentery, there are hardly any of
the Modern Physicians that speak a word. Yet it is a Remedy not improper in a
Choleric Dysentery: For it washes the Intestines with its moisture, and frees
them from all the filth of sharp Humors, and cleanses the inner Ulcers. By its
coldness also it abates and dulls the Heat and Acrimony of the Choler; and
binds up the Exulcerations of the Intestines. Nor was the Drinking of cold
Water unknown to the Ancients in this Disease. Therefore says Aetius, at the
beginning, for drink, use Rainwater; but if there be no good Rainwater, take
Fountainwater. Celsus also writes in these words, If after several days trial,
other Remedies will not prevail, and the Disease is come to be of some
continuance, the drinking of cold Water binds the Ulcers. In like manner Paulus
and others of the Ancients make mention of the drinking of cold Water in a
terrible Dysentery. Among the Moderns Amatus of Portugal, was one that by his
own report, saw a Choleric Dysentery cured by the drinking of a great quantity
of cold Water.

At other times it also happens, that when the best Medicines avail nothing, a
plain ordinary Medicine has cured most desperate Dysenterys. So by the Relation
of Captains I have heard, that when Breda was besieged by the Spaniards, and
that Dysenteries were very rife in the City, nor any Remedy could be invented
for this Distemper, when all the known Remedies of the Physicians failed; at
length a new invention was found out, by which many were cured. A piece of Silk
double died of a deep Crimson color, combed into slender Threads and steeped
in Wine; this taken in Wine with a dram or half a dram of Powder of the same
Silk for some times, infinite numbers have been cured by it. I know a certain
Dysenteric Person who was given over, who upon eating a vast quantity of
Medlars, recovered beyond all expectation. Another was freed by Man's Bones
drank in red Wine, of a Flux which was thought incurable. Oil of Olives taken
alone, or eaten with a White-bread Toast dipped in it, many times works
wonders. Holler affirms, that he was cured several times with the Juice of
Ground Ivy. Forestus writes, that he never found any thing more prevalent, then
the Dung of Dogs that only fed upon Bones given in Chalvbeate Milk. And with
this Medicine, Fuchsius says, that he cured above a hundred Dysenterics in one
Year. Riverius tells us of a Dysenteric that only used the Decoction of
Pimpernel with Water and Butter, and so was cured in three days, Bruyernius
writes thus of himself being troubled with a Dysentery. We says he, being
terribly afflicted with a Dysentery, lay given over by the Physicians: for no
Remedies were able to assuage or Cure the Disease: At length by the Advice of
an old Woman, upon eating a great quantity of raw Services, the next day I felt
all my Pain almost abated. And by this means my Belly being shut up, and I, as
it were recalled from the dead, and restored to my former Health; experienced
the saying of Gelsus to be true, that Rashness does more in Diseases than
Prudence can do.

OBSERVATION XXX. A Consumption.
LEwis Gulielm, a Seaman, about thirty four Years of Age and indifferently
robust, had sometimes before lain Sick of a Malignant Fever; of which by the
Assistance of God I had cured him. In the Month of October, about a Month after
the cure of the said Fever he was taken with an Extraordinary Catarrh,
occasioned by a Salt and sharp Defluxion that fell upon his Lungs; a short
while after, in Coughing he spit a great quantity of Blood; and not long after
this same spitting of Blood he also spit Corruption. More then this, there was
mixed with his Spittle, a white Viscous and very Tenacious white slime, which he
spit forth every day with a great quantity of Matter and Blood. This Disease
was accompanied with a slight Fever but not continuous, The Patient was all
over consumed away and so hoarse that he could hardly speak, he also complained
of an inward oppressive Pain in his right Lung; and said that he was
sufficiently sensible that what he spit forth ascended from that side of his
Breast, sometimes he was almost Suffocated with Coughing, by reason of the
Tenacious Matter sticking in his Throat; for the cure of this Distemper, I gave
him many and various Remedies for a long time to stop the Catarrh, abate and
lenify the Cough, promote Expectoration, drying and Vulnerary Medicines,
Decoctions of Guaiacum, China and Sassaperilla, Haly's Powder against a
Consumption, Looches, and other proper Medicaments but all in vain, at length
when these things nothing availed, but that the Ulcer grew worse and worse, and
the Patient grew averse from taking any more Physic, his Body being become as
lean as a Skeleton, and his strength more and more failed him, we were
constrained for some time to give over the use of Physic; In the mean time to
repair his strength and support Nature, I ordered him to drink a Draught of
Goats Milk, newly Milked from the Goat and Blood-warm; beginning with a less
quantity till he came to a Pint, after he had continued to take this Milk for
two or three Months, his Cough began to abate and his Lungs to dry up; he spit
little and gathered strength every day. Therefore still continuing the use of
it, the Ulcer in his Lungs was perfectly consolidated, and he luckily escaped a
most dangerous Consumption, neither did he perceive any thing of evil in his
Breast for several Years, till twelve Years afterward, he relapsed into the
same Distemper through a Defluxion of sharp Rhums, and in regard I then lived
at Nimeghen, and for that other Physicians did not prescribe him proper
Medicines, he died altogether consumed and emaciated.

ANNOTATIONS.
A True Phthisis or Consumption is a very dangerous Disease, which few escape.
Sometimes by long use of Medicines the Mischief may be assuaged for a time, and
Life may be somewhat prolonged, but the Patients are very rarely perfectly
cured; and yet in the foresaid Patient we prevailed so far, that he lived
Eleven Years after the Cure, in perfect Health. Now that Milk contributes very
much to the Cure of a Consumption, is confirmed by the Testimonies of Galen,
Rhasis and several other Ancient and Modern Physicians. Therefore, says
Sennertus, speaking of a Consumption, The most proper Medicines here to be made
use of, are such as answer all our ends; such as consolidate the Ulcer, restore
the Emaciated Body, and mitigate the heat of the Fever. Of which the chiefest
is Milk; then which, as Galen affirms, there can be nothing more prevalent
given to Cure Consumptions. And then again. Among Nourishments, Milk obtains to
be preferred above all others. It nourishes the Body extremely, affords good
Matter to the Blood, tempers the Acrimony of vicious Humors, cleanses the Ulcer
with its serous Part, with its Cheesy part it contributes Consolidation, and
with its Buttery Part, it moistens and resists the dryness of the Body. The
same Commendation Riverius gives to Milk in his Treatise of Physical Practice.
But in the use of Milk several things are to be considered. 1. With whom it
does not agree. 2. When, and how, it is to be given. 3. What quantity. 4. How
it is to be corrected. 5. What Milk is convenient.

1. Grato tells for what Persons Milk is not convenient in these words. Let
Practitioners in Physic observe three Conditions in the Prescription of Milk;
first that there be no weakness, nor pain in the Head. For Hippocrates tells
us, it is not good for such. Secondly, That the Fever be not very violent; For
it is almost impossible, but that Milk must corrupt in the Stomac of a Person
troubled with a violent Fever. Thirdly, That the Bowels be not distended with
Wind. And of this opinion also is Sennertus.

Secondly, Milk must be taken upon an empty and clean Stomac, else it grows
sour and corrupts. Also it is to be taken newly milked and warm, or sucked from
the Teat: For if it be cold it gathers filth; if it be boiled, it becomes
thick, viscous and ungrateful. After the Patient has taken it, let him not
sleep, nor take any other meat or drink, (as Wine, Vinegar or Stale-beer)
before the Milk be sufficiently corrupted in the Stomac.

Thirdly, Let the quantity be small at first, about four or five Ounces, that
the Stomac may accustom it self to it by degrees; then increase it to half a
Pint, and so to a Pint. For it is to be always given in such a quantity, that
the Stomac may be able to bear and concoct it: And therefore you must ascend
from the less to the greater quantity; first once, then twice, then three times
a day.

Fourthly, To prevent the Milk from curdling or growing sour in the Belly, a
little Sugar may be mixed with it ( Riverius praises the mixture of Sugar of
Roses) which however is not necessary where there is no fear of Coagulation.
Other Physicians mix Honey with it; but we do not approve that Mixture.

Fifthly, In the last place there is some choice to be made of the Milk. That
woman's Milk, says, Mercurialis, is certainly the best, there is no body will
question. For this without doubt is most agreeable to the Nature of our Bodies.
And Zacutus of Portugal says, that he perfectly cured a Consumptive Person with
the use of it. And such another Cure Valleriola relates. So Plater tells us
that he had seen several recovered by sucking Women's Milk from the Teats. Among
which there was one that not only recovered, but gathered so much strength,
that because he would not want Milk; for the future, he got his Nurse with
Child again. Next to Woman's Milk, are Asses, Cows and Goats Milk. Asses Milk is
thinner, more serous and (...) to cleanse the Ulcer. Cows Milk l^ss serous, but
more nourishing. Goats Milk differs not much from Woman's Milk. It drys and
consolidates very much. By the use of this our Patient was cured.

OBSERVATION XXXI. Vomiting.
MOnsieur de Guade a Captain in the King of France's Army, was taken with a
Vomiting which lasted for three days together, nor would any Vomitories or any
other Remedies given him do him any good; I found that what he Vomited up was a
frothy kind of Phlegm (which the Patient himself affirmed to be Salt) with which
there was a little Choler intermixed; however he did not Vomit up very much,
but little often, and with violent straining. We gave him twice or thrice a
good draught of the Decoction of Barley lukewarm, sweetened with a little
Honey; which when he had Vomited up again, with a great quantity of tough
Phlegm; At length we gave him Cinnamon water Distilled with Wine s. with which
we mixed three drops of Oil of Cinnamon; which when he had taken, he found
himself better. Half an hour after we gave him the same again. In the mean time
we laid the following Cataplasm to the Region of his Stomach.

. Flowers of Mint, Baum and red Roses an. half a handful; Mace, s.
Clove-gillow-flowers, Nu^megs, Mastic, Olibanum, Storax, Benjamin, an. ij. make
a Powder, to which add sower Leven, iij. Vinegar of Roses, q. s. make all into
a sost Past without boiling.

With these few things the vehement Vomiting ceased. The troublesome Vomiting,
which had lasted a whole day, I stopped, by giving him twice the following
draught.

. VVhite-wine warmed before the fire, ij. Oil of Clove-gillowflowers one drop,
of Cinnamon two drops, mix them for a Draught to be taken very VVarm.

The Region of his Belly was also anointed with Oil of Nutmegs warm.

ANNOTATIONS.
VOmiting is caused by the consent of other Parts, as when the Meninxes of the
Brain are wounded, or that the Kidneys are troubled with the Stone or Gravel
etc. Which Vomiting ceases, when the Disease is Cured of which it is the
Symptom. Or it is excited by the abundance and sharpness of Humors that
stimulate the Fibers of the Stomach; which are either Choleric and hot, or
Flegmatic Salt and cold, or Melancholic and Salt, or sanguineous extravasated
and corrupting into the Stomach, or flowing in too great a quantity into it. At
the beginning of the Cure, the Vomiting is still more to be provoked, that the
Stomach may be well washed, and freed from the Cause of the Distemper: for
according to Hippocrates a Vomit cures Vomitting. This done the Stomach is to
be fortified either with cold or warm Medicaments, as the Cause of the Disease
is either Hot or Cold. If the Cause be Hot, Juleps made with juice of
Pomegranates, Quinces, Citrons, and Oil of Vit^iol are proper. The raw juice of
Quinces alone, taken one or two spoonfuls at a time miraculously stays this
Vomiting. Outwardly Fomentations with a Spung dipp^d in Vinegar of Roses or
Elder-Vinegar warmed, or a Quince roasted and applied warm in the form of a
(...), or sour Leven mixed with Vinegar and juice of Mint, and applied, which
very quickly stays Vomiting, and is highly extolled by Villanovanus. Also
smelling to Vinegar, Camphire and the like, may be very prevalent.

If the Cause be cold, the Stomach is to be corroborated with hot things, as
Wine, Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, Cinnamon Water, Oil of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace,
Clove Gillowflowers, Spirit of Vitriol, and such like Distillations. Among
Simples all hot Stomach-Herbs and Spices; also outwardly Applications of
Castor, Storax, Labdanum, Benzoine, Galbanum, Tacamahacca, Olibanum, Oil of
Nutmegs and Mace, etc. To which add Quinces, Mas^ic and other Astringents. If
these do no good, Fallopius gives you this Experiment. If the Vomiting do not
cease, let him bite a piece of a Turnep twice or thrice, and champ it only with
his fore-Teeth, and you shall see the Vomiting will absolutely ease, tho his
Stomach be very weak; And this Remedy is so extraordinary, that I could never
find a better. If these things will not stay the Vomiting, you must come to
Narcotics among which in a cold Cause, Roman Philoniam is preferred above all
the rest given to the quantity of one dram. But in a hot Cause Pills of Storax
or Opiate Laudanum.

OBSERVATION XXXII.
A Country Man of Groesbeck, who because of his extraordinary Stature was
called Ironically Little John about forty years Old, and very strong, about two
years since being very hasty in Cleavingof Wood, by chance received a hurt from
a Splinter in the fore Tibiaeon Muscle of his right Thigh; the wound not being
very broad, but reaching to the Periosteum. This wound though he slighted it at
first, it could never afterward be consolidated by any Remedies, but remained
like an Issue, Nature voiding continually several Excrementious Humors out of
it; which was the reason that the Country Man was troubled with frequent
Inflammations and other Mischiefs. At length in September, having by Accident
sold a parcel of Wood, to a certain Chyrurgeon of Nimeghem, after he had showed
him his Thigh, the Chyrurgeon promised to consolidate the little wound, which
had now been of two Years standing. The other weary of his Pain and trouble,
gladly accepted the Condition, presently the Chyrurgeon, without ever Purging
his Body, thrust in Tents with I know not what Ointment into the wound, and
laid on Plasters, the Fatness of which the parts adjoining to the Periostea
brook'd but very scurvily. Hence within three days by reason of the stoppage of
the depraved Humors now remaining within, a terrible Inflammation of the whole
Thigh ensued, with a vast swelling and intolerable pain, that threatened
nothing less than a Gangrene. Then my Advice was asked. Presently after I had
thrown away all the other applications and the Oxycrate that was bound about
his whole Thigh, I ordered the wound to be well washed with Spirit of Wine, and
then that they should pour in Balsam of Perue warmed, with some few grains of
Camphire mixed with it, and that his whole Thigh should be wrapped about with
Linen Cloths dipped in Spirit of Wine. I also Purged his Body, and the next
day let him Blood, and prescribed him a proper Diet. By these means not without
some trouble, the i^flamm'd Swelling being fallen, his Thigh within six days
was restored to its first Condition. But in regard that afterward some new
beginnings of an Inflammation (with which he was wont to be molested before)
began to appear, I clapped the gray Plaster about his whole Thigh, having mixed
with every ounce of the Plaster ij. of Camphire, which I let lie for three
weeks together, only putting in a fresh Plaster three times, which prevented
the return of those Inflammations. In the mean time, to Cure the wound also I
ordered first an Issue to be made with a potential Cautery on the other side of
the same Thigh; from whence before I could well pull off the Blister, Nature by
this new Passage evacuated all those evil Excrementitious Humors, which before
were voided through the wound, and the wound closed within a few days with the
only application of the Balsam of Peru, camphorated. But I persuaded him to
keep the Issue open as long as he lived. But his Thigh being thus Cured, the
Countryman complained to me of another Malady no less ungrateful to his Wife,
that his Inclinations to conjugal performance were utterly extinguished, and
his Venereal Ability quite lost, which Malady he said had befallen him but
since the Cure of his Thigh. Presently I suspected that this Languidness
proceeded from the use of the Camphire, which I had mixed with the Balsam and
other Plasters; so that I forbore the farther use of it, and gave the
Countryman Electuary of Dyasatyrion to take, and prescribed him a Nourishing
Diet of Hot Meats, with Spices, Leeks and Onions, which restored him to that
Degree that he followed his Wives Agriculture as he was wont to do.

ANNOTATIONS.
LET your Chyrurgeons learn from hence not to trust too much to the Certainty
of their own knowledge* and make slight of Wounds of this Nature. Much more let
them be careful how they go about to close them too soon, least by their
ignorance causing Gangrenes and Mortifications, they prove the loss not only of
their Patients Limbs but Lives. First therefore let them carefully consider,
whether Nature have not been accustomed to evacuate excrementitious Humors
through that Wound, and then let them not begin the Cure, till they have caused
a Diversion some other way. Next, let them examine the place affected very well,
whether the Periosteum, or any Nerve, or such like thing that cannot endure fat
Plasters, lie near the Part, and then what Topics are convenient. In the next
place let them Purge the Body well before they begin the Cure, by that and all
other convenient means to prevent the Afflux of corrupt Humors to the Part
affected; for the Humors easily descend to the lower Parts.

As to the Cure of the Country man's Frigidity, we have observed strange things
in the use of this Camphire. The very smell and fume of it drawn through the
Nose, being sufficient to extinguish Venereal Ardor, according to the Verse,

Camphora per nares castrat odore mares. Such is the smell that Camphire
yields; That through the Nose the O^our gelds.

But I could hardly have believed, that being laid upon the Thighs it should
have had this Operation. But I remember my Brother met with the same Accident
in the Cure of Mounsieur Edward, who was troubled with old Ulcers in his Thigh;
and who having worn a camphorated Plaster for two Months upon his Thigh, found
his Venereal faculty quite extinguished, and his Wife full of sad Complaints;
who nevertheless by the use of hot Medicaments, a Nourishing hot Diet, not
without his Wives consent, was restored to his pristine Vigor. Now because of
these extraordinary Virtues in Camphire, certain Monks in Germany, who were
more desirous, then usual, to live a chaste Life, hang it up in the Barrel to
steep in Al^, which they usually drink, on purpose to suppress their carnal
desires, and to avoid the Temptations of Venus. This occasioned a very pretty
Story at Nimeghen of a Carpenter, who being hired to mend the Floor in a
certain Monastry in the Territory of Cleves, in Lent-time, when the Monks
chiefly Camphire their Ale, and being forced to stay there till he had
finished, for three or four Months, drank of their Ale all the time. But when
he came home to his Wife, never was a Guest more unwelcome in this World. For
not having the least inclination to Venery* he was forced to leave his Farm
untilled; which impediment was afterward however removed in a short time by
the use of hot things. Nevertheless the Carpenter hated that Monastry ever
after, and never would work there any more. Some attribute this Faculty of
extinguishing Venus, to the cold and dryness of Camphire, but erroneously; For
its savor and its aptness to take fire, declare that it is not cold but
manifestly hot; and therefore it must be ascribed to some occult quality, which
is said to be in Agnus Castus, Mint and Rue, all which things are hot, and yet
we find by Experience that they extinguish Venery. Sennertus attributes this
faculty to the dryness of Camphire. But there are many other things which are
endued with the same and a greater dryness, which have no such Anti-venereal
virtue; For dryness alone will not make a Man Frigid; Scaliger endeavors by
the Example of a Dog, to show that Camphire does not extinguish Venery, but
erroneously; Since the constitution of a Man is different from that of a Dog,
and therefore because the operation is not in both the same, it does not follow
that we should make conclusions against known experience.

OBSERVATION XXXIII. The Headache.
THE Wife of Captain Schayck, a strong Woman of forty years of Age, had a
violent Headache for three Months together. All the Remedies prescribed her in
the Camp would do her no good. At length in September she came to me. I
prescribed her a proper Diet, and after I had well Purged her Body, I
prescribed her this Quilt.

. Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary an. two little handfuls, of Sage, red Roses and
Melilot, an. one little handful; Mastic, Olibanum; Nutmegs an. ij. Cloves j. s.
beat these into a gross Powder, and sow them up in a red Silken Quilt.

This being laid upon her Head the intolerable pain began to abate, and in a
few days vanished. She prized this Quilt so highly, that she caused the
Apothecary to make her two more; the one for her felf, the other for her
Kins-woman, who was troubled as much as she was with the same Distemper.

OBSERVATION XXXIV. Suppression of the Courses.
JOan N. a Young Plethoric Maid, about twenty four years of Age, had her
Courses stopped for three Months which was occasioned at first by her excessive
Drinking cold raw Whey. Hence Paleness, loss of Stomach, Vomiting, Headache,
and the like. The first of October, I prescribed her a convenient Diet, and
Purged her Body with the Infusion of the Leaves of Senna and Agaric, with which
I mixed Hiera Pi^ra. Afterward I prescribed her these things.

. Roots of round Birth-wort ij. of Dittany, Master-wort, Valerian an. j. s.
Leaves of Nep, Pennyroyal, Southern-wood, Savine an. half a handful, Wormwood
a little handful, seeds of Gith, Parsley an. ij. of Lovage j. s. of Anise,
Nasturtium, Bishops-weed, an. Oriental Saffron j. make these into a gross
Powder to be put in a Bag, and so to be hung up to sleep in five Pints of
White Wind.

. Trochischs of Myrrh. j. s. Species of Hiera, Diacurcuma, Oriental Saffron an.
j. Cistor, Venetian Bora^ an. j. Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar of Squills
^j. for a mass to be made into Pills about the bigness ofa Pea.

Of these Pills she swallowed five every Morning and Evening, drinking after
them iiij or v. of the foresaid Infusion. At length on the fifteenth of October
her Courses came down. But two days after her Purgations began, she went too
soon into the Cold Air, and the Wind, and stopped the Work of Nature so luckily
begun. Hence immediately a Suffocation of the Womb ensued, so that she seemed
to be almost choked. I ordered Castor, Assa fetida and green Rue to be tied in
a bag and held to her Nose. And once a day ordered her to drink some of this
Decoction.

. Roots of Valerian, Master-wort an. s. Leaves of green Rue M. j. s. of
Fever-sew, M. j. down of Nuts, s. seed of Lovage, v. of wild Carots, of
Bishops-weed an. j. Wine and Commonwater equal parts, boil them to a Pint.

But in regard the Women that stood by, desired that something might be laid to
her Feet to draw the Matrix down, I prescribed this following Paste which was
laid to her Feet:

. Leaves of Green Butter-burr, M. v. bruise them small, adding to them sour
Leven, iij. Salt j. s. Wine, Decoction of Feverfew, q. s. make a Paste.

This abated the Uterine suffocation. But in regard it was not altogether gone
off the twentieth of October, she was Purged again with Hiera Picra, the twenty
first she took the Decoction again. The next day she took a Sudorifie; after
which when she had Sweat well, she was freed from her suffocations.

. Crabs Eyes prepared, Salt of Carduus an. j. Treacle of Andromach. j. Castor,
Saffron an. g^. iiij. Treacle-water j. s. Oil of Amber, drops xii. mix them for
a draught.

The rest of the Cure, there being no necessity, we deferred till the eight of
November, at what time she returned to the use of her Pills, and Infusion
prescribed October the second: November the fourteenth, she was let Blood in
the Saphaena Vein, of the left Foot: the eighteenth her Courses came down
plentifully, and from that time she continued in Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
AT the same time that the Courses flow, it behooves Women to have a great care
of themselves, otherwise they are easily stopped again by drinking cold Water,
or from cold Air or Wind getting into the parts, or catching cold in the Feet,
or upon frights or mistake in Diet or otherwise, which afterward prove the
causes of grievous Maladies; as it befell this our Patient. Thus Forestus tells
a Story of a Maid, that when she had her Courses, washed her Rooms barefoot,
which putting a stop upon her Courses, terrible Symptoms ensued; not could that
Flux be brought down again till after some Months. The same Person relates
another Story of a Young Girl, that at the time of her Courses leapt into the
Water; and of a Country Wench, that at such another season ordered her self to
be let Blood.

For the Provocation of the courses, we use many Remedies and as variously
composed, as we find the Patients willing to take them, and for that reason,
besides the Historical infusion, we gave our Patient Pills, as more grateful,
and no less effectual in that disease; which Pills many Physicians prescribe
after several forms, Montagnana praises these.

. Trochischs of Myrrh, j. s. seed of Parsley, Cassia-wood, an. s. Mosch, gr.
xv. make them into Pills with the juice of Parsley.

Sennertus commends Trochischs of of Myrrh taken in Pills, and these also;

. Trochischs of Myrrh, iiij. Extract of Gentian, Savin, an. j. Castor * s. make
these into Pills; the dose is ij.

Others believe these more Effectual.

. Trochischs of Myrrh, species Hiera Diambre, Venetian, Borax, prepared Steel,
Castor, an. ij. Saffrons, j* Gum Ammoniac, dissolved in Vinegar, of squills,
iij. make small Pills, the dose from j. to two.

Zacutus of Portugal tells of a Noble Matron, that reduced to the last
Extremity when no other Remedies would do her good was cured at length by
taking Pills only of Steel, and Powder of Calamint prepared with Syrup of
Mug-wort, of which she took one dram in the Morning, and exercised upon it for
the space of twenty days.

As for laying Medicines to the Feet, if they have no great force in Uterin
Maladies, yet they do no harm, and therefore the designs of Patients may be
satisfied in that Particular, especially those things having the approbation of
great Physicians, as being useful by their peculiar Qualitys, as Mug-wort,
Penyroyal, Savin, Fever-few, chiefly the Leaves of the Butter-bur, and Burdock,
which are thought by some to be of that force, that being laid upon the Head
they draw the Matrix upward, being applied to the Feet they draw it downward.
The ancient also used to tie to the Feet of menstruous Women, and Women newly
delivered to provoke the courses, Spunges dipped in Vinegar and squeezed again.

OBSERVATION XXXV. An immoderate and violent Purging.
A Kinsman of that Stout and Valiant Gentleman Mr. Lucas, Captain of Horse,
about forty years of Age, finding himself not very well, by my Advice steeped
all Night in iij or iiij of small Ale, Leaves of Senna ij. Rhubarb j. and
Anis^d ij. (for he said he was easily moved) and drank the Straining the next
Morning. This slight and gentle Purge within the space of eight hours gave him
about threescore Stools, and perhaps there had been an end of his Life, had I
not stayed the Flux with the following draught, and provoked him to Sweat.

* Terra Sigillata j. s. Red Coral prepared, Hearts horn burnt an j. Treacle of
Andromachus iiij. Nicholas's Rest j. Treacle and Carduus-water an j. mix them
for a draught.

I ordered also Napkins scalding hot to be applied to his Belly one after
another, and so the Flux stayed. I persuaded him for the future not to take any
Purge by the Advice of any Physician, though never so gentle, unless upon
eminent necessity, but rather to Ioosen his Belly with a Glyster, or some
Emollient Broth.

ANNOTATIONS.
THose Physicians are unfortunate, who at the Beginning of their Practice meet
with such a Patient as this; for they expose themselves not to a little hazard
of their Reputation. For it happens in Physie, that the younger Physicians are
called the best Tormentors; and if by their Medicaments they cure any Patient
of a dangerous Disease, it is ascribed to chance, but if the Patient miscary
under the violence of the Distemper, then they impute it to the Physician and
his Prescriptions. Thus without doubt here had been some mistake laid to my
charge, had the Medicament by me prescribed been prepared in an Apothecary's
Shop; and People would have said there had been some Poison mixed with it; but
I was freed from that Calumny, in regard that Capt. Lucas's Wife made the
Infusion and prepared it her self. The same accident befell my Brother also, who
having prescribed only a Dram of Rhubarb for a Gentleman to take, and to steep
it first at his own House in small Ale, by that single Draught had above forty
Stools.

There is a great difference in Men as to Purging; some strong Men, whom hardly
any Medicaments will stir, sometime, the most easy and gentle Physic casts
them into violent Fluxes. Others who are looked upon to be most easily and
soonest moved, many times the strongest Purgations will not stir. Thus I knew a
Man of a very short Stature and Lean, whom nothing could Purge but Tobacco
steeped in Ale all Night, and the straining given him next Morning; nor did
that give him above three or four Stools without any Alteration; which would
have put another Man in danger of his Life. The Wife of Simon VVigger, a weak
and lean Woman could hardly be Purged with any Cathartic, only Tobacco moved
her; and that without any trouble. Cornelius Steenacker, a Schoolmaster, a very
weak Man, was so hard to be Purged, that sometimes he could not be moved with
Compositions of Antimony and other vehement Cathartics.

On the other side, there are some that the very looking upon Physic will give
them a Stool. Thus I knew a Young Lady, whom the very smell of the Physic
Purged as well as if she had swallowed it; for when she took the Physic it
seldom worked more. Alexander Benedictus, also and Erastus, Iohanes Postius,
and Rondeletius, quote the like Examples of such as have been Purged by the
smell of the Physic only.

OBSERVATION XXXVI. A Stinking Breath.
THE Son of Iodocus N. a Nobleman had a very Stinking Breath. His Parents
believed that the Original of this Malady proceeded from his Stomach; and for
that reason many times gave him Hiera Picra; which doing him no good, they came
to me. I presently found that the Cause did not lie in his Stomach, but in his
Gums and Teeth: for that the dregs of his Meat detained long in the spaces
between his Teeth, and there corrupting, begot that Evil Smell. I ordered them
there to cleanse his Teeth twice or thrice a day very well with a Tooth-Pick,
and then to wash them well with his Water.

. Powdered Alum j. common Water v. Cinnnamon water s. Oil of Vitriol ix.
drops, mix them well together.

After he had used this for a few days, the ill smell of his Breath was no
longer perceived.

ANNOTATIONS.
THere are several Causes of a stinking Breath; sometimes it proceeds from
Exulcerations of the Lungs, as in Phthisical People: Sometimes from ill vapors
corrupting the Lungs, as in the Scurvy; sometimes (according to Bauhinus) from
the looseness of the Valve at the beginning of the thick Intestine, through
which the continual stench of the Ordure passing through the thin Guts and the
Stomach, breaths through the Mouth; sometimes it proceeds from the fault of the
Teeth only, when they are not well cleansed every day, so that the remnants of
chawed Meat corrupt and putrify between the spaces; In which last case, an
alumm'd-water is mainly beneficial, for that it resists Putrefaction, and
preserves the Teeth from all Corruption.

OBSERVATION XXXVII. Want of a Stomach.
CHristian ab Ummersom, a Wine Merchant, in March 1636. was troubled with a
Nauseousness, and loss of Appetite for many days, so that for want of feeding
he was become very weak. Now because the Pestilence was very rife at that time,
he thought he had got the Infection: But it was not the Pestilence, but his own
Preservative, which he drank every day before Dinner very plentifully, that was
the Cause of his Malady, that is to say, Wormwood-wine, wherefore I forbid him
to drink that, prescribed him a proper Diet, and after I had gently Purged his
Body, gave him the following Conditement:

. Roots of Calamus Aromatic. Nutmegs, Mace, Flowers of Sulphur an. j s. Cremor.
Tartar* j. choice Cinnamon j. Cloves s. Powder them very fine. Then add Roots
of Candid Elecampane vj. Conserve of Anthos s. Ginger condited vj. Oil of
Vitriol drops xv. Syrup of Limons q. s. Make a Conditement.

Of this he Eat a small quantity Morning and Evening, and sometimes before
Dinner, absta ining from Wormwood-wine; which after he had taken for some time,
his Nauseousness ceased, and his Appetite returned. From that time he had so
high an Opinion of this Conditement, that for some Years he caused his
Apothecary to make it, as he said, for the preservation of his Appetite and his
Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
GAlen ascribes to Wormwood, a heating, cleansing, corroborating, and drying
faculty, Whence Pliny writes that it corroborates the Stomach, and that the
Savor of it is with great benefit translated into Wine; And as true it is that
Wormwood-Wine (so much now in use, but by most detestably abused) is no new
thing, but an ancient invention, and very well known among the Physicians of
old; which is apparent from hence, that Diascorides sets down various
Compositions of it, where he says that it is profitable for the Stomach, moves
Urine, accelerates slow Concoction, and cures the Maladies of the Spleen and
Kidneys, and Yellow Jaundise, want of Appetite, and Distempers of the Stomach;
That it prevails against Inflations and Distension of the Hypochondrium,
expells round Worms, and brings down the Courses. All which Commendations of
Wormwood-Wine, Oribasius also confirms; but though Wormwood and Wormwood-Wine
have many excellent qualities, yet there are bounds and limits set to all
things; which if we exceed, we render good things mischeivous, for that the
best of Medicaments and Nourishments, if taken immoderately, prove hurtful, so
I have many times observed, that the excessive and inordinate use of
Wormwood-Wine causes Inappetency, extraordinary weakness of the Stomach, Liver,
and the whole Body, Vertigos in the Head, loss of Memory, Epilepsies, Dropsies,
and several other Maladies, to which the daily drinkers of Wormwood-Wine are
exposed; many times to the utter ruin of their Healths, after which nothing but
Death ensues; as it befell N. Heymerick, who died of a Cachexy and Dropsy; and
Anthony N. who died of an Epilepsie, both daily drinkers of Worm-wood-Wine.
Therefore Wormwood-Wine is only to be drank upon occasion. I will here add one
foolish Story, in the Year* 1635. when the French Army quartered in Nimeghen,
the French, to preserve themselves from the Pestilence, drank Sack betimes in
the Morning. But some of the Noble Men asking what the Dutchmen drank to
preserve themselves from the Infection, the Vintner answered, Wormwood-Wine;
which being a sort of Wine, which they had never tasted, they called for some;
but when they had tasted it they cried out, the Devil take the Vine that
yielded such Wine as that; for certainly said they, this is the very Wine which
the Jews gave Christ upon the Cross; for the Frenchmen thought the Grape it
self had been so bitter, not knowing it to be a mixture.

OBSERVATION XXXVIII. A Wound in the Lungs with a Musket Bullet.
IN the Year 1636. in May, during the Seige of Schenck Sconce, a Trooper of our
Army in a Horse-Charge was Wounded with a Musket Shot, in the Right side of the
Breast, about the Pap, three Bullets passing through his Breast and his Right
Lung, and going out again about the Scapula, at three several Holes in his
Back. When he was brought to Quarters at Nimeghen, I went along with the
Chyrurgeon, and by the Condition of the Wounds gave him over for Dead. However
that he might not Dye through any negligence of Ours, we bound up his Wounds,
losen'd his Belly with a Glyster, and gave him proper Medicines to stop the
Blood, flowing out of the Lungs, we also thrust in a Pipe of Lead into the
lower Wound, through which the Blood and Matter might be Evacuated; but finding
it could not be conveniently done in that Wound, we opened a more convenient
passage in his side by an Intercostal Incision. For Diet, I forbid him all
sharp, cold, Salt, Acid things, as also meats of hard disgestion and bad
nourishment; but prescribed him fresh Meats, broth made of Mutton, Lamb and
Chicken, potched Eggs, new Milk and the like. And as to other things that
concerned his Diet, we prescribed as we saw occasion; However we continued the
use of Vulnerary, Pectoral Apozems, no Fever troubled him, and his Appetite was
none of the worst: after three or four weeks together with the Blood, (which in
all that time had vented it is self upward through the Leaden Pipe, sometimes
frothy, sometimes watery, sometimes curdl'd,) he began to throw up a good
quantity of Matter with his Cough; which Spitting of Blood and Matter continued
till the sixth Month; so that there appeared no hope of recovery; for the
Patient all wasted away, was reduced to utmost leanness and debility; however
the poor Man willing to live, besought us not to give him over, so that we
could not choose but go forward, though we thought it to no purpose; in the
first place, therefore, to repair his Strength, we ordered him to drink a
draught of Goats Milk, warm from the Udder, three times every day, and
sometimes we gave him corroborating Amygdalates, and Conditements; after we had
made use of the Goats Milk for sometime, his Spiting of Bloody Matter began to
abate, and at length about the beginning of the tenth Month, after his being
Wounded, surceased altogether, as did also his Cough; from that time forward,
continuing the use of his Milk he gathered strength every day more and more,
and got Flesh upon his Back; toward the end of the tenth Month he walked about
the Chamber; and at the end of the eleventh Month, being perfectly cured, he
walked abroad, nor was there any thing that troubled him after so dangerous a
Wound: and I saw him seven Years afterward riding sound and well among the
rest of the Troops.

ANNOTATIONS.
WOunds in the Lungs are very dangerous, and for the most part mortal,
according to the opinion of Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen, Celsus, and of all the
most Famous Physicians, and Chyrurgeons; for that being a Spungy Bowel it will
hardly admit of any cure; but that they are not always mortal experience
teaches us, in regard that very dangerous wounds of the Lungs given by Swords,
have been known to have been perfectly cured; and others when part of the Lungs
have been cut away. As Rowland of Parma, Theodoric, Gemma, Valleriola, Hildan,
and others testify; but you shall rarely hear of any that have been shot into
the Lungs with Musket Bullets, who have escaped and been perfectly cured,
because the violent contusion of the Bullet seems to admit no cure in that
Spungy part, but rather threatens an Inflammation, a Gangrene, or a
Mortification, though Peter Futman, describes such a cure done, in an Epistle
to Gregory Horstius; and such a Cure it was that so luckily besel this Trooper
through the use of Goats Milk, and other Medicaments; and indeed it is to be
looked upon as a very wonderful Cure; for my part I never believed before, that
ever three such VVounds in the Lungs with a Musket Shot, could have been cured
by any means whatever, and should have hardly believed it, had I not been an
Eye witness; we have indeed seen VVounds in the Lungs with Swords and Knives
cured; but that is not so wounderful, because there is no Contusion there, nor
does an Inflammation so easily happen.

Besides the said Cure this is also to be admired in reference to this Trooper,
that being so dangerously wounded he was not infected with the Plague, which
was then very rise, as many that were wounded and sick of other Diseases were;
but he was a strong Man, in the Flower of his Age, and of a good Temper of Body
in Captain Conyers a English Gentleman's Troop.

OBSERVATION XXXIX. Burstenness of the Guts.
THE Wife of John Vermulen an Ale Brewer, a Woman about forty Years of Age, had
a Burstenness of her Guts, protuberant in her right Groin about the bigness of
a Goose Egg, it was accompanied with a total obstruction of the Belly, by
reason the Guts was fallen through the narrow hole of the Rupture into the
Groin. The sixth day after the beginning of the Malady I was sent for; I
ordered her to be Glistered twice, and the Gut to be gently put back by a Woman
that professed that operation; but all to no purpose, the Guts being so
distended with Wind, neither the Gut nor the Wind would go back, Fomentations
nor other proper Topics availed nothing; upon which I told her, there was
nothing but Death or a desperate Remedy, that was, to dilate the Peritonaeum by
Incision, that the Gut might be put back through a large hole, my advise did
not please: And therefore when I saw there was nothing else to be done, but
what they were unwilling to permit, I took my leave and left the Patient for
gone. After that an ordinary fellow a Stone-cutter that wandered about the
Country to get business, commonly called Mr. Gerrard was sent for, who boasted
that he would return the Gut in a small time; but after he had several times
attempted it in vain, he was dismissed with more shame then reward, four days
after his departure, the Groin putrefying and breaking, a great quantity of
Excrements came forth to the great ease of the Patient, but her inevitable
ruin; for the Gut was broken by the compression of the Mountebank, which was
the reason that the part was putrified so soon by the falling of the Excrements
into the void hollow of the Groin, the last remedy then was to sow up the Gut,
and enlarge the Peritonaeum; but in regard I saw no hope of recovery in so weak
a Patient, I advised her to let it alone and prepare her self for a more easy
Death; but such was her desire of life, that neither the sharpness of the Pain,
nor the Apparency of the danger could deter her from the Operation, so that
presently sending for four eminent Chyrurgeons she desired them to go to work.
The Skin therefore and the adjoining parts being opened with great torment, we
found the thin Gut fallen out, and not only a little part of it broken, but
almost torn asunder, quite a cross: for hardly the breadth of a Straw held the
two ends of the Gut together; this was a certain Sign of Death; for had the
solution been small it might have been cured, but of this there was no hope; in
the mean time the Gut was sowed together with a Silk Thread four times twisted,
and well waxed, and put up into the Belly, after a small dilatation of the
Peritonaeum; and then Glisters, proper Diet, and all things requisite were
prescribed, the Patient complained of a great Pain about her Navel, which we
could not assuage by any Fomentations, Bags or other Topics; otherwise she was
indifferent well, eat with an Appetite, neither were her Excrements amiss. The
fifth day after the operation, the Pain about her Navel increased; and the next
Night as the Patient was talking very heartily to the Company about her, pale
Death came and interrupted her Discourse.

ANNOTATIONS.
THIS Rupture was so narrow, that it was a wonder how the Intestine could fall
through it, it being almost impossible to put it back as it was of it self and
empty, through so narrow a Passage, much less distended with Wind. Such a
narrow Rupture I once saw before in one that was opened. Wherefore they do very
ill, who endeavor to force back the Guts through such narrow passages, like
your strolling Hang-men of Mountebanks; for that by such a force the Gut may be
sooner broken then reduced, both Reason and Experience teach us. Bursten Guts
therefore must be gently handled, and first we must endeavor with Cataplasms,
Fomentations and other proper Topics, to dispel the Wind, and drive it back,
and then without any violence to attempt the reducing of the Gut: which if they
will not do; there is no way but dilatation of the Peritonaeum.

OBSERVATION XL. Difficulty of Urine.
GErard Driessem, a Merchant about fifty Years of Age was troubled with a
difficulty of Urine; so that his Urine did not only drizzle from him with great
difficulty and Pain, but also very often came not forth at all. The cause was a
certain viscous and tenacious Slime, which at times falling down, in great
quantity to the Bladder, did so besiege the Sphincter, that it stopped both
it is own and the passage of the Urine. This Slime descending through the
passage of the Yard, and coming forth, was tough, and many times might be drawn
out in ropes with the Fingers, many times it stuck so obstinately to the
passage, that there was a necessity of loosening it and drawing it forth with a
long Silver-Headed-Bodkin; this Malady had been familiar to him for many Years,
and sometimes seized him three, four and five times a Year, and between the
Intervals, he voided a great quantity of slimy Phlegm, many noted Physicians had
used several Remedies for the cure of this Malady; but all in vain, which
Physicians varied in their opinions concerning the cause and generation of that
same tough and slimy Phlegm; as also about the place from whence it descended so
Periodically; In the mean while the Patient could neither be cured by others,
nor by my self. The Malady therefore increasing he found the greatest benefit
and ease by the following Potion, which he took very often, and by means of
which his Pains were mitigated and his Urine provoked, and because it rendered
the Urinary Passages Slippery, he voided that thick and viscous Phlegm, more
commodiously, with more ease, and less Pain, and in greater quantity.

Oil of sweet Almonds, j. s. the best Malmsey-wine, ij. Juice of Pome-Citron
newly pressed s. mix them for a Potion.

ANNOTATIONS.
SEnnertus, among other Causes of a Dysury, reckons up one not much different
from that already rehearsed. Many times, says he, a white, and as it were, a
milkie Matter is copiously voided with the Urine, and causes a heat in making
Water, which is sometimes voided in so great a quantity, that where it settles,
it fills up half the Chamber Pot; and such a voiding of Water many times
continues very long. Concerning its Generation, I have known several varieties
of Opinions* and that some have taken it for a mattery Substance bred in the
Kidneys. But if the whole Kidneys should be dissolved into Matter, it could not
amount to so great a quantity as is sometimes voided every day for several
Weeks together. My Opinion is, that this matter proceeds from Crudity and
vicious Concoction, first, of the Stomach, then, because the Error of the first
Concoction cannot be mended in the second, of the Liver, where the Chylus, and
afterward the Blood is left raw, and uncleansed from the Salt and tartarous
Parts, which ought to be separated in the first Concoction, which being
afterward attracted by the Kidneys, and transmitted to the Bladder, cause Pain
in making water, especially toward the end, while something of the said Matter
sticks pertinaciously to the Neck of the Bladder, and the Extremity of the
Urinary Passage.

For the Cure of this Malady there are many things very prevalent, which temper
and dulcifie the Acrimony, and render the Urinary Passages slippery, to afford
a freer Passage for the thicker Matter; as Oil of sweet Almonds newly
extracted, which is very useful in this case. Malmsie-wine, the drinking of
which alone, as Sennertus writes* cured a certain Person that was troubled with
a terrible Dysury. The Decoction of Cammomil-flowers in Cows Milk* with which,
Forestus writes, he knew an old Man cured. Or that Decoction with which we
cured a Child, Ob. 7. Also the Decoction of Marshmallows, Mallows, Figs,
Licorice and the like. Fernelius's Syrup of Althea, more especially Turpentine
mixed with Sugar, and swallowed in a Bolus, which cuts the thick Humors,
attenuates, cleanses, expels, softens and mollifies the Passages.

OBSERVATION XLI. Spitting of Blood.
MOnsieur Ioannes, a Priest of Craneburgh, in the Year 1636. February the 16th.
sent me this Letter.

Doctor,
THE Fame of your Knowledge and Experience ha^ overruled me, to desire your
Advice in my Distemper. For a long time a violent Cough has troubled me, which
will hardly permit me to rest; moreover, about a Month since, this Cough was
accompanied with a spitting of frothy Blood, which ever since I have
continually spit, sometimes in a less, sometimes greater quantity; which
Spitting is very troublesome to me. I have lost my Stomach, so that I can eat
nothing, unless it be some small Trifle mixed with Vinegar, or some other Acid.
If you have any proper Remedy, I beg you to impart it to us,

Your most Devoted Ioannes Sacerdos.


The same day I sent him this Answer.

Reverend Sir,
I Received your Letter, to which, according to the shortness of the time, I
send you this short Answer; you have been long troubled with a sharp and salt
Defluction upon your Lungs, from whence your vehement and continued Cough has
derived it self: At length some Vein of the Lungs being opened by the great
quantity of distilling Humors, or broken by the force of the Cough, pours out
that Blood which you spit out frothy from your Lungs. This Malady cannot be
cured, unless the descent of the Catarhs be prevented, and the Cough allayed;
to which purpose, I have here sent you some Remedies. First, seven Pills to
take to morrow Morning, which will gently purge you. Secondly, A Conditement,
of which you are to take, after you have purged, the quantity of a Nutmeg,
Morning, Noon, and Night, for several days together. Thirdly, A Looch, to lick
when your Cough afflicts you. Fourthly, Lozenges to let melt in your Mouth as
often as you please, as well in the Day as Nightime. To these four I have
added a little Bag, what is in it you must put in a new earthen Pipkin, and
heat it over the Fire without any Moisture, then put it into the Bag again, and
lay it to your Head as hot as you can endure it, letting it lie one or two
Hours, and this you must do twice or thrice a day. When you take this off, put
on a woollen Cap well fumed with Mastich and Cloves, bind a warm Napkin about
it, to the end, that by this means, your Head being over cold and weak, may be
again heated, corroborated and dried, that so the Catarh be stopped from
further descent; which done, the remaining Cure will be easily accomplished. I
am well assured, that by reason of the Wars, and your continual quartering of
Soldiers, you cannot live with those Conveniences about you as you ought to
have, nevertheless you are to take the best care of your Diet you can;
therefore you must keep your self in a warm Place, and more especially to
preserve your Head from all manner of Cold. As to your Diet, abstain from all
manner of salt and smoaked Meats, and all others of hard Digestion and
Nutriment, more especially from all Acids, as Vinegar, Juice of Limons, sour
Apples, sour Wine, and every thing else that has any Acidity in it; for all
Acids are hurtful to the Lungs. Broths made of Mutton, Lamb, Veal, Hens, Cocks,
and the Flesh themselves boil*d with Rosemary, Marjoram, Barley cleansed, and
stoned Raisins, potch'd Eggs, and Goats Milk, and in a Word, all sweet things
are proper. If the Malady do not yield to these things, send me back word of
the State of your Disease,

Yours to Command, I. de Diemerbroeck.


The Medicaments which I prescribed him, were these.

. Of the Mass of Pill. Cochiae j. s. Diagredion gr. v. for seven Pills.

. Red Coral prepared, Boodstone, Trochischs of sealed Earth, an. ij. Flowers
of Sulphur j. Olibanum, Tragacanth, Spodium, Hartshorn burnt ^n. j. Conserve
of Red Roses ij. Codigniach j. s. Nicholas's Rest j. s. Syrup of Poppy, q. s.
Mix them for a Conditement.

. Syrup of Iujubes, of Colts foot, of Licorice an. j. of Poppy, Looch, Sarum
an. j. s. Mix them for a Looch.

. Heads of white Poppy, n^ v. Cut them small, and boil them half an hour in
common Water q. s. Strain them very hard, with the Straining boil White-sugar
iiij. to the Consistence of a Lozenge, adding at the end Powder of the Root of
Althea, j. s. of Licorice sliced j. Flowers of Sulphur ij. Red Coral prepared,
true Bolearmoniac an. j. Make Tablets according to Art.

. Herbs, Marjoram m. j. Rosemary, Bitony, Flowers of red Roses, Melilot an. m.
s. Cloves j. Nutmegs, Cummin-seed an jj. Beat them into a gross Powder, and
then add Millet-seed m. iiij. Salt m. iij. Mix them together, and put them into
a large linen Bag.

When he had used these Remedies for eight days, he wrote me word, that his
Coughing and Spitting of Blood were very much abated, but not quite cured:
Therefore to perfect the Cure, I wrote him word to continue his Pills, Looch
and Conditement, and withal sent him the following Prescription.

Roots of the greater Cumfrey, Snake-weed, Tormentil, Fennel, an. s Licorice
sliced vj. Herbs, Hyssop, Coltsfoot, Scabious, Herb Fluellin, Plantain,
Betony, Rosemary an. m. j Sage, Flowers of red Roses an. m. j. Head of white
Poppies cut small no iiij. Raisins unstoned iiij. Dates no ix. Decoction of
Barley q. s. Boil to an Apozeme of lb iij.

First let him purge with his Pills, and make use of Looch, let him take his
Conditement Morning and Evening, and drink a Draught of his Apozeme after it,
about the end of March, he wrote me word that he was quite cured of his Cough
and Spitting of Blood, that he slept very well, and could eat, and gave me many
Thanks for my Advice.

ANNOTATIONS.
ALL spitting of Blood out of the Veins of the Lungs threatens great Danger,
and therefore ought to be cured with great speed and prudence. As Benedict
Faventius observes, If a Vein, says he, be broken with Coughing, and Blood spit
out of the Lungs, it will never be consolidated but with great difficulty and
care of the Physician. This Cure is more easily, or with more difficulty
accomplished, according to the variety of Causes, the Vehemence and Diuturnity
of the Distemper, and the natural Strength of the Lungs affected. But among
other Causes, this is one; when Nature endeavors to expel by the violent force
of the Cough, the Humors stoping the spiritual Passages; for by that
extraordinary Violence there is a force put upon the Organs of Respiration, so
that they become very much extended with their Vessels, and sometimes broken,
and then the Blood comes away with the Spittle. Such was the Bloodspitting that
troubled our Patient, which was very dangerous, but less then if it had been
occasioned by some ill Disposition of the Lungs, or Corrosion of the Vessels,
or any such like Cause. However, had the Distemper persisted any longer, the
Vessels, without doubt, would have been corroded by the Acrimony of the
distilling Humors, and the Strength of the Bowel would have failed, and then
Suppuration, Consumption, Rottenness, a Fever, and several other Maladies of
difficult Cure, and for the most part mortal, would have ensued. But because it
was not come to that, and because the Disease had been of no long standing, and
the Patient was of sufficient strength, the Cure was fortunately performed, and
much sooner than was expected.

OBSERVATION. XLII. Suppression of the Secondines and Courses.
THE Wife of Peter Vleys-houwer, the sixth of March miscarried; presently after
her Secondines, Courses, Urine and Evacuations of Excrement stopped, which
exposed her to imminent danger; especially when the Medicaments given her by
the Midwife availed nothing. The ninth of March, which was the fourth day after
she had miscarried, I was sent for, and presently prescribed her these things.

. Roots of round Birthwort, Dittany, Valerian, Briony, Masterwort, Fennel, an.
iij. Herbs, Mugwort, Peniroyal, Tansie, Feverfew, Savin, an. m. j. Seed of
Parsley, Lovage, wild Carrots ij. red Vetches j. s. White Wind q. s. Boil them
for an Apozeme of lb j. s.

. Of this Decoction v. Leaves of Senna cleansed iij. Best Rhubarb j. s.
Aniseseed j. Choice Cinnamon j. Make an Infusion for four hours, then strain
them very hard, and add to the Straining Oil of Amber ix. Drops for a Draught.

After she had took this she purged gently, and her Urine and Courses came down
in great Plenty, and her Secondines came forth by Piace*meals; and thus by this
one Medicament she escaped a very great danger.

OBSERVATION XLIII. A Wound in the Brain with a Pistol-shot.
MR. Vane, an English man, and Ensign of a Company, a strong young man, about
twenty five years of Age, at the Siege of Schenk Sconce, in the Year 1636. was
wounded in the ^ead with a Pistol Shot, a little Bullet entering through the
inner Corner of his Right-Eye, without hurting the Eye, and passing through the
Substance of the Brain in a straight Line, to the upper Bottom of the forepart
of the Head, on that Side, in that Place stopped and stuck under the Bone. The
Man, so soon as he was wounded, fell down in a deep Sleep, void of Sense and
Motion, and so was carried to Nimeghen for dead. No Man thought it possible for
such a Wound to be cured, in regard the Brain was so much prejudiced. However
the Chyrurgeon prob'd to the place where the Bullet was lodged, and felt it
about the upper part of the Lambdoidal Bone. Then he took a longer slender
Instrument, like a Mold wherein they cast Bullets, and thrusting it into the
Wound, got hold of the Bullet, but as he was about to draw it out, I know not
by what Misfortune, the end of the Instrument that clasped the Bullet broke,
and that part of it which had taken hold of the Bullet, remained, together with
the Bullet, in the Brain; yet not so, but that the end of it might be seen
about the entrance of the Wound. However, for want of proper Instruments, we
were forced to leave it in the Brain till the Evening, at what time, with
proper Instruments, both the broken Instrument and the Bullet within it, were
both drawn forth, and as much of the Substance of the Brain came out along with
it as the quantity of a Nutmeg. Also some little bony Fragments sticking to the
Orifice of the Wound, were taken out. The Chyrurgeon applied to the Wound a
Magisterial Balsam, and Cephalic Fomentations were clapped round about the whole
Head, to strengthen the Brain, and his Belly moved with a Glister. The next day
some ounces of Blood were taken out of his Right-Arm. The fourth day after the
Wound received, upon which we presently ordered him some Broth for Nourishment.
About the fourteenth day, that deep Sleep abated, and after that he only slept
naturally. He was troubled with no Fever, nor did he loose his Appetite. For
some Weeks he took cephalic Decoctions and Conditements; but as for the Wound,
nothing was put into it but the said Balsam. Afterward, instead of a Cephalic
Fomentation, we took a dry Cephalic Cap, made of certain Cephalic and other
Herbs, and clapped it about his whole Head. And thus this Person, so desperately
wounded as he was, after three Months, being perfectly cured, walked abroad
again, and at the fourth Months end, returned again to the Camp. Six years
after this Cure, coming to Nimeghen, he gave me a Visit, affirming, that he
retained no farther Inconvenience of his Wound, only that upon some sudden and
tempestuous Change of Weather, his Head would ache a little; or if he drank Wine
too freely, he should presently be intoxicated, and then he was almost mad; at
other times he did whatever he had to do, as if he had never been wounded.

ANNOTATIONS.
H^ppocrates affirms all Wounds of the Head to be mortal. The Bladder, says he,
being broken, or the Brain, or the Heart, or the Midriff, or any of the small
Guts, or the Stomach, or the Liver, it is mortal. In which place, we are to
understand by Mortal, not of necessity Mortal, but very dangerous, as Galen
observes in his Comment upon that Aphorism. For Wounds of the Brain, that do
not penetrate the Ventricles, do not of necessity cause Death; because we find
they are many times healed, as Massa, Carpus, Iacotius, and many others
testify. And Avicen thus writes, concerning Arrows to be drawn out of the
Wounds of those Parts. If an Arrow, says he, be fixed in any principal Member,
as the Brain, Heart, Lungs, Belly, small Guts, Liver, Matrix or Bladder, and
there appear Signs of Death, then we must abstain from drawing out the Arrow,
because it will occasion us to be looked upon as Fools, when we know we can do
the Patient no good: But if no ill Sign appear, then we go to work; for many
times in such cases, several escape to a wonder.

We therefore, following this Doctrine of Avicen, though the case seemed
desperate, yet because all our Hope lay in drawing out the Bullet, drew it out
from this Patient, whom no rational Physician would have judged could have ever
escaped; especially since the Wound was made with so much violence of the
Pistol, accompanied with a Perforation of the Meninxes, and some loss of the
Substance of the Brain. Certainly, if ever there were a miraculous Cure, this
was one. I could hardly give credit before to the Testimonies of Authors in
this matter; and had I not seen such Wounds as these, with loss of the Brain,
twice healed, I should hardly yet have believed it.

OBSERVATION XLIV. An Asthma.
ANdrew a Sal ingen, in the Month of May, was troubled with a vehement Asthma,
which afflicted him so terribly, that he could hardly speak; he had no Cough,
and spit but very little or nothing, and besides, he had quite lost his
Stomach. He had taken several Remedies, by the Advice of others, for above half
a year together. And for my Part, because the Patient was threescore years of
age; I did not believe my self, that ever the Distemper could be eradicated;
however, I told him it might be much abated and assuaged, and therefore bid him
pluck up a good Heart, and take of the following Electuary Morning and Evening
the quantity of a Nutmeg, and to abstain from all acid and cold, flatulent,
viscous and smoked Meats, and in a word, from all Meats of hard Concoction and
bad Nutriment.

. Choice Myrrh, lucid Aloes, Flower of Sulphur, Elecampane, Licorice sliced an.
^j. Saffron, Benzoin an. j. Make these in* to a very fine Powder, then add the
best Honey xi^. Oil of Anise, Drops ix. Mix these for an Electuary.

By taking this, his Belly was gently loosned, and his Apetite restored; the
Asthma ceased to a Miracle; insomuch that within a few days he was quite freed
from it, and when the Malady afterward returned, he presently cured himself by
taking the same Electuary.

ANNOTATIONS.
AN Asthma is of those Diseases, which are not curable in old People, but
accompany them generally to their Graves, because it is caused either by crude
and cold Defluxions pouring down from the Brain upon the Lungs, or by more
crude and thicker Humors flowing from the Liver into the Lungs, through the
Arterious Vein. Which crude, cold and flegmatic Humors in old men, do not admit
of Concoction, by reason of the Debility of the Concoctive Faculty; which in
them is feeble, because of their cold Constitution, Age, and abundance of cold
Superfluities. And therefore when they are troubled with this Malady, we are
only to try how to abate it. In which case, the use of our Electuary proved
very advantageous to our Patient.

Mercurialis, for the Cure of an Asthma, highly commends a Cautery in the Arm,
and long kept open. For, says he, we find it by daily Experience, that they
who are vexed with difficulty of breathing, are mainly succored by the help of
these Remedies. As for Specific Remedies proper for an Asthma, there are
several to be found in various Authors.

Avicen prescribes to Asthmatics, that are grievously troubled with Difficulty
of breathing, Cumin-seed mixed with Vinegar, or white Mustard Seed mingled with
equal proportion of Honey, to the Consistence of an Electuary. Hippocrates, to
prevent Suffocation, prescribes Quicksilver, the quantity of a Bean, with
Ethiopic, Cumin-seed; as also Sulphur beaten and dissolved with Salt of Niter.
In like manner, among the Neoterics, Lelius a Font, Victor Favent, Solomon
Albert, Quercetan, Beguin and others, prescribe Sulphur as the chiefest Remedy
in the Cure of an Asthma. Some, in case of a violent Asthma, prescribe Sulphur
with Venice Turpentine. Miraldus writes, that viscous Humors may be easily
expectorated by swallowing Nettle seed powdered j. with any Pectoral Syrup.
Leonellus commends Ammoniac, with a little Oxymel of Squills. Which Ammoniac is
commended by several Physicians, but especially by Mercurialis, in these words:
But in regard Asthmatics are wont to have certain Fits, with which they are
more vehemently troubled, I find by Experience, that Oxymel ij mixed in a
Mortar with s. of Salt Ammoniac is a thing which gives great ease, a Spoonful
being taken at a time. Paulus Aegineta commends Hog-lice patched in an earthen
Pipkin, and then boiled with Honey; but I use them without parching. The same
Commendation Valerius also gives to Hog-lice, in his Notes upon Holler. Your
Hog-lice, says he, that lie under Water-tubs, tied up in a Linen Rag, and
steeped in White Wind, and the Straining given to drink, rid the Lungs of tough
Humors in a short time to a Wonder. Soon after, says he, to assuage a violent
Asthma, one Tablet of Diatragacanth sprinkled with some Drops of Oil of Sage,
Anise, or Rosemary, Chymically extracted, conduces very much, and gives present
ease. Cardan writes, that Saffron is the Soul of the Lungs, and affirms that he
has cured many Asthmatics with it. I have known my self the Decoction of red
Colewarts given for several days with a little Sugar, give great ease. Augenius
highly applauds Syrip of Tobacco; of which also Monardes, Quercetan and others
make mention; by the use of which, Zacutus of Portugal writes, that he has
cured several. Some there are who give Turpentine ij. or iij. with Oil of sweet
Almonds, by that means purging both the Breast and the Belly at the same time.
For this Distemper are no less approved Elecampane-wine, Balsam of Sulphur,
Looch of Squills, Foxes Lungs, and the like.

OBSERVATION XLV. Pain in the Kidneys.
NIcholas of Rostock, in June, was cruelly afflicted with sharp Nephritic
Pains, which lasted for eight days, without intermission. At length, by the
Advice of an old Woman, he swallowed twice or thrice a day, the quantity of an
Acorn of new Butter, without any Salt in it; which when he had continued for
three days together, at length, without any Pain, he voided a Stone, about the
bigness, and very like an Almond, and several others lesser, with much Gravel,
and by that means was freed from his Distemper. Afterward, the same Pain
returning, taking the same Remedy, he voided more Stones.

ANNOTATIONS.
When the Stone is already fallen out of the Bladder, it is soonest and best
expelled by such Remedies as smoothen the Urinary Vessels, and render the
Passages slippery. Such is new churm'd Butter, by the use of which, John de
Scherpenhuysen many times liable to Nephritic Pains, frequently voided little
Stones out of his Yard. Such is also Oil of sweet Almonds, either alone, or
with Malmsey-wine. We have also seen some, who have frequently voided Stones
by the much eating of Figs. The Decoction also of Forestus, by us mentioned Ob.
20. and 24. is also very useful in this case.

OBSERVATION XLVI. A Wound in the Leg.
THE Wife of Christian ab Ummersum, having slightly bruised her Leg, and laying
on a Plaster of her own Head, this slight Contusion grew to an Ulcer, for the
Cure of which, when she sent for a Chyrurgeon, after many Ointments, Plasters
and other Topics, for three or four Weeks applied, he could do no good. But at
length she was cured by an old Woman, who advised her to Powder-Chalk, and mix
it with old Butter roasted, by which her Ulcer was cured in a short time.

OBSERVATION XLVII. A Pain from an odd and unexpected kind of Wound. The Author
would have it from Witchcraft.
JOhn Peter Nirot, a Child, of about five years of age, for almost a whole Year
together, had complained of Pain in the lower Part of his Belly, and was often
so miserably griped, that his Parents knew not what in the World to do. He had
no Fever, nor was his Stomach very bad, and he went well enough to stool; yet
his Belly was swelled, and his whole Body all worn to Skin and Bones; he would
rub his Nose very much, but he slept very little, only slumber'd, and that with
troublesome and frequent Wakings. In June, my Advice was sent for, I believing
the Child was troubled with Worms in his Guts, gave him several Medicaments to
expel the Worms, the Crudities and Impurities of the lower Region; but all to
no purpose, the Torments of his Belly more and more increasing, so that by
reason of his continual crying, I was afraid the Child would become bursten. At
length, after so many Medicines tried in vain, I felt with my hand a Hardness
in the lower part of his Belly, in the middle, between the Navel and the Region
of the Hair, somewhat toward the Left-side. This Hardness was also oblong, yet
caused no Swelling, so that I could not conjecture what it should be. Wherefore
I sent the Mother with the Child to a Chyrurgeon, to know his Judgment
concerning the Hardness. He for some time felt the Place with his Hands, yet
not able to make any right Conjecture. But perceiving the Child to be more in
Pain by his handling him, the better to find out the Cause of the Malady, he
squeezed the Part affected on both sides with his Hands somewhat hard, at what
time, he presently felt on the one side something hard and sharp, that piers'd
the Skin and pricked his Fingers. Therefore believing it to be some little
Bone, or some such thing, he took hold of it with a Pair of Pincers, and drew
forth, not a little Bone, but, to the admiration of all that stood by, a large
Shoo-makers Awl; after which, the Child grew very well. This Awl was about half
the length of a man's middle Finger, such as the Shoomakers use when they sow
on their Polony Heels, without any Handle, only to the End next the Handle,
there stuck a piece of Shoo-makers Wax'd-Thread, with which it had been
formerly fastened to the Handle.

ANNOTATIONS.
THere was no Person that could judge this to be a preternatural Malady. For it
is not probable the Child could swallow so long and large an Awl, without any
harm, and without any bodies knowing of it. But grant it had been so, there is
no reason can be given, how the Awl should be carried through the Membranes of
the Stomach or Intestines, the Peritonaeum and Muscles of the Abdomen, and so
athwart to the Skin, the Bowels untouched, and without any Exulceration;
insomuch that the Patient was cured, as it were, in a Moment, after the drawing
out the Awl, and was living seven years after to our knowledge. And therefore it
is very probable that it was put into the Body of the Boy by diabolical
Incartation; like to that same Story which Longius tells of a Country Man, who
had an Iron Nail which appeared under his Skin without any Prejudice, which was
cut out by the Chyrurgeon; and when he was dead, four Knives, two iron Files,
Hair and other things were found. And several other remarkable Stories of the
same nature are related by others, as Forestus, Codronchius, Gemma, Zacutus,
etc.

It Is true, it has been a Controversy for several Ages among Divines, Lawyers,
Physicians and Philosopers, whether there be any Inchanters or Witches, and
whether they have so much Power by their Charms, to hurt the Creatures, to
cause Sickness and Death, clear up Rain, and cause Thunder, etc. For a brief
Solution of this Question, in short, we must conclude, that there are
Inchanters, who by the Permission of God, can do very strange things; seeing
that the Scripture testifies, that Pharaoh's Magicians in Moses's time were
such a sort of Inchanters, who turned Rods into Serpents, Rivers into Blood,
etc. Thus St. Luke makes mention of Simon Magus, who made the People mad with
his Magic Arts. Whence we must of necessity conclude, that there are Witches
and Sorcerers, who by their Demoniac Arts, cannot only work various Miracles,
but also blast Herbs and Fruits, and do mischief to Beasts and Men; which
Mischiefs however they cannot do when they please, nor to all that they please,
but only when, and in what manner God pleases, and to such whose Faith God has
a Will to try, as he permitted the Devil to exercise his Sorceries upon Job. Or
to such, whose Incredulity or Impiety he has a mind to punish, not only in the
proper Person of the Transgressor, but also by giving the Witches Power over
their innocent Children, their Flocks, Herds, Fruit, etc. And thus, by the
Incantation of Witches, many times Infanrs, Oxen, Sheep, Horses, Fruit, etc.
are mischiefed, as we saw at a certain Country-mans at Montfort. Yet, though
there are such Inchanters and Witches, their Power of doing Harm is not at
their own, but at the disposal of God. Nor can Satan inflict Diseases, but by
the Permission of God, and then his Witches are but his Instruments, not the
primary Cause.

OBSERVATION XLVIII. Of the Gout in the Knee.
A Little Son of Thomas Peter's, an English Merchant, about six years of age,
being troubled with the Gout in his Knee for three or four Weeks, at length his
Pain was so great that he could not go. There was no Tumor, no Inflammation,
nor Dislocation, and therefore, after I had purged his Body, I only laid on a
Cere-cloth of Oxicroceum, which lay on for three days without any benefit.
Afterward his Knee swelled very much, and the Pain likewise increased;
wherefore, leaving off the Cere-cloth, the following Cataplasme was laid on for
four or five days together, shifting it twice a day. The Use of which, cleared
the Child both of his Swelling and Pain, nor did they afterward return.

. New Goats-dung lb. j. Boil it in strong French Wine q. s. to the consistence
of a Cataplasm; and when you take it off from the Fire, add Spirt of Wine iij.
Mix them for a soft Cataplasm.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis Cataplasm has a very great discussing and corroborating Faculty, which is
looked upon by some as a great Secret in these sorts of Tumors of the Joints;
the signal effects whereof, we have tried in many other cases of the same
nature. This Dung boiled in Oximel Aetius highly commends, as a Medicament
which he has often succesfully used in long continued Tumors of the Knee.

OBSERVATION XLIX. A Swelling in the Forehead, by reason of a Fall.
A Young Son of Dimmer de Raet, Consellor to the Court of Boxmer, had fallen
down a Pair of Stairs upon his Forehead, whence ensued a Swelling in his
Forehead to the bigness of a Hens Egg. To this I only applied green Grass
fresh gathered and bruised in a Mortar, cold as it was; which done, the
Swelling vanished the next day to that degree, that there was not the least
sign of it remaining.

ANNOTATIONS.
THese Swellings, though some make nothing of them, yet if they be neglected at
the beginning, they are many times the causes of great Mischiefs, which we saw
happened to the Child of Monsieur Armstrong, who having such a Tumor in his
Forehead, when it could not be dissipated by no Topics, the Place affected,
continued swelled for some Weeks after, till at length the Humor therein
beginning to putrify, and from thence bad Simptoms appearing, there was a
Necessity not only of a Tormenting Incision, to open the Tumor and let out the
putrid Humor, but also of scraping off the putrid Humor, corrupted with the
same Putrefaction from the Bone that lay underneath, by which means, that
imminent danger was to be removed from the Patient, to which also the Wound was
consolidated without any conspicuous Scar. Wherefore it is far better to
dissipate the Humors at the beginning, at what time it may be easily done, and
which we luckily did with Grass only bruised. Many times we have likewise
applied brown Paper moistened in Spirit of Wine, with as good success, or Oil of
Wax or Anise, anointed upon the Place.

OBSERVATION L. The Chollic Passion.
MOnsieur Starkenburgh, Colonel of the Regiment of Groening, about forty years
of age, of a cold and flegmatic Constitution, in September was taken with a
violent Cholic Passion. His Belly was very much swelled with Wind, which he
could neither void upward nor downward, and terrible Gripings seemed to
dilacerate the Guts. He complained also of an extraordinary Anxiety of his
Heart, with which he was so much oppressed, that he was all over of a cold
Sweat; but because he seemed to be almost ready to burst with Wind, and had
need of present Relief, I prescribed the following Glister, which was given him
about eleven a Clock at night.

. Emollient Decoction lbj. Elect. Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra j. s. Oil of Dill
and Camomil, an. j. Common Salt j. Mix them for a Glister.

This Glister he voided within a quarter of an hour, without any Ease, neither
Wind nor Excrement following; for which reason, soon after we gave him another
of the same, which did him as little good. At the same time the Patient growing
Stomach-sick, threw up some Choler with tough Phlegm. Therefore about six a
Clock in the Morning, I prescribed him another Glister after this manner.

. Emollient Herbs, lesser Centaury, Wormwood, Rue, Flowers of Cammomil, Dill,
an. m. s. Seeds of Anise and Lovage an. ij. Cummin, Laurel-Berries, an. j. s.
Boil them in common Water q. s. to lbj. In the Straining, gently boil Flowers
of Senna, j. Then press them, and add Elect. Hiera Picra, Diacatholicon, an. j.
s. Oil of Cammomil and Dill, an. j. Common Salt ij. For a Glyster.

After he had taken this, there came away with it much Excrement, and much
Wind. Afterward, being sick at his Stomach, he threw up a great quantity of
Choler and tough Phlegm, which gave him much Ease. Twice the same day he took
Chicken Broth boiled with Barley cleansed, Citron and Orange Peels, and for his
Drink, sometimes he drank Ptisan, sometimes small Ale. In the Evening this
Bolus was given him, which caused him to sleep a little the Night following,
and gave him very great Ease, and the next day he had three Stools.

. Of our Anticholic Electuary j. Transparent Aloes j. Mix them for a Bolus.

This Bolus, afterward he took thrice a day, every other day. The seventh of
October, not having gone to stool in three days, upon forbearing his Bolus, his
Cholic Pains increased again. But then, because the Gentleman would not admit
of any more Glisters, I gave him a gentle purging Draught, which caused him to
void much Choler and Phlegm upward and downward. The twelfth of October, his
Belly being bound, he took a Glister. The thirteenth, Dr. Harscamp, an eminent
Physician, was called to Counsel, and then, by common Consent, to stop his
Vomiting, we gave him at two times, one Spoonful of Cinnamon Water, with two
Drops of Oil of Cinnamon, and ordered the following Ligament to be applied to
the Region of his Stomach.

. Oil of Nut-megs squeezed, of Laurel, an. j. Of Dill, of distilled Fennel, an.
j. Of Anise Drops iij. Mix them for a Ligament.

In the Evening he took the forementioned Bolus. The sixteenth of October, he
took another Glister, which gave him three Stools with great ease. The
twentieth, to loosen his Belly, we prescribed him Pills made of transparent
Aloes only, of which, he swallowed two or three every other day, or every other
three days; which Pills wrought so well, that afterward we had no need of any
other Purges. The twenty eighth, I gave him j. s. of our Anticholic Electuary,
wherein I had mingled j. s. of transparent Aloes, of which he took Morning and
Evening s. or ij. to his great Advantage. For it strengthened his Stomach,
dispelled the Wind, and cleansed away the Phlegm and Choler. This Electuary he
afterward used as a preservative, taking his Aloes-Pills in the intervening
days. And by this means he recovered his former Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
THE Cause of this Cholic Passion was a great quantity of salt Phlegm sticking
to the Guts, and an overabounding quantity of sharp excrementitious Choler; for
the Choler being voided out of its Bladder into the Guts, and being there mixed
with that Phlegm, and causing that salt and tough Phlegm to boil, (like quick
Lime thrown upon Water, or Oil of Vitriol powered upon powdered Crabs Eyes)
begat an extraordinary Flatulency, violent Pains, and extreme Anxieties. That
this was the true Cause, appeared by his vomiting, which brought up yellow and
greenish Choler, with tough and frothy Phlegm, as I have often observed in my
Practice. Wherefore in this case, there is need of a hotter Medicament, in
regard of the cold Phlegm and the Wind; at the same time, to cleanse away the
Choler, and assuage the Gripes. To which three Purposes, the foresaid
Electuary, mixed with Aloes, was of great use; other general and necessary
Medicaments being given as occasion served.

To assuage the Pains of the Cholic, many notable Remedies are prescribed by
various Authors, which are to be varied according to the variety of the Causes.
In a cold Cause I make use of my own Anticholic Electuary with good success,
the Composition of which, is this.

. Specier. Diagalangae, Rosatum Aromaticum an. iij. s. Diambra iij. Mass of
Storax Pills iij. s. Treacle of Andromachus iij. s. Mithridate of Damoc. iiij.
v. Oil of Anise ij. ij. of Cloves j. of Nutmegs distilled j. s. Syrup of
Stocchas q. s. For an Electuary.

This Electuary sometimes I use alone, sometimes with every ounce I mix j. or
ij. of Aloes, and so given, have found it much more prevalent against the
Chollic. Holler boils in odoriferous Wine, one small Handful of common Wormwood
with ij. of Cummin-seed. He also commends Orange-peels boiled in Wine, and the
Decoction drank fasting in a Morning. We have also given the same Peel powdered
and mixed with Wine, and found it no less beneficial. Wormwood-wine is
commended by Aetius, because it corroborates the Belly, purges away the Choler,
and prevents the Growth of it, and discusses and expels the Wind. Others boil
j. of Cummin-seed in VVormwood-wine, and give the Straining. Rases approves
Confection of Laurel Berries. Avicen prescribes an effectual Medicament of
equal Parts of Castor, Pepper and Aniseseed. Against the same Distemper are no
less prevalent the Powder of Zedoary Root, from j. to j. Also the distilled
Oils of Anise, Fennel, Caroes, Dill and Zedoary given in hot Wine. The
Decoction of Flowers of Cammomil, with a little Cummin-seed added, given in Ale
or small White Wind iiij. or v. at a time, is a most present Remedy to assuage
the Pains and expel the Wind. Others applaud this Carminative Water of
Schroderus.

. Flowers of Roman Cammomil m. xxx. ^ut, bruise and infuse them twenty four
hours in Cammomil-water lb x. (others say xv.) stout Wine lb vj. squeeze these
very strongly, and in the straining, infuse for twenty four hours more, Flowers
of common Cammomil m. xxiiij. Press them and strain them. In the Straining
steep Flowers of Cammomil m. xij The yellow of Orange Peels j. s. Pontic
Wormwood m. ij. Lesser Centaury, Penyroyal, Basil an. m. ij. s. Seed of Dill
iij. Of Anise and Fennel an. j. s. of Caroways, Cummin, Carduus Benedictus,
Mary's Carduus an. j. s. Juniper berries j. Laurel-berries s. Let them stand
twenty four hours, then distill them with a Gentle Fire, in Baln^o Mariae.

Rodoric Fonseca recommends, as a singular Remedy, and a very great secret,
arising from the Propriety of the whole Substance, the Testicles of Horses,
which he says he has several times tried in the Cure of cholical Distempers.
These Testicles he washes in generous Wine, and cuts into thin slices and then
dries them in an Oven with a gentle Heat, and keeps them for his Use upon
occasion, after general Remedies, he gives of these powdered j. in Wine, three
hours before any other Meat. Zacutus prefers the Pizzle of a Bull, as having a
Wonderful specific Virtue, one Scruple of the Powder being taken in Malmsey
Wine, affirming, that he had cured several who were most cruelly tormented with
that Grief, with that only Medicament. He also commends for almost as effectual
the sole drinking of Urine. In vehement Cholic Pains, Riverius prescribes these
Pills, which he has often given with great Success.

. The best Aloes j. Laudanum Opiate gr. iiij. Diagridion gr. vj. Make six Pills.

Let the Patient take these at a convenient time, and within an hour after they
assuage the Pains and carry away noxious Humors. Paraeus tells us of one, who
when all other Remedies would not prevail, was at length cured with drinking
iiij. of the Oil of sweet Almonds mixed with White Wind and
Pellitory-wall-water, and then swallowing a leaden Bullet smeared over with
Quicksilver. This we also saw our selves of a Trooper, who being troubled
frequently with the Cholic, swallowed three or four Pistol Bullets, which
coming out again, he was presently rid of his Distemper.

OBSERVATION LI. A Wound in the Head.
THomas Gravener, about sixty years old, but a good strong Man of his age, a
Trooper under Captain Conyers, an English Officer, upon the fourteenth of
November, playing with some others in the Lieutenants Quarters, by what
Misfortune I know not, fell backward, and broke the hinder Part of his Head
against the Pavement, which made a slight Wound in the Skin, which the
Chyrurgeon slighted, and only laid some sort of Plaster to it. But immediately
after the Fall, the Trooper grew sick at his Stomach, and had an Inclination to
Vomit; besides, he had a slight giddy Pain in his Head, yet not so, but that he
walked the Streets for the three or four first days; but upon the sixth day,
his Face and all his Head began to swell very much. The twenty fourth day of
November, and the eleventh after his Fall, about Evening, I was sent for; I
found the Patient very weak, with his Face so swelled, that he could not open
his Eyes for the Swelling, and under his Eyes were black and blew Spots.
Thereupon, having examined the whole Case more diligently, from the beginning
of the Fall, I concluded he would dye, in regard, that by the Signs, his Head
seemed to me to be cleft, and that the Blood being extravasated between the
Meninxes and the Cranium, was there putrified; and that therefore this Blood
which the Chyrurgeon should have drawn out at first, by a Perforation of the
Cranium, would be the Cause of his Death. The Chyrurgeons therefore that had
him in Cure, Mr. Edmunds and his Son observing their Mistake, as also the
Troopers Wife and Friends earnestly desired that the Operation might yet be
tried, and notwithstanding all my Persuasions to the contrary, I stood by while
it was done. Thereupon that Evening the Hair being taken off, and a Cross-like
Incision made in the place affected, the Cranium was laid bare to a good
breadth. The next day, the Tents being taken, and the Wound more narrowly
looked into, we found a long Fissure in the Skull, which Cranium was
immediately trepan'd. But then we found the Blood, which the Wound had bled,
sticking to the thick Meninx, not coagulated or putrified, but altogether dried
up, so that it stuck like a clammy Powder, the more close to the Meninx and
Cranium, which was a most certain Sign of Death, by reason that the Blood so
dried, could in no manner flow forth. So that upon the twenty sixth of
November, he fell into a deep Sleep, and the next day he died.

ANNOTATIONS.
COntusions and Wounds in the Head are never to be made slight of. For
sometimes they deceive the quickest Eyes; so that such as seem to be nothing
dangerous, bring a Man into the greatest hazard of his Life. We have observed
some, who after the tenth, nay fourteenth and twentieth day after a slight
Wound in the Head, have felt little or no pain, yet of a sudden have been
taken with an Apoplexy, Convulsions, or some terrible Distemper; which contrary
to expectation has ended their Days. Thus a Servant of the Sieur Morignan, a
French Gentleman, falling from his Horse upon his Head had no outward Wound to
be seen: the first day his Head aked, and he was so very Giddy that he could
not stand* from the second to the twelfth he felt no harm, but went about his
business. The twelfth day he complained of a Giddiness of his Head, the
fourteenth about noon he fell down with an Apoplexy and within a few hours
Expired. In the same manner a Servant of Captain Lucas, a Captain of Horse, in
a Scuffle among certain Soldiers received a slight blow upon the Head with a
Cudgel, whence ensued a very great swelling, without any wound; for the first
few days he was Giddy, after that he complained of a Heaviness of his Head: the
thirty second day an Epilepsy took him; and the forty sixth after the blow he
Dyed Convulsive. Valeriola also tells a Story of a Woman that having received a
very slight Wound with a Pot in her Forehead, for two days seemed to aile
little or nothing. The third day a terrible Fever seized her; her face swelled
all over, with a Redness and Inflammation; soon after a Delirium, and
Convulsion, afflicted her, to all which Evils upon the fifth day, Death put a
final end. Her Head being opened there appeared a Chink in her Skull which was
hardly conspicuous, a very great Inflammation within the Skull, the hard Meninx
swelled, black and blew, and covered with a great quantity of Putrefaction. In
such cases therefore it is better to lay bare the Skull at first, and if need
be to perforate, then by lingering to expose the Patient to mortal danger.

OBSERVATION LII. A Fissure of the Skull.
PEter ab Ewjick, a Trooper under Captain Conyers, about thirty four Years of
Age, being talking to the Lieutenant with his Hat off in the Yard belonging to
his quarters, a Servant of the House threw down out of an upper Window a piece
of Wood of ten or twelve Pound weight, which fell accidentally upon the
Troopers Head; Immediately the Trooper fell down Speechless, and was carried
into the next Room for dead; where, for an hours space he appeared so
Apoplectic, that every Body thought he would have died, at length he came to
himself, but raved all that day and the next Night; the Chyrurgeon that was
sent for perceiving nothing but a slight superficial Wound thought there was no
danger, and promised to cure him in three or four days. However Mr. Cooper, not
confiding in that Chyrurgeon, upon the third day desired me to see him, I found
him without Pain, sound in his judgment, with a slight Wound in the forepart
of his Head; yet hardly Penetrating; his Eyes also were surrounded with black
and blew, so that so few Symptoms appearing, the Chyrurgeon and all the
standers-by made slight of the business; But I having examined the business
from the beginning, certainly affirmed that the Skull was either broken or
slit, and therefore that it was absolutely necessary to make a preforation as
soon as possible, that the Extravasated Blood might be let out, and that there
was no dallying till more terrible Symptoms ensued, when Art and Industry would
be too late; so that at length my Advice was followed. First therefore, after
we had loosened his Belly with a Glister, the same Evening upon the sinister
Bone of the Bregma, an Incision large enough was made in the form of the Letter
T. and the Skull triangularly laid bare; at that time we could perceive nothing
for the Blood; but the next day we discovered two apparent Fissures in the
Cranium, and upon one side a small Particle about half a Fingers length,
somewhat depressed; which Particle was every way severed and broken from the
Bone. Therefore in the next firm Part we made a perforation with a Trepan, and
took out half an ounce of Blood, which had flowed out of the little broken
Veins between the Cranium and the thick Meninx, and there had sheltered it
self; which being wiped off, we laid a little rag dipped in Honey of Roses upon
the Meninx, and having filled the Wound without side with dry Wool, we covered
it with Emplaster of Betony. The sixth of February, some little Blood came
forth; but after that, none at all; in the mean time we kept his Belly loose
with a gentle Purge, thus we ordered the Wound till the twelfth of February,
and covered his Head with a quilt of Cephalic Herbs, and other things;
afterward we began to lay the following Powder mixed with Honey of Roses upon
the Meninx.

. Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, Aloes, Myrrh, an. j. Fine Barley Flower, j.
s. Make it into a very fine Powder.

The eighteenth of February, the flesh began to grow from the inside of the
Meninx. The first of March, the Meninx was covered with flesh. The sixteenth of
March, a little Scale was separated from the upper Bone of the Skull laid bare:
and at the beginning of April, the Man being perfectly cured went abroad.

ANNOTATIONS.
THE sudden Consternation of this Person, as it were Apoplectic was a certain
sign of the Skull being depressed; which depression could never have been made
without a Fracture or a Fissure. And though for the following days the Patient
felt nothing in his Head, in regard such a depression and Fissure could not
happen without breaking some of the little Veins, it was better to open the
Skull and take out the Extravasated Blood, then to expect the Symptoms of it
when Corrupted and Putrified: For a very little Blood, though no more then a
dram, yet Putrefying upon the Meninx, may cause terrible Symptoms and Death it
self.

OBSERVATION LIII. The Headache.
PEtronel de Kuijck, a Country-Woman, about threescore Years old, complained in
February, of terrible Pains in her Head, as also of Catarrhs falling upon her
Eyes, Teeth, Shoulders, and other parts; that she had been troubled all the
Winter, and felt a very great cold at the top of her Head, as if the fore part
of her Head had been dipped in cold Water; Therefore having prescribed her a
hotter and Cephalic Diet, I Purged her with Pill. Cochiae and Golden Pills,
then I ordered Linnen-cloths four doubled and dipped in Spirit of Wine warmed,
and gently squeezed to be laid over all the upper Part of her Head, and to
continue so doing for some days, which done, that Diuturnal Pain, together with
her Catarrhs, all ceased within a few days, then for prevention and
preservation I prescribed her a Quilt to wear upon her Head,

. Marjoram one little Handful, Rosemary, Sage, Flowers of Melilot, Lavender,
an. one little Handful, Nutmegs, Cloves, an. ij. Make a Powder for a Quilt.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN these cold Maladies of the Brain, besides general and internal Medicines,
proper Topics are very beneficial; so that many times they alone, at the
beginning of the Distemper, contribute very much to the Cure. In which case we
made use of Spirit of Wine with good Success; the Fomentations of which are
highly commended* by Arculanus. Plater commends Dill; Forestus Cammomile,
however they are made use of in Head-achs proceeding from cold Causes. Aetius
applaudes Goats dung, bruised and laid on Morning and and Evening. Others dry
up cold superfluous humors after this manner.

. Millet-seed lb j. common Salt lb s. Leaves of Majoram, Rosemary, Sage,
Flowers of Lavender, Melolet an. one small handful, Seeds of Anise, Fennel,
Dill, Cummin an. ij. Laurel Berries iij.

These being fried in a Drying Pan, let them be put into little bags, and while
they continue warm, let the head be first dried and then well rubbed with them
for half an hour. Aetius prefers Vervein. with the Roots, and creeping Time,
boiled in Oil, for the Cure of all Headaches proceeding from cold and thick
Humors. He also recommends Hog-lice boiled in Oil for the same purposes. P.
Aegineta writes of a Woman who was very famous for cuing Headaches either with
or without a Fever by this means. She boiled the green Roots of Asses Cucumers,
cut very small, and Wormwood in Oil, till they grew soft, and with this Oil and
Water she moistened and watered the Head, and then clapped the Root bruised with
the Wormwood upon it: Which Medicine is highly recommended by Avicine, who
prescribes it after this form

. Common Oil, common-water an. lb j. Leaves of Wormwood M. j. s. Root of Asses
Cucumers ij. Let them boil together.

OBSERVATION LIVE. A Hickup.
ANtonetta N. a poor Woman desired me to see her Daughter, a Maid about twenty
four Years of Age, she had been troubled for ten days with a continual violent,
and troublesome Hickup, and none of the old Women's Remedies would do her any
good, when I understood her Womb was well, I judged that the Malady proceeded
from some sharp Matter, firmly Impacted in the Tunicles of the Stomach;
therefore I gave her first a light Vomit, which gave her three or four Vomits,
but no release from her Hickup. Thereupon I prescribed her this following
little Bag.

. Flowers of Mint, camomil, Dill, an. M j. of red Roses, Melilot an. M. s. one
white Poppy Head cut small, Nutmeg, Aniseed an. j. of Dill, and Cumin, an j. s.
cut and bruise them grossly, and make a Linen bag about the bigness of two
hands breadth.

This Bag I ordered her to boil for half an hour, in new Milk and common Water
an. lbj. s. and to take ever and anon a Draught of this Decoction; and after
she had gently squeezed the Bag to apply it hot to the Region of her Stomach;
which when she had continued to do but for one day, her Hickup left her.

ANNOTATIONS.
SAys Hippocrates, A Convulsion is caused by Repletion or Emptiness, and so is
a Hickup. But for the most part a Hickup proceeds from Repletion, seldom from
Emptiness as Galen testifies. Under the word Plenitude are comprehended also
whatever matter sticks close to the Tunicles of the Stomach, and twiching and
gnawing them with its Acrimony, whether sharp, tough Humors, Pepper or any
other thing.

A Hickup if it last long, is very troublesome, but it seldom uses to continue
long. Yet M. Gatinaria tells a Story of a Doctor of Law, who was troubled with
a Hickup for twelve days together: and Forestus makes mention of an old Woman
that Hickupp'd many times for half a year together. To suppress this
Hickupping, those Medicaments are most proper, which loosen and remove the
sharp and biting humors from the Tunicles of the Stomach; such are Vomiting
Medicines and Sternutories. Hence says Hippocrates, Sneezing frees the Person
that is troubled with a Hickup. But if these things nothing avail, and that the
sharp Matter will not be thus removed, then the Acrimony of it is either to be
mitigated (thus in Forestus we read, that a certain old Woman, when no other
Remedies would prevail, was cured with Looch Sanum) or else to be concocted and
mitigated together. To which purpose a Decoction of Camomil-flowers, and Seeds
of Dill, Cumin, Figs, or drinking of Malmsey or other soft Wine neat and pure.
Or else the Matter is to be concocted, and at the same time the acute Sense of
the Stomach is somewhat to be blunted, and then Treacle, Mithridate, and
chiefly Philonium are mainly contributory. Sometimes we read of Hickups cured
by sudden Frights: and Variola confirms the same.

OBSERVATION. LV. A Wound in the Head; and an opening of the Skull with a
Trepan.
LAmbert N. a Dutch Gentleman, about twenty four Years of Age, Young and
strong, the seventh of March, as he was managing a sprightly Horse, was
unawares thrown out of his Saddle, and knocked the hinder part of his Head
against the Carriage of a great Gun, yet so that no Wound appeared outwardly:
Presently after his fall he fell a Vomiting, and was taken with an
extraordinary dizziness, which ceasing for some time, he mounted again and rode
home. But no sooner was he alighted in the Stable, but being again taken with a
dizziness, he fell down upon the Flower, and his memory being as it were quite
lost, he neither knew what had befallen him, nor how he fell from his Horse,
nor where he was. At the same time a Camp Chyrurgeon being sent for after he
had shaved off the Hair behind the left Ear, somewhat upward, where the Patient
complained of no Pain, made a slight incision, which no way concerned the
Pericranium; and the next day took about a pint of Blood out of his left Arm.
The twelfth of March, the Pains increasing, I was sent for; at what time I
found that the Patient complained of most sharp Pains in his Head, yet there
was no Fever, in the place affected, besides the Wound, which the Chyrurgeon
had made, I perceived a slight and soft Tumor; so that by the feeling, a Man
might easily conjecture a depression or Fracture of the Skull, the Chyrurgeon
had hitherto laid on a defensive of Bolearmoniac, whites of Eggs and Vinegar
mixed together, for fear of an Inflammation, which because it was misapplied in
this case, I threw away, and ordered Linen Clothes four doubled and dipped in
the following Fomentation, and gently squeezed to be clapped warm over all his
Head, and to be shifted three or four times a day.

. Betony, Rosemary, Thyme, Sage, Marjoram, Vervain, an. M. j s. Flowers of
Stocchas, Camomil, Melilot, an. M. s. Laurel berries Comin seed, an. iij.
White Wind, q. s boil them according to Art to lb iij. add to the straining,
Spirit of Wine vj. mix them for a fomentation.

But in regard the Patient had not gone to Stool in four days, I gave him a
gentle Purge, which gave him five Stools; the same Evening, after the
fomentation several times applied, appeared in the place affected a Tumor
about the bigness of half a Hens-Egg, which being perforated, there flowed out
Black Blood; therefore the next day sending for a more skilful Chyrurgeon, I
advised him to open the Skull. But the Patient and his Friends being extremely
against it, we staid two days longer, till the fifteenth of March, which was
the ninth day from the fall, by which time there appeared in the same place a
Tumor bigger then the former, so that then with the Patients consent I ordered
the Skull to be laid bare about the Evenings and in regard the Wound was near
the temporal Muscle, there was an Incision made cross-wise to the very Bone it
self, somewhat toward the hinder part of the Head, by the Lambdoidal Suture,
presently gushed out a large quantity of Blood black and coagulated, which was
expelled by the strength of Nature, through the Lambdoidal Suture, which by the
Incision we had in part laid bare, and had stuck between the Cranium and the
Pericranium; the Cranium thus laid bare, and the Pericranium scraped, the Wound
was filled with dry Wool; the next Night, the Pain being somewhat mitigated,
the Patient slept a little, the next day the Cranium was Trepan'd, but scarce a
Dram of Blood flowed out upon the opening of it, which till then had stuck
between the Cranium and the Hard Meninx, and by this time was in some Measure
coagulated; from thence I judged the Patient to be in great danger, when I
found coagulated Blood, and believed there might be more which still lying hid
under the Cranium could not come forth, and for that the Meninx being gently
squeezed, nothing followed. The seventeenth of March, a Fever seized him; the
next Night followed Convulsions, so strong that four robust, stout Men, could
hardly hold his Arms and his Thighs; Moreover he slept not at all, raved
altogether, was very thirsty, and when Drink was offered him, Drank very
greedily; the next day he remained in the same Condition, so that because of
his Delirium and his Convulsions his Wound could not be bound up, thus raving
he both Dunged and Pissed in his Bed, and more then that he bit off a piece of
the tip of his Tongue with his Teeth; of the Pain whereof, when he came to
himself, he very much complained; these three mortal Signs, the Delirium, the
Fever, the Convulsions continued till the twentieth of March; at what time the
Convulsions remitted, but the Fever, and raving contiued, that day the
Chyrurgeon with a flat, obtuse and oblong Instrument, which I ordered to be
provided on purpose, compressed the Meninx a little, and between the Meninx and
the Cranium, thrust in his Instrument about the breadth of two Fingers,
separating the Meninx from the Cranium, by depressing it every way round about,
to the end that if any coagulated Blood lay there concealed, it might the more
conveniently be evacuated; but when he put down his Instrument upon the Meninx
toward the Back-part, by chance he litt upon the place where the cause of all
the mischief recided, out of which there came out about half an ounce of black
Blood, purulent, and watery. The twenty first, twenty second and twenty third of
March, the same Instrument being every day thrust in, a good quantity of Blood
and watery, putrified Matter was brought away, in the mean time the Delirium
abated very much, and the Patient took several naps. The twenty fourth the
Meninx being pressed downward nothing came out, then the Delirium was very
slight, and the Patient rising out of his Bed sat two hours by the Fire, then
also the flesh began to grow up from the lower Bone about the Meninx in the
hole of the Cranium; he could hardly eat because of the Pain in his Tongue, of
which he had bit of the tip with his Teeth; for which reason we gave him a
proper Water to wash his Mouth, which healed his Tongue again by degrees; all
this while we made use of the fomentation prescribed the twelfth of March; but
then leaving that off, we clapped a Cap about his Head with Cephalic Herbs sowed
into it. Upon the twenty fifth, the Fever went off and the Patient grew much
better, hitherto we had laid nothing but Mel Rosaceum, or Honey of Roses mixed
with a little Spirit of Wine, upon the hole of the Cranium, or the Meninx; but
then we mixed the following Powder with the Honey.

. Aloes Hepat, Sang. Draconis, Myrrh, Mastick, Olihanum, an. j. s. Barley
Flower, ij. s. reduce the whole into a very fine Powder.

The twenty sixth of March, he quite recovered his Senses, then again the
Meninx being pressed down with the foresaid Instrument, there flowed out a
small quantity of white and well concocted Matter both Morning and Evening;
after this day he rose and sat up for three or four hours, and fed well; the
following days nothing of Matter came forth of his Skull; but contrary to our
desire, in four days time the hole was filled up with Flesh, without side also
the Flesh grew every way, but too suddenly; so that we were forced many times
to take it off with a slight Caustic; in regard we were to stay till the Bone
Scaled, at last in the sixth Week a great large and thick Scale was separated
from the Bone: and then the Wound being filled up with Flesh, the Patient was
cured in a short time; only this Inconvenience remained, that upon any sudden
change of Air his Head would ache, and Wine presently fuddl'd him.

In this Condition of Health he lived above four Years as he used to do. But in
September, 1641. as he was sporting in the Camp, well in Health with some other
Troopers, he fell down Senseless, and presently his whole Body being contracted
with a most terrible Convulsion, he Expired within a quarter of an hour; had I
been there at that time, I would have opened his Skull to have seen whether the
cause of his Death had proceeded from any thing of his old Wound.

ANNOTATIONS.
AS to Wounds in the Head with a Fracture of the Cranium, the Question is, when
the Separation is to be made, says Albucasis, If the Patient come to the three
first days after the Wound, then the Bone must be taken away before the
fourteenth day: if it be in the Summer, then make have to remove the Bone
before the seventh, before what lies under the Bone of the Pannicle be
corrupted, and terrible accidents ensue. Says Avicen, Separation must not be
delayed in Summer beyond seven days, in Winter not beyond ten, but the sooner
the better. Hippocrates allows but three days before Separation of the Bone,
which is to be cut, and admits no longer delay if the weather be hot. To which
Hippocrates ought to have added, if the Chyrurgeon be sent for soon enough: for
if he be sent for late; or that the Patient and his friends will not consent,
then the Skull is to be perforated at any time, so there be any hopes of Life.
For in a certain danger a doubtful Remedy is better then none. For it matters
not, says Celsus, Whether the Remedy be altogether safe, when there is no
other. Horstius opened the Cranium of a certain Person upon the Eleventh day,
and of another upon the Fifteenth. Hildan tells a remarkable Story of a Cranium
perforated with success, two Months after the Wound received; upon which the
Matter gushed out with a full stream, the Patient was cured. Thus in our
Patients Case at first came forth mattry and watery Blood, and upon the
Seventeenth day mere white Matter. Hildan also produces another Example of a
Skull perforated upon the eleventh day. And Aegineta writes, that he knew one
whose Cranium was perforated a Year after the Wound received, by which means,
the Patient recovered. However he advises Separation of the Bone in the Winter
before the fourteenth day, and in the Summer before the Seventh. In short these
Operations prove best at the beginning, and as Avicen says the sooner the
better. But if the beginning be over-sliped, it would be inhuman to give men
over so long as there is hopes. Otherwise as Celsus says, It is part of a
prudent Man not to meddle, where there is no hopes at all. Had those deadly
Symptoms there appeared in our Patient before the Operation, which appeared
afterward, we had never adventured it; nevertheless he was cured contrary to
our Expectation.

Some Physicians advise ye to take great care, least in the laying bare of the
Cranium, which proceeds perforation, you make any Incision in the Sutures, for
fear the Fibers of the hard Meninx, passing by the Sutures, and united with the
Pericranium, should be hurt: as if there were any such great danger in that.
For I have been present at such Operations many times, and have ordered
Incisions to be made upon the Sutures, if I found it a proper place, and that
the little Fibers should be scraped off with a Penknife; and yet no harm
ensued; and I have found by Experience, that such cautions as these are only
fit for contemplating Physicians, who never were present at such Operations.
Only take care of hurting the Temporal Muscle, and that the Trepan be not set
upon the Sutures, and the Perforation made there.

OBSERVATION. LVI. An Opthalmy.
THE Wife of Captain Iunius was troubled with an extraordinary Inflammation of
her Eyes with great Pain, two days after two of her Maids and a Man Servant
were seized with the same distemper, and said they contracted it by looking
upon their Mistress; after due Purgation I laid upon the Eyes, all Night, the
Yolk of a hard-boyl'd Egg, kneaded together with Woman's Milk, to assuage the
Pain, afterward I ordered one or two drops of this Opthalmic Water to be dropped
into the Eyes twice or thrice, which being duly observed, the Ophthalmy
vanished within three days.

. White Vitriol, j. Sugar Candy, j. Plantain Water, ij. Rose Water, j. mix them
together.

ANNOTATIONS.
GAlen numbers Blear-Eyedness among the Contagious Diseases, and says it may be
contracted by Contagion, like the Pestilence or Itch. But he gives no reason
for what he says. Thus Plutarch, of all Diseases, the Contagion of
Blear-Eyedness says he, creeps amongst them that live together from one to
another, so sharp a faculty it has of affecting the Sight. Thus says Ovid,

Dum spectant Laesos Oculi, laeduntur and ipsi;
Multaque Corporibus transitione nocent.
As to the Nature of this Contagion, Physicians are very silent; but who treat
of it, seem to be of this Opinion, that Corrupt Vapors and Spirits issue forth
from the vitiated Eye, which being carried to the Eyes of those that are sound,
infect the same. However Benedictus Faventinus writes, that there is something
of Putrid, which Exhales from the Blear-Eyes, which infects the ambient Air
with the same Quality, which Air being received by the Eyes of others, affects
them by Contagion. Of the same Opinion is Mercurialis, that an Ophthalmy is
therefore Contagious, because the Spirits of the Eye affected are contaminated,
which when they come to touch those Eyes that are sound, infect them likewise.
But none of these seem to have hit the Mark. First, Who can believe that such a
quantity of Malignant Spirits should Exhale from the Eye, which is covered with
a hard horny Membrane, as to infect the Eyes of those that look at a distance.
Such a Transpiration would dry up the Eye in a few hours. Secondly, Grant such
an Exhaling should infect the ambient Air, and so infect the Eyes of others,
why are not the Eyes of all Visitants and Relations infected, but only of such
as fix their Eyes upon the Party. Thirdly, Why are not they infected also, that
more curiously and long behold and view Blear'd-Eyes in reference to their
Cure, as well as they that view Short Eyes but for a time, and only by
accident? For these reasons I do not believe Blear-Eyedness can be communicated
by Contagion, but that it may be contracted sometimes through the Conturbation
of the Humors and Spirits of the sound Eye. Which Conturbation is not
occasioned by corrupt Humors or Spirits, carried from the Blear-Eye to the
sound Eye: but because the sound Eye beholds the Blear-Eyes with a kind of
terror and abomination; which terror vehemently disturbs the Spirits and Humors
of certain weak Eyes, so that being rapidly moved and stirred up by that
Conturbation they flow to the Eye, and their growing over hot inflame the Eyes.
Which Rabbi Moses seems to intimate; where he says, he that first sees a
Blear-Eyed Person, presently has his Eye disturbed, so that if he still look
more intently, the Eye is not only disturbed, but contracts an Opthalmy. Now I
have said that weaker Eyes are disturbed; according to that of Sennertus, You
may know those Eyes to be weak, that are bleared themselves by looking upon
another. But stronger Eyes, and such as are not terrified at the Sight, as they
are not disturbed, so they contract no Ophthalmy. So that it is the strength or
weakness of the Eye, the more or less aversion, which is the Cause that some
Eyes are endamaged by looking, others not.

Nor is this a new, or to be admired at Opinion, when we find that
Contu^bations and Frights upon the sight of frightful Objects are many times
the occasions of very terrible Diseases, as we find by Experience in Women
great with Child, whose tender Issue frequently bear the Marks of the Mothers
Frights, and aversions of Sight. Others upon the sight of any frightful Object
having the Spirits of their Brain vehemently disturbed, have become Paralitic
or raving Mad; or upon a Perturbation of the Spirits of the Heart, have fallen
into Palpitations, Syncopes, Fevers, or violent Distempers: What wonder then
that the Spirits of a sound Eye should be in a Perturbation upon the frightful
Sight of a Blear-Eye, and by that vehement Motion be heated to that degree, as
to cause an Ophthalmy? If any one object that Ophthalmies have been Epidemical,
we say, that Propagation does not proceed from any Contagion, issuing out of
the affected Eye, but from that common Depravity of the Air or Diet. Nor does
it signify any thing, what Aristotle affirms, That Menstrous Women will infect
a Looking-glass by looking upon it; because it is not credible that such an
Infection happens through any Contagion issuing from the Eyes, but from certain
corrupt Vapors which they send forth upon the Glass together with their Breath.
Nor is it of any moment what Philosophers say, that a Basilisk will kill a Man
by looking upon him; for which there may be other reasons given; the first, For
that many venomous Vapors exhale not only from the Eyes, but from the whole
body of the Serpent, which infect the ambient Air. Secondly, Because he that
sees that horrid Creature may be terrified and disturbed in his Spirits to that
degree, that the venomous Spirits may be easily drawn by that terror from the
Body close by, and carried to the Heart, to its extreme prejudice: So that it
is not the Sight, but the Terror and Conturbation, caused by that horrid Sight,
and joined to the venomous habit which causes Death; I say, joined to the
venenmous habit; For no Man shall persuade me that a Basilisk seen at a
distance can ever kill a Man with his Eye, though the same Man should look upon
him all day long. To say that a Basilisk will dye, if he sees himself in a
Looking-glass, is a mere Dream, unless we may allow the Creature it self to be
so terrified, and disturbed at the sight of it is own horrid shape, that he dies
upon his Spirits being too much disturbed, and over tumultuously crowding about
the Heart. Or else that he is so extravagantly overjoyed at the sight of his
own Image, that the very dissipation of his Spirits kills him.

OBSERVATION LVII. Spitting of Blood.
JOhn Hugo Trumpeter to Monsieur de Persil, having over-strain'd, and
consequently overheated himself with sounding his Trumpet, soon after felt a
kind of a dull Pain in his Breast, and with a little Cough began to Spit out
frothy Blood but not much, and became so weak that he could hardly draw his
Breath, neither could he stand or speak, but was forced to lie in his Bed upon
his Breast; he was so averse to Physic, that he resolved to take the Advice of
no Physician: But after he had lain about six or seven Weeks in that condition,
and found himself nothing better at length upon the tenth of March, he sent for
me, I found him Sick without a Fever, but very weak, which weakness proceeded
from some want of Breath; for he could not dilate nor contract his Breast at
his Pleasure; the reason of which Malady was, for that by his straining in
blowing his Trumpet, he had over-stretched the Muscles of his Breast, and
thereby so weakened them, that they could never afterward be contracted, but
the spitting of Blood, which was very much, proceeded from some little Vein
that was broken in his Lungs. First therefore I prescribed him a proper Diet;
next I Purged him gently, thirdly, I took out of the Median Vein of his right
Arm, half a pint of Blood; and lastly I applied the following Cere-cloth to lay
over all his Breast.

Castor, Saffron Oriental an. ij. Mastic, Olibanum, Storax an. j. Benzoin j. s.
Gum Taccamahacca, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, Emplaister of Melilot,
Oxocrotium an. j. Make a Cere-Cloth to be spread upon red Leather big enough to
cover the whole Breast from the Sword-form gristle, to the Asperia Arteria, as
also to come about the sides under the Arms on both sides, let it be anointed
with Oil of Nuttmegs.

Moreover I ordered a Girdle to be made of the Skin of an Elke, about a Hands
breadth, with a broad Button; the Cere-Cloth was first laid on, and then the
Girdle girt about his Breast just under the Armpits, as hard as he could well
endure it, and so Buttoned. This done he presently felt a great deal of ease,
and fetched his Breath much more freely, and strongly. The fourteenth of March,
his spitting of Blood, together with his Cough, quite left him; this Cere-Cloth
lay on a Month, by which time the Muscles of his Breast were so closed, that
the Patient had no need of any other Medicines, and sounded his Trumpet again,
without his Girdle, however I advised him to wear his Girdle; especially when
he told me, that he blew his Trumpet with more ease when he had it on.

ANNOTATIONS.
THIS Patient would swallow nothing but only a Laxative Medicament, which made
me fear he would fall into a Consumption; for besides his spitting of Blood,
his strength was so wasted, that he could not sit upright in his Bed, but was
forced to lie upon his Back. But when I found that weakness proceeded merely,
from a defect of Motion in the Instruments of Respiration, I recovered him
contrary to the expectation of all Men, by the said Cere-cloth and Girdle. Nor
was the least part of the Cure to be ascribed to the Girdle; for so soon as I
had bound his Breast tite, he could sit up in his Bed, and fetch his Breath
much more freely.

Many of these Trumpeters striving to outvie one another, strain themselves in
their Sounding to that degree, that oftentimes they become Bursten, or spit
Blood, and many times crack the Thread of their own Lives. As we saw in
November 1641. at what time one of Captain Bax's Trumpeters, striving to outdo
the rest in Sounding, broke a great Vein in his Lungs, which bled in such
abundance that within two hours he Expired.

OBSERVATION LVIII. An Hysterical Suffocation.
RIcherda, a Maid, belonging to the Lady of Nassau, was troubled with a
vehement Hysterical Suffocation accompanied with a grumbling in her Belly, and
sometimes with Vomiting and raving talk, she said she contracted this Distemper
by sitting in a cold House of Office exposed to the Wind, which she received up
into her Body. The ninth of January, because she was bound, I gave her a gentle
Purgative, which gave her five Stools; upon which day she was clear of her Fit;
But the next Night her Fit was more violent, and the next day very grievous;
the Fit went off very well with the Smoke of Partridge Feathers held to her
Nose; besides that, we gave her a Ball of Assa Faetida, made up with Castor and
Galbanum to hold in her hand, and smell to ever and anon; toward Evening two
hours before her Grand Fit, she fell into such Deliriums, that she talked idly,
and had several Inclinations to Vomit, but nothing came up, but what she had
eaten or drank before; the Fit went off again with the Smoke of Partridge
Feathers, and the following Emplaster was applied to her Navel,

. Castor j. Benzoin j. Oppoponax* Sagapen dissolved in Vinegar an. ^j. mix them
and spread them upon a piece of Leather of a hands breadth.

I gave her also an Hysterical draught; but that she brought up again within an
hour. The eleventh of January, she took the following Apozem ever now and then.

. Roots of Masterwort, Valerian, Dittany an. iij. Leaves of Mug-wort,
Peny-royal, Feverfew, an. M. j. Seeds of Lovage, Wild Carrots ij. Common* water
q. s. Boil them to a pint and a half.

All that day she took of this, and never vomited; but without any benefit; her
deliriums and ravings returned by Intervalls, toward Evening I gave her this
Powder in a little Ale,

. Castor s. Oriental Saffron, gr. v. Trochischs of Myrrh, s. make them into
Powder.

All this did no good; therefore the twelfth of January, when the Symptoms
began again to appear I gave her only j. of Yellow Amber prepared and
pulverized with a little Ale; which Powder when she had taken, within an hour
all the Symptoms miraculously vanished; but in the Evening when she began to
perceive some fore-bodings of her Distemper, the same Powder was given her
again, and so she slept quietly all the next Night, the thirteenth and
fourteeeth when she perceived any grumbling in the lower part of her Belly, she
took the same Powder again Morning and Evening, which quite recovered her.

ANNOTATIONS.
AMber is said to be a prevalent Remedy in Hysterical Distempers by a peculiar
Faculty; the effect of which when I found by this Experiment, I made use of it
again with great success in the like Cases. The Smoke of Patridge Feathers is
very effectual also in the time of the Fit, of which I also made use upon the
like occasions with the same good fortune. With these Feathers Forestus freed a
Hysteric Woman from her Fits, when all other Remedies failed, as he writes
himself, and therefore he always kept them by him, as being endued with an
occult quality for that purpose. Gradus, Bottonus, Riverius and Others commend
the same, beside that it is a Remedy well known among the Women. Most
Physicians extol the Smoke of Hair, Horns, Old Shoes and Rags burnt, and held
to the Nose. Galen and Priscian commend the smell of Rue; and the same Effects
are produced by Galbanum, Castor, Assa Faetida, and such like stinking Smells
held to the Nostrils. Leonellus compounds a Ball of Castor iij. Assa Faetida,
Galbanum an. ij. Wax. q. s. to incorporate them. Among all the Remedies, says
Bottonus, that, that soonest recals Women out of their Fits is a Fumigation of
the Powder of Wens, that grew upon Horses Legs, dried in a hot Oven, burnt upon
the Coals and held to the Nostrils. This Powder is commended also by Augenius
and other Physicians. But though these stinking and loathsome Fumigations,
tried by common Experience, and by Galen, Avicen, and other Famous Physicians,
are made use of, and extolled as the best and most present Remedies in these
Uterine Suffocations, yet there are some who utterly reject and disapprove
them. Thus Cleopatra, and Moschio disparage them as vain and frivolous.
Capivaccius writes, that they do very ill, who at first make use of Frictions
and Fumigations; for he would have the whole Body first Evacuated, and in the
first place the Uterine Parts. Duretus writes, that ill Smells nothing avail in
Suffocations, that proceed from Menstruous Suppressions, or Suppression of the
Seed, but do more harm then good; which Mercatus also affirms: But that they
are only proper, when the Womb moves of it self to the Liver, and sticks to it.
However with their good leave, this Opinion seems very repugnant to the
Doctrine of Hippocrates, whom in all Uterine Suffocations prescribes stinking
things; but for the lower Parts recommends sweet Fumes, as also the Fumes of
Castor and Fleabane. As for the Suffocation when the Womb ascends voluntarily
to the Liver, it is hardly credible there should be any such thing in Nature;
For the Womb never moves of it self, but when it is forced by some manifest
Cause, as Menstruous suppression, refrigeration, corruption of the Seed or the
like.

OBSERVATION LIX. Loss of Appetite.
Mr. Hare, an English Gentleman about Thirty Years of Age, having for several
days together, contrary to his custom, fed excessively hard, and by that means
disturbed the Functions of his Stomach, and collected many crudities therein,
lost his Stomach to that degree, that for a fortnight together, he could scarce
eat any thing at all, at length by my advice he took this Vomit;

. Green-leaves of Asara-Bacca, iij bruise them, and press out the juice with
ij. s. of the Decoction of Radish, add to the expression Oxymel with Agaric j.
mix them for a Draught.

This caused him to Vomit stoutly, afterward I ordered him to eat three or
four Mouthfuls of candied Elecampane Root, three or four times a day, to
observe a warm Diet, to abstain from Immoderate eating, to drink generous Wine,
but in a less quantity, and after Dinner and Supper, because his Stomach was
very moist, to eat a bit or two of a raw Salt Herring, and by this means he
recovered his Stomach again within a few days.

ANNOTATIONS.
LOss of Appetite sometimes proceeds from a hot Cause, as a hot Distemper of
the Stomach, a Fever, abundance of Choler, and then it is cured with Choler
purging and Refrigerating Medicines. Sometimes it proceeds from a cold
disposition of the Stomach; which happens either through weakness of the innate
Heat, as in old Men, or through bad Diet; and thence Crudities collected in the
Stomach; or else by reason of cold humors flowing from the Head, or other Parts
to the Stomach. Now in every cold Disposition of the Stomach, by reason of the
weakness of the Concoctive faculty, mary crude, flegmatic, moist and cold
humors are collected in the Stomach, which weaken the heat of the Stomach, and
dissolve the strength of it, and blunt the Sense of Attraction and Suction. In
the Cure of this Distemper, t^ ^lear the Stomach from the filth of Crudities,
Vomits are mainly necessary. But if other Purgatives are to be made use of,
Hiera Pills are chiefly commanded by Galen. Then a Diet is to be observed upon
things of good juice and easy of Digestion, hot and dry, not fat or oily,
which take away the Sense of Suction* The use also of most hot things, Ga^gale,
Calamus Aromaticus, Rosemary, Marjoram, Hysop, Sage, Lawrel-berries, hot Seeds,
all Spices and the like, all generous Wines, and mo^e ^pecally Wormwod Wine,
Spirit o^ Wine is commended by all, either simple, or distilled off with
Juniper Berries, Seeds of Anise, Caraways, Fennel, Cinnamon, or Cloves: all
Hippocras and Cinnamon Water sublimated out of Wine. Matthiolus extols his own
Aqua Vitae, which is used by many Physicians, Levinus Lemni above all extols
Ginger, either dry or condited, to help Concoction, restore the Appetite,
dispel Wind, and consume Crudities. Others are for swallowing some few
Pepper-corns, either whole or cut into three or four pieces. I have observed in
my Practice, that the Roots of Elecampane alone, so condited, that they still
retain their bitterness, are more effectual than all the rest; by the (...) of
which I have made those who have lost their Stomachs, in a short time, in a few
days very hungry. I also used to give them pulverized with strong Wine, and
have found them answer Expectation. For they warm the Stomach, yet not too
much, consume Crudities, promote Concoction, corroborate, open, dry and dispel.
Salt meats also very much excite the Appetite; So that I have observed that the
eating of a third or fourth Part of a Pickled Herring after Dinner or Supper
has recovered a lost Stomach, if the Person be not very old; for it extremely
drys and corroborates the Stomach: For though a Herring be hard of Digestion
when it is boiled or broyl'd, yet taken out of the Pickle and eaten raw, it is
easy of digestion.

OBSERVATION LX. A Superfoetation
THE Wife of Dionysius N. a Soldier living at Nimeghen in October 1637. was
brought to Bed of a Boy lusty and at the full time, which she Nursed her self,
after she was Delivered, her Terms came down in due order, and she was
indifferent well all the time of her lying in, like other Women, after her
Month was out, she went about her business as before; but the seventh Month
after her delivering being at Church, she felt such a sudden alteration that
she was forced to return home; where a Midwife being sent for, her Waters came
down accompanied with the throws of Delivery, and while the Women were all
admiring what the matter should be, she was brought to Bed of another lusty
sound Child, which she Nursed with the former, and may be alive still for ought
I know.

ANNOTATIONS.
SAys the Great Hippocrates, the mouth of the Womb of such Women as are with
Child is compressed. And Galen observes, that if the Mouth of the Womb be shut,
it is a sign of Conception: and he says it is then so close shut, that it will
not admit the point of the smallest Bodkin. But granting all this, yet we must
not conclude from hence, that there can be no Superfoetation though it rarely
happen. For says Aristotle, if after Conception there be Copulation, there may
be a Superfoetation; though rarely; for that the Womb though very rarely closes
it self till delivery. Thus Hippocrates, those Women have Superfoetations whose
Wombs are not exactly closed after the first Conception. He also gives us an
Example of Superfoetation in the Wife of Gorgias, who Conceived a Girl, and
when she was near the time of her delivery Conceived again. I knew a Woman says
Albucasis, that was again impregnated, when she had a dead Birth in her Womb.
Says Cardan, Superfoetation is rare, yet seen at Millan in our time. Says
Dodonaeus Superfoetation is very rare, yet there has been an Example of it in
the Wife of a very honest Man. And Plater gives us two Examples of
Superfoetation.

But now granting Superfoetation, the Question is how the Superfoetation can be
brought to perfection, Aristotle says, that if after the first Conception a
Woman Conceive again, the Superfoetation may be nourished; but if the first
Conception be grown, then the second proves Abortive. Which is the Opinion of
Hippocrates Pliny, Dodonaeus, Bauhinus and others, Reason also seems to agree
with Experience, which teaches us that the first Conceived, and first
increased, draws the chiefest part of the Nourishment to its self, by which
means the latter Conception must be deprived of Nourishment, and consequently
dye and be expelled as an Abortion. But if the last Conception draws sufficient
Nourishment, and be sufficiently perfected, and do not prove Abortive, it is
impossible it should be ready so soon for delivery as the former; and yet it
will be delivered in time: as we find by this Example, by me recited, for the
ratities sake. Yet Nicholas tells ye a greater Wonder; I knew, says he, the
Wi^e of Zachary de Scarparia, who brought forth a Male Child, and three Months
after that was delivered of another Boy, and both lived in good Health.
Therefore we must conclude, the last Conception had Nourishment enough in the
Womb, and was strong, and consequently able to retain it self in the Womb,
during the delivery of the other, in regard the Woman's Labor was easy and
without any violence.

OBSERVATION LXI. Worms in the Head.
THE Son of a certain Treasurer of Iuliers, a Young Lad about twelve Years of
Age, from his Childhood had been always troubled with Worms in his Head, at
length his Mother by the advice of a Quack, washed and daubed his Head with I
know not what Lotions and Ointments, and so the Worm was killed; by which the
Mountebank thought to have got himself a great name in the Town; but within a
few days after the Boy began to complain of a Pain in his Head, which every day
increasing at the Months end was so intolerable, that I was sent for, but all
to no purpose; after trial of all external and internal Medicaments; at nine
Weeks end, Epileptic Convulsions seized him, which in a few days turned to a
vehement Epilepsie, which afflicted him at first every day, then every hour,
then every quarter of an hour, at length the Child died; his Head being opened,
the Hard Meninx was all over of a red Color, and very Black in that part next
the upper part of the Head, somewhat toward the the left side, this being
dissected, there came forth a Blackish and watery Goar, which had lain between
both the Meninxes; the substance of the Brain was very little altered: but in
the Ventricles of it there was a kind of greenish Humor, watery, yet not very
clammy, but the quantity very small, in other things there was no alteration.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN this manner it was that these Worms were cured by this Mountebank; However
he was wise in this, that upon Notice of the Boys Death, he sneaked out of
Nimeghen; perhaps afraid I should upbraid him with the Death of this Patient;
like an Ignoramus as he was, who had stopped up the way, by which Nature voided
the noxious Excrements of the Brain before he had made any diversion.

OBSERVATION LXII. A Tertian and Intermitting Fever.
THE Wife of Monsieur de Spieck, a strong Child-bearing-Woman, the second Week
after she was brought to Bed, found her self very well; but trusting too much
to her strength, got out of her Bed, walked about the Chamber, and eat a bit of
a dried Neats-Tongue; but at the end of the third Week, she was seized with a
violent double Tertian Intermitting Fever, with an extraordinary Heat,
continual Waking, her Stomach quite lost, unquenchable Thirst, with several
other bad Symptoms. The twenty second of August, I was sent for, when I found
her very anxious and weak and in the midst of her second Fit; which most People
thought would have carried her off. I gave her presently Bezoar Stone. s.
Confection Hyacinth j. with six Drams of our Treacle-water, which as she said
soon after gave her some ease; to quench her Thirst I gave her this Julep,
which pleased her so well that she drank nothing else all the time of her
Distemper.

. Waters of Carduus Benedict. Succoury, Borage, an. lb. s. Syrup of Limons j.
s. Violets j. Oil of Sulphur q. s. to make it grateful to the Pallat.

Toward the Evening I prescribed this Infusion which she took the next Morning.

. Leaves of Senna well cleans'd s. Rubarb the best j. s. Rhenish Tartar,
Anniseed an. j. Succoury water q. s. Steep them all Night; the next day boil
them gently, then press them strongly, adding Syrup of Roses Solutive s. For a
Draught.

This gave her four Stools which brought away much stinking Excrement, and gave
her great ease; after the Purge I prescribed her Chicken Broth with Sorrel and
Chervil boiled together in it, with a little juice of Citron, to relish it, and
to quench her Thirst still gave her the Julep before mentioned. The next Night
she slept indifferently, and when she waked found her heat much abated, the
next expected Fit was so slight, that she was hardly sensible of it; nor did
the Fever after that appear any more, being vanquished by these Medicines only.

ANNOTATIONS.
Childbearing Women not careful of themselves when they lie in, oft-times pay
for their Rashness, as this Gentlewoman did: As also did a Neighbor of Ours,
who going abroad too soon fell into a continued Fever, upon which first a
Frenzy and then Death ensued. Another of our Acquaintance the second week of
her Month, looking to soon after her House Affairs, and presuming to Comb her
Head, fell into an Epilepsie, upon which a Delirium ensued; which Maladies
though at length they were much abated, yet could they never be cured all the
while the Gentlewoman lived.

OBSERVATION LXIII. A Bleeding at the Nose.
THeodore Bijl about fifty five Years of Age, in August about four a Clock in
the Morning, was taken with a Bleeding at his right Nostril: Three hours after,
being sent for, for revulsion I ordered the Chyrurgeon to open a Vein in his
right Arm with a large Orifice, and to take away ten Ounces of Blood; which
done, by applying cold Water to his Neck and Forhead, the Bleeding was stayed;
three days after, being invited to a Feast where he drank Wine a little too
freely, upon his return home, he was again taken with the same Malady, and bled
all that Night before I was sent for; the next day I ordered him to be let
Blood as before, but to no purpose; nor durst we repeat Blood-letting in regard
of his Age and his strength, nor would he permit any Tents to be put up into
his Nostrils; and therefore we applied a little lock of Tow moistened with this
mixture to his Forhead;

. Bole Armoniack ij. s. Bloodstone, Mastick, Frnkincense, Red Coral an. ij. The
white of one Egg. Vinegar of Roses q. s. mix them together.

Moreover Oxocrate, which is actually cold, was applied to his Neck, Forehead
and Testicles, and Revulsions by Ligatures and Painful Frictions of the extreme
Parts, and by Cupping Glasses applied to his Shoulders, which availed nothing;
at length, after the bleeding had continued above thirty six hours, and the
strength of the Patient, through loss of Blood was very much exhausted, then he
was forced to admit of Astringents to be thrust up into his Nostrils; therefore
when we had cleansed his Nostrils from the clotted Blood, we ordered a Powder
of Trochischs of Myrrh, of Bole-Armoniac, Mastick and Frankincense to be blown
through a Quill into his Nostrils, and withal thrust up a thick Tent made of
Linen about a Fingers length dipped in Vinegar, and the white of an Egg, and
sprinkled with the same Powder, by which means the bleeding seemed to stop for
two or three hours; but afterward the Blood began to descend through his
Palate into his Mouth, and the Tent falling out, he bled again at the Nostril.
Then after we had once more cleansed his Nostril; we blew up the same Powder
again, and thrust up a piece of Chalk in the form of a Tent, so big as to fill
the whole Concavity of the Nostril; which stopped the bleeding presently;
however, to be sure, we let the Chalk stay in three days; and so for this time
the Patient escaped a most threatening danger; the next Year, in Autunm, the
same bleeding took him again, for the stopping of which, after he had used a
whole Day and a Night certain idle old Women's Remedies in vain; when his
strength was almost Exhausted, he sent again for me; and then with the same
means of a Chalk Tent I presently stopped the Bleeding as I had done before;
but not long after, his Liver being refrigerated and weakened through the loss
of so much Blood, being seized at the same time with a Dropsy and an Asthma, he
ended his days.

ANNOTATIONS.
AN excessive Bleeding at the Nose, when Symptomatical, and not Critical, in
regard it occasions the Dropsy, a Cachexy, and other grievous Maladies, is to
be stopped with all the speed imaginable. This is cured by revulsion of the
Blood flowing to the Nostrils; by repelling the Blood from the Nostrils; by
thickning the Blood; and by shutting the opened Veins.

The best and suddainest way to draw back the Blood, is, by opening a Vein in
the Arm, on that side which is affected; by which means Galen affirms, that he
has suddenly stopped violent Bleedings at the Nostrils. Most Physicians
believe a little Orifice is best, and to take away the Blood in a small
quantity and at several times. But we are for a large Orifice, that the Blood
may freely spin forth, which causes a swifter revulsion, Cupping-glasses also
are are prevalent Revulsives. Thus Galen stopped a bleeding in a Young Man by
applying a Cuping-glass to his Hypochondriums. Forestus cured a desperate
Bleeding at the Nose by Cupping-glasses applied to the foot; which Experiment
we have frequently tried with success. Cuppingglasses applied to the shoulders
are not so well liked by many; because they draw the Blood from the lower Parts
to the upper. Crato commends the painful bending of the little-finger on the
side affected: of the same Nature are Frictions and painful Ligatures of the
Extreme Parts, and an Actual Cautery applied to the Soles of the Feet; by which
means Zacutus writes, that he cured a most desperate bleeding at the Nose.

The Blood is repelled from the Nostrils with Vinegar, cold Water, or Oxymel
applied to the Temples and Neck, or with Cataplasms of Bole, sealed Earth,
Mastic, Frankincense, Vinegar, Whites of Eggs and the like; to which may be
added Plantain, Pimpernel, and other astringent and cooling Herbs, gathered
fresh and bruised; Snails with their Shells mixed with Frankincense and
Vinegar, and applied to the Forehead and Nostrils, are much commended. Riverius
commends Parget kneaded with Vinegar, and laid upon the Forehead and Nostrils
about the thickness of two Fingers. Others prefer Vinegar alone or Oxymel snuft
up into the Nostrils, or cold Water dashed unawares in the Face. Actius
commends the Steam of Vinegar, poured upon a red hot Tile. Says Pachequus,
being sent for to a Countryman, who bled so excessively that he was just at
Deaths door, I dropped into the contrary Ear to the Nostril that bleed, some
drops of Vinegar of Roses, and presently the Bleeding stopped. This I learnt
from Dr. Pontuado, who saw this Remedy made use of by a Dutch Physician.

Thickning of the Blood is performed by cooling, astringent and thickning
Medicaments taken inwardly, and outwardly applied, such are Oxymel and cold
Water, and the repelling Medicines already mentioned. Thus Hildan, by wrapping
the whole Body of the Party in Linen Clothes, dipped in Oxymel, stopped a
Bleeding of which the Cure was dispaired of.

The Veins are shut by astringent and glutinying Medicaments thrust up into the
Nostrils. Galen mixes Frankincense and Aloes reduced into Powder with the White
of an Egg, and with a Linen Cloth first strewed with Hare's Hair, put up into
the Nostrils. The Moss that grows upon dead Men's Skulls exposed to the Air,
powdered, and put up any way into the Nostrils, is accounted a most effectual
and present Remedy. For my part I have always found the Benefit of a round
piece of Chalk. Cotton dipped in Ink, and thrust up into the Nostrils is a very
good Remedy. Hogs-dung if applied while warm, or warmed with Bole-armoniac and
Vinegar is accounted a Specific, if applied to the Forehead and Temples, smelt
to, or thrust up, into the Nostrils; by which means I knew a Noble German,
cured of a desperate Bleeding at the Nose. Rodoric a Castro, and Zacutus
commend Asses-dung, used in the same manner, the Powder of Man's Blood dried,
and Snails burnt with the Shells, and Frogs burnt, and blown up into the
Nostrils, is by some no less esteemed. Pereda tells us of his curing an old
Woman that had bled for three days, with only thrusting up Mint into her
Nostrils. The Juice of Nettles either taken inwardly, or applied to the
Nostrils, or else Nettles bruifed and laid to the Forehead by a Specific
Quality, stop Bleeding. Lastly, Riverius applauds for a present Remedy,
Spikenard finely powdered, and one dram given in Broth, Plantain, or other
proper Liquor, which not only by a Specific quality, but by strengthening the
Liver stops Blood.

OBSERVATION LXIV. The French Pox.
A Certain Captain about sixty Years of Age, complained of a very dry Cough,
which had troubled him for two or three Months together, with some difficulty
of Breathing, and a very great Pain in his Chest; he had eaten very little in
two Months, his Stomach was so bad, which had reduced him to a very low and
weak condition, though he did not keep his Bed; his Head and Shoulders aked
extremely, but chiefly in the Night, he had a Pain in his Loins, he made water
very often, but very little; and when he had need he must do it presently; for
he could not hold his water, sometimes his Urin was very sharp, and pained him
in passing through; besides that, it died his Shirt of a Safforn or reddish
Color, more then this he had found himself impotent for a whole Year together.
By these Signs I judged him to be troubled with the French Disease; more
especially because he confessed he had been a long time troubled with a
Gonorrhea, which an unskilful Chyrurgeon had stopped without any preceding
Purgation, which occasioned these Symptoms, that every day increased. He had
also been peppered with the Distemper, about ten Years before; and was known to
be a common frequenter of lewd Company. As for the inward Pain of his Chest and
dry Cough, I knew they proceeded from his immoderate taking Tobacco, sometimes
fifty, and when he took least, thirty Pipes a day. First therefore I prescribed
him a proper Diet: and among other things enjoined him to leave off his
excessive taking Tobacco, allowing him three or four Pipes a day, for fear the
total forsaking of an inveterate Custom might do him an injury, then for his
Cough and the Pain in his Breast I prescribed him the following Emplaster to be
laid over all his Chest, which in a short time first abated, and then perfectly
cured his Cough, and difficulty of Breathing, to a wonder;

. Castor, the best Saffron, Nutmegs, Cloves, Storax, Calam. Bezoin an. j. s.
Reduce them to a fine Powder; and mix therewith G^m Ammoniac, Galbanum
dissolved in Wine, Emplaster of Meltlot, Oxycroceum, an. v. Make a Plaster to
be spread upon a thin piece of Leather.

Before I laid on this Plaster, I purged his Body. The next day, being the
twenty second of November, I prescribed him this Decoction, to take every
Morning a good draught, and Sweat a little, and in the Evening to take another
draught, but because he was so weak, no Sweating was expected.

. Lig. Guaiacum. xii. Bark of the same, Salsaperil. an. iij. Sassafrass-wood,
Licorice sticed an. j. s. Common-water lb. xii. Macerate them near the fire
twenty four hours. Then boil them in a Vessel close shut to lb. v. Roots of
Elecampane j. Carduus Benediot. M. ij. Rosemary, Scordium, Baum, Germander,
Groud-Ivy, Marjoram, Centaury the less an. M. j. Stoned Raisons of the Sun. vj.
Make a Decoction.

The twenty eight of November he was purged again, and he took the same
Decoction again, adding j. s. of China-root; but he Sweat with a great
difficulty, and very little, because of the extremity of the cold Weather. By
the fifth of December, the Pains in his Shoulders and Head were much abated, so
that he slept quietly at Nights, and felt himself much better, however the
sharpness of his Urine still continued, and a slight Gonorrhea; where we went
on as we begun; for his Cough and weakness of his Stomach, I prescribed him
this Tablet.

. Dry root of Elecampane j. English Saffron. s. Calamus Aromaticus,
Florence-Orrice, Benzoyn an. j. Flower of Sulphur ij. sliced Licorice j. s.
Reduce them in a very fine Powder; and with fine white Sugar dissolved in
Fennel-water make them into Tablets.

The tenth of December, he purged with our Antipestilential Pills: for his Body
was soon moved. The seventeenth of December, he took Decoction again, which
made him Sweat plentifully, because perhaps the long use of the Decoction had
made Nature more prone to Sweat; and now all the Symptoms began to vanish by
degrees, his Appetite returned, and in regard the Patient felt no more Pain, we
forbore any more Physic; and thus by this easiy course, the Gentleman was
perfectly freed from that detestable Disease. But his Genitals had contracted
such a Debility from a long continued Gonorrhea, that his Venereal abilities
were quite decayed, nor could be restored by any Provocatives whatever. The
Year following 1638. in Feburary returning to his wonted excess of taking
Tobacco, the Pain in his Breast, his dry Cough, and difficulty of breathing
likewise returned, which by his abstaining from Tobacco, and the application of
the foresaid Emplaster were again absolutely removed.

OBSERVATION LXV. A Diarrhaea.
A Dutch Gentleman having drank in the Evening too large a quantity of new
Wine, all that Night was Tormented with violent Pains in his Belly; the next
day he was taken with a looseness, which seemed at first to give him some ease;
but afterward increasing within two days was changed into a Dysentery; then
the Gentleman, afraid of his Life, sent for me; I presently gave him the
following Purge;

. The best Rubarb ij. Leaves of Senna cleans'd iij. Myrobolan Cheb. ij. Seeds
of Anise ij. Decoction of Barley. q. s. Make an Infusion. To the straining add
Syrup of Succory with Rubarb j. Mix them for a Draught.

This brought away much Choleric Matter, and strangely eased the Gripes of his
Belly; the next Evening I gave him the following Sudorific, which caused him to
Sweat much that Night afterward he Sweat quietly, and both the Pain and the
Flux ceased, and his former Health returned.

. Treacle of Andromachus j. Philonium Romanum j. Of our Treacle-water,
Stone-Parsly-water an. j. Mix them for a Potion.

ANNOTATIONS.
MUST or new Wine, as Diascorides and Galen testify is difficulty concocted,
and begets Wind. Hence Crudities, Oppilations of the Bowels, and Griping of the
Guts. Many times the excessive drinking of it causes a Suppression of Urine, as
it befell my self once in France. Sometimes it begets Cholic pains; Sometimes it
causes a Dysentery, as it happened to our Patient. Hence it happens that our
Germans little accustomed to Must, when they go into France and swill it too
immoderately, are troubled with Diarrheas dangerous and many times mortal
Dysenteries, especially such as had eaten great plenty of Grapes before.

OBSERVATION LXVI. An Uterine Suffocation.
JOan Segers a Widow, in the flower of her Age, left with Child by her Husband,
that dyed some Months before, was delivered of a Son in August. This Woman
during her Month having been too busy about her House, in the third week was
taken with an Uterine Suffocation; so that she thought her Matrix ascended up
to her Throat; and this Suffocation was accompanied with Murmuring and Pains of
the Belly and Sides. The Woman had not slept in three whole days and nights,
nor could she either sit or lie still in a place for a quarter of an hour. I
conjectured that these Suffocations proceeded from Wind or Cold received into
her Body through her Womb. In the Evening therefore I gave her the following
Potion, which caused her to sleep a little, and put off the greatest part of
the Symptoms.

. Flowers of Cammomil. M. s. Lovage seed. j. s. Wild Carot seed. s. White Wind
q. s. Let them boil a little.

. Of the straining, ij. Roman Philonium, Mithridate of Damoc, an. s. Oil of
Amber distilled by descent drop, ix. Mix them for a Potion,

The next day, though she was much better, yet because the Symptoms were not
absolutely ceased, and for that she had not gone to Stool in three days, I gave
her a gentle Purge; which done, this Emplaster was laid to her Navel.

. Castor Pulverized, Benzoyn an. j. s. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar,
Tacamahacca, an. ij. s. Mix them, and spread them upon a piece of Leather of a
hands breadth.

In the Evening going to Bed she took ij. of Amber powdered with a little Wine:
She slept quietly, and heard no more of her Symptoms.

ANNOTATIONS.
ERotis in a Suffocation and Dislocation of the Womb, commends the Root of
Lovage boiled and bruised with Hog's Grease, and laid to the Navel; but I
believe the raw root bruised to be better. Mercatus recommends Tacamahacca or
Caranna alone; or an Emplaster of Great Treacle, Angelica and Agnus Castus
seed. Montagnana extols for a great Secret, and a present Remedy, the following
Emplaster laid upon the Navel:

. Mugwort, Feverfew, Lignum Aloes, an.. s. Galbanum, Ammoniac dissolved in
Vinegar an. j. s. Wax, q. s. For a Plaster.

But he more highly applauds the following Emplaster.

. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, j Soft and whitish Bedellium ij. Powder of
Feverfew j. s. Myrrh. j. Mix them for a Plaster.

Forestus affirms that a Plaster of Galbanum alone has done Miracles: but that
he had found by daily Experience the extraordinary benefit of the following
Magisterial Emplaster, which he spreads upon Leather, edged about with
Galbanum, to make it stick the better.

. Gallia Moscata, Alipta Moscata, Storax Calam. Pure Laudanum, Mastic, an..
Lignum Aloes, Xylobalsamum, Galangal, Cyperus Carpobalsamum, an. iij Red Roses
j. s. New Wax lb. s. Turpentine, q. s. Make a Plaster according to Art.

OBSERVATION LXVII. A Burstenness in the Groin, with a Gangrene.
THomas Adeler, an English Trooper, about sixty years of age, had had a
burstenness in his left Groin for many years. In the Year 1637. in September,
the Gut which fell down into the Burstenness, being distended with a great
quantity of Wind, happened to break, so that the Ordure fell down into the void
Space of the Burstenness. This presently caused a Gangrene of the Part, with an
intolerable Stench; by which means, the Part being putrified and broken, the
Ordure of the Belly came forth at that Hole, never at the Fundament. Being sent
for, though I thought him incurable, yet I ordered Spirit of Wine, with Mel
Rosatum, and Ointment Egyptiacum, to be applied to the Part; till the
Gangrenous Parts were separated from the sound Parts. Then we found that the
Gut was not only broken, but quite broken off the one Part from the other, and
that the upper Part hung out, and gave passage to the Excrement. The end of
this Intestine afterward grew fleshy, and acquired a kind of a fleshy Ring,
and this Ring cleaved afterward so fast to the neighboring Flesh; so that for
the future, the Intestine remained always fixed and open in that Part, and gave
passage to the Excrement: So that we ordered him to carry a little brass Pot,
so ordered and hung, as to give him the least trouble that might be; and thus,
in all other Parts sound and healthy, he walked abroad wherever he pleased;
and in nine years, that he was forced to carry about him that troublesome
Burden, he was never sick.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis is a tare and remarkable Example. I never thought before that a broken
Gut could grow to the adjoining Flesh in the Groyn, till I was a Witness of it
in this Patient. True it is, that if a Gut happen to break among the fleshy
Muscles of the Abdomen, such a Coalition may sometimes happen, as Plater
observes: A certain Captain, says he, being wounded in his Belly, voided his
Excrements through a Pipe which was left there after the Wound was cured, and
was for many years afterward alive and well. The Cause of which, when I
examined, I found that Wounds of the Guts, if they seem to trace the fleshy
Portions of the Muscles of the Abdomen, after the Lips of the Wounds of the
Guts and muscly Flesh are glutinated on both sides, there may be a Passage made
for the Excrement to come forth, and be prevented from falling into the Cavity
of the Abdomen; and that those Wounds, although they cannot be consolidated,
yet they are not Mortal; which though very seldom happens, sometimes in other
Parts, as in the Bladder. John Hornung, also a Physician of Heydenheim, tells a
Story of a Country Man, whose right Gut, upon a Wound in the Abdomen, came
forth, opened with a broad Wound; nor was it put back by the Chyrurgeon, but
the Wound of the Abdomen being cured, hung out as long as the Man lived,
retaining its natural Color, yet somewhat more thick and more fleshy; and
through this Passage it was that the Excrement came always forth with an
extraordinary Stench, forsaking the common Road of the Fundament.

OBSERVATION. LXVIII. A Pining Consumption, caused by a vitiated Stomach.
MOnsieur de Nassau, a Captain of Horse, in the Flower of his Age, in the Year
1637. during the Siege of Breda, in September, as he lay in his Bed all in a
Sweat, hearing some Troops of Horse march by his Window, leaped out of his Bed,
opened his Casement, and stood looking out for some time; and by that time
became suddenly overcool'd by a North Wind, at that time cold and tempestuous,
fell into a violent Distemper. Presently he complained of an extraordinary
Griping in his Belly about the Region of his Stomach; he had also withal, a
slight Fever, with a violent Cough, which brought up much clammy, phlegmatic,
ill-coloured Matter, yet without any Pain in his Breast. Several of the most
eminent Physicians were sent for, who by his Spittle, his Cough, and other
Symptoms, concluded that his Disease was a real Consumption, and that
incurable, and told the Prince of Orange that he would suddenly dye. As for the
Pain in his Belly, those they unanimously agreed to be the Cholic Passion,
caused by the sudden Cold. To assuage this Pain, which they called the Cholic,
they used several Remedies for a long time, which gave ease sometimes, but
never cured, which they affirmed was impossible to be done. To abate his Cough,
they made him an Issue in his Left-arm, and gave him the following Apozeme to
take for many Weeks;

. China Roots the best j. Leaves of Scabious, Coltsfoot, Betony, Pim^ernel,
Plantain, an. m. j. Cordial Flowers, an one small Handful, stoned Raisins j.
Licorice shaved ij. Anise-seed iiij. Boil them in Barley water of the second
Decoction, q. s. to lb ij. For an Apozeme.

For an ordinary Looch, they gave him equal Parts of Syrup of Poppy and
Cumfrey. Also they prescribed him a cold Diatragacanth in Tablets; and to
loosen his Belly, they gave him this small Potion.

. Rhubarb choice j. Yellow Saunders s. Decoction of Barley iij. Infuse them all
Night, and to the Straining add Manna of Calabria s. For a Potion.

This gave him one or two Stools. Now, when they had had the Gentleman two
Months and a half, and all their Physic did no good; insomuch that the
Gentleman was reduced to Skin and Bone, and his Strength every day more and
more decayed; they would give him no more Physic, but gave him over for
incurable. Then I was thought of, and the Gentleman was brought from Breda to
Nimeghen in a Man of War. The Gentleman gave me a full Account of his
Distemper, and what had been done to him, and showed me the Receipts that had
been prescribed him, and which he had taken: So that when I had considered all
things, I could not be of those Physicians Opinion. For by his Spittle and
Cough, he showed no Signs of a Consumption, for though he brought up tough and
ill-coloured Stuff, yet neither was it Matter nor Blood. The Pain of his
Stomach was no Cholic, as being fixed in his Stomach, and not accompanied with
Wind; but twitching the Ventricle with extreme Pains, by Intervals, not
wandering through the Guts. Therefore I judged the Cause of this Pain to be a
salt Phlegm, caused by the first sudden Refrigeration, and adhering to the
Ventricles of the Stomach, which fermenting at Intervals through the afflux of
Choler, or sharp Rhume, caused those cruel Gripings. Other things also showed
the Stomach to be offended, as loss of Appetite, inclination to vomit,
troublesome Belches, Crudities, etc. The Cough I looked upon, as caused by
Defluctions falling upon the Lungs, which were continually fed by the crude
Vapors carried from the ill affected Stomach to the Head, and thence falling
down again upon the Breast; the Gentleman thus satisfied with my Conjectures,
in order to the Cure, upon the twenty sixth of November, I laid him on upon his
Head, a Cap or Quilt of Cephalic Herbs, and other hot Ingredients, which he
wore all that Winter. I ordered him a warning and attenuating Diet, Meats of
good Juice, and easy of Digestion; to which Diet, I left him wholly, without
giving him any other Physic, for three or four days, because of his
extraordinary Weakness. Within a few days, his stinking and ill-coloured
Spittle, his Brain being corroborated by the help of the Quilt, and his
Defluxions ceasing, became white and of its natural Consistence, and neither so
much nor so clammy as before. The thirtieth of November, the Pains of his
Stomach began to gripe him, not extending themselves beyond the Region of the
Stomach, yet so terrible, that they seemed to surpass the Pains of Childbed.
To assuage this Pain, I gave him one Dram of our Anticholic Electuary, by five
a clock in the Morning, and again, at eleven at Noon; but this would not stir
the Pain. Thereupon I applied to his Breast a Cere-cloth of Storax, Benzoin,
Castor, Galbanum, all over the Region of his Stomach. The first of December,
the Patient would swallow no Physic, only he took a Glister that gave him one
Stool. The next day, he having taken Pill. Ruffiae, had three Stools, but his
Pain nothing abated, so that his Strength being extremely wasted by the
Violence thereof, we were forced to Narcotics; of which, I made choice of the
hotest, by its heat to strengthen the Stomach, and digest and cut the clammy
cold Humors, and by its Narcotic Faculty to assuage the Pain. To which purpose,
I gave him about Night one Dram of Philonium Romanum, prepared with Euphorbium,
which allayed the Pains within three hours. The third of December, he took
several times that day a small quantity of the following Conditement;

. Specier. Diamosch. Diambra, an. j. s. Diagalanga j. Roots of Calamus
Aromaticus condited, Conserve of Anthos, an. s. Preserved Nutmegs ij.
Confection of Alkermes ^j. Syrup of Limon q. s. Oil of Cinnamon gutt. ij. For a
Conditement.

About Night his Pains began to return again, but not with that vehemence. The
next day, taking Pill. Ruffiae, he had three Stools. Toward Evening, by his
Pulse I found him somewhat feverish; but upon taking this small Potion the
Fever vanished.

. Treacle of Andromac j. Of our Treacle-water j s. Oil of Vitriol gutt. vij.
For a Draught.

The fifth of December, the Pain in his Stomach was very gentle; his Cough and
Spitting ceased; but some beginnings of a Fever appeared, which upon taking
this Apozem vanished;

. Succory Roots of Asparagus, an. j. Of Elecampane s. Herbs, Endive, Centaury
the less, Roman Wormwood, an. M. j. Carduus Ben. M. s. Anise-seed j. s.
Corrents ij. Orange and Citron Peels dried, an. iij. Boil them in common Water
q. s. for an Apozem, to lbj. s.

In the Evening I gave him an Amigdalate, which caused him to sleep, which was
continued for three days, during which time, feeding now and then upon
Chicken-broth, his Strength was somewhat recovered. All this while there was
somewhat troubled the Patient's Stomach, which he could not well express in
Words, only that something ascended up now and then to his Throat; this spoiled
his Appetite, and hindered his Digestion, and as the Patient believed, was that
from which the Fits derived their Original; therefore to extirpate this Malady,
I gave him the following Antimoniate Wine.

. Crocus Metallorum of our Preparation gr. xv. Strong French Wine iiij. Steep
them all Night, the next Morning strain them through a double brown Paper for a
Draught.

He took this Potion the twelfth of December, at eight of the clock in the
Morning: At nine a clock he had an Inclination to Vomit, but brought up
nothing; but a little after, he brought up some few Lumps like Glue, and of a
greenish Color. About eleven a clock, his Anxiety ceasing, he had seventeen
watery Stools, of a mixed Color, without any Gripes; however, because his
Strength was much impaired, we refreshed him with Cinnamon Water and Sugar. In
the Evening, I gave him a Draught of generous Wine, with a Dram of Treacle, and
so the next Night he slept indifferent well. The next day, he perceived the
thing that troubled him in his Stomach to be gone, which he never felt more.
From that time his Stomach began to come to him, and he eat three Porringers of
Broth that day, and digested them well. The following days he was so hungry,
that he not only eat three or four times a day, but sometimes at Midnight: the
two first days he was fed with Broths variously prepared; the third day, be
began to eat boiled Chickens, Lamb, Veal, etc. and sometimes to drink a Glass
of Wine; the fourth, he came to roasted Meats, and so fell to his accustomed
Diet, and so in a short time he recovered his former Strength.

OBSERVATION. LXIX. Nephritic Pains.
MOnsieur Bronkherst, Lord of Werdenburgh, in the Flower of his Youth, and a
great Lover of Rhenish-wine, was taken the twenty sixth of December, with most
cruel Nephritic Pains, not without some obstruction of his Urine. Six years
before, being troubled with the same Pain, he had voided a little Stone, but
after that he had not had the least touch of the Malady, nor so much as voided
any Gravel. To assuage the Pain, I gave him an Emollient Glister, then
prescribed him this Mixture.

. Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn iij. s. Juice of Limons vj. Malmsey-wine iij.
Mix them for three Doses, to take once in three hours.

The following Liniment was also laid warm to his Loins;

. Oils of Scorpions, Laurel, bitter Almonds, an. s. Of Cammomil, Dill,
Turpentine, an. ij. Mix them.

Toward Evening his Pains ceased; in the Night, making Water freely, he voided
a rough unequal Stone, about the bigness of a Pea. The fourteenth of January,
having exposed himself to the Cold in vehement Weather, his Pains returned; at
what time, taking the same Mixture again, he voided another Stone, and was
again freed from his Pains. But for the future Prevention, I advised him to
swallow every other day a Pill of transparent Aloes, or a Bolus of Venice
Turpentine, and sometimes to use Fernelius's Syrup de Althea; but above all
things, to forbear the use of Rhenish-wine.

ANNOTATIONS.
THE Reason why Rhenish-wine engenders the Stone, and causes the Gout, is the
Sal Tartar, which is more sharp, and four times more abounding in Rhenish-wine,
than in French or Canary, or any other Wine; which tartareous Salt, not being
well digested in some Bodies, is separated from the Mass of Blood, and with the
Serum, carried to the Kidneys, and so hardens into Stones, and being expelled
into the Joints, causes most dreadful Torments. For the Nature of Salts is, by
corroding other Bodies to reduce them into Atoms, and associate to themselves.
This Corrosion is the Cause of the Gout; for while the tartarous Salt corrodes
the nervous and membranous Parts, and endeavors to associate them to its self,
those cruel Pains are excited, which are mitigated by an Afflux of watery
Humors, for Salt dissolved with much moisture looses its Acrimony. But you will
say, why does not this Salt cause as great Pains in the Kidneys as in the
Joints? because the most subtle and acrimonious part of it, is dissolved by the
continual Passage of the Urine, and carried away with the Urine through the
Bladder; but the thick, gravelly and earthly Substance remains, which does not
offend so much by its Acrimony, as by its Bulk and roughness. Now the reason
why the German Wines abound with Tartar, is, because the very Soil of Germany
it self, where the Vines grow, abounds with Tartar; nor is there any Plant
which sucks up the salt and tartarous Parts of the Earth, more than the Vine.
And therefore it is, that in many Places of Moravia, Austria, Bohemia and
Hungaria, where the Soil is such, that most Men are troubled with the Gout, or
Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, or both. Lastly, that Wine engenders the
Gout, is apparent from hence, for that the Forbearance of Wine cures it. Of
which, the Physicians bring many Examples; and M. Donatus himself confesses,
that he was cured of the Gout by leaving off Wine for two years.

OBSERVATION LXX. An Extreme Pain under the Sternon-Bone.
LIeutenant More, in the Flower of his Age, in January, felt a most terrible
Pain, which extended it self in a right Line from the top of the Aspera
Arteria, to the upper Orifice of the Stomach, all along the Sternon-bone, and
so cruelly tormented the Person, that he could not move himself one way nor
other. He neither had any Cough or difficulty of Breathing; his Lungs and
Aspera Arteria were perfectly free; nor did his Gullet pain him in swallowing;
neither lastly, was there any thing to be seen outwardly. The Pain lay under
the Sternon, where it is fastened to the Mediastrinum, or in the Membrane
annexed to it withinside, which was thus occasioned. The Patient, the Evening
before, had been hard drinking a strong sort of French Wine, at a great Supper,
and with that and a very great Fire all the time in the Room, had overheated
himself to a great degree. After which, going home at Midnight in a Sweat, of a
sudden by the way, he was taken with a violent Cold, for it freezed very hard;
hence the Pores being presently shut, the hot and sharp Vapors being condensed
and congealed, stuck to the inner Membrane of the Sternon-bone, which almost
numbed that part with the sharpness of the pain, that was still increasing by
the motion of the Breast. For the Cure of this Malady, I loosened his Body with
a Glister, and then prescribed him this Sudorific to take warm.

. Treacle iiij. Extract of Carduus Ben. and Angelica an. j. English Saffron gr.
vj. Of Treacle-water ij. Oil of Anise gr. iiij. Mix them for a Potion.

Upon this he sweat very well, but the pain continued as before. After he had
sweat, I applied the following Cere-cloth to the place affected.

. Powder of Castor, Cloves, Benjamin, Saffron, an. j. Galbanum dissolved in
Wine s. Melilot, Oxicroceum iij. Mix them and make a Cere-cloth to be spread
upon Leather as long as the Part affected, four Fingers broad, and anoint the
same with Oil of Nutmegs distilled.

After this Cere-cloth had stuck six or seven hours to the Part, the pain began
to abate very much, so that the Patient could move himself with more ease. The
next day he took a Purge, and had five Stools; which done, after the Cere-cloth
had stuck on three days, the pain went quite off, and the Gentleman went abroad
well in Health. But afterward, in February, having overheated himself with
drinking of Spanish Wine, the same Cere-cloth cured him again in three days.

OBSERVATION LXXI. The Headache.
PEter Ioannis, an Ale-brewers Servant, a strong Fellow, in January, when it
freezed very hard, was taken with a terrible pain in his Head, otherwise ailing
nothing; by reason of which pain, he could take no Rest night nor day, for
several Days and Nights together, which not only caused the loss of his
Stomach, but also a Delirium; nevertheless, the Patient was so obstinate, that
he would take no Physic, only by much persuasion he would admit of Topics.
Thereupon, for present ease, I prescribed the following Fomentation, with which
being warm, I ordered his Head to be fomented, and Napkins four times doubled,
and dipped in the Fomentation, to be laid all over his Head, and to be shifted as
they grow cold, and this is to be continued all the Night long.

. Rosemary, Vervain, Betony, Thyme, an. m. j. Marjoram m. j. s. Sage m s.
Flowers of Cammomil and Melilot an. m. j. of Dill and Stoechas, an. m. s. Seeds
of Cummin and Dill, Laurel Berries, an. s. White Wind q. s. Boil them to lb
iij. To the Straining add Spirit of Wine iiij. For a Fomentation.

The next day the pain was much abated; but in regard the Patient refused all
manner of Physic, the Fomentation was continued for two days, by which time his
Sleep returned, and the pain went almost all off, only some remainder of pain
in his Forehead, a little above his Nose, with some Obstruction of his
Nostrils, which proceeding from a tough Phlegm, closely adhering to the
Ethmoids-bone; I prescribed him a sneezing Medicine of the Juice of the Root of
Betony, which when he had drawn up into his Nostrils, first opened with a
Quill, he voided from his Palate and Nostrils a great quantity of tough Phlegm,
and so was quite freed from his intolerable pain.

ANNOTATIONS.
I Confess this Course of curing, without any Evacuation or Diversion
preceding, was not so safe; for that the flegmatic Humors collected in the
Brain, and attenuated by the hot Fomentation, might have easily fallen upon
some noble Bowel, not without great danger; but in regard the great abundance
of Humors threatened either an Apoplexy or a Delirium, or a Lethargy, and the
Intensness of the Pain, a Fever, and for that the Patient refused to take any
Physic, not so much as a Glister, nor would suffer Blood-letting, I was forced,
for the prevention of greater Mischiefs, to proceed as I did to Topics,
remembering the Saying of Celsus, It Is no matter whether the Remedy be safe when
there is no other.

OBSERVATION LXXII. The Scurvey.
AGnes Alberti, a Maid of about twenty four years of Age, complained of a dull
heavy Pain in her left Side, under the Bastard Ribs; as also of a certain
Chilliness of her whole Spine. She had also certain cold Shakings, frequent
Debilities and fainting Fits, which presently went off; besides, she had
certain black and blew Spots upon her Thighs; moreover, her Teeth were loose,
and her Gums eaten away, she had an ill Smelling. By these Signs, I judged her
to have the Scurvy. But in regard it was in the midst of a hard frosty Winter,
when no proper Herbs were to be got, and because the Extremity of the Cold
would not permit of Purgation, I only prescribed her this following Electuary,
to take of it the quantity of a Nutmeg three times a day, and all the while to
observe a good Diet;

. Specier. Diambrae, of Aromaticum Rosatum, Seed of Bishopsweed and Parsley,
an. ij. Nasturtium, Cremor Tartar, an. iij. Choice Cinnamon j. Sal Prunella j.
Reduce them into a very sine Powder. Then,

. Long fat Raisins q. s. Boil them in Wine till they are soft, and strain the
Pulp through a hair Sieve.

. Of this Pulp lbs. and mix the whole Powder with it, together* with Oil of
Anise and Juniper, an j. Syrup of Limons q. s. For an Electuary.

I would willingly have mixed some bitter things, but she had an Aversion to
them. I advised her also, if there were any Winter Scurvygrass or Nasturtium to
be got, to steep those Herbs in small Ale or Wine, and then to boil them
gently, and to take that Decoction, deferring the rest of the Cure till April;
in the mean time, to fix and fasten her Teeth, I prescribed the following
Alum-water.

. Powder Alum, j. Common Water vj. Cinnamon Water j. Mix them to wash the
Mouth.

After she had made use of these things a while, she felt a great ease, and the
Spots of her Thighs vanished. The twenty sixth of April, the following Apozem
was prepared for her; of which, after she had taken three or four times, and
purged her Body twice, she was quite freed from her Distemper.

. Pylypody of the Oak, Rind of Caper-roots, an. j. Roots of Fennel, Eryngos,
Stone-parsley, Elecampane, an. s. Fumary, Dodder, Lesser Centaury, the whole
Dandelyon, an. m. j. Roman Wormwood, Flowers of Elder, an. m. s. Seeds of
Parsley, Anise, Fennel, Nasturtium, an. j. s. Currants ij. Rhenish Tartar j.
Common Water, q. s. Boil them according to Art, adding at the end, Root of
wild Raddish j. Herbs, Scurvy Grass, VVater-Nasturtium, Brook-lime, an. m. j.
To make an Apozem of lb ji.

ANNOTATIONS.
MAny believe the Scurvy to be of the number of those new Diseases, which
Dodoneus writes were first known in Brabant, in the Year 1556, though epidemic
for some years before; among the Belgians, Danes, and other Northern Regions.
However, Hippocrates describes a certain Disease called the Bloody Volvulus,
very like the Scurvy, if not in all things, yet in most, as a stinking Mouth,
starting of the Gums from the Teeth, bleeding at the Nose, Ulcers upon the
Thighs, some going off, others newly come, the Skin emaciated and black,
Sloathfulness, and Inability to work or walk. Pliny describes this Disease by
the Name of Sceleturbe, where he says, that there was a new Disease in
Germanicus's Camp beyond the Rhine, which caused shedding of Teeth, and loosned
the Joints of the Knees. But that there was a Root which was found out for it,
which was called Britannica, good for the Nerves and Maladies of the Mouth,
having a long Leaf and a black Root. For as in the French Disease, Guaiacum,
Sassaperil, and some few other things are Specific; so has this Disease certain
proper Antidotes, as Spoon-wort, the Nasturtiums, Brook-lime, Fumitory, wild
Radish, etc. with some other bitter things that are not purgative.

OBSERVATION LXXIII. A Weakness of the Stomach.
CAptain de Gone, about fifty years of age, for some Weeks had been troubled
with a Weakness of his Stomach, which had both lost its Appetite and
Concoction, accompanied with troublesome Belches, and a nauceousness. After I
had prescribed him a proper Diet to cleanse his Stomach from Crudities and cold
and viscous Humors, I prescribed him this Apozeme, to take at four times, four
Mornings together;

. Roots of Elecampane, Mecoacan, Fennel, an. s. Calamus Aromat. Galangale, an.
ij. Herbs, Mint, Rosemary, Nipp, Marjoram, lesser Centaury, an. m. j. Wormwood,
Baum, Hyssop, an. m. s. Seed of Carthamum j. Of Fennel, Caroways, an. ij.
Raisins stoned ij. Common Water q. s. Boil them, and add toward the end, White
Agaric ij. Leaves of Senna cleansed, j. s. Anise-seed v.

This gave him three or four Stools a day; so that after he had thus purged, I
ordered him to take an hour before Dinner and Supper, a Dose of this Powder in
a Draught of generous Wine.

. Root of Calamus Arom. Specier. Diagalangae, Diambra, an. j. s. Mace, Choice
Cinnamon, Ginger, an. j. Make a Powder to be divided into ten equal Doses.

I advised him also in a Morning, to drink a Draught of Wormwood-Wine, and
these few means restored his Stomach to its former Strength.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN cold Distempers of the Stomach, besides those already mentioned,
Observation 5. 8. there are several others which are highly commended by
Physicians. Some extol the use of Turpentine, and call it the true Balsam of
the Bowels, in regard it gently heats, purges and cleanses the Bowels. Zechius
highly commends this Bolus, and says there is nothing better can be used.

. Clear Turpentine j. Mastich powdered s. Powder of Aromaticum Rosatum s. Make
a Bolus to be given two hours before Meat.

Some there are that boil up Turpentine into the Form of Pills, but
erroneously; for that the more effectual virtue of the Turpentine exhales in
boiling. Balsam of Perue is an admirable thing to strengthen the Stomach; if
you take some few Drops of it in strong Wine before Meat. Crollius commends his
Elixir Proprietatis: Hartman and others prefer Zedoary before all other things.
The Decoctions of Guaiacum and Sassafras are very good. Distilled Oils also are
very proper, of Cloves, Anise, Carroways, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and the like,
given in some few Drops of strong Wine. The following digestive Powder is also
very much used to help Concoction.

. Coriander prepared j. sweet Fennelseed and Aniseseed, an. ij. Cinnamon,
Cloves, an. s. Sugar iij. Reduce them into Powder; the Dose one Spoonful after
Meals.

Wormwood also taken any way is very much commended, as Galen testifies, who
cured a Woman that had lost her Stomach, and so weak, that she could get no
Food down, with only Wormwood-wine. Therefore, says Montagna, among Medicines
which strengthen the Appetite and Digestion, and open the Obstructions thereof,
and cleanse away and dries up the Matters therein contained, Wormwood is the
most famous: and all Wormwood Medicines, whether Julebs or Confections.
Langius's Electuary is also very proper in such cases.

. Conserve of Roses ij. s. Rosemary Flowers j. Lavender Flowers s. Galangale,
Cubebs, Xyloaloes an. j. Aniseed s. Cinnamon j. Calamus Aromaticus ij. Ginger
condided s. Pine Apples prepared vj. Make these into an Electuary with Syrup of
preserved Citron.

I restored a lost Appetite, and a Stomach overwhelmed with Crudities by the
use of this Powder.

. Roots of Zedoary, Galangale, Calamus Aromat. an. j. White Ginger s. Cinnamon
ij. Cremor Tartar ij. Make a Powder, the Dose s. or ij. in the Morning, after
Dinner and Supper in a Draught of generous Wine.

Monsieur de Spieck generally made use of this;

. Root of Calam. Aromatic. White Ginger, Galangale, an. j. For a Powder.

But these kind of Stomachical Electuaries, Powders, Tablets, etc. every
Physician ought to prescribe according to the Disposition of the Patient.

Horstius makes use of this Powder.

. Coriander-seed prepared j. s. Anise, Fennel-seed, an. s. Ginger, Galangale,
an. j. s. Lignum, Aloes s. Cinnamon j. Fine Sugar, the weight of all the rest,
for a Powder.

OBSERVATION LXXIV. The Stone.
RUtger Schorer, a little Boy, had a small Stone which fell down into his
Bladder, with extraordinary Pain, but being afterward expelled into the
Passage of the Yard, because it was too big to pass, it stuck in the middle of
the Pipe, and stopped the Urine. Several ways were tried in vain to get it out,
so that at length, to add to the Pain, there appeared an Inflammation of the
Part; by which we found that there was no way but Incision to get it forth.
Wherefore, after the Chyrurgeon had pulled up the Skin somewhat toward the
Glans, he opened the Ureter on that side where the Stone stopped, and took out
the Stone, and so the Wound was presently consolidated, without any hurt to the
Child.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis sort of Operation, mentioned by Aetius, Grumelenus and Paraeus, seems
difficult and dangerous, but yet is very secure. Plato also recites two
Examples of Stones cut out of the Ureter. And though some are afraid of a
Fistula upon such a Wound, yet I never knew any such Consequence*

OBSERVATION LXXV. Nephritic Pain.
THE Son of Lieutenant St. George, about eighteen years of age, who had been
always troubled with Gravel from his Infancy, and had often voided little
Stones, in January, was so tormented with a Stone that stuck in both Ureters,
that he knew not where to turn himself: For Cure I prescribed him this Apozem,

. Roots of Fennel, Saxifrage, an. s. Licorice scraped vj. Herbs, Althea,
Mallows, an. m. j. Cammomil Flowers, m. j. s. Cleansed Barley j. Seeds of wild
Carrots, Mallows, Nettles, Burdock, an. j. Four greater Cold-seeds, an. j. s.
Fat Figs no ix. Dates xi. New Milk, Common Water equal parts. Biol them and
make an Apozem to lbiij.

This being taken the same, and the next day, the Pain ceased, after he had
voided a small Stone and much Gravel.

The next Month he was troubled with the same Pains, but then, by taking the
said Decoction, the Stone was easily brought down through the Ureters into the
Bladder; but then, when it came into the Yard, it was so big it could not pass,
but obstructed the Urine with most cruel Torture, which the Father not being
able to bear, there being no Chyrurgeon to be sent for, with a Razor, made a
small Wound underneath the Urinary Passage, where the Stone stuck; which done,
the Stone spurted out, and the Urine followed in great quantity. The Wound was
consolidated afterward, sooner than we imagined, with the Application of a few
Plasters.

OBSERVATION LXXVI. Milk in a Virgin's Breast.
A Certain Noble young Lady, about twenty years of age, a Virgin of eminent
Chastity, in the Month of February, complained of a Pain in her right Breast,
which was also full of Milk. When I had diligently examined the place affected,
I felt a hardness in the middle of the Breast, about the bigness of a
Pidgeons-egg, which pained her upon Compression: I also understood from her
self that her Purgations had been suppressed for four Months together. In order
to the Cure, I prescribed her first a convenient attenuating Diet; then, after
I had purged her Body, I gave her some Apozems to move her Evacuations, and
three or four days before the time of the Period, I opened a Vein in the Heal,
by which means, the Evacuation succesfully ensued, which having continued three
or four days, the Swelling in her Breast fell down, nor did any more Milk come
forth. However, in regard the Hardness remained with some Pain, I laid this
Ointment spread upon Linen, upon the place affected, shifting it once a day;

. Honey, Populeon Ointment, Virgins Wax, an. j. first melt the Wax, then mix
the rest, and stir them with a Spatula till they are cold.

This Topic very much abated, and within four days the hardness came to
Suppuration. After the Apostem was broken, and had cast forth much white
Matter, within a few days the same Topic cured her.

ANNOTATIONS.
CErtainly had not this Lady been a Person eminent for her Chastity, she might
easily have incur^ed the Scandal of lost Virginity among the Vulgar. For
rational Physicians will not deny, but that upon menstruous Obstructions, Milk
may sometimes be generated in the Breasts of Virgins. For, says Hippocrates, if
a Woman, that neither is with Child, nor ever brought forth, has Milk, that
Woman labors under a Suppression of her Courses. And I remember the same Case
in a young Lady of Montfort, whose Chastity was above the reach of Scandal, who
was cured upon the forcing down her Purgations: To which purpose, Bartholin
thus writes, Even in Virgins, many times Milk may be generated, if the Breasts
are full of Sperituous Blood, and that there happen withal a menstruous
Suppression, in regard the glandulous Substance concocts more than is necessary
for the Nourishment of the Woman. But it is no wonder that such things should
happen in young Virgins that have their Flowers, when it is known that the same
thing happens to old Women. For Bodin reports a Story of an Infant, that
sucking a dry old Woman upon the Death of her Mother, at length drew Milk out
of her Breasts, and was nourished with it to sufficiency. Nay, I have seen Milk
more than once milked out of the Breasts of Infants not above two years old;
which is also attested by Cardan and Camerarius. But more wonderful it is, that
Milk should be generated in the Breasts of Men; as Aristotle testifies of a
certain Lemmian Slave; and Abensina, who saw Milk milked from the Breasts of a
Woman, enough to make a Cheese. Several other Stories also there are in several
other Authors, of Men giving Milk, too tedious to relate.

OBSERVATION LXXVII. Epileptic Convulsions.
A Little Son of John ab Udem, an Infant of seven Months old, was twitched with
Epileptic Convulsions, almost, without intermission, for two days together, so
that nothing but Death was expected. The third day I was sent for, presently I
ordered this Quilt to be prepared and laid upon his Head.

. Leaves of Marjoram, Vervain, Rosemary, Flowers of Melilot, an. one small
Handful, Nutmegs j. s. Cloves j. Make a gross Powder to be quilted up in red
Silk.

After this had lain four or five hours upon his Head, the Convulsions ceased
by degrees, and within twelve hours vanished quite, to the Admiration of all,
that the Child should be so soon freed from so desperate a Distemper.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN regard the Brains of Children are very moist, and that thence arise many
watery and flegmatic Vapors; Nature, for their more easy Evacuation, leaves the
Skull open for some time at the top of the Head. But as this Opening gives an
easy Exit to the Vapors, so if the Head be not well covered, to prevent the
entrance of the external, Cold then upon shutting the Pores, and the
Refrigeration and weakening of the Brain, the Vapors being detained therein,
condense into a tough Slime in the Ventricles of the Brain; which Burden, when
Nature cannot throw off, thence arises Epileptic Convulsions, which procure the
Death of many Infants. Or if they escape with Life, they either become
Changlings, or retain some other terrible Misfortune as long as they live; as
some Paralytic Member, Blindness of one Eye, etc. However this Diistemper
differs from a true Epilesie, in regard the Convulsions in this Malady are less
vehement, though more frequent and of longer continuance: Besides, that these
Convulsions proceed from abundance of Humors, and weakness of Concoction an^
Expulsion in the Brain; but the true Epileptic, from the Malignity and the
Envenomness of the Humors. Nevertheless it has been known when the Humors so
collected in the Brain, if the Distemper have continued long, by degrees have
acquired a malignant Quality, and indeed a malignant Quality into the Brain and
Meninxes, and then these Convulsions become the most grievous of all Epilepsies.

The Cure of this Distemper consists chiefly in corroborating and warming the
Brain, to the end the Pores may be opened, and the Vapors have free exit; which
being done in time, I have known many that have escaped the Distemper. Some
endeavor an Evacuation of the Phlegm at the Nose and Mouth, by thrusting up Oil
of Amber and Rosemary into the Nostrils. But when the Brain is become so weak
through the extraordinary quantity of Phlegm that overlays it, that it cannot
contract it self, that way of Cure does little good, or rather more harm* as
causing stronger Convulsions, while the enfebled Brain is forced to more
vehement Expulsion. Therefore it is much more expedient to warm and corroborate
the Brain, and by that means to promote the Concoction of the crude Humors, and
to evacuate the Vapors through the Brain, not yet consolidated: Which done, the
Brain is sufficiently able to concoct and dissipate the rest of the Slime which
adheres to the Ventricles, and to expel it through the Passages appointed for
that Evacuation. To which purpose I have often found a Quilt laid upon the top
of the Head, to be very prevalent; for it answers all Expectations, it warms
and corroborates the Brain, it opens the Pores, and powerfully promotes the
Concoction and Dissipation of the Crude Humors. Sometimes before I lay on the
Quilt, I anoint the top of the Head with a drop or two of Oil of Marjoram.
Sometimes I order the Patient to take a spoonful or two of the Water of the
Flowers of Lilly of the Valley, and Syrup of Stoechas, two parts of the first,
and one of the latter. I have also observed, that if Infants wear these Quilts
till their Heads are firmly consolidated, they are not only free from this, but
many other Maladies of a cold Brain. Nicholaus Fontanus* in this case highly
extols Childrens Urine, and tells a Story of a Patient to whom he gave three
Glysters with success, of the Decoction of proper Herbs boiled in Urine, and
then gave him to take, a Syrup of Child's Urine, made up with various Cephalics.

OBSERVATION. LXXVIII. An Intermitting Tertian Ague.
JOseph Wenties, a young Man, in the beginning of March, was taken with an
Intermitting Tertian Fever, which seized him with an extraordinary shaking, and
went off with a violent Sweat: Within a months space he had made use of a
hundred several Remedies of old Women and Mountebanks, Purges, Vomits, and
Topics to his Wrists, not forbearing Charms and Amulets to hang about his Neck;
all which were so far from abating the Fever, that after the beginning of
April, it grew stronger every day than other. Upon the seventeenth of April I
was sent for; I found the Patient very weak, his Stomach quite gone, and so
lean, that his Skin could hardly cover his Bones. He had taken a Vomit the day
before, and therefore I thought it not proper to purge him any more. Wherefore,
after I had prescribed him a proper Diet, I gave him an opening and
refrigerating Apozeme, which he drank three days together, but without any
benefit. Thereupon I ordered the following Mixture for a bag to be hung up in a
Vessel of White Wind.

. Leaves of Carduus Benedict. Lesser Centaury, Wormwood, an. two small
handfuls, Lucid Aloes, ij. Cut the Herbs small, and bind them together in a bag
to be hung in (...) v. of White Wind, and sometimes to be squeezed out.

Of this bitter Wine he drank a draught of iiij. or v. the first day twice, but
afterward once a day; this gently purged him, and brought the Distemper to a
simple Ague; and then it abated every day; and this drink being continued, in a
short time went quite off leaving the Patient restored to a very good Stomach.

OBSERVATION LXXIX. A Bastard Intermitting Tertian.
THE Lady of Nassaw, in the Flower of her Age, but lean and squeamish, was
seized by an intermitting Tertian, that came every other day, but no certain
hours, sometimes latter, sometimes sooner, accompanied with pain in the Head,
Nauseating, Anxiety of Heart, and seizing with an extraordinary shaking, but
going off with a violent Sweat; her Stomach was gone and she slept very little;
and in regard she was very thirsty, she would drink six or eight Pints of Water
during her Fit. Upon the twenty fifth of April, at the beginning of her cold
Fit I was sent for, at what time to make her sweat the sooner, I prescribed her
this draught.

. Salt of Wormwood, Extract of Carduus Ben. Confection of Hyacinth, an. j.
Treacle water, j. Mix them for a draught.

The next day, not willing to a Purge, she took a Glister only, which gave her
two Stools; after which, she took no more Physic for four days. May the first,
I prescribed her a refrigerating and opening Apozem, which she drank up in two
days; her Ague still continuing in the same state; thereupon because she
abhorred the taste of Physic, I gave her the following Vomit which when she
took, she thought she had drank Wine.

. Crocus Metallorum, gr. xvi. White French Wine iiij. or v. Steep them all
Night, and the next day strain them through brown Paper.

This draught she took the sixth of May in the Morning, about nine she began to
Vomit, without much trouble at first; but at length she brought up a whole
Chamber Pot full of Yellow green Choler, mixed with a tough and Flegmatic Slime:
and her Vomiting ceasing, she had also two or three Stools: but still the Ague
continued in the same condition; but then I prescribed her a Magisterial
Wormwood-Wine in this manner.

. Carduus Benedict. Lesser Centaury, Wormwood an. two small handfuls Lucid
Aloes, j. Cut the Herbs small and hang the mixture in a long bag in a Glass
Vessel filled with (...) viij. of small white French or Rhenish Wine

Of this Wine she drank four Ounces Morning and Evening for the first two days,
but afterward, because it gave her three or four Stools a day, no more then
only once a day, that is to say in the Morning; the fourth day, through the use
of this Wine the Ague became simple, much milder and shorter, and from that
time abating by degrees, upon the eighth day left her quite; however for more
certainty I ordered her to continue the Wine for four days longer, which gave
her two Stools a day: and thus both her Appetite, and her sleep returned, and
she recovered her lost strength in a few days.

ANNOTATIONS.
AT this time intermitting Bastard Agues were very rise about Nimeghen and the
neighboring Parts, obstinate and of long continuance, in some simple, in
others double. Physic seldom cured them, ordinary helps nothing availed; not
would Blood-letting do any good. Some felt a slight Pain in the right
Hypochondrium: some Vomited great store of Choler of their own accord: some
were troubled with Headaches, others with anxiety of Heart; all were very
thirsty, during the Fit; very Cold and Shivering at the beginning but intensely
Hot at the end. That the Cause of this Ague proceeded from the Excrementitious
Choler putrefying in the Follicle of the Gall and neighboring Parts, the very
Signs, and the Fever it self, sufficiently declared. Sometimes the Cause of the
Disease being Evacuated by Vomits, the Disease ceased: sometimes neither Vomits
nor Purges would avail; for that though they purged away a great quantity of
Choler, yet they left some remainders of the corrupt Choler behind, to which
new Humors flowing were Infected with the same Corruption. Blood-letting
nothing profited, because the Seat of the Distemper lay neither in the Veins or
Blood. Refrigerating Medicaments could not subdue the Choler, because they
could hardly reach thither, in regard the Follicle attracts that one which is
most bitter and hottest in the Blood. Upon these Considerations I thought that
the Cure of this Disease required some cleansing, opening, bitter and
moderately hot, and that in a thin and liquid substance: that by reason of its
liquidness it might be able to penetrate the Mesaraic Veins more easily, and by
reason of its heat and bitterness be more eagerly drawn by the Follicle; and be
more effectual to concoct Crudities, remove Obstructions, resist Corruption,
cleanse the part affected, and expel Noxious and Superfluous Humers. To answer
all which expectations, I thought nothing better then the foregoing
Wormwood-Wine, with which I have Cured several without any other Remedies. Nor
let any one wonder that I give Wine in Fevers contrary to the Opinions of all
the Ancients: for that the Ancients meant simple and not Medicated Wines,
seeing that both Galen and several others both Ancient and Neoteric Physicians
recommends Wormwood-Wine in Agues. Some question whether Medicaments prepared
with Wormwood are proper in exquisite and Bastard Tertians; Trallian allows
them in Bastard, not in Tertian Agues; and with him Avicen, Oribatus, and
Amatus of Portugal agree. But says Galen, If the signs of Concoctions appear,
then thou may safely Administer Wormwood-Wine; which is otherwise a Sovereign
Preservative of the Stomach, when molested by Choler. To decide the Question
therefore I say that Wormwood is not less proper in Exquisite, then in Bastard
Agues, especially after Concoction in regard it potently cleanses Choler, and
Purges as well by st^ol as Urine: for which reason it must of (...) abate an
Ague by removing the Evil Mat^er that Feeds the Distemper: and that therefore
the heat and draught of it ought not to be scat'd, especially if it be given
with other refrigerating things; in regard that the Choler being removed, the
heat will cease.

OBSERVATION LXXX. The Cholic Passion.
PEter Galman, a German Merchant, in March, the weather being cold and rainy,
had the hap to Travel along with me; at what time not being able to heat our
selves by riding the excessive cold brought upon him a most vehement Cholic
passion; so that he could no longer sit his Horse; alighting therefore at the
first good Inn, we came to, we warmed our selves by a good Fire, and applied
warm Cloths to his Belly to mitigate the pain; but the pain increasing more and
more, for want of other Medicaments, that were not there to be had, I took of
common Soap and White Wind of each j. and after I had warmed them very hot over
the Fire, I added j. of Spirit of Wine. In this mixture I dipped a Linen Cloth
doubled fourfold, about a hands breadth, and applied it hot to his Navel, and
by that only Topic freed him from his Pain within a quarter of an hour.

ANNOTATIONS.
BEsides several Remedies against a Flatulent Cholic to be given inwardly,
there are various Topics which being outwardly applied are of singular Virtue,
as we found by this quick and successful Experiment. In this case there is an
Oil of Soap, the Extraction of which Sennertus teaches us in his Institutions,
that it is very prevalent, nor is Oil of Galbanum less effectual* Galbanum also
it self dissolved in Wine or Aqua Vitae, then mixed with Castoreum, and applied
like an Emplaster to the Navel, as also Caranna and Tacamahacca dissolved with
Spirit of Turpentine, are of singular Efficacy. Holler prepares this Liniment
of Civet; Which he says, he has often tried.

. Oil of Rue, Nard. an. vi. Galbanum dissolved in Aqua Vitae. iij. Melt them
together, then add Civet gr. iiij. Saffron gr. vj.

Horstius anoynts the Navel with Treacle mixed with a little Civet. And it is
not amiss to apply warm to the Belly equal parts of Common Salt and Sand tied
up in a Linen Bag. The Ophite or Serpents stone heated and applied is also in
great esteem among the Vulgar. Little Bags also of Flowers of Dill, Cammomil,
Melilote, Cummin, Anise, Fennel seed and the like, sprinkled with warm Wine, or
gently boiled in Wine, and applied hot to the Belly. One thing more I may add
concerning Soap, which a Mount^bank in France was said to have Cured several
Persons of the Wind Cho^ic: his Secret was this.

. Malmsey Wine lb j. Spanish Soap s. or vj. and sometimes also an.. Salt ij.
Dissolve these altogether for a Glyster.

OBSERVATION LXXXI. An Obstruction of the Spleen.
JUstin de Nassau, a Noble Youth about six Years of Age, about the end of
April, began to be troubled with an obstruction of his Spleen; which within a
Fortnight increased to that degree, that the hard Spleen bunched out almost
half as big as a Man's Fist; when I came I felt the Boy's Spleen with my hand,
and perceived the Child otherwise cheerful, then grown Melancholy like an Elder
Person; but in regard he loathed Physic, I only prescribed him a proper Diet,
and ordered him only s. of Tartar Pulverized every Morning and Evening in a
little Broth; I also ordered the following Emplaster to be laid upon his
Spleen, which after it had lain on ten days, and then but once shifted, the
hardness vanished, and the obstruction was dissipated;

. Gum Ammoniac, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, an. j. Emplaster of Melilot,
iij. Mix them and spread them upon red Leather.

OBSERVATION LXXXII. A Suffocation of the Womb.
GOdefrida ab Essem, a Woman about thirty Years of Age, had been troubled with
an Uterin Suffocation, for which she had taken in vain several things that had
been given her by Midwives and other Women; her Fits increasing I was sent for,
and found her somewhat red in the Face, but altogether senseless, only she
breathed and that but very little neither. The Woman cried out her Womb was got
up to her Throat, which was Impossible; but indeed I felt a certain hardness in
the upper Region of her Stomach, that moved up and down from one side to the
other, about the bigness of a Man's Fist; therefore because she was not in a
condition to swallow any thing, I ordered her Temples and the inside of her
Nostrils to be rubbed with Oil of Amber distilled by descent. Then I ordered
the Midwife with her middle Finger smeared with three or four grains of Civet,
to fret the sides of the Matrix within side, while another Woman with all her
strength forced down the hardness: and thus within a quarter of an hour, the
Woman after she had ejected a putrid sort of Seed, came to her self again, nor
had she ever after any more Fits.

ANNOTATIONS.
THat sweet Odours applied below draw down the Womb, not only the Authority of
Authors, but Experience tells us. Therefore Galen says that perfumes which heat
and loosen, do good, because they heat. Those that heat, attenuate also and
loosen, by which means what is thick, and difficultly moveable is easily Purged
out through the open Pores: Moreover that they have a faculty to dispel Wind,
which is very troublesome in Uterine Suffocations. Aegineta advises the pouring
of most Odoriferous Ointments i^to the Womb: and Aetius would have the Womb
fumigated with Spices that have a faculty of loosning, sweating, and expelling
Wind. However care is to be had how you hold these sweet Odours to the Nose,
least you increase the Suffocation by oppressing the Head. In this case some
Physicians make use of many sweet Scents; but for my part, I only make use of
Musk mixed with a little Oil of Lillies: and many times order a Woman to fret
and sitillate the inside of the Orifice with Musk only, which has produced
wonderful Effects. Frication with the Finger alone helps to a miracle, and is,
commended by Galen, Avicen, Valesco de Tarenta, Simon Betreino: though indeed
there is nothing like present Copulation, where it is to be done with
allowance; so that indeed for a Woman in the same Condition with our Patient,
there is no such Remedy as a Husband. Thus Duretus being called to a Woman
under a Hysterical Suffocation and finding her in a Fit as cold as Ice, and her
Husband by, ordered him to have to do with her, which he did, and the Woman
presently recovered.

OBSERVATION LXXXIII. An Erysipelas, or St. Anthony's Fire in the Thigh.
MOnsieur Kelfken, Consul of Nimeghen, had an Erysipelas in his right Thigh,
with which he had been formerly often troubled; he was threescore Years of Age,
and had a very foul Body. He had laid upon the Erysipelas Linen rags dipped in
Vinegar, and Water of Elder-berry Flowers, which somewhat abated the
Erysipelas, only certain little Blisters rose up here and there, as he was wont
to have when he used the same Vinegar and Water before; upon these Blisters
after he had pricked them with a Needle, he laid a Leaf of green Tobacco; but
after it had lain on for three or four days the Skin was more and more
exulcerated, and a certain gangrenous Particle began to appear; upon which the
Gentleman sent for a Chyrurgeon; who easily cut out that gangrenous Part,
sticking in the Skin; and then endeavored with various Plasters, to cure the
solution; anointing the whole Thigh, because of the Erysipelas with Galens
refrigerating Ointment, and this course he took for six Weeks; but when he
could do no good I was sent for; I found the Patient full of watery and
Flegmatic Humors, which falling Salt upon his Thigh, caused that continual
Exulceration: this made him loose of Body, and his Stomach was indifferent, but
he had such an Aversion to Physic that he would swallow nothing; when I looked
upon his Thigh, I found the Plasters were the cause of the Exulceration of the
Neighboring Parts; which by reason of their Fatness and Density they were not
able to retain or suck up the Salt and sharp Humors flowing into them, the
Humors were forced to flow to the Neighboring parts, which they corroded;
therefore deeming it the best way to perform the Cure with Cataplasms, which by
reason of their softness, might suck and dry up the flowing Humors, I
prescribed the following Cataplasm without any Oyliness or Fatness.

. Pomegranate Rinds, Flowers of Pomegranates, an. j. Leaves of Oak, of
Plantain, Egrimony, Sanicle, an. Mij. Pimpernel, Flowers of red Roses, an. Mj.
common water, l. iiij boil them to the Consumption of half.

. Leaves of Oak, M. iiij. of Egrimony, Plantain, an. Mj. s. Powder them
together; then ada Bean Flower, ij. of the said Decoction, q. s. boil them a
little, and make a Cataplasm.

This being oftentimes shifted, cured the Ulcer; but about three Months after a
new Defluction fell upon the Thigh, causing a large fiery Erysipelas; now
unless it were one Purge, and one Decoction of China, Sarsaperil. etc. He would
take nothing inwardly; thereupon the foresaid Cataplasm was laid on which did
very well for a time; but then a new Defluxion happening with a large
Erysipelas, the Pains increased, the Ulcer enlarged it self, and a little after
the part gangrened, and there appeared a blackish gangrenous Particle in the
outer side of the Thigh, about the bigness of a Doller; the Chyrurgeon
therefore washed the part affected with lukewarm Wine, anointed it with
cleansing ointment of Parsley, and laid on the same Cataplasm, which caused the
gangrenous Particles to fall out; then the Ulcer being well cleansed, the
Cataplasm alone was laid on; in the mean time for the more convenient
Evacuation of the Humors descending, I would have made an Issue in the outer
part of the Calf of the Leg; but the Patient would not permit it. In March, the
Ulcers being by this time healed, a new sharp Defluxion fell down with an
Erysipelas, which raised a new Ulcer as broad as the Palm of a Man's Hand, on
both sides the Thigh; the Cataplasm would do no good; both strength and
Appetite decayed, and he became so weak that he could hardly go, presently
after a Gangrene appearing as broad as a Man's Hand, the Patient seemed to be in
some danger, as well by reason of the abundance of ill Humors in his Body, as
also because of the great loss of his strength, however the gangrenous Ulcers
were anointed with cleansing Plaster of Parsley, the Cataplasm laid on; for
Spirit of Wine so Tormented him that we were forced to leave it off. Then he
admitted an Issue in the Calf of his Leg, which was made with a potential
Cautery; within three or four days the Gangrene was much increased in the
Ulcer, and seized the very place where we had applied the Cautens, from which
the Crust was not yet fallen off; thereupon the Chyrurgeon Scarified the
Cauteriz'd place to the quick, for the more speedy separation of the Crust,
some bits of which he cut off. The three next days the Gangrene increased more
and more, so that in the place of the Issue, there was a piece of dead Flesh,
to be cut out as broad as a Dollar, and as deep as my Thumb; the next day the
Gangrenous parts stunk like putrified Carrion, and the Gangrene continually
increased, therefore to resist Putrefaction and Mortification, we rubbed the
part affected with Spirit of Wine, wherein we had first disolved common Salt:
and laid on Tents dipped in the same Liquor, and bound up the Ulcer three times a
day, by which means the stench was taken away in half a day. Then that the
Gangrenous and dead parts might be the sooner separated by Suppurating from the
parts adjoining, and the sound be preserved from Corruption, we laid on our own
Magisterial Balsom, which powerfully resisted Putrefaction, and promoted
Suppuration, by which means the Gangrenous parts began to fall away: which
being taken off, for sometime a disgestive Ointment was laid on, and then the
Cataplasm alone, by which the Ulcers at length were cured, but very slowly; and
the Humors afterward vented themselves out at the Issue.

OBSERVATION LXXXIV. An Exquisite Tertian Ague.
CAptain Willmot, a strong Man, was seized with an Exquisite Tertian
Intermitting Fever, after the third Fit he sent for me; and upon his well day I
gave him a Purge that gave him six or seven Stools, and brought away much
Choleric Matter; but hi^ Fit returning the next day, with the same violence, he
would take no more Physic, but by the advice of another Captain, applied the
following mixture hotb his Wrists; which the other Captain told him had
expelled Agues in three or four days time, so that they never returned.

. White Mustard prepared with Vinegar, j. s. black Peper, gr. xv. five Cloves
of Garlic, Salt, a small handful, Chimney Soot, Sour Leaven, an. iij. Beat
them together and make a Past with a little Vinegar of Roses. Of this apply to
each VVrist, a piece about the biggness of a Dollar, and let it lie on three
days.

ANNOTATIONS.
OUR Patient, and many others who saw him thus Cured, ascribed the whole Cure
to this only Topic: but they were mistaken; in regard that after the Purgation,
the Ague had ceased of it self in the same Interval of time, without that
Topic, or the taking of any other Physic; For the Patient observed an exact
Diet, and the Ague was an exquisite intermitting Tertian Ague, which as I have
observed, never exceeds above the seventh Fit, unless any error in Diet be
committed. For Confirmation of which we have that Rule in Hippocrates, an
exquisite Tertian is judged at the end of seven Fits at most. I have seen a
thousand several Topics, a thousand times applied to Wrists, which have availed
nothing; or if after their application the Agues have either abated, or being
Cured, it was not to be ascribed to those Topics but to other Causes. I
remember I once knew a Person that had been long molested with a Diuturnal
Bastard Tertian, which when it could not be Cured by all the Remedies
prescribed by two Physicians, at length by the advice of an Old Woman, he took
Ginger, Seed of Nasturtium and Cobwebs kneaded together with a little
Populeon-Oyntment, and laid it to his Wrists. This Topic being twice or thrice
shifted, the Ague ceased within four days, not through the Virtue of the Topic,
but because the Topic was applied at such a time when Nature was endeavoring a
Crisis by a Choleric looseness and Evacuation of the Belly. Which Crisis
happening the next day after the application of the Topic, and lasting two
days, freed the Patient from the Ague by Evacuating the Matter which fed the
Ague, though the Cure were by the Ignorant ascribed to the application of the
Topic. Another I knew, to whom an Egregious Critical Vomiting happened
presently after the application of a Topic of the same Nature, who was freed
from his Ague not by Virtue of the Topic, but by the force of the Vomiting. But
these follies have invaded some Physicians to that Degree that they ascribe
great Virtues to these Topics which are but mere Whimseys. Thus many extol
Cobwebs, concerning which, says Abraham Seiler, I have observed, that if before
the Fit comes, you apply Cobwebs mixed with Populeon to the Wrists it has done
very much good. These Cobwebs others mix after this manner.

. The lesser Nettle, Sage. an. M. s. Cobwebs s. Common Salt. iij. Strong
Vinegar one spoonful. Mix them for an Emplaster to be applied to the VVrists
two hours before the Fit comes.

The Egyptians prepare an Ointment of Spiders themselves bruised together with
their Cobwebs, and reduced into the form of a Liniment with Oil of Roses: or
else they boil Spiders in Oil of Roses, and clap them warm to the Wrists,
others prepare this mixture.

. Leaves of Plantain, Celandine the Greater an. Mj. Cobwebs, Nettle seed,
Coimney Soot common Salt an. j. Strong Vinegar. q. s. Make a Cataplasm, to be
applied to the VVrists before the Fit, and to be shifted three or four times.

Plater takes the inner Rind of a Nut-Tree, and after he has steeped it in
strong Vinegar applys it to the Wrists: at the same time he also commends this
that follows;

. Leaves of Treacle, Mustard, Plantain, Shephearas-purse an. M. s. Apply them
bruised with Salt and Vinegar.

Others commend Chimney Soot bru^ with Nasturtium and the white of a^* Egg:
Others Soot with Garlic and Onions; others the fresh Leaves of Crowfoot
bruised: others Mousear bruised with Salt and Vinegar; and some Prick-Madam
prepared after the same manner. I knew a Woman that applied to the Wrists seed
of Zedoary bruised and mixed with Oil of Turpentine. Coetius applies this
following Topic to the Wrists, which he says has cured several;

. The greater Celandine green, Feverfew an. M. s. Bruise them in a Mortar, and
then add Olibanum powdered j. Sour Leven iij. strong Vinegar q. s. Make soft
past.

Yet though these things are extolled by many, I cannot conceive by what virtue
they perform their work, or how they can do any good. Nay the known virtue of
the Ingredients are sufficient to show the Vanity of them. Neither does
Sennertus seem to give any Credit to these Topics. Is you ask, says he, how
these Medicaments operate, there can no other reason be given then this; that
the Putrid Vapors is by these Medicaments drawn from the Heart; especially
that defilement which corrupts the Humors, more especially if any small
Corruption remain behind, and the Ague be in its declination. Thus because some
raise Blisters in the Wrists in the Cure of Agues, therefore all Vesicatories
may be said to have an Ague expelling Virtue. But as for Cobwebs, Plantain,
Feverfew, Olibanum, Sage, etc. There never was nor can be given any reason why
they should have any such Virtue. Reiverius however believes that they
Communicate their Virtues through some remarkable Arteries running to the
Wrist; and by that means may be able to work a Cure. Whereas the Heart expels
from it self through the Arteries, so that the Virtues of Topics can hardly
ascend through them to the Heart; besides that, this reason does not show us by
what Virtue these Topics which are so well known can any way prevail. So that
unless Reverius will fly to the common Sanctuary of Occult Quality, I do not
find how he can get out of this Labyrinth: Therefore my advice is that Men
abstain from things venomous and corrosive, and endued with such a Malignity as
may do much hurt: but as for other things that do neither good nor harm, let
the Physicians prescribe them as they please, not that any Cure is to be
expected from them, but only to satisfy their Patients.

OBSERVATION. LXXXV. A Swelling in the Face caused by a Fall.
MAry de Frist, a Young Maid, the Wagon where she sat being overthrown, fell
with a Terrible Fall upon the left side of her Face, presently she vomited
extremely, and lay in a Swoon for half an hour; when she came to her self she
vomited Blood, but that seemed to have fallen down into her Stomach from some
Vein broken in her Nostrils; half her Head swelled extremely; so that her Eyes
were hardly to be seen; In the exterior part of the Orbit of the Eye, there
was a small solution of the Continuum: and Blood came out from the inner corner
of the Eye, so soon as I saw her to dissipate the Contussion and Tumors, I
ordered this Fomentation to be applied.

. Leaves of Betony, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, red Roses, an. M. S. Cumin
seed, j. shred them and sow them in a little bag: which must be boiled a while
in Wine and pressed, and then laid on warm.

I did not question much a Fissure in the Skull, for that presently after her
vomiting she fell into a Swoon; Blood had come out of her Eye, and because a
very great swelling accompanied the Contusion: therefore after application of
the Topic, I took out of her right Arm half a pint of Blood; about Night she
had a slight Fever with shivering, which upon her taking a Sudorific left her,
and returned no more. The next day I ordered her a Purge, that gave her four
Stools, two days she continued the foresaid Fomentation, repeating it twice or
thrice a day. The sixth of June, the swelling in her Face was very much fallen,
so that she could open her Eye indifferent well; the Fomentation therefore
being continued for two days longer, her Eye, that was overspread with a
redness and wept much, so that she could not see out of it, had the following
Collyrium laid all over it, between two Linnen-rags, and shifted Morning and
Evening.

. Whites of two Eggs, beat them with a little Alum till they thicken into the
form of a hard Ointment; in which after you have steeped a Flake of Tow, lay it
between two Linnenrags upon the part affected.

This Collyrium presently took away the redness of the Eye; abated the weeping,
and restored her sight; but the swelling of the Face being dissipated, there
still remained a deformed redness all over her Cheek, which I cured by washing
her Face three or four times a day with Virgins Milk; nevertheless there still
remained a weeping of the Eye, which was very troublesome, I ordered a piece of
raw Beef, cut from the Muscles of the Neck, to be laid ^o the Neck of the
Patient, and so to be bound on, shifting it Morning and Evening; which being
done for six days, the weeping ceased. And thus was this Maid restored to her
former Health, only that she had a little Scar in the outer corner of the Eye,
next her Cheek, in which place, after the Cure, it manifestly appeared that the
Bone was depressed by the fall.

OBSERVATION LXXXVI. The Kings Evil miraculously Cured.
SIR Water Vane, a Captain of Horse in our Army in his Youth had been troubled
with the King's Evil, nor could all the Art of all the Physicians, and
Chyrurgeons of England, of any remark, do him any good: so that the Malady
still increased, thereupon he was advised to go to the King, and to desire his
Blessing, from which he could only expect a Cure; this Favor was easily
obtained by his Father, then Secretary to King Charles the First, who moved
with Compassion laid his hand upon the Head of the Young Lad, and at the same
time pronounced these words. The King touches thee, but God heales thee: and
withal gave an Angel piece of Gold, boar'd through, and threaded with a blew
Riband, to hang about his Neck, which afterward he always wore as long as he
lived. And from that time his Distemper vanished in a few Months, without the
help of any Physic; I asked him several times, whether he durst not leave off
that piece of Money, for sometime; to which he answered, that he durst not, for
that he had known some who having thrown away their Money, were again
persecuted with the same Distemper, and though touched a second time by the
King, could never be cured.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis Privilege of Healing the Evil many ascribe to the Kings of France only;
and among the rest Andrew Laurentius. But Experience shows us that this Divine
Privilege is granted by God, not only to the Kings of France, but also to the
Kings of England. For besides this Sir Walter Vane, I knew another Young
Gentleman the Son of C. Killegrew, who having received the same Kings Blessing,
was Cured of the Evil otherwise incurable, who also wore such another piece of
Gold about his Neck as Captain Vane did.

OBSERVATION LXXXVII. Obstruction of the Spleen.
CAptain Aussuma, in the full Vigor of his Age, had long been troubled with an
Obstruction of his Spleen, and was become very Melancholy. At length his Spleen
grew hard and swelled very much, so that it bunched out a good way; so soon as
he came to me, after he had tried several others in vain, I prescribed him a
proper Diet, forbidding him smoked and Salt Meats, windy Fruit, shell Fish,
Herrings, Salmon, in a word all sorts of Meat, breeding crude and flatulent
Humors, all strong and sweet Wines, all muddy sorts of Ale: but to observe a
moderate Diet upon food of easy digestion and good nourishment; and for his
drink enjoined him small Wine and small Ale, and moreover to keep merry Company
and refrain Melancholy; this done I gave him a convenient Purge; but because he
had an Antipathy against Physic, I ordered him only to take a draught Morning
and Evening of this Medicinal Wine.

. Rind of the Root of Tamarisch, Capers, Fennel, Elecampane, Polypody of the
Oak, an. s. Water-Tresoile, Mj. Dodder, Ceterach, Fumitory, Lesser Centuary,
Roman Wormwood, an. M. s. Nutmegs, Iuniper-berries, Seeds of Fennel,
Bishops-weed and Anise, an. j. Make a little (...) to steep in (...). v. of
White Wind.

This being drank up, the same was repated again with an addition of Senna
leaves, j. s. Aniseed, s. of which he drank a draught every Morning that gave
him five Stools; this gave him some ease, brought him to a Stomach, and made
him a little more cheerful; but the hardness of his Spleen with the Pain
remained as it was before; but in regard, the Patient would take no Decoctions,
Powders, Condite^ents, or other Medicaments, nor would take the Wine prescribed
him any longer, I prescribed him the following Topics,

. Wormwood, Althea, Mallows, Flowers of Camomil, Melilo^, Elder Dill, an. Mj.
Seeds of Cummin, s. of Anise, Lovage, Fennel, an. ij. Make two little quilts,
according to Art.

. Roots of Dwarf Elder j. Althea, ^ryony, Fennel an. s. Flowers of Elder,
Coleworts. H^mlock, an. M. j. s. Mallows, Bee^s, Althea, Flowers of Melilot
Camomil, an. M j. Cummin-Seed, Anise, vj. Boil them in common water, q. s. to.
lb j. s. then add strong Vinegar (...) s.

. Oil of Capers, Wormwood, bitter Almonds, Goose-grease, an. j. Oil of
Turpentine, s. Mix them for a Limment.

In the Morning he made use of these Topics in this manner, first the Region of
the Spleen was chafed somewhat hard, the two little bags were dipped in the
Decoction being warmed by turns, and the Fomentation continued for half an
hour: afterward the place affected was anointed with the warm Oils, which
being contiued for some days and the Patient now and then taking a draught of
the last Wine, the swelling in his Spleen quite vanished, and the hardness went
off; and to dissipate the Relics, all other Topics being laid aside, this only
Emplaster was applied.

. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, vj. Ammoniac, iij. Emplaster of Melilot, s.
Mix them, and spread them upon Leather.

Thus the Captain being freed from his Distemper, returned to the Camp.

ANNOTATIONS.
OBstructions and hardness of the Spleen, where the Patients refuse to take
inward Medicines, are many times remarkably Cured by Topics. Among which
Galbanum, and Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar are chiefly to be commended;
Fabricius ab Aquapendente applauds his own Cere-cloth, made of two parts of
Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, one part of juice of Tobacco, half a part of
Pine Rosin, Turpentine and Juice of Dwarf-Elder, the other of Oil of Capers and
new Wax, q. s. with which Degestive and Emollient Plaster he Cured several
hard Spleens. Mercurialis applauds this that follows,

. G. Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, j. Powder of both Hellebores, Colocynth an.
j. Mix and apply them.

Heurnius compounds a most effectual Plaster thus,

. Hemloch, M. iiij. Ammoniac. lb j.

Infuse them in very sharp Vinegar eight days; then let them boil till the
Ammoniac be dissolved. Then strain them hard through a strong Linen Cloth; and
let the strained Liquor simper five times, then with the Wax and Oil of Sweet
Almonds make an Emplaster. Forestus makes use of the following Ointment.

. Oil of Capers, White Lillies; New Butter an. s. Juice of Briony, and Sowbread
an. v. Boil them to the Consumption of the Juices, then add Ammoniac dissolved
in Vinegar, ij. s. Hens grease, Marrow of Calves Legs, Moist Sheeps-grease an.
s. Powder of the Rind of the Roots of Capers, Tamarish, Fern, Ceterach an. s.
Seed of Broom, Agnus Castus an. s. A little Wax. For an Ointment.

Amatus of Portugal extols this for a Miracle, as that with which he has cured
the most obstinate Schyrruses of the Spleen,

. Common Oil, (...) iij. Marrow of Oxes Leg, lb j. New Bu^er, (...) s. Juice of
Briony, Sowbread an. lb j. Let them boil over a gentle fire to the consumption
of the Juices. To the straining add Green Wax, viij. Powder of Ceterach, Rind
of C^per-roots, Tamarish, and Agnus Casti-seed an. iij. Mix them for an
Ointment.

Senertus prepares a Sovereign Remedy of the juice of the Flowers of Elder mixed
with a Decoction of Mallows and Oxycrate. Galen commends simple Vinegar,
because it cuts and attenuates thick obstructing Humors, and is proper in
respect of the Bowel, because Fermentation is not troublesome to it. Aquapendens
his having cured the Schyrrus of the Spleen and Dropsy, by fomenting the
Abdomen with a Sponge dipped in Limewater. But as for cutting the Spleen as it
is called, he laughs at it as a ridiculous piece of Witchcra^t; This is done,
says he, by setting the Edge of an Ax upon the hard Spleen, the place being
first covered with a piece of Paper, and then striking upon the Ax with a
Hammer or Mallet. One of these Professors once brought his Ax to one that was
troubled with a hard Spleen; but after he had set his Ax upon the Paper, he
stroke so hard with his Mallet, that he cut through Paper and Skin, into the
very Spleen it self, to the loss of his Patients Life.

OBSERVATION LXXXVIII. The Sciatica.
THE Son of Albert Verstegen, about twenty four Years of Age, addicted neither
to Venery nor Gluttony, began to complain of Sciatic Pains in his right side;
which increased in a few days to that degree, that he could no longer go, when
I was sent for I found no Tumor in the Part, nor Inflammation, but a sharp
Pain with a weakness in the Joint, so that he could not move his Thigh but with
great trouble; he had taken by the advice of others two Purges; and therefore I
rather chose that I might abate the Defluxion of the Humors to prescribe the
following Apozem, of which he was to drink three or four Ounces in a Morning,
which gave him three or four Stools.

. Roots of Elecampane, Valerian, Fennel, Bryony, Mechoacan, Stone Parsley, an.
s. Herbs, Rosemary Majoram, Betony, an. Mj. Thyme, Baume, Sage, Germander,
Ground Ivy, Flowers of Elder, an. M. s. of Stoechas, two little handfuls, seeds
of Lovage and Anise, an. ij. of Carthamum, j. Raisins of the Sun well washed,
ij. Boil these in Common-water, q. s. adding at the end Leaves of Senna
cleansed, j. s. white Agaric, ij. Fennel-seed and Dill-seed, an. j. s. Make an
Apozem of (...) ij.

The following Emplaster was likewise applied to the part affected.

. Sulphur finely Powdered, v. Castoreum, j. Tar. vj. Oxycroceum Plaster, s.
Balsome of Sulphur ij. For a Plaster to be spread upon red Leather.

After he had taken all his Apozem, and that his pains remained in the same
condition, I prescribed him another purging Decoction; of which he drank twice
a day.

. Sassafrass wood, vj. Roots of Eringos, Cammoch, Lovage, an. j. Masterwort,
Fennel, stone Parsley, an. s. Vervaine, Rosemary, Betony, Majoram, Germander,
Ground Ivy, an. Mj. Savine, Flowers of Stoechados, an. M. s. Anise-seed.
Iuniper-berries, iij. Boil them in Common-water, q. s. to (...). ij. Then add.
Syrup of Stoechas, iij. For an Apozem.

Two days after the former Plaster was laid on again, and when he had drank up
his Apozem, I gave him the following Vomit, which brought up a great quantity
of Viscous Phlegm with Choler.

. Leaves of green Assarabacca, iij. Bruise them and press out the juice with
ij. of the Decoction of Raddish, to which add Oxymel Scyllit, with Agaric, j.
Mix them for a Potion.

When all these things did no good I applied this other Plaster.

. White Mustard Seed, and of Nasturtium, an. j. Castorium ij. Euphorbium j. s.
Spanish-So^e, x. Pine-Rosin, and Turpentine, an. iij. Mix them well to spread
upon Leather.

After this had stuck on two days, it had raised innumerable little Blisters in
the Skin, out of which a green Humor flowed from the inner parts in great
quantity; so that in four days he felt great ease. The Plaster being removed I
laid on Colewort-leaves; but observing the Plaster not to be very violent, but
that it only gently drew out the internal Humors, and kept the Blisters open
without Corrosion, I laid it on again; and so in twelve days the pain went
quite off, and the joint was so corroborated, that the Patient went about
without any trouble; but for fear of a relapse I gave him the purging Apozem
again, and the Plaster of Sulphur was laid on for a Fortnight longer, which
absolutely completed the Cure.

ANNOTATIONS.
THough the Sciatica be a kind of a Gout, yet because of the Place the Cure
differs in some Remedies. Sometimes it is very hard to be cured, because that
joint is not so profound, that Topics cannot reach it by reason of the
thickness of the Muscles that lie over it: and for that inward Medicines
require a great deal of time to abate and remove the Cause. This Disease
proceeds from too much fullness of Blood, sometimes from a defluxion of cold
and and sharp Humors. In repletion Bloodletting is requisite; which in a very
great repletion is to be done in the Arm, then in the Thigh affected. The Vein
is to be opened in the Ham, or else the Sciatica Vein. I have cured, said
Galen, the Sciatica by opening a Vein in the Thigh. Some there are that apply
Leeches to the Fundament instead o^ Blood-letting. Which way Paulus and
Aurelian commend, if you lay on eight or ten Leeches at a time; and Zacutus
affirms, he has cured the Sciatica with Leeches, when other Remedies sailed
within the space of ten hours. Some prefer Cupping-glasses before Leeches. But
if the Malady proceed from sharp, tartarous and cold Humors, Blood-letting does
no good (unless there be a Plethory) but first there must be strong Purging
with Elect. Caryocostin and Hermodactyl Pills; or Vomits of Ammonia, or
Asarabacca; and then Topics such as assuage Pains, sufficiently known to every
skilful Physician. Some extract and dissipate the Morbific matter insensibly:
to which purpose Donatus ab Altomary, takes a great quantity of the Stones of
sweet Grapes, and presses out the Liquor strongly. This he heats with its Must,
then pours it out upon the Pavement, and with his Hands strongly compresses
into a heap; then making a kind of a furrow in the Grape-stones, burys the
Patient in them, up to the Mid-belly; and there lets the Patient lie to sweat
for half an hour, or an hour twice a day. Duretus commends Grape-stones in all
sorts of Gouts. If in Vintage time the Grapes are carried into a Barn, and
covered with Coverlets till they grow warm, and then for the Patient to thrust
his Feet, Arms, legs, ^r else to lay his whole Body in the heap. Then which
says he, There is not a better Remedy under Heaven. Solenand^r also among the
best and safest Remedies that corroborate the Parts affected, and cherish the
natural heat, commends the laying the Hands and Feet, or other Parts affected,
in a heap of Grape-stones hot from the Press, or heated with new Wine, and this
continued for fifteen days. To which he adds that he knew a Noble Person, that
could not go, who was recovered by the use of this Medicine. I knew my self, a
Country man cured by such a Fomentation, for some days together in Horse-dung.
Matthiolus affirms experimentally, that several Sciaticas have been cured with
the slimy water of Snails, when all other Remedies failed, which Paraeus and
Laurentius approve. Old stinking Cheese kneaded into the form of a Cataplasm,
with the Decoction of a Westphalia-Ham, asswages the Pain, draws forth the
cause of the Malady, and dissolves the rigid hardness of the Part. Sylvius
commends a Cataplasm of Dwarf-Elder, Barley-meal and Honey. Forestus also tells
of two Sciaticas cured, with laying upon the Part only Nettles boiled in Ale.
We look upon Balsom of Sulphur among the most effectual Remedies; as having
more then once observed the happy effects of it. Galen commends an Emplaister
of Pitch two Parts, and one of Sulphur, mixed and laid upon the Part affected,
till it fall off of it self: Which Forestus so highly extols as the most
effectual Remedy that can be invented; only he believes it would be better to
equal the proportions of the Pitch and Sulphur.

If these things, or the like, avail not, then such things must be made use of
that insensibly draw forth the matter, and that either by diversion or from the
Part affected. By diversion, ^auteries applied to the Arms and Thighs are of
great use. So Paschal tells us of a Physician cured of a pain in his Hipps. by
a Caustic applied under his Knee, of Quicklime and Alum. Hippocrate^ orders an
Incision of the Veins behind the Ears. Zacutus of Portugal in ^ defluxion from
the Head, saw a Person cured by a Caustic applied behind the Ears, from whence
after the falling off of the Crust, for ten days together* there flowed a thin
and watery moisture, and so the Distemper ceased.

From the Part affected Visicatories and Rubificants draw forth the peccant
Matter. Thus Douynetus tells us of several that have been cured by the
application of Vesicatories. Arculanus and others have successfully made use of
a blistring Cataplasm in an obstinate pain that gave way to no other Remedies.

. Sour Leven lb s. Cantharides j. Pulp of Figs s.

Andrew Laurentius recomends this Visicatory.

. Old Leven ij. Cantharides. ij. Seed of Mustard and Stavesacre, an. iij. Beat
them together with Strong Vinegar, for a Vesicatory.

John Matthew de Gradibus prepares another of the Seeds of Mustard and
Nasturtium, Pigeons-dung, Decoction of Figs and Venegar; which rubifies and
raises Blisters, which being broken and cleansed with the Decoction of Figs,
then lay on a Colewort Leaf warm; and this he says extirpates the inveterate
Pains of the Hips and the Gout. Galen, Aetius, and Paulus prefer a Cataplasm of
wild Cresses, which raises Blisters; and is accounted a peculiar Remedy for
these Distempers. Schenkeus tells us of a Sciatic, who when all other Remedies
failed, of his own Head took Skins of Hemp macerated with Ashes, and having
boiled them in strong Vinegar, laid them to the place affected, as hot as he
could endure them: This raised several Blisters upon the Skin, out of which
flowed a great quantity of greenish yellow Water, by which means his Pain left
him. Tagaultius celebrates this Emplaister of Galen and Avicen, then which he
says there can be none more effectual, or that gives such present ease.

. Mustard and Nettle-seeds, Sulphur, Froth of the Sea, round Birthwort Bdelium
an. j. old Oil, Wax an. ij. For an Emplaister.

I have found that Emplaister, which I prescribed to our Patient, with Spainish
Soap, to have wrought wonderful effects. I remember a Young Maid at Montfort,
miserably troubled with the Gout, so that she could neither move Shoulders,
Arms, nor Hips, who was cured only with Emplaisters of Spanish Soap, mollified
in Wine, and spread upon Leather; which raised Blisters, and drew out a great
quantity of yellow, greenish Water; which restored her unexpectedly to her
Health in a few weeks.

OBSERVATION LXXXIX. A Wound with a Bullet.
A Citizen of Nimeghen, the twentieth of May, 1637. imprudently discharged his
Pistol downward; so that the Bullet rebounding from the Flint-stone-pavement of
the Street, hurt a Woman that was passing accidentally by. The Bullet had
entered the Cavity of her Breast about three Fingers from the Spine of the
Back, between the fifth and sixth Rib, and entering the exterior substance of
the Lungs, had made a great Wound in the fourth Rib, in the side from the inner
part, so that the Rib was broken, but the Bullet did not pass through, but
stook in the Cavity of the Breast, not round but flat and oblong by hitting
against the stone, as appeared by the Wound unequal and bigger then usual, the
Woman was carried wounded home; very little Blood Issued from the Wound; but
the next day with Coughing she threw up a good quantity, the danger was great
which I foresaw; in regard that the Bullet lying upon the Diaphragma, could no
way be drawn forth out of the Cavity of the Breast: as also for that Wounds in
the Lungs are difficultly cured, because of their continual motion; especially
when the Wound is made by a Bullet, which cannot be done without a great
contusion. However the Chyrurgeon bound up the Wound, and after I had gently
purged her Body, I prescribed her this Apozem to drink Morning and Evening.

. Roots of Madder, j. Eryngos, Fennel, stone Parsley, an. s. scraped Licorice,
vj. Herbs, Scabious, Violet-leaves, Coltsfoot, Chervil, Leaves of black Ribes,
or Garden Currants, an. M. j. greater Celandine, M. ij. four greater
Cold-seeds, Anise-seed, an. j. Raisins of the Sun, ij. Boil them in
Common-water, q. s. to lbij. add Syrup of Licorice, Poppy Rheas, an. j. s. Mix
them for an Apozem.

She complained of no pain but one where the Wound was, and the place where her
Rib was broken, which pain went off upon laying on a Plaster of Oxycroceum,
and her Rib closed again. The first six days she was very weak, she eat little
or nothing: little or no Matter came out of her Wound: she had no Fever or
Cough or difficulty of Breathing; and after the second day she spit forth
nothing either of Blood or Matter out at her Mouth. May twenty seventh, being
somewhat bound, we gave her a loosening Draught, which gave her two or three
Stools. May the thirtieth she was grevously tormented, so that every Body
thought she would have died; but in the Evening of a sudden she coughed up a
good quantity of white Matter with some Blood, which gave her great ease, and
then she began to be better, the Wound also closed against our Wills; neither
did any thing of Matter come forth from the Wound out of the hollowness of her
Breast all the time of the Cure; after she had voided this corruption, for
seven days she continued without a Cough. The seventh of June, with a slight
Cough she spit up a small quantity of Corruption again, and then the Cough
ceased, and the Patient grew stronger and stronger every day, nor did she after
that spit forth any more Matter or Blood, but after the second Month being
restored to her perfect Health, went abroad again, feeling no Inconvenience
from so great a Wound afterward for nine Years together, nor did she feel the
Leaden Bullet in her Breast, only when she fetched her breath with a deep sigh,
she felt something heavy upon her Midrife.

ANNOTATIONS.
WIthout doubt the Bullet did not pass the middle of the Lungs: nor touched the
Bronchia or bigger Vessels, but only slightly touched the substance of the
Lungs in the outer side: otherwise more terrible Symptoms would have ensued;
nor would the Cure have been so soon accnmplished; which however was
sufficiently to be admired, when such a wound could not happen without a very
great Contusion.

Now the great Wounds in the Lungs are incurable, and slight Wounds difficult
to be cured, yet we are not to despair, since very great Wounds in the Lungs
have been often Cured. I remember I knew a Victualer that lived near Leyden,
who in a scuffle with a Countryman was stabbed under the Pap of his right
Breast, with a broad Knife that past through the middle of his Lungs, and went
out behind under the Scapula. Yet this Man reduced to mere Skin and Bones,
through the Exulceration of his Lungs, two years afterward being brought to
Utrecht, was perfectly cured by a Chyrurgeon, with only vulnerary Decoctions.
However a great Part of his Lungs was consumed by Suppuration, which was easily
perceived, when he moved backward or forward, for then his right Lung would
strike against his Breast, like the Clapper of a Bell. 'Twas to be admired that
such a Wound should be brought to a perfect Cicatrization; yet this Man I saw
ten years after without a Cough, without any Malady, sound and whole as ever I
saw a Man in my Life. In the year 1635. I had another sturdy Countryman in
Cure, who had received a Wound under the Pap of his left Breast, with a broad
Knife that entered as far as the middle of the Lungs. Other Countrymen before
we came had laid him upon his Belly, and kept the Wound open with their Hands;
so that he had bled three full Chamber-pots. After we had bound up the Wound,
the Patient sounded and it was thought he would have died, but upon giving him
corroborating Cordials he came to himself. For the first day he voided
sometimes a great deal of Blood, and sometimes Corruption; and frothy
coagulated Blood came forth from the Wound, but not much; yet to be short, this
Man was cured of this dangerous Wound by the Use of proper Medicaments, nor did
he afterward feel any inconvenience in his Chest.

Hildan tells us also of a remarkable Cure of the Lungs wounded, at what time a
good Part of the Lungs was cut away. And many other Examples of the Lungs cured
are frequently to be found in several other Authors.

OBSERVATION XC. An Extraordinary Binding of the Belly.
N. ab Offendorph, a German Gentleman, a strong Man in the Flower of his Age,
was usually so bound in his Body, that he could hardly go to the Stool without
the help of Physic; yet he was not sick, but when he had not gone to Stool in
five or six days he grew sleepy, dull and lazy. In August, not having been at
Stool for seven days together, when his usual Pills would not move him, he went
to Monsieur Romphius, Physician to the Queen of Bohemia, who gave him two
Glisters and two Purges without success; then afraid of his Life he came to me:
at what time he had been bound for sixteen Days together, first therefore I
tried to move him with this following Glister.

. Roots of Bryony j. Herbs, Mallows, Althea, Herb Mercury, Wormwood, Lesser
Century, Flowers of Camomil, and Melilot, an. M j. Leaves of Senna j. s.
Colocynth Apples j. fat Figs no. vij. Anise-seed s. Boil them in Commonwater,
q. s. to x. add to the Straining Stibiate-Wine, iiij. For a Glister.

After he had kept this a quarter of an hour, his Belly was much moved, and he
had above twenty Stools with a great deal of ease, afterward I prescribed him
a loosning and emollient Diet, and so sent him away back to the Camp quite
eased of his burden.

ANNOTATIONS.
SChenkius has collected several Examples of People that have been strangely
bound in their Bellys. In which Cases, when Cathartics will do no good: I have
observed the wonderful Operations of Stibiate-Wine: I remember I gave a Purge
to a strong lusty Countryman once, that was very much bound in his Body, but
without success. The next day therefore I gave him a Glister, wherein among
other things I boiled s. of dry Tobacco, which presently opened his Body with a
Witness. I knew a Captain of a Man of War also, that told me, how he was bound
in his Body at Sea, to that degree, that when no Medicaments would move him,
and that he was in despair of his Life, by the advice of one of his Seamen,
drank the Parings of his Thumb-Nails in a draught of Ale; which when he had
done, at first he fell into a Swoon, so that every body thought he would have
died; but coming to himself, he purged upward and downward to that degree, that
he was soon freed from his Distemper.

OBSERVATION XCI. A Bastard Ague.
A Daughter of Captain Rifflaer, about six Years of Age, had been troubled a
long time, with a disorderly kind of Ague, yet not very vehement, which took
her sometimes in the Forenoon, sometimes after Dinner, sometimes at Night,
sometimes every day, sometimes every other day; she looked black and blew about
the Eyes; slept unquietly, had her Belly swelled and distended; rubbed her Nose
often but complained of no pain, from these signs I conjectured that crude and
Flegmatic Humors were putrified in the lower Region of her Belly, which caused
the Ague, and that moreover she might have Worms in her Belly; now in regard
she was very squeamish and would take nothing that was bitter, I gave her j. of
Mercurius Dulcis which gave her five or six Stools, that brought away much
viscous and slimy Matter, and three or four large Worms; the three days
following I ordered her to take a dose of the following Powder, Morning and
Evening, in which time she voided eight Worms.

. Hartshorn, burnt Coral prepared, an. iiij. Sugar Candy ij. to be divided
into six equal Doses.

Afterward when I observed her Ague, and the distension of her Belly to
continue in the same condition, I gave her again j. of Mercurius Ducis, which
after it had given her six Stools, she found her self better, the next three
days she would take nothing; the fourth day I got her to take Mercurius Dulcis
again, which after she had voided much viscous and watery Matter, but without
Worms, the distension and tumor of her Belly went off together with her Ague,
and she recovered her former Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
IN these Cases I have frequently with success made use of Mercurius Dulcis:
and though several eminent Physicians disapprove the use of it, as too
dangerous, yet so it be well prepared, I never observed that it did any harm in
moist Bodies. For dry Constitutions it is not thought so proper, and therefore
to such I either give other Physic, or mix other Purgatives with it, that it
may be the sooner expelled out of the Body. Thus Simeon Iacoz, gave xii. gr. of
it mixed with gr. v. of Diagridion to a Child of four Years of Age, which
within two hours brought away twenty Worms. And indeed it is a most excellent
Remedy against Worms in the Belly; for it not only kills and expels the Worms,
but brings away the the cause that breeds them; therefore says Sebastian
Strommayien, there is no such Remedy to be found; for it falls upon all manner
of Worms bred in our Bodies, speedily, safely and pleasantly, and by a certain
Specific quality utterly expels them: which Experience has sufficiently made
manifest. Sometimes instead thereof j. of Jalap pulverized; or less according
to the Age of the Patient, which is an insipid Medicine and and not displeasing
to the Taste, which gently Purges away the Cause of Worms and Agues joined
together. Rondeletius extols Electuary Diacarthamum, as a powerful Remedy to
expel Worms and Purge away Phlegm, and the corrupt Chylus that breeds and
nourishes Worms. Others commend Diaturbith with Rhubarb. For such as can take
ill tasted Physic Hiera Picra, or Aloes alone is an excellent Remedy, given in
Pills. Dodoneus tells us of a Woman of forty Years of Age suddenly taken with
terrible gripings in her Stomach, that upon taking Hiera Picra voided forty
Worms; and the same Virtue have all Medicaments, wherewith Aloes is mixed.
Benivenius writes of one that after he had taken a Composition of Aloes, Myrrh
and Saffron, voided forty eight Worms. Crato recommends these Pills that follow.

. Aloes Rosat. j. choice Mirrh. j. Make them into Pills, the Dose s.

Plater commends these,

. Aloes, ij. Myrrh, j. Worm-seed j. Make them into a Mass with juice of
Wormwood or Gentian, the dose from, s. to j.

Sennertus prescribes these,

. Aloes, j. Rhubarb. ij. Myrrh, s. Trochischs of Alhandal, gr. iij. Powder of
Coral, s. Make them into twenty two Pills with juice of Wormwood. The Dose for
Children j.

To destroy all Matter and Nutriment of Worms in the Guts there is not any
better Remedy to be found, then for the Patient to swallow once a Week one. of
Aloes Succotrine; for Aloes has a peculiar occult quality to Purge and cleanse
the extreme Parts of the Guts. This is the opinion of Mercurialis in his own
Words; but I usually order a or two of Rhubarb to be put into a little bag, and
hung up in the ordinary drink which the Patient drinks; and by that means I
both expel the Worms and the cause of the Worms.

Saxonia and Solenander with many others extol the Decoction of Sebesten, in
iiij: of which Crato macerates, j. of Rhubarb and gives the straining to drink;
Rhubarb also given in substance is a great enemy to the Worms; and Dodoneus
voids them with this Powder.

Worm-seed j. Shavings of Heartshorn, Citron-seed, and Sorrel-seed, an. j.
Rhubarb, ij. Make them into a Powder, the Dose, j.

Riverius takes,

. Powder of Rhubarb, and Coral, an. s.

Duretus prescribed this,

. Chosen Rhubarb, Wormwood, Sea Wormwood, Shavings of Hartshorn, an. iij. Make
them into a Powder Dose j. with the Decoction of Scordium.

This as we have tried, says he, excells all the rest. Lastly Antonius
Cermisonius as a most destroying expelling Remedy against the Worms, prescribes
a Glister of x. of Goats Milk, and ij. of Honey.

OBSERVATION XCII. The Worms.
THE Son of Mr. Cooper, about six or seven years old, had been long troubled
with Worms in his Belly, which sometimes ascending his Gullet, crept out at his
Mouth in the Nightime. The Parents had often given him Worm-seed, but to no
purpose; so that at length, when the Child was nothing but Skin and Bone, they
sent for me. I found him thirsty and averse to all manner of Physic; thereupon
I took half a pound of Quicksilver, and macerated it in two pound of
Grass-water, shaking the Water very often. Afterward, having separated the
Mercury, I added to the Water, Syrup of Limons iij. Oil of Vitriol, q. s. to
give it a grateful Taste. This he only took for two days together, in which
time he voided downward six and thirty Worms and being so rid of his
troublesome Guests, recovered his Health.

ANNOTATIONS.
SOme extol Quicksilver it self given in the Substance, as an excellent Remedy
against the Worms; insomuch that Sanctorius says, there is no killing of the
Worms but with strong and violent Medicines, as Aloes and Mercury or
Quicksilver. Of which, Baricellus thus writes, Quicksilver, says he, which
many take to be Poison, is given with great Success against the Worms, and is
accounted so certain a Remedy in Spain, that the Women give it to Infants that
puke up their Milk, to the quantity of three Granes. I cured a Woman that for
nine days together had been troubled with continual Vomiting, occasioned by the
Worms; besides that, she had not eaten in three days, nor could keep what she
swallowed; but after I had given her two Drams of Quick silver, mortified with
a little Syrup of Quinces, without any trouble, she voided downward about a
hundred Worms, and was freed from her Distemper the same day. I have Water at
home wherein I continually keep Quicksilver infused, and will lingly give it
away to children for the Worms, yet never heard of any Hurt* that ever it did.
The dose of Mercury to be given to Children is j. to elder People ij. or j. It
is corrected and mortified by bruising it in a Glass Mortar with brown Sugar,
till it be dissolved into invisible Parts; and to prevent it from returning to
its pristine Form, you must add to it two little Drops of Oil of Sweet Almonds,
and give it fasting with Sugar of Roses, Syrup of Violets or Quinces to the
Party affected. Zappara confirms this use of Quicksilver by many examples; and
Hildan tells of a Woman cured of the Worms by Quicksilver, of which she passed
j. s. through a piece of Leather, and then swallowed it. Where this is
remarkable, that the same Woman at that time wore a Plaster upon her Navel,
which was afterward found all covered over with Quick silver. Thus many
Physicians celebrate Quick silver; but more applaud it than condemn it; as
Plater, Horatius, E^genius; and Fallopius, says of it, That it does not work
those Effects being drank, as used by way of Ointment. I have known, says he,
Women that have drank Pounds of it to cause Abortion without any damage; and I
have given it to Children for the Worms. The same is testified by Marianus
Sanctus, and Fracastorius. And Matthiolus affirms, that Quicksilver is only
prejudicial, because it tears the Guts by its weight; and therefore if it be
not given in too great a quantity, he says it can do no harm. And I have seen
it given by Midwives to Women in difficult Labors, without any hurt at all.
For my part, I never give it alone, but always in some Infusion of Grass-water,
Wine, or other Liquor. And as for Stromaiier and Horstius, though they reject
raw Quicksilver, yet rightly prepared, they extol it as the best Remedy in the
World against the Worms. Sennertus however advises, that though Quicksilver
may be used in desperate Cases, yet to forbear it where milder Medicaments may
serve the turn. Since there is a possibility that it may do mischief.

OBSERVATION XCIII. The Gout.
MR. Hamilton, in the Flower of his Age, was miserably tormented with the Gout,
in the Joint of his Right-shoulder; so that he had not slept in three Days and
Nights. After I had prescribed him a proper Diet, I purged him with Cochia
Pills, gave him a Diuretic Decoction for some days, and then applied this
Plaster to the place affected.

. Gum. Galbanum dissolved in Spirit of Wine, Tacamahacca dissolved in Spirit of
Turpentine, Emplaster of Oxycroceum, an. s. Mix them and spread them upon
Leather

This Plaster stuck on eight days, within which time that immense Pain went
off, so that he could freely move his Arm; after that, he returned to the Camp,
where he was unfortunately slain.

ANNOTATIONS.
MAny Disputes there are about the Causes of the Gout; but for my part, I
believe there are necessarily two. For either those Pains proceed from cold
Defluxions, mixed with some Salt and Acrimony, falling from the Head upon the
Joints, refrigerating and corroding the Nerves, Tendons and Ligaments, annexed
to the Joints. For how great an Enemy Cold is to the Nerves and membranous
Parts, we find in Wintertime, by the Wounds by which those Parts are laid
bare. There, says Hippocrates, all cold things are fatal to the Nerves.
Besides, that such Defluxions cause Weakness and Stiffness of the Nerves, or
too much Relaxation; so that being oppressed with weight, they are extended
with Pains; but this sort of Gout is not so terrible. For the second Cause of
the Gout proceeds from the salt, sharp and tartarous Humors, separated from the
Blood, and thrust forward upon the Joints. Therefore, says Sennertus, I must
conclude, that a sharp, salt, subtle Humor, nearest to the Nature of salt
Spirits, is the Cause of the Gout. Let any Man call it by what other Name he
please, Choler, or Phlegm mixed with Choler, Salt or Tartar, so the thing be
rightly understood.

In vain therefore Physicians have hitherto sought, for the Cause of the Gout
in the Heat and Drougth of Choler, or the Moisture and Cold of Phlegm, for they
are not the first but the second Qualities which induce those Pains; that is,
the Salt and the Acrimony which corrode and gnaw those Parts. Therefore, says
Hippocrates, it is not hot, cold, moist and dry, that have the acting Power, but
bitter and salt, sweet and acid, insipid and sharp, which if rightly tempered
together, are no way troublesome, but when alone and separated one from the
other, then they give the Vexation and show themselves, etc.

In the Cure of the first, in regard the Cause proceeds from a depraved
Disposition of the Brain; therefore the Brain is to be evacuated and
corroborated, to prevent these Excrements from gathering any more in that
place. The Parts affected also are to be corroborated with Topics, warming the
Parts, dissipating and drying up the crude Humors.

In the Cure of the hot Gout, the salt Humors are to be evacuated and purged
away by inward Medicaments, before they be pushed forward into the Joints, and
that their Generation may be prevented. Topics also must be made use of to
temper the Acrimony of the salt Humors, to dissolve, dissipate and evacuate by
transpiration, those Humors; the Forms of which, I shall give in another place.

OBSERVATION XCIV. A Pain in the Stomach with Vomiting.
PEtronella Beekman, a Maid about twenty seven or twenty eight years of age,
the nineteenth of June, was taken with an intolerable Pain in the upper part of
her Belly, which extended it self sometimes to the Right, sometimes to the
Left, but most to the Sides. She had a Vomiting likewise, sometimes more
gentle, sometimes vehement, which brought up all her Meat. Sometimes her
vehement Vomiting brought a Pint, or a Pint and a half of black Water, with
some tough Phlegm: At the top of this Water swam certain little Bodies, about
the bigness of a Filberd, in Color and Consistence resembling Butter. When
these came up she had some ease for two or three hours, but then her pain
returned again. She had no Fever, no Tumor in her Spleen, no Obstruction in her
Kidneys; and she made Water without trouble, but very thick, neither did she
void any Gravel either before or after; nor was there any Distemper to be
perceived in her Womb, where all things proceeded according to Nature; nor had
bad Diet been the cause of her Distemper, but what that buttery Substance
should be* I could not certainly tell for my Life, only I conjectured that it
might be some corrupt Choler, preternaturally changed into that Substance.
However, the first thing I did, was to stop her Vomiting; to which purpose, I
caused her Stomach to be anointed with Oil of Nutmegs, and applied a warm
Cataplasm to it of Mint, Red Roses, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mastich, Olibanum, sour
Ferment and Vinegar of Roses, but all to no purpose. The next day, her Pains
and Vomiting having very much weakened her, I gave her a corroborating
Medicament of Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, Treacle and Cinnamon Water and Syrup of
Limons, equal parts, to take frequently in a Spoon, which stayed with her. The
twenty first of June, I applied to the Region of her Stomach a corroborating
Plaster of Tacamahacca, Galbanum, Cloves, Benjamin, and the like. The twenty
second, I gave her a gentle Purging Draught, which she presently brought up
again; then I ordered her a Glister, which gave her two or three Stool, but her
cruel Pain and Vomiting continued still. The twenty fourth I gave her one
Scruple of Pill. Ruffiae, which stayed with her, and gave her three Stools
about Evening; and then, because the Plaster was troublesome, I took it off,
and applied in the Room a Linen Quilt filled with Mint, Wormwood, Sage,
Flowers of Cammomil, Melilot, Dill, Nutmegs, Cumin-seed, Fennel, and Dill-seed;
which Quilt was boiled in strong Wine, and applied to her Stomach. The twenty
eighth she took another Glister. The twenty ninth about night, I gave her two
Scruples of Philonium Romanum, prepared with Euphorbium in a little Wine, which
caused her to sleep that Night four hours, whereas she had not slept till then
from the beginning of her Distemper; the next day her Pain returned,
nevertheless the Philonium seemed to have endeavored some Concoction; for that
she began to belch, which gave her some ease; wherefore about Evening I gave
her two Scruples of Philonium. The first of July, she belched more freely,
therefore that Evening I gave her Philonium again. The next day her Pains
abated, and her Vomiting ceased, and at Noon she supped a little Broth, which
was the first Nourishment she had taken since her Sickness. July the third, she
took Pill. Ruffiae to loosen her Belly. The fourth of July, her Pains
increasing, I prescribed her an Amigdalate, but she brought it up again.
Therefore the sixth of July, I gave her two Scruples and a half of Philonium,
which caused her to rest indifferently. The next day her Pains abated, so that
at night the same Dose of Philonium was again given her, as also the next
Evening* The ninth of July, in the Morning, she took Pill. Russiae, and in the
Evening Philonium again, and so for three Evenings more one after another; by
which means her Pains and Vomiting ceased, her Appetite returned, and she
recovered her Health.

The twenty third of November she was again taken with the same Pains and
Vomiting; thereupon, after I had purged her Body with Pills, I gave her
Philonium again, which gave her ease, and so continuing the use of Philonium
for twelve Evenings together, and loosning her Body every day with Pills, at
length I mastered the Obstinate Disease; so that for six years together, I knew
her safe and sound from that and all other Distempers.

OBSERVATION XCV. A Bastard Intermitting Tertian Ague.
HErman N. in the Vigor of his Age, in the beginning of March, was taken with a
Bastard intermitting Tertian Ague, which began with a great Coldness, and ended
in a violent Heat; it came every other day, but at uncertain hours, sometimes
sooner, sometimes later. During the Fit, his Head ach'd violently, and he was
very faint; his Stomach was gone, and his Strength much wasted. After he had
taken many things in vain from other Physicians, coming to me, I gave him half
a Dram of lucid Aloes reduced into Pills, which gave him five Stools;
afterward I ordered him to take dry Wormwood Mj. Lesser Centaury Mij. Carduus
Ben. Flowers of Cammomil, an. Mj. s. and to cut them all* small, and then boil
them in three Pints of Small Ale for a quarter of an hour, and then to squeeze
it out strongly, and to take of the Straining warm, twice upon the Fit-Day, and
thrice upon the Intermitting-day, and when that was done to make more; but this
Decoction served the turn, for the Ague vanquished by this Medicine, lasted not
above four Fits; after which time the Patient was fully cured, and his Stomach
returned.

ANNOTATIONS.
THis Decoction, by which this Patient was freed from a long Ague, though it
did not consist of many costly far-fetched Ingredients, or prepared by
laborious and pompous Chemistry, yet was compounded of such Simples as are
chiefly celebrated for the Cure of Agues. For Wormwood, Carduus and Centaury
the less manifestly open all Obstructions of the Bowels, concoct and remove
Crudities, cut thick Matter, and resist Putrefaction, and expel noxious Humors
by Urine and Sweat, and are so well known among the Vulgar to have these
Virtues, that they are able to be their own Physicians in the Cure of Agues, by
the use of Powder of Carduus, Wormwood-wine, and Decoctions of Centaury. I
added Flowers of Camomil, by reason of the Wind which troubles the
Hypochondriums, and therefore of great benefit in Agues. Camomil, says Galen,
discusses and dissolves Agues where there is no Inflammation of any Bowel;
especially such as proceed from choleric Humors, or thickness of Skin. For
which reason, by the wise Egyptians it was consecrated to the Sun, and was
looked upon as a Remedy against all Agues, but in that mistaken for it; only
cures such Agues as I have mentioned, and those concocted. Though it helps the
rest, which are Melancholy and Flegmatic, and proceed from the Inflammation of
the Bowels. For against those it is also a potent Remedy, when they are once
well concocted. Wherefore Cammomil is most grateful to the Hypochondriums. But
though Galen tells us here that Cammomil is only to be used after Concoction of
the Matter; yet in regard that of it self it is very prevalent to promote that
Concoction, cuts thick Humors, opens Obstructions, removes Crudities, discusses
Wind, and provokes Sweat and Urine; therefore it is thence apparent, that it
may be given with success before the Concoction of the morbific Matter. Thus
Sennertus reports, that Johannes Anglicus was wont to give Cammomil
promiscuously, as well before as after Concoction, and that he always found it
very advantageous; and therefore it was no wonder that our Patient succeeded so
well with those four most noble Febrifuges boiled together, and that the
morbific Matter was so speedily concocted, discussed and expelled.

OBSERVATION. XCVI. Thunderstruck.
IN the Year 1637, upon the twenty fourth of August, rose a most terrible
Tempest, with horrid thunder and Lightning. At that time a Servant of a
Countryman of Nimeghen was abroad in the Field gathering in Harvest, having
with him a Girl, an old Woman with a Child, and a Cart with one Horse; they
terrified with the Tempest fled, and the old Woman with the Child crept under
the Cart, while the Servant and the Girl were endeavoring to bridle the Horse.
In the mean time a violent Thunderclap struck the Servant, the Girl, the Cart
and Horse, the old Woman and the Child receiving no harm. The Beam of the Wagon
made of strong Wood, was broken into Shivers; the Horse fell down dead of a
sudden, and yet nothing of hurt appeared outwardly; the Girls Right-thigh and
Leg were both struck by the Thunder, so that all the Parts appeared black, blew
and purple; besides that, her Peticoat and Smock were torn into long Rags; the
Girl also was thrown to the Ground and lay speechless for two hours. The
Servant was maimed over all his Body, especially upon his Right-side; from
which Side, his Doublet, Breeches, Drawers and Shirt were not only torn, but
shivered into long Rags, and retained a vehement stink of Fire, as if they had
been burnt for Tinder. His Right-shoo, made of very strong Leather, was rash'd
into long Thongs, and cast thirty Paces from his Foot. By such a vehement
Stroke the young Man being laid prostrate upon the Ground, fell into a Swoon,
and was carried home for dead: This Fit lasted for two hours, and then he came
to himself. I saw the Man, and viewed his whole Body, and found his Right-side
from Head to Foot all of a Color, between black and purple, his Skin flead off
in some places; there was also a very great Contusion, and a burning fiery Heat
joined with it. The Patient spoke very little, only complained of a violent
Pain of his whole Side, an extraordinary Heat of his Heart, a Compression of
his Breast, and Difficulty of Breathing; he could not move the Joints of his
Right-side, and remained so disabled for two months. Being asked what he first
felt, he answered that at the very moment that he was struck, he thought his
Heart had been burnt with a red hot Iron; neither could he draw his Breath,
which was the reason that he fell down as if he had been stifled. I gave him
several things, and applied several Topics to the Parts affected; but nothing
availed against that ethereal Fire; till at length, the Patient, by Divine
assistance, was cured without the help of any Medicaments. The old Woman, that
with the Infant escaped under the Cart, related that she smelt a most horrible
Stink when the Stroke was given, and felt such a violent Heat, as if her Head
had been in a Bakers Oven, so that for the time she could hardly draw her
Breath.

ANNOTATIONS.
WIth what a violent force, and how wonderfully Thunder sometimes strikes
inferior things, both ancient and modern Testimonies sufficiently convince us.
In the Year 1626. eight days before Easter, rose a very great Tempest, with
Thunder and Lightning; at what time, with one Clap of Thunder, four Houses and
six Barns were quite overthrown in Blockland near Montfort, and above three
thousand Trees, not only broken, but torn up from the Roots, and cast at a
great distance from their Holes, neither Men nor Beasts receiving any harm. In
the Year 1628, a Country Man was killed in the Fields near Bodegrave with a
Flash of Lightning, his Bones being broken to bits, yet neither his Skin or
Flesh endamaged. In France at Poitou, in a certain Tower, we saw the Rafters
burnt, the Lead being untouched; nor was the Fire quenched without a great deal
of trouble. In the Year 1638, at Nimeghen, in the Walk called the Calves-wood,
above a thousand Birds were killed at one time by the Lightning; and while the
same Tempest lasted, some Oxen were killed by the Lightning, having their Bones
broken, and several Trees were thrown down and broken, having their Leaves
scorched and parched by the Flame* Cardan reports, that in the Year 1521, the
Castle of Millain was almost demolished by Lightning, at what time a hundred
and thirteen Men were killed. Hildan tells a remarkable Story of a Gentleman,
who was Thunderstruck himself, at what time his own Horse, and his Man with
another Horse were both killed out right. The Gentleman's Clothes were torn to
Pieces, and his Sword melted, the Scabbord, receiving no harm; only that the
Iron Chape was melted at the same time. Therefore says Cardan, upon this;
Motion not only causes a greater Penetration, but kindles the Heat it self, and
renders the Fire hotter. Therefore it is no wonder there should be such a force
in Lightning, and that a Fire so different from the Nature of other Fires,
should work Miracles; for by reason of the Swiftness of its Motion, it not only
penetrates more, but the Fire is also hotter than any other Fire: For what
other Fire is there that kills by touching? This is peculiar to this Fire; that
is, the hotest of most hot; or as I may say, the Fire of Fires: And therefore
sometimes it melts the Money in the Purse, and leaves the Purse untouched, etc.

OBSERVATION XCVII. A Cough.
NIcolaus Kerckwegg, in the Vigor of his Age, was troubled with a lamentable
Cough for three or four years; he was nothing but Skin and Bone, and seemed to
be perfectly Ptisical. When, after he had tried several others in vain, he came
to me; I examined the Condition both of the Person and the Disease; I looked
upon his Spittle, which was slimy and tough, without any Matter or Blood,
therefore I could not judge him to be in a real Consumption, but that the Cough
proceeded from a Cathar falling upon his Lungs, which in a long time of
continuance, had weakened, not only his Lungs, but his whole Body. For Cure, I
prescribed him a proper Diet, and some few Remedies, for that his Antipathy
against Physic, and his Weakness, would not permit me to give many. Therefore,
having gently purged his Body, I ordered him to take a Draught of the following
Decoction three or four times a day.

. White Horehound M. iij. Shred it small, and steep it all night in common
Water lbj* s. to which, the next day, add the Head of one white Poppy shred
into bits, Leaves of Hyssop M. j. Oxymel lbj. s. Boil them in an earthen Pipkin
close stopped, to the Consumption of the third Part, and keep the Straining for
your Use.

This Decoction he continued for three or four months till at length the Cough
abated every day more and more, and at length ceased; the Man also having
recovered his Strength, and growing fat and lusty, so continued without any
further Molestation.

OBSERVATION XCVIII. An Uterine Suffocation.
THE Wife of a Brick-layer at Nimeghen, about twenty eight years of Age, in
July, was troubled with a Suffocation of her Womb with a great pain in her
Left-side, and difficulty of Breath. Being sent for about Evening, I gave her
the following Draught, which when she had taken, the Malady ceased in part, and
so she slept quietly that Night.

. English Saffron, Castoreum an. gr. v. Trochischs of Myrrh s. Prepared Amber
j. Treacle ij. Treacle-water j. Mugwort s. Oil of Amber gut. ix. Mix them for a
Draught.

The next day her Fit returned with the same vehemence, and because she had not
been at Stool in three or four days, I gave her this Purge.

. Leaves of Senna s. Lovage-seed j. s. Mugwort-water q. s. Make an Infusion,
then add to the Straining Elect. Diaphenicon, Hiera Picra, an. j. s. For a
Potion.

This gave her five Stools; the Suffocation remaining, nay, growing more
violent than before, wherefore I prescribed her the following Decoction, of
which she drank warm an ounce, or an ounce and a half every hour, which after
she had continued the whole day, her Evacuations came down, and the Suffocation
vanished.

. Roots of Masterwort, Valerian, an. s. Dittany, Briony, an. iij. Savine M. j.
Seed of Lovage vj. Of wild Carrots ij. White Wind q. s. Boil them for an Apozem
to lbj. s.

OBSERVATION XCIX. Deafness.
THE Wife of Henry Iordens, in the Month of August, complained that for half a
year she had been troubled with a very great Deafness, so that she could hear
nothing but very loud Noises. She was about forty years of age, and during this
Deafness, had been all along very hard bound in her Body, so that she seldom
went to Stool in four or five days; for which reason, I judged that many Vapors
ascended up to her Brain, which furring the auditory Nerve and Tympanum, caused
this Deafness: Thereupon, after I had well purged her Body with Pills, I
ordered her every Evening when she went to Bed, to swallow two Pills of Lucid
Aloes, about the bigness of a Pea; by taking of which, her Body was naturally
loosned, and so that great Deafness, within a Fortnight, was quite taken away,
to the Admiration of many.

ANNOTATIONS.
THE Head, like a Lembick, receives the Vapors of all the Parts that lie
underneath: Which if they are carried thither in greater abundance than can be
digested and discussed by the Brain, causes various Diseases of the Head,
Pains, Catarrhs, Ophthalmies, Deafness, etc. And this abounding Ascent of
copious Vapors, chiefly happens to those that are bound in their Bodies. For
this reason, if the Deafness have not been of a very long standing, then the
Malady is easily cured by loosning the Body; by which means the morbific Matter
is derived to the Intestines: Which Celsus intimates; where he says, Nothing
more prevails against Deafness than a Choleric Belly. For which, Galen gives
this Reason, because that Choler being carried to the Auditory Passages, and
causing Deafness if it be removed from those Parts to the lower Parts, the
Deafness is cured by Choleric Stools. Neither is this only true in Deafness,
but in Ophthalmies, and other Affections of the Head, according to that Saying,
All Stools below remove the Diseases of the Superior Parts: Which is to be
understood not only of Evacuations of Choler, but of all other Evacuations by
Stool. Hippocrates and Celsus speak particularly of Choleric Humors, because
they occasion Deafness more than any other Humor, in regard that Choler has a
familiar passage to the Ears; as appears by the Bitterness of the Excrement of
the Ears: Which Mercurialis believes that Nature carries thither, merely to
cleanse the Auditory Organ, and keep it clean. Wherefore in such Maladies of
the Head, purging Medicines that mollify the Belly, are of great use; partly to
hinder the Ascent of such Humors and Vapors; partly to draw off such as are
already got up into the Head; of which, we saw the happy Event in our Patient.
For though there be no conspicuous Passage for the Descent of those Humors from
the Brain, yet Nature finds out ways unknown to us, by which she evacuates the
Morbific Matter, and rids her self of many Distempers.

OBSERVATION C. The Itch.
A Young Gentlewoman had got the Scab, which chiefly infested her Hands with an
extraordinary Itching. This Malady had continued for half a year, and because
it began to spread more and more, I was sent for: Thereupon, after I had purged
her Body, I ordered her to wash her Hands with equal parts of mercuriated Water
and Virgins Milk, and to let them dry of themselves. By which means the
Scabbiness came forth more and more for two or three days, but within three or
four days afterward, wholly dried up, and was cured.

OBSERVATION CI. A Malady in the Stomach.
ISaac of Aix la Chapelle, forty six years of age, was troubled with an old
Distemper in his Stomach, occasioned by difficult and painful Belchings; so
that after he had eat or drank any thing, he was forced to belch fifty, and
sometimes a hundred times and more, and that often both by day and by night;
neither could he stop them; or if they did not break forth, he was like one
that was ready to burst. Besides, his Sight was very weak, so that he could not
see to read or write without Spectacles, and that at a very near distance too,
and thus he had been troubled from the twentieth year of his Age till then. He
had had the Advice of several Physicians to no purpose; upon which, I desired
him to try only one Experiment, which was to smoke one Pipe of Tobacco after
Dinner and Supper. At first he took but half a Pipe, but afterwars he grew such
a Proficient, that he would take two or three; so that after he had continued
the use of Tobacco in that manner for about a month, his Belching ceased, and
his Sight was much amended.

ANNOTATIONS.
NIcholas Monardes writes, that Tobacco is hot and dry in the second degree,
and therefore attenuates, concocts, cleanses, discusses, asswages Pain, and has
a stupifying Quality, is good against the Toothache, allays all Pains of the
Head being outwardly applied, and laid upon the cold Stomach, cuts the same,
etc. Which Qualities, Dodonaeus acknowledges also in Tobacco. But in regard
that in their time this Plant was not so much in request, the Benefit and Abuse
of it was less known to them than to us.

Practical Disputations OF Isbrand de Diemerbroeck, Concerning the DISEASES OF
THE HEAD, BREAST and LOWER BELLY.
The Cures of the chief Diseases of the whole Head, in Twenty Five
Disputations, annexed to the Cases of the Patients themselves.

HISTORY I. Of the Headache.
A Person of forty years of age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, often liable to
Catarrhs, in the midst of VVinter, in a very cold Season, had traveled for
forty Days together, and by the way had fed upon flatulent, viscous Meats, of
hard Digestion, and other such kind of Food, to which he had not been
accustomed, and instead of Wine, he had been forced to drink thick muddy Ale.
Upon his return home, he complained of a troublesome Pain in his Head, more
heavy and obtuse than acute, which if you laid your hand hard upon the place,
was so far from being exasperated, that it was more gentle for the time. This
Pain was also accompanied with Noises in his Ears, an Inclination to Sleep,
which his Pain however would not permit him to take, and a want of Appetite, a
Lassitude of the whole Body, and Paleness in the Face.

I. IN this Patient we find the Head to be first affected, by the Pain thereof,
and the Noise in his Ears: Whence, by consent, the whole Body suffers, as
appears by his Lassitude and other Simptoms.

II. The Malady of which he chiefly complains, is a Pain in the Head; which is
a trouble to the Sense of Feeling in the membranous Parts, caused by the
Solution of the Continuum.

III. This Pain is internal, in the Parts contained within the Skull; as is
from hence apparent, for that it is not exasperated, but somewhat mitigated by
laying the Hand hard upon the Part.

IV. The remote Cause of this Malady is disorderly Diet; by which means, by the
use of Meats of ill Juice and hard Concoction, several crude and flegmatic
Humors are generated in the whole Body, but especially in the Head, which
produce the Antecedent Cause; which being increased by the external Cold,
wherein he had traveled for four days together, and fixed in the membranous
Parts of the Brain, occasioned the containing Cause.

V. These flegmatic Humors being by the external Cold condensed in the Head,
and not being evacuated through the Pores, obstructed by the Cold, or other
Passages appointed for the Evacuation of the Excrement, were gathered together
in great abundance in the Passages of the Brain, and by reason of their
quantity distending the membranous Parts of the Brain, and dissolving the
Continuum, caused the Pain.

VI. The Cure is to be hastened, for if that flegmatic Humor stay long in the
Head, it is to be feared that the Malady may turn to a heavy Drowsiness, or an
Apoplexy, or if it dissolve too soon, and make too improper a way, least it
cause some dangerous Catarrh, which falling upon the Lungs or lower Parts may
endanger a violent Cough or Suffocation, or some other desperate Distemper in
some other part.

VII. Four Indications are here to be considered in order to the Cure. 1. That
the abounding Phlegm be evacuated from the Head and whole Body. 2. That it be
specially evacuated out of the Head it self. 3. That the Pain be allayed. 4.
That the Head be strengthened, and the Concoctions of the Bowels be promoted,
and so a new Generation of abounding Phlegm, as well in the Head as whole Body,
be prevented, and that the Phlegm already generated and abounding may be
consumed.

VIII. For the Evacuation of Phlegm abounding in the whole Body, let him take
this purging Draught.

. Trochischs of Agaric j. Leaves of Senna cleansed s. Anise-seed j. s. White
Ginger j. Decoction of Barley q. s. make an Infusion. Then add to the Straining
Elect. Diaphaenicon ij. Diagredion gr. iiij. Mix them for a Draught.

If the Patient cannot take this, give him of Pill. Cochiae ij. or iij. or else
j. of Powder of Diacarthamum, or Diaturbith with Rhubarb. This Purgation must
be repeated to prepare the Humors three or four times every three or four days
one after another.

IX. For Evacuation of the Phlegm, particularly accumulated in the Head,
Sternutories and Errhines are of great use. The one, because they draw down
viscous and tough Humors through the Nostrils and Palate. The other, because
the Brain being by them provoked, and violently contracting it self, as
violently expels tough Humors sticking to the Ethmoides Bone, and by removing
the Obstruction, makes way for the Excrements detained therein.

X. Of this Sneezing-powder, let him twice or thrice a day snuff up a little
into his Nose.

. Marjoram Leaves j. Root of white Hellebore j. s. Pellitory of Spain s. Black
Pepper, Benjamin, an. gr. v.

If Sneezing prevail not, let him snuff up a little of the following Errhin
into his Nostrils.

. Juice of Marjoram s. Juice of the Root of white Beets j. Mix them for an
Errhin.

XI. In the mean time, to allay the Pain, anoint the Forehead, Temples and Top
of the Head with Martiate or Alabastrin Ointment, mixed with a sixth part of
Oil of Dill; or a Cataplasm of Flowers of Cammomil, Melilot and Dill; adding a
little Nutmeg and Saffron with as much of the Crum of White-bread and
White Wind as is sufficient, and lay it between two Linen Rags to the Temples
and Forehead; but beware of all Narcotics.

XII. For the Corroboration of the Head* and the rest of the Bowels, and
Diminution of the Phlegm, External and Internal Medicaments are proper, and a
convenient Diet.

. Roots of Calamus Aromatic. Elec^m pane, Fennel, an. s. Galangale iij Herbs,
Betony, Marjoram, Rosemary, Hyssop, Baum, Thyme, an. M. j. Sage. Fowers of
Cammomil, Staechas, an M. s. Seed of Fennel, Ani^e, Caroways, an s
Iuniper-berries vj Raisins cleansed ij. Common Water and White^ine equal Parts.
Boil them an^ make an Apozem to lb j. s. with which, mix Syrup of Staechas ij.
or iij.

If after he has taken this, there requires more Exsiccation still, the same
Simples may be boiled in a Decoction of (...), Sassape^il or Sassafras, which
will make the Medicine more effectual. Let him continue this Decoction for some
time, or if at length it prove distastful, let him often take of this
Conditement.

. Specier. Diambra iiij. Aromatic. Rosatum ij. Ginger condited, Conserve of
Flowers of Sage and Rosemary, an. s. Syrup of Staechas q. s. For a Conditment.

XIII. And in regard that Topics are of great use to corroborate the Head, and
fetch down cold Humors therein remaining, let him anoint his Temples and
forepart of the Head upon the Coronal Suture with this Liniment.

. Oil of Nutmegs pressed j. Oils of Thyme, Rosemary, Dill dis^illed, an. j. Mix
them for a Liniment.

After this Anointing, put upon the Head the following Quilt.

. Leaves of Rosemary and Marjoram, an. s. Flowers of Melilot, Red Roses and
Lavender, an. j. Root of Florence Orrice, Nutmegs, Cloves, Benjamin, an. j.
Beat them into a gross Powder for a Quilt.

Let him wear this a Month or two upon is Head.

XIV. Let the Patient keep a proper Diet; live in an Air moderately hot: Let
his Food be Meats of good Juice, hot and easy of Di^estion, seasoned with
Rosemary, Marjoram, Stone-Parsly, Sage, Betony, Hysop, Pepper, Ginger and other
Spices. His Drink, small Wine or Mede, or midling Ale. Let him not sleep long,
and use moderate Exercise. Let him keep his Body soluble. Let him avoid
Sadness, Melancholy and sudden Frights, and keep himself in an even Temper,
free from Passion.

HISTORY II. A Frenzy.
A Stout young Man, of a Choleric Constitution, abounding with Blood, and
living intemperately, having drank over freely at a Merry*meeting, and thereby
overheated, at length, being affronted by one of the Company, fell into a most
violent Passion; yet being hindered from his present Revenge, and carried Home,
never slept all that Night, but like a Madman ran about his Chamber, talking
of nothing but Brawls, Fighting, Wounds and Revenge; and that with great Rage,
and many Follies intermixed, The next Day he was absolutely mad, and began to
lay violent Hands upon the Servants, so that he was forced to be held by lusty
Men. The next Night he continued waking with an extraordinary Delirium and
Fury, picking Straws and the Bed-cloaths, sometimes flying upon those that were
in the Room. His Eyes were red, his Looks furious and wild, he bawled and
roared, was very thirsty, feverish, and his Urine pale. The third Day the
Physicians were sent for.

I. THE continued and raging Delirium, with his Waking showed that the Brain of
this Patient was distempered, and the Fever was a Sign that his whole Body was
out of order.

II. The Disease was an Inflammation of the Membranes of the Brain, and thence a
hot Distemper of the Brain and Spirits, which caused the Fever; and that the
Commotion of his Mind, which the Physicians call a Frenzy, which is a raging
and continued Delirium, with a continued Fever, arising from an Inflammation of
the Membranes of the Brain.

III. The remote Cause was Intemperance in Diet, which engendring a great
quantity of choleric Blood in the Body, occasioned the antecedent Cause. Which
choleric Blood being heated by excess of drinking Wine, and carried in greater
quantity to the Head, and there powered into the Substance of the Membranes of
the Brain, constitutes the containing Cause of this Distemper, which Disease
this Simptom follows.

IV. For the hot Blood flowing over copiously into those Membranes, and there
putrefying inflamed them; and part of that Putrefaction being communicated
through the Veins to the Heart, and thence expelled hotter through the Arteries
to the whole Body, kindles the Fever, which causes the extraordinary Drought of
the Gullet and Mouth.

V. This Inflammation of the Membranes infects with a hot Distemper the Brain
it self, and Spirits, whose extreme Heat, Mobility and inordinate Motion,
deprave the principal Functions of the Brain, and so breed a Delirium, which
proves raging and continued, because of the extreme and continued Heat, and
rapid Motion of the fervent Spirits.

VI. This Disease is dangerous for several Causes. 1. Because the principal
part is affected. 2. Because continual Waking weakens the Patient. 3. Because
this Delirium is not accompanied with Laughter but with Raging. 4. Because the
Inflammation is thereby much augmented and fomented, and the Choleric Matter
which uses to dye the Urine is carried all to the Head, and leaves the Urine
pale. Only there is some hopes of Cure, because there is no decay of Strength,
or appearance of bad Simptoms, as Convulsions, loss of Speech, Hickupings,
Gnashing of Teeth, or the like; and therefore Cure must not be delayed till the
Patient grow worse.

VII. This Cure consists in taking away the antecedent and containing Cause,
and Correction of the ill temper of the Parts.

VIII. The choleric Blood which flies to the Head, is first to be evacuated,
drawn back, derived, and repelled. And therefore after an emollient Glister
given, open a vein, first in one Arm, and take away ten or twelve ounces of
Blood; the next day in the other, and the third day again, if there be
necessity, in the Vein of the Forehead.

IX. To evacuate the choleric Humors, give this Draught.

. Rubarb the best, Leaves of Senna, an. ij. Rhenish Tartar iij. Aniseseed j.
Succory Water q. s. Make an Infusion, then add to the Straining Elect.
Diaprunum solutive iij. Diagridion gr. iij. Mix them for a Draught.

The next Days, if he be bound, let him be loosned with Glisters, and the third
or fourth day give him the foresaid Purge again.

X. Let his Temples and Forehead be anointed twice or thrice a day with the
following Liniment.

. Populeon Ointment vj. Oil of Poppy iij. Mix them for a Limment.

After anointing, apply the following Oxyrrhodine, with rags luke warm to his
Forehead.

. Oil of Roses ij. Juice of Lettice iij. Juice of Housleek, Rose Water, Vinegar
of Roses, an. j. s. Mix them well together.

XI. For diversion of the Morbific Matter, apply Pigeons dissected alive to
his Feet, or else this following Medicine.

. Leaves of red Cabbage, white Beets, an. ^. j. s. beat them in a Mort^r, and
make them into a* Past with sour Levea iiij. Salt ij. Vinegar of Roses q. s.

XII. About Night, give gr. iiij. of Laudanum in a Pill, or if he refuse a
Pill, dissolve three Grains of that Laudanum in one ounce of Decoction of
Barley, adding an ounce of Syrup of Poppy Rheas to provoke Sleep.

XIII. While these things are done, for his usual Drink, give him small Ale, or
Whey of sour Milk or Fountain Water, having some Pieces of Citron steeped in
it, adding a little Sugar and Rose Water, or else this Julep.

. Lettice Leaves M. iiij. Endive M. ij. Red Currants M. j. Barley-water q. s.
Boil them to a Pint; to the Straining when cold, add Syrup of Violets and
Limons, an. j. of Poppy s. Juice of Citron q. s. to make it pleasing.

XIV. Let him also take of this Conditement often in a day.

. Powder of Diamargarite cold iiij. Pulp of Tamarinds, Conserve of Violets,
pale Roses, Robb of red Currants, an. iij. Syrup of Violets q. s:

About Evening, when he does not take his Laudanum Opiate, let him drink one or
two Draughts of this Emulsion.

. Four greater Cold seeds, an. ij. Seed of white Poppy s. Decoction of Barley
q. s. Make an Emulsion of about vij. To which add Syrup of Violets and Poppy
R^eas, an. v.

XV. When the Distemper begins to assuage, the sooner to dissolve the peccant
Matter, cut alive Hen in the middle, and lay it to his Head, or else the Lungs
of a Calf or Sheep newly killed.

XVI. Let his Air be between cold and moist, and his Chamber somewhat dark. His
Diet sparing and cooling, prepared with Lettice, Endive, Borrage, Sorrel, and
the like; his Drink as before. Let him not be t^oubled with much company nor
Talk. Only let those, for whom he had a Kindness in his Health, endeavor now
and then to pacify his Rage with good Words* Lastly keep his Belly soluble.

HISTORY III. Of Melancholy.
A Learned Man, forty years of age, of a melancholy Constitution, in the
Summer time, walking out of the City with a Son of his, came to the River side,
pulling off his Clothes, lea^t into the Water, to please himself with Swimming,
to which he persuaded his Son likewise, to make him skilful of the same Art;
but his Son leaping into the Water, sunk to the bottom, and was drowned before
his Father could come to his Assistance. Upon which, the Father fell into such
a deep Sadness, continuing thinking of his Misfortune, and believing himself
the Author of his Child's Death, that he did nothing but weep Day and Night,
without sleeping: and within a few Days, was brought to that pass, that he
believed himself guilty of Murder, and for that reason eternally damned. He
also thought the Devil, who had tempted him to do the Fact, always stood at his
side, and showed his horrid Shape to those that stood by, pointing at him with
his Finger, wondering they did not see him, as well as He. As to other things he
was well enough; only this false Imagination stuck so deeply in his Mind, that
no Persuasions or Consolations of his Friends could root it out.

I. When the seat of the Principal faculties in the Brain was endamag'd, and
the Imagination depraved, it was a sign the Patients Brain was out of order, as
appeared by his sadness and fear.

II. This Malady is Melancholy, and a depraved Distemper of the Brain, hurting
the Imagination, and deluding it with false Apparitions, and causing fear and
sadness without any reason; which are two unquestionable Signs of Melancholy,
according to Hippocrates. Therefore we may well define Melancholy to be, a
Delirium without a Fever, arising from a Melancholy Fancy.

III. The first and external Cause of this Man's Malady, was his grievous
Misfortune, having his Son drowned, which seized him the more violently, as
being naturally Melancholy. Which when he could not forget, but spent whole
Days and Nights, continually thinking upon it without any Sleep, the Animal
Spirits, prone to Melancholy, were disorderly agitated in the Brain, and so
contracted a Specific and Ocult distemper, which they communicated not to the
Brain, but to the Heart and whole Body: Hence horrible thoughts, sadness and
fear.

VI. When he thought of his Son, whom, he believed to be drowned by his fault,
he persuaded himself he was guilty of Murder, which because he knew it was a
Sin hareful to God, therefore he thought himself Damned, and the Devil to be
always at his Elbow; the continual thinking upon which, had shaped the Idea of
a Devil, so firmly in his mind, that he could not be otherwise persuaded, but
that the Devil was always before his Eyes, nor could any Body dispossess him of
that Imagination. In other things he was well, because his perception and
judgment of things was no way hindered by that false Imagination: as being
wholly taken up with that Imagination, and nothing so much, not with such an
emotion of Mind intent upon other things.

V. Because this occult Distemper of the Brain and Animal Spirits was bred in
the Brain, plain it is that this was a primary or self-suffering Melancholy.

VI. This Melancholy Delirium, though very troublesome, yet is it not Mortal; and
gives great hopes of Cure, because only the Imagination is depraved, the
Ratiocination and Memory little endamaged; then again, he was sound in Body,
and lastly, because he was a Learned Man, and so much the sooner to be governed
by Reason: besides that it was in the Summer when this happened; which was a
Season more proper for Cure.

VII. In the Cure the Evil Melancholy Matter, and the ill Temper of the Brain
is to be amended, that the purer Spirits may be freed from that Specific
Melancholy, Contamination and generated anew. The same evil Matter is also to
be evacuated, and his Head to be corroborated, and all means tried to take off
the Patients thoughts, from false and horrible Imaginations.

VIII. First, therefore Purge him with this Bolus.

. Con^ection Hamech, Elect. Diaphoenicon an j. s. Diagridion gr. vij. Mix them.

Or if he will not take that, give him this Glister.

. Emollient Decoction to which an Ounce of the Leaves of Senna has been added
ix. Elect. Diaphoenicon ij. Oil of Camomil j. s. Salt. j.

IX. Because such a Patient has not much Blood, therefore to preserve his
strength, there is no Blood*letting to be used, unless there be a Palpitation
of the Heart, or any such Symptom which requires it.

X. After the Belly is well cleansed, to prepare the Melancholy humor, and
strengthen the Head, let him drink three or four times a day, a draught of this
Apozem.

. Root of Polypody of the Oak j. Calamus Aromatic. Fennel, rind of Caper-roo^s,
Tamarisch an. s. Herbs Baum, Borage, March Violets, Tops of Hops, Betony,
Germander, Majoram an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s. Cordial Flowers, an. one
little handful, Citron and Orange Peel an. iij. Seeds of Fennel and Caraways
an. j. s. Currants ij. Water and Wine equal Parts. Make an Apozem for a Pint
and a half, to which mix Syrup of Stoechas and Borage an. j. s.

XI. After this preparation, Purge with this Potion.

. Leaves of Senna s. White Agaric j. Anise-seed j. Ginger j. Decoction of Barley
q. s. Infuse them all Night. Then add to straining Confect. Hamech iij.

XII. This done let him take this Apozem again, and continue it for some time,
loosing his Belly every three or four days either with the foresaid draught, or
Confect. Hamech, or Cochiae Pills, or Mesues and compounded Syrup of Apples,
highly commended by Rondeletius in this Case.

XIII. After every Dose of his Apozem, as also after Dinner and Supper, let him
eat the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Conditement.

. Specier. Diambr. sweet Diammosch Dianthos an. ij. Candid Citron and Orang
Peels, an. iij. Conserve of Flowers of Borage, Baum, and Rosemary, an. s.
Confect. Alkermes, j. s. Syrup of Citron Rind. q. s. Mix them, for a
Conditement.

XIV. In the midst of these Cures, peculiar Evacuations of the Head will not be
amiss, either by Masticatories or Sternutories made of Mar joram, Githseed,
Roots of white Hellebore, and Pellitory, or the like.

XV. Great care is to be taken to provoke the Patient to sleep. Therefore for
his Supper give him sometimes a Hordeate or Amygdalate, made with a Decoction
of Barley and Lettice, with which if he be hard to sleep, mix one Ounce of Syrup
of Poppys or more. Or if these avail not, of the Mass of Pills of Storax
fifteen grains, or of Laudanum Opiat. three grains; but this not often: When he
is not so much troubled with Waking, it will suffice to anoint his Temple with
Ointment of Populeon, mixed with some few grains of Opium. Though Narcotics are
to be used as little as may be, for fear of accustoming the Patient too much to
the use of them.

XVI. His Diet must be such as breeds good Blood, and corrects all the
qualities of Melancholy Humors; easy of Digestion, moderately hot and moist,
prepared with Barley cleansed, Borage, Baum, Bugloss, Marjoram, Raisins, Betony,
etc. avoiding Leeks, Onions, Garlic, Cabbige, Fish long pickled, or dried in
the Smoke; and whatever beeds ill Juice and Melancholy nourishment: let the
Patient be moderate in his Diet, neither too full nor too empty: Let his Drink
be small, with a little Baum, Rosemary or other such Herb mixed with it: Let his
Exercises be moderate: His sleeping time much longer: Let his Body be kept
soluble. And which is of great moment in this Cure, let his Mind be taken off
from all manner of sadness and thougthfulness; and all occasions of fear and
grief be avoided; while his friends on the other side labor with grateful
Arguments to persuade him of the vanity and falsehood of his idle Dreams and
Imaginations.

HISTORY. IV. Of Hypochondriac Melancholy.
A Noble German of forty Years of Age, of a Melancholy Constitution having
suffered deeply in the calamities of the late German War, as Captivity, Exile,
Famine, and other Miseries, which had reduced him to an ill sort of Diet; the
long use of which had begot wind, roarings and distensions about his Midriff,
and a troublesome Ponderosity especially about his left Hypochondrium, with
difficulty of respiration, and a palpitation of the Heart, though not
continual, with loss of Appetite, which made him sad, fearful, and thoughtful;
till at length understanding the death of his Wife, he became so consternated,
that no persuasive and kind Language could assuage his sadness; so that through
continual watching, restlessness, horrible thoughts, and want of sleep he began
to rave at first by intervals, but afterward without ceasing; he thought every
Body came to kill him, and therefore sought retirement, and avoided Society. No
body but Servants entered his Chamber, and of them he was afraid too: if any
other Persons came to visit him, he besought them not to Murder him unprovided,
but to give him time to prepare himself for Death; he only seemed to trust his
Physician, from whom he often desired Antidotes against Poison, which he
assured himself were often mixed with his Meat, and took any Medicaments that
were brought him.

IN this Person thus Distempered, various Parts were grievously afflicted,
especially the Brain, as appeared by the Delirium, and the Bowels of the middle
and lower Belly, which the Palpitation of his Heart, difficulty of breathing,
distention and ponderosity of his Hypochondriums and loss of Appetite plainly
demonstrated.

II. The Symptom that chiefly insested, is called Melancholy, which is a
Delirium without Rage or Fever, arising from a Melancholy Phantasm.

III. The remote Causes of this Malady are Fear, Terrors and Grief, occasioned
by Misfortunes, which had long troubled and disordered the Spirits in their
Motion: to which an ill Diet mainly contributed. For thereby Crudities were
bred in the Bowels of the lower Belly; thence Obstructions in the Spleen and
neighboring Parts. The faculty of the Spleen was weakened, so that not able to
do its Office in Chymification, and breeding Matter unfit for convenient
Fermentation of the Humors, it left many feculent, acid, sour, thick and crude
Humors, which not able to pass the small Vessels, got together in a large
quantity in the left Hypochondrium about the Spleen, which occasioned that
troublesome Ponderosity; accompanied with wind and roarings; for that while
Nature endeavors the Concoction of that acid Matter, which she cannot well
accomplish, those acid Humors receive some Fermentation, which begets that
great quantity of Wind, which not finding an easy Exit, occasions those
rumblings, and distensions of the Parts. This thicker, acid and sharp Matter
being carried to the Heart, causes Palpitation, while the Heart endeavors to
expel that sharp pricking Matter from it. And in regard that Melancholy Juice
is not equally troublesome to all the Parts of the Heart; thence it happens that
the Palpitation does not always continue, but comes by intervals. The same
Juice being expelled from the right Ventricle of the Heart to the Lungs, when
it comes to fill the small branches of the Arterious Veins, and Veiny Artery,
as not being able to pass them without great difficulty, fills the Breast with
many Vapors, and causes difficulty of Respiration. But being carried through
the Arteries with the Vital blood to the Brain, it disorders the Motion of the
Animal Spirits, renders them more impure, and alters them by a Specific and bad
mistemper. Thence those Melancholy Imaginations, by which the Operations of
the Mind and Ratiocination are disturbed, which occasions a Delirium
accompanied with fear and sadness.

IV. But because that Melancholy humor is not generated at first in the Head,
but ascends from the Hypochondriums, especially the left, to the Head; hence
this Melancholy is not particular to any Part, but Sympathetic, and therefore
from the Name of the Place, where the Nourishment of the Distemper lies, is
called Hypochondriac.

V. This Melancholy Delirium is hard to be cured, and not void of danger. 1.
Because the Causes of it are mischievous and remote, in regard they occasion
the Generation and Accumulation of that feculent Melancholy Matter in the
Hypochondriums. 2. Because that feculent Matter is obstinate and not easily
tamed by Medicaments, and infects the Animal Spirits with a peculiar evil
Temper. 3. Because the Cure requiring a longer time, the question is, whether
the Patient will take so much Physic or no. 4. Because the continued ascent of
the Melancholy humor to the Brain, the Distemper instead of being Sympathetic,
may turn to be the peculiar Passion of that Part. 5. Because those Melancholy
Humors are troublesome to the Membranes of the Brain and Nerves, through their
occult and manifest Qualities, their acrimony and sourness, etc. whence the
fear is, least their copious afflux to the Brain should cause Convulsions,
Epilepses, etc. 6. Because this Delirium is not accompanied with Laughter, but
with a sad and serious Musing. Yet while there is strength and a willingness to
take Physic, there is some hopes of Cure.

VI. In the Method of Cure, the containing Cause is first to be discussed, and
the ill temper of the Animal Spirit to be removed as also that the Antecedent
Cause, or Melancholy Humor in the Hypocondriums, be atteuated, digested and
evacuated, and a new Generation and Accumulation of it prevented, that
Obstructions be removed, and that the Brain, Spleen and other Bowels be
corroborated.

VII. Milder Medicaments, not very hot will be most convenient; least the
Matter being agitated by stronger and very hot Medicines be carried in too
great a quantity to the Heart and Brain.

VIII. First loosen the Belly with this Glyster.

. Emollient Decoction x. choice Hiera P^cra, Diacatholicon an. j. s. Oil of
Camomile j. s. Salt j. mix them for a Glyster.

The next day but one, or the third day, give him this Purge.

. Leaves of Senna s. white Agaric, Anise-seed, an. j. Ginger j. Decoction of
Barley q. s. make an Infusion, then add to the straining Confect. Hamech ij.
Hiera Picra j. For a Potion.

IX. Now because People thus affected have their Veins swelled, with a
Palpitation of the Heart sometimes, and that their strength is in good
Condition, after Purging, Blood-letting will not be amiss in the Arm; or if the
Hemorhoid Veins appear, Leeches may be properly applied.

X. This done let the Patient drink three or four times a day, a draught of
this Apozem.

. Root of Polipody of the Oak j. Eringos, Cammoch, Rind of the Roots of Capers,
Tamarisch, an. s. Herbs, Borage, Roman-Wormwood, Strawberryleaves, all the
Dandelions, Ceterach, Germander, water Trefoile an. M. j. March Violet leaves
and Baum an M. s. Citron and Orange-Peels an s. Damask Prunes vij. Currants ij.
Steel tied in a little knot j. Anise-seed iij. common Water q. s. Make an
Apozem. of lb j. s.

XI. After he has used this Apozem four days, let him take the Pu^ge aforesaid
again, and then return to his Apozem; and so continue this method for some
time, and if he be bound while he takes his Glister, let him be loosened with
the foregoing Glister; now and then the Apozem may be made Purging by adding.

. Leaves of Senna ij. Root of black-Hellebore ij. Indian Mirobalans vj.
Anise-seed s. and let him drink iiij. every Morning.

If he find himself nauseous and inclining to Vomit, this Vomitory may be given
him.

. Conserve of Leaves of Asarabacca x. Decoction of Radishes iij. Oxymel
Scyllitic with Agric s. Vomitious Wine iij.

XII. In the mean time that he takes these things, let him also for the
strengthening of his Head and Bowels, take of these Tablets several times in
the Day.

. Specier. Diambrae j. Dianthos, Aromatic. Rosatum, an. j. Powder of the Yellow
of Citron-rina j. s. Sugar dissolved in Betony-water ij. For Tablets.

Or let him sometimes take a small quantity of this Conditement.

. Specier. Diambrae j. Conserve of Borage, Baum, Rosemary-flowers, pale Roses
an. iij. Syrup of Citron rind, q. s.

XIII. Let him keep in a good and pleasant Air, and avoid Loanliness; converse
with merry Company, and be merry himself. Let him abstain from all Meats of
hard Digestion and ill Nourishment, especially salted and smoaked food. Let him
avoid bottled and windy Drink, and let his Salads and Sauces be such as
attenuate and open, and promote Concoction, but not very hot.

HISTORY. V. Of Madness.
A Young Gentlewoman about twenty eight Years of Age, lusty, perspicacious,
melancholy, musing and thoughtful, but using an ill Diet, and sometimes liable
to obstructions in her Hypochondriums; finding her self to be slighted by her
Parents, a long time concealed her grief, and publicly showed her self
cheerful, but spent the Nights without sleep, in Morosness, Tears and Sighs. At
length she was taken with a pain in her Head, accompanied with a slight Fever,
disorderly but continual: within a few days her pain leaving her she appeared
to be light Headed, for she that was before reserved of her Speech, grew to be
very talkative of a sudden; so that at length she began to talk not only all
day but all night long. However for the first two or three days, though she
talked much yet what she said was all sense and rational enough; but after that
she fell to raving and nonsense; then her Fever ceased; but still she never
slept; this Delirium within a few days increased to that degree, that she grew
sullen, angry, run about the Chamber, made a noise, and grew so out-ragious,
that she laid violent hands upon all that came near her, talked obscenely, and
tore her Clothes: so that she was forced to be held down in her Bed,
nevertheless she was strong, had her Evacuations duly, and an indifferent good
Stomach, nor was she very thirsty; neither was she much sensible of the bitter
Cold, Frosty, Winter-Season, though she had hardly any Clothes upon her; but
was always warm.

I. THAT the Brain of this Woman was terribly affected, appears by her
continued Madness, accompanied with want of sleep, boldness, immodesty and
anger, and that her Heart and the rest of her Body suffered, was plain from her
extraordinary heat.

II. This Delirium is called Madness, and is a continued Commotion of the Mind
with an enraged Boldness, arising from the heat of the Spirits.

III. The chiefest of all the evident Causes, was her grief to be so slighted
by her Parents, which though she dissemblingly suppressed at first,
nevertheless in a young Person, Melancholy of her self, and by reason of her
disorderly Diet, abounding with Choleric and Melancholy humors, and so liable
to Diseases, it might easily produce a raging Delirium. For that slight,
sometimes moved her to Anger, while the Choler boiled that was mixed with her
Melancholy humors, sometimes to sadness, the Melancholy humors being moved,
and overcoming the Choleric, and through that disorderly strife and
Effervescency of the Choler with the Melancholy, the whole Mass of Blood
boiled, which occasioned a slight Putrefaction, which begot a slight disorderly
Fever accompanied with the Headache, caused by the sharp Choloric* and
Melancholy Vapors, carried up together to the Head. But at length that
effervescency of Choler and Blood, being vanquished by the abundance and
quality of the Melancholy Humor, the Fever went off; and the Animal Spirits
were heated also, by the hot Melancholy humors, predominant in the Body and the
Head, and set a boiling by the foregoing effervescency of the Choler; and were
so rapidly and disorderly moved, that they caused a Delirium, first more ge^,
while the Spirits were not so much heated and agitated; then violent with
Anger, Immodesty and Rage, by reason the sharp heat of the Animal Spirits was
augmented; so that being now too much attenuated, and become more eager, they
are more rapidly moved, and more disorderly and violently agitated.

IV. Now because not only the Animal, but the Vital, Spirits are possessed with
that heat, as also the whole Mass of the Blood, hence it comes to pass that the
whole Body becomes so heated, that they are not cooled by the Cold of the
External Air, but always re mains hot.

V. Yet there is no Fever, because that violent fervor of the Blood and
Spirits, though it be great and sharp, yet there is neither Putrefaction nor
Inflammation, because it consists more in Salt then Sulphury Particles.

VI. This Malady is difficult to Cure, partly, because the most noble Bowels
are affected; partly because the Cause lies in a depraved, obstinate and
copious Humor. Lastly, because the Patient being Mad, will not be ruled, nor
suffer the administration of proper Medicines. However the longer it is
delayed, the more difficult the Cure will be.

VII. The primary Indications relating to the Cure are these. 1. To prepare and
evacuate the Melancholy humor abounding in the Body, and to extinguish the
heat both of that, as of the Blood and Spirits. 2. To prevent the new
generation of the same Humor and Fervor. 3. To coroborate the Bowels,
especially the Heart* Brain, Liver and Spleen. And this is to be done by Diet,
Chyrurgery and Pharmacy

VIII. The Chamber wherein the Patient lies must be gloomy, where he or she
must be kept by strong Men or Women; or else their Arms must be bound with
broad Swaths, that they may do no harm to themselves nor others. They are to be
visited by very few, whose Company they loved in the time of Health. They must
be kept in a temperate Air. Their Diet must be moistning and moderately
cooling, rather moist then dry. Their Drink* Ptisans or small Ale. They must be
kept quiet with good words, and provoked to sleep as much as may be, and all
Evacuations of Nature in both Sexes, must proceed naturally; while Art supplys
the disorders of Nature.

IX. Though the enraged Patient refuses all Medicaments, yet fair words must be
tried, and this draught obtruded instead of Drink:

. Leaves of Senna s. Anise-seed j. Decoction of Barley q. s. infuse them
according to Art: then to the straining add* Confect. Hamech iij. Extract of
Hellebore j. Mix them for a draught.

X. After Purgation Blood-letting is requisite, not once but often in the
Hands, Feet, Forehead* Arms, and other convenient Places, and a good quantity
of Blood to be taken away, according to the strength of the Patient. And the
Patient is to be well guarded from loosening the bindings of the Fillets after
stopping the Blood.

XI. Between every Blood-letting, Purge the Patient then with a draught before
mentioned, or Powder of Dia-Senna, or Confect. Hamech alone. Or if these be
refused, make use of Codiniac, or Rob of red Currants, to every Ounce of which,
add grains twenty four; and of this mixture give six or seven drams, as you
find it works. Or if the Party love Currants, boil them in the Decoction of
Senna-leaves, or Roots of black Hellebore, till they ^row plump, then take them
out and let them dry, in a place exposed to the Wind, that they may not seem to
have been boiled, and give them to eat.

XII. You may try either by fair words or by fraud, to make her drink now and
then in a day, a draught of this Apozem.

. Roots of Polypody of the Oak, Succory an. j Rind of Caper-roots, Tamarisch.
an. s. Herbs, Dodder, Venushair, Lettice, Dandelion with the whole, Sorrel,
Ceterach, Borage, Bugloss an. M. j. Cordial Flowers an. one little handful,
Citron and Orange Peels an. iij, Fruit of Tamarinds j. Commonwater q. s. Boil
them for an. Apozem of lb j. s.

If you steep in this Apozem,

Leaves of Senna j. s. Root of Black Helebore ij. Anise-seed ij.

By that means it will become a Purging Apozem, which if the Patient likes may
be often administered.

XIII. Let this Conditement be also offered upon occasion.

. Conserve of Violets, Pale Roses, Rob of Red Currants, Candied Citron-peel an.
iij. Pulp of Tamarinds vj. Syrup of Violets q. s.

XIV. Because such a Patient chiefly requires sleep; toward Evening giv^ an
Amygdalate, wherein put an Ounce of Syrup of Popies, or a little more, or three
grains of Opiate Laudanum; but this not above once or twice in a Week, or one
or two Heads in the boiling the aforesaid Apozem, or by adding to the aforesaid
Conditement one or two drams of Nicholas's Rest: or by anointing the Temples
and Forehead with Oil of Popies or Populeon Ointment.

But give not these Soporifics too often, too long, nor too strong.

XV. In the mean time, the Hair being shaved off, let the Head be fomented for
an hour or two in the Morning, with this Fomentation lukewarm.

. Herbs, Betony, Vervain, Marjoram, Plantain an. M j. Lettice M iiij. Flowers
of Roses, Melilot, Dill, Camomil, an. M j. Hemp and Coriander-seed an. s.
Common-water q. s.

After Fomentation keep the Head well covered from the cold Air. But this
Fomentation will not be proper before the Body be well purged, and some Blood
be taken away.

XVI. When the Distemper begins to assuage, it will not be amiss to clap alive
Hen cut in two upon the Head, or the Lungs of a new killed Sheep or Calf newly
killed.

XVII. Some applaud the clapping of Medicines to the Feet, as also Pigeons
slit, or Tenches slit, or else Leaves of Coleworts and Rue, with Sour Ferment
Salt and Vinegar, and so bruised into the form of a Past, and bound to the
Soles of their Feet, which if they do no good, yet do no harm, and therefore in
this case may safely be made use of; for the satisfaction of such as desire it.

HISTORY. VI. Of the Disease called Coma, both Somnulent and Wakeful.
A Person about forty Years of Age, somewhat of a Phlegmatic Constitution, was
wont to be troubled twice or thrice a Year with Catarrhs falling upon his Teeth
or Lungs, which sometimes seized him with a slight Pain in his Head, sometimes
without any at all; at length in Autumn, he felt a distensive and heavy pain in
the hinder part of his Head, such as used to precede his Catarrh, but then no
Catarrh ensued; however this pain increasing and being accompanied with a
giddiness, after Purgation and Bloodletting by the advice of a Physician, and
other proper Remedies applied, the Pain abated, so that the Patient went abroad
again; but venturing too soon into the cold Air, when he found the Pain
together with the giddiness increase again, he was forced to take his Bed, and
of a sudden was perceived to rave. The Pain still more and more augmenting,
the second day, standing by his Bed side, he fell down, not being able to rise,
but by those in the Room was put to Bed again, where in a short time he fell
into such a deep sleep, that nothing but violent pulling and pinching him would
wake him, and then he only opened his Eyes a little, but spoke nothing, and
fell asleep again. The third day there was no rowsing him; but when this
profound sleep had continued about four days he began to wake, however then he
spoke but little, and that after a wild and raving manner; thus he lived eight
days. Afterward he had a continual Inclination to sleep, with his Eyes
winking, but could not sleep, and muttered many things idly to himself;
sometimes lying still, when he was thought to be asleep, of a sudden he would
endeavor to leap out of his Bed and to do something or other; but was so weak
that he could not. In this inclination to sleep with a continued Delirium he
remained eight or ten days; afterward he could not sleep at all, neither had
he any Inclination to sleep for a Fortnight together; in the mean time the
Delirium abated every day; so that within that time, he became sound of his
Mind and recovering his strength was restored by his Physicians to his former
Health, during the whole course of his Distemper he had no Fever. His Appetite
was good even in his profound sleep; for though when he waked he asked for
nothing, yet he took whatever was given him and digested it well. By his wild
Answers it appeared, that not only Imagination and Reason, but his Memory was
weakened. The Question is, what sort of Disease this Man was troubled with, and
with what Remedies it was to be cured?

I. THat the Brain of this Person was affected, and thence his Principal and
External Senses were also troubled, is plain by the Relation.

II. That profound sleep, which at first oppressed him was a Somnulent Coma,
which is a deep sleep arising from the benumedness of the common Sense. But
that heavy inclination to sleep, which followed after, yet with an inability to
sleep, was a Wakeful Coma, which is a heavy propensity to sleep, with an
impotency so to do, by reason of the Obstruction or Compression of the Vessels
in the Ventricles of the Brain, and a disorderly motion of the Spirits
disturbing the Mind.

III. The Antecedent cause of this Malady was a Copious Generation of Phlegm in
the lower Parts; which being carried to the Brain, and collected in the
Ventricles of it, constitutes the containing Cause. For that same Phlegm not
being able to fall down to the lower Parts, as is usual, but being there
detained, with its quantity distends the Vessels; whence first a distending and
oppressive Pain; afterward that Phlegm being more increased, in some manner
compressed the Choroid-fold, together with the wonderful Net, hence the Vital
Spirits not suffi^ng to supply the want of Animal Spirits to perform the
Offices of the principal and external Senses, the Patient, motion ceasing, fell
down, not being able to rise again; and then the external Senses ceasing, a
deep sleep ensued. At length by the help of Nature and Medicines that
obstruction of the Choroid-fold being somewhat opened, and the Vital Spirits
let loose to increase the Animal, which were not yet plentiful enough, besides
that they moved disorderly through obstructed passages, hence the mind became
disturbed; for that though more Spirits then before flowed forth to the Organs
of the Senses, yet they were not sufficient to perform the whole duty; which
caused that great inclination to sleep; which however was still disturbed by
the continual disturbance of the Mind; so that though the Patient were willing
to sleep he could not, but as it were waked sleeping, with continual Deliriums.
Lastly the Obstruction being wholly opened, and the Spirits having gained free
Passage, yet very few Vapors ascending to the Brain by reason of the extreme
Emptiness of the Body, to stay them their due time in the Brain, hence followed
continual Watchings, which abated as more Vapors ascended to the Brain upon
Digestion of more Nourishment. There was no Fever, because no Putrefaction of
Humors molested the Heart.

IV. A Somnulent or waking Coma, is a most dangerous Disease, which kills many,
especially if the profound sleep extend it self beyond the fourth day: in
regard the most noble Bowel the Brain is most grievously affected. For that
Obstruction and Compression endangers the Choroid-fold for two Reasons: either
because the Coma for want of Animal Spirits may turn to an Apoplexy; or because
the hot Vital Spirits, not being able to get through their wonted passages, may
cause an Inflammation in the Membranes of the Brain, and then a Frenzy would
ensue.

V. The principal Curative Indications are to draw back and evacuate the
containing Matter at the beginning, and so to open the Obstruction; then to
take away the Antecedent Cause; and hinder a new collection of Phlegm.

VI. Because a Man in that profound sleep can swallow nothing. Glysters must be
administered at least once a day. Hard Frictions and Dolorific Ligatures of the
extreme Parts must be made use of: Blood must be taken from the Arm.
Cupping-glasses both without and with Scarification, must be applied to the
Shoulders, Back and Neck. The Patient also must often be waked with jogging and
pinching, i^ it be possible; and that the containing Matter may be shaken off
and expelled, this Sternutory is to be blown up into the Nostrils, ever now and
then:

. Root of white Hellebore, j. Pellitory, s. Leaves of Marjoram, j. Pepper,
Castoreum, an. gr. v. For a Powder.

VII. His sleep abating; give him these Pills.

. Mass of Pill Cochiae, j. Extract of Catholicum, s. For five Pills.

Or if he cannot swallow them, give him one dram of Powder of Diaturbith, or
Diacarthamum in a little small Ale. Or a Purging draught, prepared with Leaves
of Senna, Agaric and Jallop-Roots or the like.

VIII. The Body being sufficiently Purged, this Apozem, or such like may be
prescribed.

. Root of Acorus, vj. of Elecampane, Fennel, an. s. of Galangal, ij. Herbs,
Marjoram, Rosemary, Betony, Baum, Calaminth, an. M. j. Sage, Flowers of
St^chas, an. M. s. Iuniper-Berries, vj. of Laurel, ij. cleansed Raisins, ij.
Water, q. s. Boil them, and make an Apozem of (...). j. s. to which may be
added Syrup of Stoechas, ij. or iij.

Let him drink of this Decoction, three or four times a day. In the mean time
let him continue the use of his Sternutory.

IX. If he cannot take his Apozem, let him now and then take a Quantity of this
Conditement.

. Specier. Diambrae j. s. Conserve of Baum, Flowers of Sage, Betony, Rosemary,
an s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s. For a Conditement.

X. Also let the following Quilt be laid upon his Head.

. Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary, Flowers of Lavender, Melilot, an. iiij.
Benjamin, Nutmeg, Cloves, an. j. To be grossly powdered for a Quilt.

Then anoint his Temples and the top of his Head with this Liniment;

R. Oils of Rosemary, Marjoram, Nutmegs, an. j. Martiate Ointment ij.

And let him wear this a good while after the Cure.

XI. Let his Diet be sparing, Meats of good Juice, and easy of Digestion,
seasoned with Rosemary, Marjoram, and other Cephalics. When he wakes
continually Amygdalates are proper: for they yield good Nourishments and
provoke sleep: and all natural Evacuations must duly proceed.

HISTORY VII. Of the Lethargy.
A Person, threescore Years of Age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, having all the
Autumn being careless of his Diet, feeding greedily upon Fruit, Lettice,
Cowcumbers, Melons and such like, for some days perceived a weariness of his
whole Body, with a great Inclination to sleep. Then he was taken with a slight
continued Fever, which toward Night growing worse, seemed like a Quotidian.
This Fever was presently accompanied with a very great drowsiness, so that he
could not be kept from sleeping and which was so profound, that he heard not
the standers by, though they bawled out and made never so loud a noise; being
at length rowsed out of his sleep not without great difficulty and hawling and
pulling, he looked upon the standers-by, but answered very little to their
questions; and that, very little to the purpose; not knowing that he had been
asleep: if they gave him a Chamber Pot; he forgot to make water; and so with
his Mouth and his Eyes shut he fell asleep again; his Pulse was strong, but
slow and at distant intervals; and toward Night unequal and somewhat swifter,
his Urine was muddy, with a very thick Flegmatic Sediment.

I. THat the Head and whole Body of this Patient were affected, appears from
the profound Sleep, which oppressed the one, and the continued Fever and
lassitude that seized the other.

II. That heavy drowsiness which seized our Patient, is called a Lethargy,
which is an insatiable Propensity to sleep with a gentle Fever and molestation
of the Principal faculties.

III. The remote Cause of this Malady was cooling and bad Diet, which
generating a great quantity of Flegmatic humors in a Flegmatic Body, made the
antecedent Cause.

IV. Which Flegmatic humors being carried in great quantity to the Brain, and
affecting it with a cold mistemper; partly putrefying in the larger Vessels,
and inflamed in the Heart, and thence dispeirsed through the whole Body, and
through the Carotides Arteries to the Brain, constitute the containing Cause of
the Sleep and Fever.

V. For when those crude Humors already inflamed in the Heart come through the
Carotides Arteries to the Choroid-Fold, whose small Arteries by reason of the
cold temper of the Brain, (are narrower then usually,) and partly through their
own thickness, partly through the narrowness of those passages slowly pass
through the Choroid Fold, they are there thickened still more and more, by the
cold Constitution of the Brain, and their Passage becomes more obstructed; so
that for that reason the Animal Spirits growing fewer, and but ill supplied,
and consequently not sufficing to officiate in their dutys, hence follows a
Cessation in the Organs of those Senses: by which means when no objects can be
carried to the Principal Senses they cease too, when a profound Drowsiness out
of which when the Patient is roused, the Principal Senses appear damnified, for
want of Spirits, and their disorderly motion through obstructed Passages.

VI. This Disease is dangerous. 1. Because the Brain is dangerously affected.
2. By reason of the Fever which affects the whole Body. 3. Because the Patient
was old, and unable to conquer such a Malady for want of Natural heat and
strength; but because he had some strength remaining, there was hopes of Cure.

VII. In the Cure, the Flegmatic Matter abounding in the whole Body is to be
Evacuated, drawn back from the Head, and derived to the lower Parts. The Cold
Distemper of the Head to be removed, the Head to be corroborated, and the
Matter therein contained to be dissolved and drawn away.

VIII. After a Glyster, Dolorific Ligatures, and hard Frictions of the Thighs
are very proper, if frequently used. Blood-letting at such an Age is not so
convenient; therefore Cuppingglasses both with and without Scarification are to
be applied to the Shoulders, Neck and Back. But no repelling Cold Medicines are
to be used in this Case.

IX. So soon as the Patient can be waked let him have this Apozem given him.

. White Agaric, j. Leaves of Senna, s. Anise-seed, j. Ginger, j. Decoctions of
Barley, q. s. Infuse them, then add to the straining Ele. Diaphenicon iij.

If the Body be bound it must be loosened with Glysters.

X. The Body being well Purged, let him take every foot a draught of this
Apozem.

. Roots of Aromatic Reed, Elecampane, Fennel, Stone-Parsly, an. s. Herbs,
Betony, Venus Hair, Century Lesser, Dandelion, an. M. j. Rosemary, Marjoram,
Hyssop, Flowers of Stoechas, Camomil, an. M. s. Iuniper-Berries, vj.
Anise-seeds, j. s. Citron and Orange-Peels, an. s. Water q. s. Make an Apozem
of lb j. s. To which add Syrup of Stoechas ij. or iij.

XI. After he has taken this Apozem, let him Purge as before or if he like
Pills better, let him take ij or iij of Cochia Pills, or j. of Diaturbith or
Diacarthamum powdered and dissolved in Barley-water.

XII. After this second Purgation, let him return to his Apozem, to which you
may then add several Diuretics as Roots of Dodder, Asparagus, Eryngos; and
Herbs as Stone Parsley, Strawberry Leaves and the like. Castoreum also may be
properly mixed in this Apozem; or else five or six grains given him in a little
Oxymel of Squills.

XIII. While these things are a doing let the Matter be specially Evacuated out
of his Head; the Head be Corroborated with Topics, and the remaining Matter
there discussed. Evacuation is performed by Errhins of equal Parts of Roots of
Beets and Leaves of Marjoram: and by Snuf blowing into his Nostrils the
following Sternutory.

. Root of white Hellebore j. of Pellitory, and Leaves ^f Marjoram, an. s. Black
Pepper, gr. v. Castoreum, Benjamin, an. gr. iiij.

To corroborate the Brain anoint the top of the Head and Temples with this
Liniment: and then cover the Head with the following Quilt.

. Oils of Amber, Rosemary, Marjoram, an. ij. Martiate Ointment, ij. Castoreum,
Powdered, s. For a Liniment.

. Leaves of Marjoram, M. j. of Rosemary, Sage, and Flowers of Melilot, an. one
little handful, Cloves, Nutmegs, an. j. Castoreum, s. Beat these into a gross
Powder for a Quilt.

XIV. Let him have a good Air, a light Room, moderately warm, and Perfumed with
Castor, Peny-royal, Rosemary, Sage, Thime, Marjoram, Baum, etc. let his Food be
easy of Digestion, Condited with Rosemary, Betony, Marjoram, Hyssop and the
like. Let him avoid Milk, Pulse and Fruit, Garlic, Onions, Mustard, Radishes,
etc.

Let his Drink be Barley-water, with Majoram, Hyssop, Rosemary and the like
boiled in it, sweetened with a little Hydromel or Honey, and a^omatiz'd with
Saffron. Let him sleep as little as may be: and make his natural Evacuations
come forth in due order.

HISTORY. VIII. Of the Profound Sleep called Carus.
A Stout young Man having fallen from a high Place upon his Head, was seized
with a deep sleep; being put by his Friends, who thought him drunk, into his
Bed; he continued so for two days. There was no Wound appeared in his Head,
which was defended by a good strong Cap; only in the top of his Head there was
a Contusion, not very big; his Pulse beat well; nor did he show any Signs that
his Heart was affected; he breathed freely* If he were pricked, he shrunk up the
pricked Member; In the mean time no noise, nor pulling him by the Hair nor other
means would wake him.

I. How far this Patients Head was affected, the profound sleep sufficiently
showed.

II. This sleep is called Carus, which is a profound sleep, with an injury to
the Animal Actions.

III. It Is no Apoplexy because the Person breaths freely; nor Lethargy, because
there is no Fever: and the Patient cannot be waked; wherein it differs from
Coma since the Patients in that Distemper are often waked, and move their Limbs
from one place to another.

IV. The cause of this is a depression of the upper Skull, and the Bones of the
Bregm^ caused by the Fall, by which the Brain being depressed the Brain is
hindered in its Motion, which injures all the Animal Actions. Besides that the
Choroid-fold being obstructed by the Compression, hinders the Passage of the
Vital Spirits to the Brain, and consequently the Generation of Animal, to
supply the wast of Spirits in the Organs of the Senses; into which the Animal
Spirits having not a free Influx by reason of that Compression, the actions of
the Parts fail, and thence that deep sleep.

V. This Carus is very dangerous, and threatens an Apoplexy, if not taken care
of in time.

VI. The Cure consists, in raising the depressed Skull. 2. In corroborating the
wakened Brain. 3. In taken care of the whole Body to prevent the flux of many
Humors to the Head; or any other Disease from breeding at that time in the Body.

VII. Therefore a Glister given, take eight or nine Ounces of Blood out of the
Arm. Then proceed to Denudation, and if need require, Perforation of the Brain.

VIII. The same day the Glister is given, and the Vein opened toward the ^kull,
in the place where the Contusion ^ppears, must be laid bare with a Cross^ike
Incision made in the fleshy Parts: The next Morning raise the Bone with ^roper
Instruments. But for fear least ^y that violent Contusion, some little Veins
should be broken in the hard Meninx, which may have poured forth any Blood
between the Meninx and the Cranium, which corrupting there, should af^erward be
the Cause of unexpected death, the safest way would be to Perforate the Skull
in the firm Part next the depressed Part; to give ^he extravasated Blood an
easy Exit, and for the more easy raising of the depressed Skull.

IX. The Skull being raised and the wound stopped according to Art, let this
Fomentation be clapped warm about his Head, still shifting it as it grows cold.

. Betony M. iiij. Marjoram, Rosemary, Vervain, Fennel, Leaves of Laurel, Baum,
Thime, Rue, Flowers of Stoechas, Camomil, Melilot, an. M. j. Common Water q. s.
boil them according to Art, adding toward the end White Wind lb j. Make a
Fomentation of (...) iij.

X. Anoint his Forehead with this Liniment.

. Oils of Amber, Rosemary, Marjoram distilled an. j. Castoreum pulverised gr.
ix. Martiate Unguent ij.

XI. The Patient being roused from his sleep, which uses to happen, after the
raising of his Skull, give him this Purging draught.

. Leaves of Senna iij. Rubarb j. s. white Agaric s. Anise-seed j. Decoction of
Barley q. s. Infuse them: then add to the straining, Elect. Diaprunum solutive
iij.

XII. The Body being Purged, let him drink twice or thrice a day a draught of
this Apozem.

. Succory Root j. s. of Fennel and Acorus an. s. Herbs, Betony, Dandelion,
Borage, Baum, Rue, an. M. j. Rosemary, Marjoram, Flowers of Stoechas an. M. j.
Orange and Citron Peels an. s. Currants ij. Water q. s. For an Apozem of lb j.
s.

XIII. Instead of the Apozem, he may now and then take a small quantity of this
or such like Conditement.

. Specier. Diambrae j. Roots of Acorus Condited, Candied Orange-peels, Con^erve
of Anthos and pale Roses an. s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s.

XIV. If he be bound at any time in his Body, let him be loosened with
Glisters. Or else take the following Mixture, and hang it up in a little Bag,
in a Pint and a half of small Al^, and give him a draught or two every Morning.

. Leaves of Senna j. s. Rubarb ij. Root of Iallop j. Anise. ij. Leaves of
Marjoram, Carduus Benedict. an. M. s.

XV. Keep him in a good temperate clear Air: let his Meats be of easy
Digestion; and spa^ing at first. His Drink small; his Exercises moderate:
little Sleep at first especially. But let his natural Evacuations duly proceed,
either spontaneously or provoked by Art.

HISTORY IX. Of a Catalepsis.
A Young Maid, her Evacuations being obstructed, and frequently liable to
Uterine Suffocations, being taken of a sudden, remained void of Sense, and in
that Posture as she taken waxed cold, keeping her Eyes open and fixed but
seeing nothing; if the standers^y moved her Arm upwards or downward or
side-ways, it remained as they laid it; if they set her upon her Feet she
stood; if they moved her Body forwards, she put out her Foot, if they turned
her Head on one side, so it stood all this while she breathed freely; when this
fit had lasted an hour, she came to her self, but remembered nothing of what
had happened. Two days after she was taken with another Fit, which went off of
it self.

I. THat the Seat of this Distemper was in the Head, the terrible Molestation
of the Animal Actions declare; as the Uterine Suffocation showed the Distemper
of the Womb.

II. This Affection is called a Catalepsis, and is a sudden, and very great
Molestation of the Animal Actions, with a cold Rhuminess of the whole Body; in
which Distemper the Patient keeps that Posture of Body, wherein they were when
first taken.

III. The Brain of this Woman was affected, not the whole, but in that Part
where the common Sense lies, and that by a vicious Humor or Vapor, translated
thither from the Womb.

IV. The Antecedent Cause, is a vicious and viscous Humor, or thick Vapor,
generated or collected in the Womb, and thence conveyed to the Head through
blind Channels, which adhering to the common Sensory, and Parts adjoining, and
involving them of a sudden, hinders the determination of the Spirits from the
common Sensory, and so constitutes the containing Cause of this Catalepsis.

V. Now because the whole Brain is not affected, but that sufficient Spirits
are generated therein, whose Influx into the Nerves is not hindered by any
Compression or Obstruction of the beginning of the Nerves, hence it comes to
pass, that those Spirits flowing into the Parts designed, when the common
Sensory is already possessed of a sudden by that vicious Humor, or thick Vapor,
are not determined to other Parts, but copiously flow to those Parts to which
they were determined, just before the Catalepsis. Which is the reason that the
several Parts remain in that Posture, wherein they were before the Fit, and
that the Eyes, Arms and Thighs remain as it were fixed.

VI. Now the reason why the Patient stands, being set upon her Legs, and why
her Members being moved this way or that, remain in the same Situation, is
this, because the Situation of the Muscles being changed, the Influx of the
Spirits is also changed, and the Pores before open, through which the Spirits
flowed, are shut; but others which were shut before, are opened; so that the
Spirits which copiously flowed before into these, the Situation being altered,
flows into those Muscles, into which they still also flow, till the Situation
be altered.

VII. Respiration is performed after the same manner as in those that sleep,
and remains unhurt; partly, because of the remarkable largeness and broadness
of the Pores, and the mainly necessary use of the Respiratory Nerves; partly,
because of the Customary and continual Determination to the Respiratory Nerves.

VIII. The Fit ceases upon the discussing or dissipation of that Humor or Vapor
which possesses the common Sensory. And the Fit returns when any Vapor or Humor
of the same Nature suddenly takes possession again of the same common Sensory.

IX. This Distemper is very dangerous, because the most noble Part is affected,
and because those vicious Humors or Vapors are not easily dispiers'd. But in
this Patient there was great hopes of Cure, in regard the Malady was not
generated in the Brain, but arose from another Place. Besides that, the Fits
being short, we thence judge the common Sensory to be seized, not so much by a
tough and viscous Humor, as by a thick Vapor, which is more easily attenuated
and dispelled. However, in regard this thick Vapor may condense into a tough
Humor, to the hazard of a more durable Catalepsis, and loss of Life it self,
therefore the Cure is not to be delayed.

X. The Method of Curing, is, 1. To discuss that thick Humor or Vapor,
possessing the common Sensory. 2. To purge the Womb, and remove the
Obstructions of it, and prevent a new Generation of that depraved Humor. 3. To
prevent the assent of that Humor or Vapor to the Head. 4. To strengthen the
Head, that it may no more admit of those Humors or Vapors, but may be able
forthwith to dissipa^ and expel them.

XI. In the Fit, let this Sternutory be blown up into the Nostrils, that the
Expulsive Faculty being provoked, the Vapor or Humor may thereby be violently
removed.

. Root of white Hellebore j. s. Pellitory, Leaves of Marjoram, Flowers af Lilly
of the Valley, an. s. Black Pepper Corns no vii. Castoreum gr. iiij.

Then anoint the Nostrils, Temples and Top of the Head with this Liniment, and
put a little Cotton dipped in it into the Ears.

. Oil of Thyme, Rosemary, Sage, Caroways, Castoreum, Amber, an. s. Martiate
Ointment j.

Then let this little Bag be hung about the Neck.

. Castor, Assa Fetida, Camphor, an. j. s. Sow them into a thin silk Bag.

And in the mean time, omit not the giving of a strong Glister.

XII. If after all this, the Fit remain, apply Cupping glasses, with and
without Scarrification to the Necks, Scapulas and Shoulders, with dolorific
Ligatures, and painful Frictions of the Thighs and Feet. Then le^t this little
Bag boil a little while in Wine, and then squeezed, be laid warm upon the top
of the Head.

. Flowers of Rosemary, Marjoram, Thyme, Calamint, Flowers of Camomil and
Stoechas, an. M. s. Seeds of Cummin, Caroways, Lovage, an. j. s. Lawrel-berry,
Nutmegs, an. j. For a little Bag.

XIII. The Fit being gone off, give this purging Draught.

. Leaves of Senna s. White Agaric j. Seed of Lovage ij. Decoction of Barley q.
s. infuse them, and add to the Straining Elect. Hiera Picra ij.

XIV. The Body being thus purged, open a Vein in the Ancle, and take away six
or eight ounces of Blood.

XV. Then let the Patient drink three or four times a day, a Draught of this
Apozem.

. Roots of Fennel, Valerian, Dittany, Aromatic Reed, Male Pyony, an. s. Herbs,
Marjoram, Nipp, Calamint, Rue, Peniroyal, Water Trefoil, Baum, an. M. j.
Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Stoechas an. M. s. Seeds of Lovage and wild
Carrots, an. ij. Juniper Berries vj. Water q. s. For an Apozem of lbj. s.

XVI. These Medicaments are to be often repeated, as occasion requires.

And as for the regular Course of living, let the Air be temperate and pure,
perfumed sometimes with Rosemary, Baum, Thyme, Rue, Lovage, Castor, and the
like. The Diet of good Juice and easy Digestion, as such as corroborates the
Brain and Womb. The Drink small, and without Settling. Sleep and Exercise
moderate; and let all the Patients Evacuations be regular, and in due time,
either spontaneous, or procured by Art.

HISTORY X. Of Giddiness.
A Woman, of thirty years of age, fat and lusty, of a flegmatic Constitution,
having many times been troubled, so soon as Winter was over, with a heavy Pain
in her Head, and Noise in her Ears, at length, in the Spring time, was taken
with a Giddiness that often went and came; first more mild, then more vehement,
at what time, she thought all things turned round, so that sometimes she could
hardly stand upright, but fell down, unable to rise, till the Giddiness ceased;
which presently returned, if she looked upon Wheels that ran round, Flame or
Smoke ascending upward; upon any rapid Stream, or from any Precipice. Her
Appetite and Digestion were good; her Evacuations were regular and in Season,
and all the Bowels of the middle and lower Belly seemed to be in a good
Condition.

I. CErtain it is, that the Seat of this Affection was in the Brain, in regard
that Annoyance of the Sight did not proceed from any Fault of the Sight, or of
the Medinum, or the Object.

II. This Malady, by the Physicians is called Vertigo or Giddiness. And is a
Deception of the Sight, which makes that visible Objects seem to turn round,
arising from a kind of Whirl-pit Motion of the Animal Spirits in the Brain.

III. The remote Cause is the External Motion, refrigerating the Brain, and
streightning the Passages of it, appointed for the evacuating of Excrements; so
that Phlegm abounding in the Body, and copiously collected in the Ventricles of
the Brain, constitutes the containing Cause.

IV. By those flegmatic Humors, the Ventricles are first distended; thence the
heavy Pain. This Phlegm augmenting, stops up the Passages of the Brain, through
which the Spirits ought to pass, partly by repletion, partly by compression; so
that the Spirits missing their direct Passage, and lighting upon the obstructed
Passage, gets thorough in a circular Motion, as Water falling with violence, if
it meet a Dam in its way, recoils three or four times in Circles, before it run
by.

V. These whirling Spirits thus circularly carried to the Seat of the Mind,
intermixing with the Images of visible things, which are carried to the same
Mind, are offered to the common Sensory with the same circular Motion, and so
occasion that Fallacy of Sight; by which all visible Objects seem to be whirled
about in the same manner as the Images of visible things.

VI. But this same whirling of the Spirits does not last, partly, because the
narrowness of the Passages of the Brain is sometimes more, sometimes less;
partly, because the Spirits are sometimes thicker, and sometimes thinner, and
pass through sometimes with more, sometimes less violence; which is the reason
the Vertigo comes by Fits: For in the Motion of the Body, the Spirits are moved
with more violence, and in greater abundance, which if they cannot pass freely
and directly through the ordinary Passages of the Brain, but light here and
there upon the obstructed Passages, causes the Fit, whether they be thin or
thick. For the Repulse of the Obstruction puts them into a Circumgyration; and
the plenty and violent rushing of the thin Spirits makes them they cannot pass;
but the thick are stoped by reason of their thickness; and therefore Drunkards,
and young People that abound with thin Spirits, are as much liable to
Giddiness, as old Men, whose Spirits are thicker. But the Giddiness of old Men
is more frequent, and lasts longer, because of their more abounding Phlegm;
longer, and more frequently streightens the Passages of the Choroid-Fold.
Therefore the Vertigo seldom happens when the Body is in Motion, and is
generally abated and cured by rest.

VII. But because there are not enough of those whirling Spirits that make
their way through the Passages of the Brain; besides that, their ^ircumrotation
hinders them from entering in sufficient quantity into the Nerves: This was the
reason that this Patient, for want of Animal Spirits in the Muscles, often fell
to the Ground, without being able to rise before the Vertigos ceasing, the
Animal Spirits flowed more copiously again into the Muscles.

VIII. Then the Fit returns again upon the Sight of Wheels turning round,
Precipices, etc. because the Images of those things being carried to the inner
Parts with that same whirling and unequal Motion affects the Animal Spirits
with the same circular and unequal Motion. Upon the Sight of Precipices, the
Vertigo returns; in regard the Sight of them striking a Terror into the
Beholder, the Affright streightens the Passages, and by that means, puts a
sudden stop upon the Spirits, which being forced forward by those that come
behind, because they have not a free Passage, are agitated by the Repulse of
the Obstruction, and forced into a circular Motion.

IX. This Malady is hard to be cured, and many times turns to an Epilepsie, or
Apoplexy, or some other grievous Distemper of the Brain, and therefore the
Cure of it is not to be delayed.

X. The Cure consists in removing the primary, antecedent and continuing Cause,
and Corroboration of the Brain.

XI. First, Therefore let her be purged with these Pills.

. Mass of Pill. Cochiae j. Extract of Catholicon s. Diagridion gr. ij. Syrup of
Stoechas a little. For vij. Pills.

XII. Though not much good can be expected from Blood-letting, yet least the
Blood should fly up to the Head in too great a quantity, it may be taken from
the Arm, or if it happen in the time of her monthly Customs, out of a Vein of
the Foot. Let the Vein be opened, the Patient lying in Bed, and let her not see
her own Blood.

XIII. Then let her drink three or four times a day, a Draught of this Apozem.

. Root of Acorus j. Elecampane, Fennel, an. s. Herbs. Betony, Marjoram,
Rosemary, Calaminth, ^hyme, an. M. j. Sage, Leaves of Laurel, Flowers of
Stoechas, an. Ms. Seeds of Anise, Fennel, Caroways, an. j. s. Cleansed Raisins
ij. Water q. s. Boil them according to Art, adding toward the end White Wind
lbs. Make an Apozem of about lbj. s.

Sometimes, instead of the Apozem, she may take a small quantity of this Apozem.

. Specier. Diambrae j. Sweet Diamosch j. Candied Root of Acorus, Conserve of
Flowers of Sage, Anthos, Baum, an. s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s.

XIV. In the mean time, let her use this Masticatory.

. Root of Pellitory, Elecampane, an. j. Herbs, Marjoram, Hyssop, an. s. Black
Pepper s. Mastich v. Reduce these into a Powder, and then make them into
Trochischs with a little Turpentine and Wax.

XV. Let her Temples, Nostrils and Top of her Head be anointed twice a day with
this Oil.

. Oil of Nutmegs distilled j. Oils of Rosemary, Amber, Marjoram, an. s.

She may also wear the following Quilt upon her Head for some Months.

. Leaves of Rosemary, Melilot, Sage, Flowers of Melilot, an. one little
handful, Nutmeg ij. Cloves j. Benjamin s. Beat them grossly for a Quilt.

XVI. Let her have a warm Room and good Air. Let her feed sparing, and let her
Food be easy of Digestion, not flatulent, and seasoned with hot Cephalics, and
carminative Seeds. Her Drink must be small, wherein, if a little Bag of
Marjoram, Rosemary, and a little Cinnamon be hung, 'twill be so much the
better. Moderate Sleep and Exercise is best, when the Giddiness is off; but let
her Rest in the time of the Fit. Keep her Body soluble, and take care that all
Evacuations be regular and natural.

HISTORY XI. Of the Nightmare.
A Woman of fifty years of age, in good plight, fleshy, strong and plethoric,
sometimes troubled with the Headache, and Catarrhs falling upon her Breast in
the Winter; the last Winter, molested with no Catarrhs, but very sore in the
Daytime, but in the Nightime, when she was composing her self to Sleep,
sometimes she believed the Devil lay upon her and held her down, sometimes that
she was choked by some great Dog or Thief lying upon her Breast, so that she
could hardly speak or breath, and when she endeavored to throw off the
Burden, she was not able to stir her Members. And while she was in that
Strife, sometimes with great difficulty she awoke of her self, sometimes her
Husband hearing her make a doleful Inarticulat Voice, waked her himself; at
what time she was forced to sit up in her Bed to fetch her Breath; sometimes
the same Fit returned twice in a Night, upon her going again to Rest.

I. THe Brain of this Woman was primarily affected, especially in the hinder
Ventricle of the Brain, near the Spinal Pith, for the Muscles of the Parts
seated below the Head, are agrieved, which appears by her difficulty of
breathing, and the hindered Motion of her Breast, Thighs and Arms. Hence the
Heart is affected with the Lungs.

II. This Affection is called Incubus, or the Nightmare, which is an
Intercepting of the Motion of the Voice and Respiration, with a false Dream of
something lying ponderous upon the Breast, the free Influx of the Spirits to
the Nerves being obstructed.

III. The antecedent Cause of this Malady, is an over-redundancy of Blood in
the whole Body, whence many Vapors are carried to the Head, and there detained
by the Winter-cold, streightning the Pores, and thickning those Vapors, and
narrowing the Passage to the beginning of the Spinal Marrow, which hinders a
sufficient Passage of the Animal Spirits to the Nerves; and this constitutes
the containing Cause.

IV. For while the Passages of the Nerves are compressed by the more thick
Vapors, detained about the lower part of the Brain; at the entrance of the
Marrow into the Spine, sufficient Animal Spirts do not flow into the lower
Parts, which causes the Motion of the Muscles to fail. Now, because the Motion
of the Muscles, for the most part ceases in time of sleep, except the
Respiratory Muscles, therefore the failing of their Motion is first perceived,
by reason of the extraordinary trouble that arises for want of necessary
Respiration. Now the Patient in her Sleep growing sensible of that
Streightness, but not understanding the Cause in that Condition, believes her
self to be overlay'd by some Demon, Thief, or other ponderous Body, being
neither able to move her Breast, nor to breath. Then endeavoring to shake off
that troublesome Weight, as apprehensive of some ensuing Suffocation, but not
being able to move the rest of her Members, she believes them under the same
Pressure. Upon which, when she tries to call out for assistance, but because of
the streightness of her Respiration, she is not able to speak distinctly, she
makes an inarticulate Noise with great difficulty. In this Struggling she
continues, till the Animal Spirits, detained at the lower Part of the Brain, by
the Compression of the Spinal Marrow, and there collected in a greater
quantity, at length forced by the continual Flux of Spirits from the Heart,
violently make their way through the Pith into the Nerves and Muscles, and
restore Motion to the Parts. Then the Patient moves her Body and wakes, and by
that motion those thick Vapors are dissipated, and being awake, she is forced
to take Breath, to repair the Loss which she suffered for want of Respiration.
But because there is yet a larger quantity of these Vapors still remaining in
the Head, hence it comes to pass, that if she fall asleep again, especially if
she lie upon her Back, the same Evil returns, in regard those thick Vapors
settle more easily toward the hinder part of the Head near the Marrow.

V. Now that they are Vapors, and not Humors, is plain from hence, that the
Malady is so soon mastered, which could not be done so suddenly were they
Humors, which would rather cause an Apoplexy, or some other more dangerous
Evil, that they are thick, and not thin Vapors, appears from hence, because the
thin Vapors would pass more easily through the Pores, though narrower, which
the thick cannot do, which requires motion of the Body to dissipate them; which
Motion ceasing in Sleep, they stick to the Place and streighten the Pores of
the Nerves. But if any cold ill Temper of the Brain happen at the same time,
those Vapors are easily condensed into Humors by that Cold, which if detained
in the Head, cause Heaviness, the Coma, Apoplexy, and the like. If they flow
from the Head to the lower Parts, they breed Catarrs, with which our Patient
was wont to be troubled in the Wintertime.

VI. This Malady is dangerous, least the collected Vapors being condensed in
the Head, should breed a Coma, Apoplexy, or the like.

VII. It consists in removing the Antecedent, Principal and containing Cause,
and the Corroboration of the Brain.

VIII. To purge away the Antecedent Cause, or the great quantity of Humors, let
the Body be purged with Pill. Cochiae, Powder of Diaturbith, or this Potion.

. Leaves of Senna iij. White Agaric, Rhubarb, an. j. s. Anise-seeds ij. White
Ginger s. Decoction of Barley q. s. Infuse them, and to the Straining, add
Elect. Diaphaenicon ij.

IX. Then because she is plethoric, take away viij. or ix. of Blood from her
Arm.

X. After Blood-letting, let her take every morning a Draught of this Apozem.

. Root of Calamus Aromaticus, Fennel, Stone-parsley, Capers, an. vj. Herbs,
Betony, Marjoram, Dodder, Succory, Borage, Sorrel, an. m. j. Flowers of
Stoechas m. s. Juniper Berries s. Blew Currants ij. Water q. s. Boil them
according to Art, adding toward the end Rubarb, white Agaric, an. ij Anise-seed
s. Cinnamon j. s. Make an Apozem of lb. s.

XI. To expel the containing Cause, Errhinas snuft up into the Nostrils, or a
sneezing Powder of Root of white Hellebore, Pellitory, Leaves of Marjoram, and
Flowers of Lilly of the Valley, greatly conduce.

XII. To corroborate the Brain, let her take a small quantity of this
Conditement.

. Specier. Diambr. Aromatic. Rosat. an. ij. Conserve of Flowers of Betony,
Sage, Anthos, candied Root of Acorns, an. s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s.

XIII. To the same purpose let her wear such a Quilt as this upon her Head.

. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram, Thyme, Flowers of Lavender, an. j. Nutmegs ij.
Cloves j. Benjamin s. Beat them into a gross Powder.

XIV. Keep her in a pure and moderate hot Air. Let her Diet be sparing, but of
good Juice and easy Digestion. Let her Suppers be more moderate then her
Dinners. Her Drink must be small, her Exercise moderate, and so must her Sleep
be, and let her be careful of sleeping upon her Back. Lastly, a sedate Mind,
and a soluble Body are of great moment in this Case.

HISTORY XII. Of the Apoplexy.
A Strong Man, about forty years of age, both a great Feeder and Drinker,
complained of a heavy Pain in his Head for two Months together, but took no
care of himself, but followed on his usual Course of Drinking Fore-noons and
After-noons; but at length, one Morning waking in his Chamber, after he had
muttered out three or four inarticulate Words, he fell of a sudden void of
Sense or Motion, only that he breathed, and had a strong Pulse.

I. THat this man's Head was terribly afflicted, the Cessation of the Animal
Functions sufficiently declared.

II. This Affection is called an Apoplexy, which is a sudden Privation of all
the Animal Functions, except the Act of Respiration.

III. It is plain that it was no Lethargy, Syncope, Sleepy Coma, Catalepsis, or
Epilepsie, because the Patient, without any Fever, lay almost immovable,
insensible, nor could be waked by any means* having all his Members languid,
only with a strong Pulse, and a heavy Respiration, which are no Simptoms of the
foresaid Diseases.

IV. The Brain is affected about the beginning of the Pith, which is the
Original of all the Nerves, then besieged by a Flegmatic Humor.

V. The remote Cause was continual Gluttony and Drunkenness, by which the Brain
in a long time was extremely weakened, and the many crude and Flegmatic Humors
generated therein, and collected together in the Ventricles, made the
Antecedent Cause, which afterward settling at the Original of the Nerves,
constituted the containing Cause.

VI. The Animal Spirits being hindered by those Humors, contracting the Pores of
the beginning of the Nerves, presently all the Animal Functions cease, and the
Patient becomes void of Sense and Motion, except Respiration; because the
Spirits still flow thither by reason of the largeness of the Pores of the
Respiratory Nerves. But the Distemper lasting, together with the Flegmatic
Obstruction or Compression, the Influx of the Spirits into them is also stopped,
which causes the Respiration also to fail, and thence a heaving and rattling in
the Throat.

VII. The Pulse beats well, because the Blood sent from the right Ventricle of
the Heart to the Lungs, is sufficiently, as yet, refrigerated; but if the
Disease continue, the Pulse will also fail, because the Blood of the right
Ventricle of the Heart, is not sufficiently ventilated and cooled, so that
little Blood comes to the left Ventricle, which weakens the Motion of the Heart.

VIII. This Disease is very dangerous; yet because it is but in the beginning,
and Respiration is not yet come to Rattling, and for that there is a strong
natural Heat remaining in the Patient, there is some hope of Cure, though not
without some fear of a Palsy that will ensue the Cure.

IX. The Method of Cure, the removal of the flegmatic Humors, obstructing the
beginning of the Nerves; to prevent a new Generation and Collection of them,
and to corroborate the Brain.

X. Let the Body be moderately moved, let the Hairs be plucked, and laborious
Rubings and Ligatures of the Arms and Thighs. This Glister may be also
administered.

. Wormwood, Rue, Pellitory of the Wall, Mercury, Hyssop, Beets, Lesser
Centaury, an. M. j. Leaves of Senna j. Celocynth tied in a Bag j. Aniseseed v.
Water q. s. Boil them according to Art.

. Of the Straining x. Elect. Hiera Picra, Diaphoenicon, an. j. Salt iiij. for a
Glister.

Or instead thereof, this Suppository.

. Specierum Hierae j. Trochises, Alhanhal s. Salt Gemma j. Honey vj. Make a
Suppository, and at the end of it, fasten gr. iiij. of Diagridium.

XI. After he has taken this Glister, Bleed him moderately in the Arm; then
apply Cupping-glasses with and without Scarification to his Neck, Shoulders,
Scapulas and Legs.

XII. Let this Sneezing Powder be also blown up into the Nostrils.

. Roots of white Hellebore j. Pellitory of Spain s. Leaves of Marjoram j. Black
Pepper, Castoreum, an. gr. v. For a Powder.

XIII. Outwardly, let this little Bag be applied warm to his Head.

. Salt M. j. s. Sea-sand Mij. Seeds of Cummin, Fennel, Lovage, an. ij. Cloves
j. s. Heat them in a dry Stone Pot, put them in a linen Bag, and apply them
warm to the Head.

XIV. Let the Nostrils, Temples and Top of the Head be anointed with this
Liniment.

. O^ls of Castor, Lavender, Rosemary, Amber, an. j. Martiate Ointment j.

XV. When the Patient begins to come to himself, give him now and then a
Spoonful of this Water.

. Water of Tylet Flowers, Lilly of the Valleys, Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, Syrup
of Stoechas, an. j.

XVI. Let him then be purged with Pill. Cochiae, extract of Catholicon, Elect.
Diaphenicon or Hiera Picra, Powder of Diaturbith, or the Infusion of such kind
of Flegm-purging Ingredients.

XVII. After Purgation, let him take this Apozem.

. Roots of Sweet Cane, Fennel, an. vj. Galangal iij. Marjoram, Betony,
Rosemary, Rue, Calamint, Hyssop, an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s. Cordial
Flowers, an. one little Handful, Juniper Berries vj. Seeds of Anise, Fennel,
an* ij. Water and Hydromel, equal par^s. Make an Apozem of lbj. s.

Of which, let him take four or five ounces thrice a day, with a small quantity
of this Conditement.

. Specier. Diambre iiij. Sweet Diamosch s. Roots of sweet Cane candied,
Conserves of Betony, Anthos and Flowers of Sage, Syrup of Staechas, q. s.

XVIII. Let this Quilt be laid also upon his Head.

. Leaves of Marjoram M. j. Rosemary, and Flowers of Lavender, an. two small
Handfuls, Cloves, Nutmegs, an. jj. Benjamin j. Beat them into a gross Powder,
and quilt them into red Silk.

XIX. An Air moderately hot and dry, either by Art or Nature, is most proper
for this Distemper. Meats of good Nourishment and easy of Digestion, condited
with Rosemary, Marjoram, creeping Thyme, Sage, Betony, Baum, Hyssop, the
Carminative Seeds, and Spices, etc. Small Drink, and sometimes a little
Hypocrass, Short Sleeps, moderate Exercise, and orderly Evacuations.

HISTORY XIII. Of the Palsy and Trembling.
A Virgin, twenty five years of Age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, having for a
long time ^ed upon Sallads, Cucumbers and raw Fruit, afterward complaining of
heavy dozing Pains in her Head, at length, fell Apoplectic to the Ground,
without Motion or Sense, except Respiration. The Physician who was sent for,
had brought her to this pass, that after six hours she opened her Eyes again,
and after twenty hours, was fully restored to her Senses, and spoke; but all
the Left-side of her Body below the Head, remained immovable, with a very dull
Sense of Feeling. Yet her Monthly Customs observed their Periods, though not so
copious.

I. THat Affection which remained, after the weak Apoplexy went off, is called
a Palsy, Which is a Privation of Voluntary Motion or Sense, or both, in one or
several Parts of the Body.

II. The Part affected is the Spinal Pith, chiefly about the beginning of it;
where the one half Part of it being compressed or obstructed by the Flegmatic
Humor, expelled from the Brain, disturbs the Use of all those Nerves proceeding
from that side, and by consequence of the Muscles.

III. The remote Cause is disorderly Diet, and the too much use of cold things,
whence many flegmatic Humors being generated in a flegmatic Body, cause an
oppressive Pain in the Head, which is the antecedent Cause, which also
afterward obstructing the Original of the Marrow of the Brain, and afterward
cast off by one half, but still obstructing the other, constitute the
containing Cause.

IV. Thus the Motion of the Left-side was taken away, because that half of the
Pith being obstructed, the Animal Spirits could not enter into that half of the
Pith, nor the Nerves proceeding from it, which causes a Cessation of the
Actions of the Instruments of voluntary Motion, or the Muscles on that side.
But the Sense is not quite lost, but remains very dull, because that several
Spirits pass through the contracted Pores of the Pith, sufficient for Motion,
yet not anew to impart Sense to the feeling Parts.

V. This Malady is hard to be cured, by reason of the detension of a viscous
and tenacious Humor in a cold Part; but Youth and Strength of Body promise
hopes of Recovery.

VI. The Method of Cure requires the Attenuation and Dissipation of the
Obstructing Humor. 2. To prevent the Afflux of any more. 3. To take away the
antecedent Cause. 4. To cortoborate the Parts affected.

VII. For Evacuation of the Flegmatic Humor, give these Pills.

. Mass of Pill. Cochiae s. Extract of Catholicon s. with a little Syrup of
Stoechas, make up vij. Pills.

Instead of them may be given Powder of Diaturbith or Diacarthamum j. or a
Draught of an Insusion of Leaves of Senna, Root of Jalap, Agaric. These Purges
are to be repeated by Intervals.

VIII. Blood-letting is not proper in this Case.

IX. To corroborate the nervous Part of the Body, and prevent the Generation of
phlegmatic Humors, let him take this Apozem.

. Root of Acorns, Fennel, an. vj. Florence Orice iij. Betony, Groundpine,
Marjoram, Rosemary, Calamint, Thime, an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s. Seeds
of Fennel, Caroways, Bishops-weed, an. j. s. Water and Wine equal parts, boil
them to a Pint and a half, and to the Straining add Syrup of Stoechas iij. For
an Apozem.

Of which, let the Patient take four ounces three or four times a day, with a
small Quantity of this Conditement.

. Specier. Diambr. Diamosch Dulcis, an. iiij. Conserve of Flowers of Sage,
Anthos, Root of Acorns candied, an. v. Syrup of Stoechas q. s.

X. The Use of Paralitic and Apoplectic Waters will be very proper in this
Case; of which there are several to be found among the Prescriptions of
Physicians.

XI. If the Disease will not submit to these Remedies, let him take every
Morning five ounces of the following Decoction, and sweat in his Bed, according
to his Strength.

. Lig. Guaiacum iiij. Sassafras, Sarsaperil, an. ij. Water lbvij. Macerate
these twenty four hours; then boil them, adding toward the end Roots of Acorns,
Valerian, Butter-bur, Fennel, an. vj. Galangale, Licorice sli^'d, an. ij.
Herbs, Betony Miij. Ground Ivy, M. ij. Thyme, Marjoram, Rosemary, Flowers of
Stoechas, an. M. j. Sage Ms. Iuniper-berries j. Boil them to lb. iij.

XII. For Corroboration of the Head, prepare this Quilt.

. Flowers of Rosemary, Marjoram, Thyme, Flowers of Lavender, Melilot, an* one
small Handful, Cloves, Nutmegs, an. ij. For a Quilt.

XIII. While these things are doing, let the Spine of the Back be well chafed
with hot Clothes, especially in the Neck about the Head, and then fomented with
a Fomentation of hot Cephalics boiled in Wine; or else anoint the Neck with
this Liniment warm.

. Oil of Foxes, Spike, Rue, Goose and Cats-grease, an. vj. Oil of Turpentine s.
Oil of Peter, Rosemary, Amber, an. ij. Powder of Castoreum iiij.

After Unction and Friction, lay on this Plaster.

. Pull, Castoreum ij. Benjamin j. Galbanum, Opoponax dissolved in Spirit of
Wine. Emplaster of Betony, Lawrel-Berries, and Melilot, an. vj. Mix them
according to Art.

XIV. This Disease requires a hot, dry and pure Air. Meats of good juice and
easy Digestion, calefying and attenuating. For Drink, Hydromel or Wine,
imbibed with Rosemary, Marjoram, Betony, Cardamum, etc. Now and then a Draught
of Hypocrass, or a Spoonful of Juniper-wine, or Anthoswine, or Aquae Vite of
Matthiolus will not be improper; avoid long Sleeps and Repletion, and let
Natures Evacuations be regular and due.

HISTORY XIII. Of Trembling.
A Man, fifty years of Age, struck with a great and sudden Terror, immediately
fell down, fixing his Eyes upon* the Standers by, but not able to speak: Soon
after recovering his Spirits, he talked well enough, but rose up with a
Trembling over his whole Body. From that time, when he moved his Limbs, the
Trembling still remained, which as his Body drew cold, was more violent, as he
grew warm, abated.

I. TRembling is a Deprivation of the Voluntary Motion of the Limbs, by which
they are agitated with a contrary Motion, in a continued Vicissitude.

II. The antecedent Cause is a Flegmatic Humor contained in the Brain, which
being stirred by the great sudden and disorderly Commotion of the Spirits
proceeding from the Terror, and cast off to the Pith of the Spine, constitutes
the containing Cause.

III. For the Humor in that place contracting the Pores of the Pith, prevents
the free Influx of the Animal Spirits through the Marrow into the Nerves and
Muscles. So that not being sufficient to perfect the voluntary Motion, it
happens that the Limbs are moved forward by a voluntary Motion, but are
depressed by their own Weight, so that both together cause a trembling Motion.

IV. This Trembling is more vehement in the Body, when cold; less violent when
the Body is warm: Because the Pores are more contracted by the Cold, and more
dilated by the Heat. Which causes a freer or less open Passage to the Animal
Spirits, and consequently a more or less vehement Trembling.

V* This Trembling is not a little dangerous, for it may turn to a Palsy, or
may be accompanied with an Apoplexy, a Carus, or a Lethargy.

VI. The Cure is the same as of the Palsy.

HISTORY. XIV. Of a Convulsion.
A Maid, about thirty years of Age, received a Wound in her Right-arm, which
laid a Nerve bare, but unhurt. However she lay in a cold Place, and by reason
of her Poverty, not well guarded against the Cold, and besides an unskilful
Chyrurgeon, having stopped the Blood, put a Tent into the Wound dipped in
Egyptiaeum and the Apostles Ointment, which caused a most painful and vehement
Convulsion in her Arm; which soon after was accompanied with a Convulsion of
the Thigh on the same side, and of her Arm and Thigh on the other side, which
lasted sometimes half a quarter, sometimes an Hour, sometimes half an hour,
intermitting and returning. She was in such Pain, that many times it made her
talk idly.

I. THE Nerves and Muscles of this Patient were affected, as appeared by the
Motion not spontaneous, and that still more increase; and her Head was grieved,
as appeared by the Delirium.

II. This Simptom is called a Convulsion, which is a continued and unvoluntary
Contraction of the Nerves and Muscles toward their beginning.

III. The remote Cause was the Wound received, which laid the Wound bare. The
next Cause was the sharp and biting Ointment, provoking the Nerve, and the cold
Air no less troublesome to it.

IV. Which Vellication of the Nerve being communicated to the Nerve, and
perceived by the Mind, presently more copious Spirits were determined to the
Place affected for its Relief, which distending in breadth the Nerve and Muscle
belonging to it, but contracting it in length, caused the Convulsion. By the
Pain of this Convulsion, the Head being troubled, sends the Animal Spirits
disorderly to these or other lower Parts, and so contracting them in the same
manner, the Contraction happens not only in the wounded, but in other Parts
likewise; and from this great Disturbance of the Brain and Animal Spirits
happens a Delirium.

V. This is a dangerous Malady; for besides the Nerves and Muscles, the noble
Bowel is distmpered. Therefore, says Hippocrates, a Convulsion ensuing a Wound
is very dangerous. But the Youth and Strength of the Patient promises great
hopes of Cure, besides that, the Convulsion proceeds from an external Cause
that may be removed.

VI. The Method of Cure consists in keeping the Patient warm, and in a warm
Place, in removing the sharp and biting Ointment, and washing the Wound with
Barley-water boiled with Hyssop, and a little Honey dissolved in it; then put a
Tent into it dipped in this Ointment.

. The Yolk of an Egg, n^ j. Honey, Turpentine, an. iij. Spirit of Wine ij.

Then lay on Emplaster of Betony or Melilot.

VII. The Parts afflicted, and especially the wounded Arm, are to be fomented
with this Fomentation.

. Marjoram, Rosemary, Betony, Calamint, Hyssop, Basil, an. M. j. Flowers of
Dill M. ij. Of Chamomil, Melilot, an. M. j. s. Seeds of Cumin j. of Lovage iij.
Of Dill s. White Wind q. s. Boil them to lbiij.

VIII. After Fomentation, strongly cha^e the Parts affected with this Liniment
warm.

. Martiate Ointment, Oil of Ireos, Oil of Foxes, Earthworms and Spike, an. j.
Oil of Castor s.

IX. In the mean time, after a Glister given, let the Parties take a Draught of
this Apozem to strengthen the Brain and Nerves.

. Root of sweet Cane, Fennel, Male Piony, an. vj. Herbs, Of Majoram, Rue,
Betony, Rosemary, Baum, Basil, Calamint, an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s.
Fennel Seed ij. Raisins cleansed ij. Water q. s. Boil them to lbj. s. Then mix
Water of Tilet Flowers, Syrup of Stoechas, an. iij.

X. Now and then let her take a small quantity of this Conditment.

. Species Diambra iiij. Candied Root of sweet Cane, Conserve of Flowers of
Sage, Betony, Anthos, an. s. Syrup of Stoechas, q. s.

XI. Lastly, clap such a quilted Cap upon her Head.

. Leaves of Marjoram M. s. Of Rosemary, Betony, Flowers of Dill, Melilot, an.
Two little Handfuls, Nutmegs j. Benjamin s. Beat them into a Gross Powder for a
quilted Cap.

XII. The Convulsion ceasing, the Body must be purged with an Infusion of
Leaves of Senna, Rubarb, Agaric, etc. or with Cochiae or Golden Pills,
Diaphenicon, or Diaturbith, with Rubarb. And then return to the use of the
foresaid Apozem and Conditement.

XIII. Her Diet must be easy of Digestion, condited with Marjoram, Hyssop,
Rosemary, Betony, Sage, Aniseseed, Fennel-seed, and the like. Let her sleep
Long, and take her Rest as much as may be. And be sure the Body evacuate
regularly.

HISTORY. XV. Of the Epilepsie.
A Boy of eight years of Age, indifferent lusty, no care being had of his Diet,
first became sad, and the Winter being past, often complained of a grievous
Headache. In March, as he was at play, he fell down of a sudden, quite
senseless, writhed his Eyes, and clutch'd his two Thumbs hard in his Fists.
That Fit soon went off; but the next day it returned much more vehement,
attended with manifest Convulsions of the Body. From that time the Fits
returned twice, thrice, and four times a Week, with more terrible Convulsions.
But in the Summer they were much gentler, and not so frequent. But the Autumn
following, especially near Winter, the Fits took him very often, and very
violent, and that too of a sudden without any warning, with horrid Convulsions
and Foming at the Mouth. And at last, the I continuance and violence of the
Distemper had so disordered the Animal Functions, that the Child was become
sottish.

I. THAT the Boys Brain was affected, was plain by the distress of the Animal
Functions.

II. This Distemper is called an Epilepsie, Which is a Convulsion of the whole
Body, not perpetual, with which the Party taken falls to the Ground, with an
intercepting of the Senses and Functions of the Mind, rising from a Peculiar
malignant and acrimonious Matter.

III. Bad Diet contributes much to the breeding of this Disease (as the greedy
devouring of bad and raw Fruit) which heaps up Crude and Flegmatic Humors in a
Flegmatic Body; and these filling the Brain, first caused the Headache; then
through their long stay in the Brain, obtaining a certain peculiar pravity and
acrimony, constitute the containing Cause of the Epilepsis.

IV. From this depraved and acrimonious Humor exhale sharp and malignant
Vapors, which as often as they twitch and bite the beginning of the Nerves,
about the heat of the common Sensory, so often they cause the Fit. For while
Nature endeavors to shake off that troublesome Acrimony from the sensible Parts,
it happens that as the Spirits flow in greater or less quantity into them, they
contract and relax alternately, and move the rest of the Nerves and Muscles of
the Body after the same manner; whence those short and frequent Convulsions.

V. Now because this Malignant and sharp Humor chiefly and oftenest afflicts
the small diminutive Nerves, near the seat of the common Sensory, hence it
comes to pass, that the fit so suddenly seizes. For so soon as those little
Nerves feel that Acrimony, Nature endeavors to shake it off. And because that
endeavor is made, and begins near the common Sensory; therefore there is a stop
put upon the Functions of the Senses and Mind. For in regard the Pine Kernel is
presently affected, and for that the Influx of the Animal Spirits through the
Nerves sometimes contracted, sometimes relaxed, can never be regular, hence it
happens that the Organs of the Senses become defective in their Functions, and
by reason of that disorderly Influx of the Spirits into the Nerves and Muscles,
the Patient presently falls.

VI. The Fits are milder and not so frequent in Summer. For that the Pores of
the whole Body are more open, by reason of the External heat, so that there is
a greater dissipation of the Humors; and considering the time of the year less
Phlegm is bred and heaped up in the Brain. Therefore in Autumn and Winter they
are most frequent and violent, because of the greater abundance of Phlegm then
bred, and less easy to be dissipated through the Pores then contracted with
Cold; besides the Vapors exhaling from it, are more abundant and acrimonious.

VII. The Foam at the Mouth proceeds from hence; for that those Flegmatic
Humors expelled from the Brain into the Jaws and Lungs, by that vehement
agitation, by reason that respiration is hindered, grows hot in those places,
and being mixed with the Air, unequally and difficultly passing to and fro, by
vehement respiration are forced all frothy into the Mouth.

VIII. The Fit lasts, till that malignant and sharp Vapor be altogether
discussed; and returns again when the depraved matter, stirred anew, sends
forth the same Vapors to the Original of the Nerves. The Fit is more or less
vehement, and does less hurt to the principal Functions, according to the
quantity and quality of the evil Matter.

IX. Now because this ill and acrimonious Humor is bred in the Brain, and
because the Fits were frequent and vehement, and the Disease of nine Months
standing, therefore the Cure was difficult, but the Strength and Age of the
Patient gave great hopes of Cure. For being but a Child, the very change of
Youth out of one Age into another many times effects the Cure, as Hippocrates
testifies.

X. The Cure is to be performed either in the Fit, or when the Fit is gone off.
In the Fit, Castor, green Rue, Oil of Marjoram, Amber, Nutmegs and the like are
to be held to the Nostrils.

XI. When the Fit is past, the Original Causes are to be taken away, the
antecedent Cause to be removed, the depraved quality of the containing Cause to
be removed, and the whole Brain to be corroborated.

XII. Let the Body be gently Purged with two drams of Heira Picra or
Diaphaenicon; or with one Scruple and a half of Powder of Diacarthamum; or an
ounce of Purging blew Currants.

XIII. Then let him drink twice or thrice a day a draught of this Decoction.

. Roots of Male Piony, Misletoe, Sassafras-wood an. vj. of Calamus Aromatic.
Valerian an.. s. Herbs, Marjoram, Rue, Calamit., Rosmary, Vervan,
Laurel-leaves, Flowers of Stoechas an. M j. Iuniper-berries s. Seeds of Anise,
Wild Carrots, Fennel an. j. Seed of Male Piony iij. Raisins cleased ij. Water
q. s. Boil them to an Apozem of lb j. s.

Before he drinks this, let him take a small quantity of the following
Conditement.

. Spicier. Diambr. j. s. Roots of sweet Cane candied, Conserves of Anthos,
Flowers of Sage, Betony, an. s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s.

XIV. Sometimes instead of the Apozem, he may take a spoonful of this mixture.

. Epileptic water of Langius iij. Water of Lime-tree Flowers, of the Lilly of
the Valleys an. j. Syrup of Stoechas j. s.

XV. Upon his head let him wear this Quilted Cap.

. Leaves of Marjarom, Rosemary, Thime, Flowers of Lavender and Red Roses an.
Two small handfulls. Cloves, Benjamin an. j. Beat them into a gross Powder.

XVI. Let the Patient be kept in a warm Air; his food must be Meats of easy
digestion condited with Marjoram, Baum, Rosemary and other Cephalics. His drink
must be small; his sleep and exercise moderate; and his Evacuations regular.
Raw Fruit, Garlic, Onyons and Swines Flesh, and all other Meats of hard
digestion and ill juice are naught.

HISTORY. XVI. Of a Catarrh.
A Man of forty Years of Age, of a cold Constitution, and one that had long
used a cooling and moistning Diet, was troubled first with a heavy Pain in his
Head, with a proclivity to sleep. Afterward he was troubled with a vehement
Cough, sometimes with deafness, noise in his Ears, Pains in his Neck, Teeth,
Shoulders, and other Parts, sometimes a most terrible Cough took him, not
without some difficulty of breathing and danger of Suffocation, sometimes he
had nauseousness, and was molested with troublesome Belchings and Pains in his
Stomach; under his lower Jaw rose Flegmatic Tumors, which fell and vanished
soon after; his Nostrils were more then usually dry and he spit little. He
complained also that he felt a continual chilness in the top of his Head; and
that his Hair was not so moist as it used to be.

I. HEre is one molested with a Catarrh, which is a Preter natural Defluxion of
Humors from the Head to the lower Parts.

II. The remote cause of this Distemper was a cold raw and Flegmatic
nourishment, which over-cool'd and weakened the Bowels serving to Concoction,
and bred a great quantity of Excrementitious Phlegm, which was the anteceding
Cause of the Distemper: and which being colected, and accumulated in the Brain,
over-cool'd it, and thence fell down upon the lower Parts.

III. This Phlegm augmented in the Brain, because it had not heat enough to
concoct and dissipate so cold and thick a Humor; besides that the Passages to
the Nostrils and Palate were obstructed.

IV. This Obstruction happens in the inner Parts of the Head by reason of the
viscosity of the Humors stuffing up the narrow Passages for the Evacuation of
those Excrements. Therefore not able to pass the regular way, they flow to the
inner Parts of the Ear, where they cause Noises, Deafness and Pain; sometimes
to the Larinx and Lungs, which causes vehement coughing and danger of
Suffocation; sometimes to the Stomach and other Parts, where they breed several
Maladies. In the Exterior Parts this Obstruction happens, by reason the Pores
in the top of the Head, are filled with Humors contracted by the External cold:
and that cold continuing in those refrigerated Parts, causes that chilness
complained of by the Patient. And this cold not only hinders the Passage of the
Vapors, but condenses them under the Pericranium, into a serous and flegmatic
Humor, which being ill concocted becomes salt and sharp. Which for want of
dissipation falls down upon the Teeth, Neck, Shoulders, etc. and causes those
Pains complained of.

V. That the ordinary Passages were obstructed is apparent from the dryness of
the Patients Nostrils and Hair, and because he spit so little.

VI. This Affection is not a little dangerous, in regard the Symptoms that
attend it may bring a Man into a Consumption; and breed occult and dangerous
Apostems in the inner Parts.

VII. In the Method of the Cure, the Body must be Purged twice or thrice with
Pill. Chochiae, Powder of Diaturbith or Diacarthamum, or such a draught as this.

. Leaves of Senna iij. White Agaric. j. s. Anise-seed j. Choice Cinnamon white
Ginger an. s. Decoction of Barley q. s. Infuse them, then add to the straining
Elect. Hiera Picra j. Diaphoenicon ij.

VIII. Then the Brain is to be dried and strengthened with the following Apozem.

. Roots of Acorus Fennel, an. vj* Galangal iij. Herbs, Marjoram, Betony, Thime,
Rosemary, Baum, Calamint, an. M. j. Laurel-leaves, Flowers of Stoechados an. M.
s. Seeds of Anise, Fennel an. ij. Laurel-berrys s. Water and Wine equal Parts,
Boil them to an Apozem of lbj. s. Of which let him take three or four draughts
a day.

IX. Noon and Night after Meals let him take a small quantity of this
Conditement.

. Specier. Diambr, Diamosch, Diagalanga, an. s. Conserve of Anthos, red Roses,
an. vj. Candv'd Roots of Acorus, iij. Syrup of Stoechas, q. s.

X. While he follows this course, Masticatories and Errhines may be used; and
the taking of Tobacco is very Beneficial.

XI. Decoctions of Guaiacum, Sassafras and Sassaparil prepared with hot and
drying Cephalics to provoke Sweat now and then are of great use.

XII. This Quilt may be made for the Patient to lay upon his Head.

. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjarom, Thime, Flowers of Lavender an. two small hand
fuls, Mastic, Frankincense an. j. Cloves, Nutmegs an. j. For a Quilt.

To anoint the Temples and top of the Head, which is every day to be done use
this Liniment.

. Oils of Rosemary, Amber, Marjoram an. j. Oil of Nutmegs pressed ij. Martiate
Ointment ij.

XIII. If notwithstanding all this, the Catarrh continue, make an Issue in one
Arm or in the Neck.

XIV. Let him keep in a moderately warm Air; observe a good Diet, roasted
rather then boiled, condited with Spices and hot Cephalics, avoid Radishes,
Mustard, Garlic, Onions, which raise and fill the Head with Vapors* His Drink
must be sparing, but strong; moderate sleep and moderate Exercise.

HISTORY XVII. Of an Opthalmy.
A Person about thirty Years of Age, abounding with hot and Choleric Blood,
having heated himself the last Winter at an extraordinary compotation of strong
Wine, and then exposing himself in a bitter cold Night to the extremity of the
weather, presently felt a sharp pain in his Eyes, with a burning heat; the next
day a very great redness appeared in the white of his Eye, with a manifest
swelling of the little Veins. He could not endure the light, so that he sat
continually with his Eyes shut, sharp Tears flowed from his Eyes, which when he
opened his sight appeared to be very dim.

I. HEre the Part affected was the Eye, in which the annate Tunicle or the
Conjunctive Tunicle, was chiefly aggreived, the other Parts of the Eye, only by
Accident.

II. This Disease the Physicians call an Opthalmy, or Blear-eyedness, which is
an Inflammation of the annate or white Tunicle, accompanied with redness, heat,
pain and tears.

III. The Antecedent Cause of this Disease, was an abundance of hot Blood
through the whole Body, which being violently stirred by the extraordinary heat
caused by the Wine, and suddenly detained by the Original Cause or the outward
extreme Cold, and overflowing the conjunctive Tunicle, constitutes the
containing Cause.

IV. For the blood being moved more rapidly through the Arteries and Veins by
reason of the extraordinary heat of the Wine, was thickened of a sudden by the
external Cold received into the Eye; so that it could not pass so speedily
through those little Veins, as it was sent from the Heart, which caused the
Veins of the Tunicle to swell, and distended the Tunicle it self; and the stay
of the Blood corrupting it, and causing it to wax hot and sharp, produced the
Inflammation.

V. The Pain was occasioned partly by the distention of the Tunicle; partly by
the acrimony of the Humors corroding the Tunicle.

VI. He could not endure the Light, partly because the Pain was exasperated by
admission of the External Air; partly because the Eyes being opened the Animal
Spirits presently flow into it, as they are determined for the benefit of
seeing, and distend the Eye, which destension augments the Pain, for the
avoiding of which the Patient keeps his Eyes shut, to avoid the distension of
the Part.

VII. Now in regard the sight proceeds from the copious Influx of the Spirits
into the Eye, and because the Tunicle cannot endure that distension, hence the
Eyes being open, the sight grows dim; in regard that the fewer the Spirits are,
the duller the sight is.

VIII. The Tears issue forth, chiefly upon opening the Eye, by reason that the
Caruncle in the larger corner of the Eye, that lies upon the hole in the Nose,
is twitched and contracted in each Eye by the neighboring Inflammation:
especially if any injury of the Air accompany it, and by reason of that painful
contraction does not exactly cover the Lachrymal point, so that the hole being
loose and open, the Tears flow forth in greater abundance. And they are sharp
by reason of the Salt mixed with the serous Humor, and seem to be much sharper
then they are, by reason of the exquisite Sense of the Tunicle, which is now
already molested.

IX. This Opthalmy threatens great danger to the Eye, in regard that by reason
of the Winter cold, the discussion of the Humors flowing into the Annate
Tunicle is the more difficult, and the longer stay of it may hazard the
Corrosion and Exulceration of the Annate and the Horny Tunicle, and so produce
a white Spot, a Scar, or some such blemish in the Sight.

X. In the Cure, the antecedent Cause is to be removed, as being that which
nourishes the Containing; and the Original Cause is to be removed, that the
Containing one may be the better discussed.

XI. The Body is first to be Purged with one dram of Pill. Cochiae or half an
ounce of Diaprunum, Electuary Solutive, adding a few grains of Diagridium: or
else such a Draught.

. Rhubarb j. s. Leaves of Senna iij. Tartar j. Anise-seed j. Decoction of
Barley q. s. Infuse them, and then add to the straining Solutive Diaprunum
Electuary iij.

XII. The Body being Purged, open a Vein in the Arm, and take away eight or ten
ounces of Blood. Then Purge again, and if need be bleed again.

XIII. To divert the Excrementitious Humors from the Brain to the Eyes,
Cupping-glasses may be applied to the Neck and Shoulders; or a Vesicatory
behind the Ears. Which if they prove not sufficiently effectual, make a Seaton
in the Neck, or apply an Actual or Potential Cautery to the Arm or Neck.

XIV. To assuage the Pain, drop into the Eye the Blood of the Wing-feathers
plucked from Young Chickens, or Women's Milk newly milked from the Breast; or
the Muscilage of the Seeds of Flea-wort, and Quinces extracted with Rose Water;
or the Yolk of an Egg boiled to a hardness, or else the following Cataplasm
laid upon the Eye.

. Pulp of an Apple roasted j. s. Crum of new White-bread iij. Saffron Powdered
j. s. New Milk and Rose Water equal Parts. Make them into a Cataplasm.

XV. The Pain being somewhat assuaged, this Collyrium may be dropped into the
Eye.

. Sarcocol fed with Milk j. Tragacanth. s. Muscilage of the Seed of Quinces q.
s.

XVI. For discussion of the Humor contained in the Tunicle, foment the Eye with
a Spung dipped in the following Fomentation warm.

. Herbs, Althea, Fennel, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, an. M. j. Water q. s.
boil them to eight ounces; then add Rose Water iij.

XVII. After Fomentation lay on the Cataplasm again, or else drop the following
Collyrium into the Eye.

* Alloes washed in Fennel-water j. Sarcocol steeped in Milk j. Saffron gr.
vij. Eyebright and Fennel-water an. j.

XVIII. Let him keep in a temperate and clear Air, free from Dust and Wind and
Smoke; let him avoid too much Light, and wear a green p^ece of Silk before his
Eye. His Diet must be sparing and of easy Digestion, condited with Fenel,
Eyebright, Succory, Borage, etc. His Drink must be small. Let him avoid
Radishes, Onions, Cabbiges, Beans, Lentils, Olives, etc. The longer he sleeps
and the less Exercise he uses, the better: and let him keep his Body open.

HISTORY. XVIII. Of the Pin and Web, and Bloodshot.
A Boy about twelve Years of Age of a cold Constitution, above five Months
since perceived a dimness in both his Eyes, so that at first he thought he saw
Gnats and Straws fly before his Eyes. Afterward he seemed to look through a
thick Mist; and so his sight began to fail more and more; so that he saw Men
after a fashion, but could not distinguish Faces; nay he could hardly
distinguish a Horse from a Cow. In the Apple of his Eye appeared a white spot,
covering the Christaline Humor, which yielded to the Finger if laid upon it.

I. THis Affection of the Eye is by the Physicians called Suffusio or the Pin
and Web, which is an Obstruction* of the hole of the Uve^us Tunicle, caused by
a Humor preternaturally gathered and staying between the Horny Tunicle and the
sight of the Eye, and hindering the Sight*

II. This Humor in this Patient was Flegmatic, as appeared by the white color
in the Apple of the Eye: where it was collected by reason of the cold Temper of
the Eye, not so able to concoct their Nourishment, but that some few thick
Vapors exhale from the Uveous Tuncle, which are condensed into a thick Humor by
the External cold, in the space between the Chrystalline Humor, lying upon the
Uveous hole, and the Horny Tunicle, and mixed with the watery Humor, and swim at
the top in viscous and thick Particles.

III. This Humor being thinner and less in quantity at the beginning, did not
hinder the Ingress of the Beams into the Christalline humor altogether, but
only the thicker Particles of it, prevented all the Beams from entering in,
which made the Patient think at first that Gnats and Straws hovered before his
Eyes; which however were only the thicker Particles of the said Humor; but the
Humor afterward becoming more plentiful and thicker, then the Sight looked as
it were through a Cloud; and as that thickness of the Humor increased, the
Sight waxed dimmer and dimmer.

IV. The Cure of this Evil is very difficult, because the Humor covering the
Apple of the Eye, is now very much condensed; and therefore the danger is,
least hardening into a little Skin it should produce Blindness. But there is
hopes of Cure while the Sight remains, and for that the Humor giving way to the
Finger appears as yet not to be fixed.

V. In the Cure the Body must be Purged with Pill. Lucis, Golden Pills or
Chochiae: Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra, Diacarthamum, or any draught composed of
Agaric, Turbith, Iallap, Senna or the like.

VI. For the discussion of the cold humors, let the Patient Sweat twice a week
with Treacle, Mithridate, Decoction of Sassaparil, China, and Sassafras. In the
middle between whiles let him take Decoctions of Marjoram, Rosemary, Eyebright,
Fennel, Betony, Rue, and the like: as also Cephalic Conditements of Conserves
of Anthos, Flowers of Sage, Eyebright, Betony, etc.

VII. To strengthen the Head, let him make use of Cephalic Quilts. The
Excrementitious humors are to be diverted from the Eye, and carried otherways
off by Visicatories applied behind the Ears, or an Issue in the Arm or Neck.

VIII. After these things Topics may be applied to the Eyes; and first such a
Decoction is to be prepared.

. Roots of Radishes ij. Valerian j. Rue, Fennel, Eyebright, Lovage, Marjoram,
Leaves of Laurel an. M. j. Flowers of Camomil M. ij. Seeds of Fennel, Caroways
an. ij. Water q. s. Boil them to lb j. s.

While it is boiling let the Patient sit with his Eye over the steam of the
Decoction: afterward with a soft Sponge dipped in the same Decoction lukewarm,
let him frequently and long foment his Eye, and observe this course for three
weeks together.

IX. Let him then drop this Collyrium into his Eyes.

. Juice of the bigger Celandine, Rue, Fennel, Hony-water an. s.

When he has used this for some time, let him make it stronger by adding to it,
the Gaul of a Patridge, and of a Pike one dram, and afterward one dram and a
half*

X. His Diet must be moderate hot, attenuating and discussing. His Sleep and
Exercise moderate, and an open Body.

XI. If these avail not the Suffusion must be taken from the Eye by the help of
a Needle.

Of Bloodshot.
A Plethoric Young Man playing in a Tennis-Court by misfortune, a Ball struck
him in the Left Eye: His Eye upon this aked to that degree that he could not
hold open his Eye. The next day the Pain ceasing, an extraordinary Bloody
Redness was seen over his whole Eye without any Inflammation, and his Eyelids
seemed to be infected with the same Redness. But his Sight was no way damnified.

I. THis Malady of the Eye is called a Suggillation or Bloodshot, Being a
pouring forth of the Blood without the Vessels into the Tunicles over the Eyes
and Eyelids.

II. This Blood flowed out of the small Vessels of the Annate Tunicle and the
Eyelids, broken and opened by the stroke of the Ball. For the Horny Tunicle
was not hurt as appeared by the soundness of the Sight which was no way
damnified.

III. There is no danger in this affection if it be taken in time, before the
extravasated Blood putrify and inflame.

IV. First the Body is to be Purged, and a Vein opened in the Arm. Then drop
Woman's Milk into the Eye, or Blood squeezed out of the Quills of live Chickens,
and foment the Eyes frequently with this Fomentation.

. Willow-leaves, Plantain, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot an. M. j Boil them in
Water, q. s. Add to the straining Rosewater j. s.

V. When there is no fear of a larger Efflux of Blood, let the Fomentation be
only discussive.

HISTORY XIX. Of Blindness.
A Person of forty Years of Age, strong, but given to his Belly, after he had
complained for sometime of a slight giddiness with a troublesome heaviness, at
length his sight in two days time was so decayed, that he could hardly see, no
not so much as the light, but became absolutely Blind; and yet his Eyes did not
seem to ail any thing. The Patient for some time was very temperate, but his
blindness still continued, though his heaviness and Vertigo went off: and the
rest of his Body was well.

I. THis Malady is called Caecitas or blindness, which is a Deprivation of the
Sight.

II. The Antecedent Cause of this Distemper is Phlegm collected in the
Ventricles of the Brain, which flowing thence to the Optic Nerves, and
obstructing them, hinders the Influx of the Animal Spirits to the Eye and the
preception of visible Objects.

III. This Phlegm was generated out of the Crude and Flegmatic Vapors and Humors
arising from too much gutling, and there thickened through the colder temper of
the Part.

IV. By the same crude Vapors carried through the Carotides to the
Choroid-Fold, and obstructing the narrow passages of it, that first whirling
passage of the Humors, and consequently the Vertigo was caused; which was
accompanied with a great Heaviness caused by the thick and viscous Humors,
which Nature endeavors to evacuate through the Sieve-like Bone.

V. In the mean time the Eyes look very well, because there is no Mistemper no^
vicious Conformation in them, and because the Sight fails only for want of
Animal Spirits, caused by obstruction of the Optic Nerves.

VI. These Nerves are obstructed only at their beginning by the said Flegmatic
Humor which somewhat insinuated it self into the broader Pores of the begininng
of the Pith.

VII. The Patient was afterward freed from his Vertigo and Murr, because he
abstained from his usual Gormondizing: which produced in a strong Body a better
Concoction of the Crudities, which abated the anteceding Cause, and consumed
the containing Cause.

VIII. But the Blindness remained, because the crude Humor, fixed in the Pores
of the Nerves, as well in regard of their own Viscosity as the narrowness in
the Pores of the Nerves, could neither be discussed nor consumed. And though it
be no longer supplied by the anteceding Cause, yet in respect of it self and
the Part to which it adheres, may remain and cause the obstruction.

IX. This blindness is very difficult to be cured: because the Humor sticking
in the Optic Nerves is not easily discussed. But because the Distemper is of no
long continuance, there is some hopes of Cure.

X. In the Cure, first the Body is to be Purged with these Pills.

. Mass of Pill. Lucis, Cochiae an. s. with a little Syrup of Stoechas. Make
nine Pills.

Instead of which may be given j. of Powder of Diaturbith with Rheon, or Rubarb.

XI. The next day take away a little Blood out of the Arm; and two or three
days after Purge again.

XII. After that let him drink three times a day a draught of this Apozem.

. Roots of Acorus, Valerian, Fennel, Elecampane an. s. Betony, Eyebright,
Creeping-time, Marjoram, Rosemary, Laurel-leaves an. M. j. Flowers of Camomil,
Stoechas an. M. s. Seeds of Fennel, Caroways an. ij. Iuniper-berries s. Raisins
cleansed ij. Water q. s. Boil them for an Apozem of lb j. s.

After this is drank off, it may be made Purging by adding,

. Leaves of Senna. j. s. Rubarb, white Agaric an. ij. Aniseed iij. Cinnamon j.

This let the Patient drink not above once aday.

XIII. The Body being sufficiently Purged, this Errhine may be coveniently put
up into his Nose.

. Juice of Marjoram, Fennel an. s. of Beets j. s.

XIV. For diversion, apply Cuppingglasses to the Back and Scapulas;
Visicatories may be also applied behind the Ears, or a Seaton or Issue made in
the Neck.

XV. To dissipate the Remainders contained in the Brain of the Optic Nerves,
and for the Corroboration of the Head, foment the Eyes, Forehead, top of the
Head and Temples with this Fomentation.

. Fennel, Marjoram, Rue, Rosmary, Betony, Eyebright, Flowers of Camomil,
Melilot, Stoechas an. M. j. Seeds of Anise, Caroways, Lovage an. ij. Water q.
s. Boil them to (...) ij. for a Fomentation.

XVI. After Fomentation lay on a Quilt of hot attenuating Cephalics; and into
his Ears put little Tents dipped in Oil of Fennel.

XVII. This done drop into the Eye such Colliryums as these.

. Juice of Fennel j. Celandine and Rue an. s.

Which may be made sharper by adding Juice of wild Radish three drams.

XVIII. Let his Diet be Food of easy digestion, Condited with Marjoram,
Fennel, Betony, Rosemary, Eyebright, Fennel, Anise-seed and the like; Shunning
Mustard, Garlic, Onions and the like. His drink small and clear. Let his Sleep
and Exercise be moderate, and let him keep his Body open.

HISTORY XX. Of thickness of Hearing and Noise in the Ears.
A Woman about thirty six Years of Age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, the Winter
before had been often troubled with Catarrhs; from which however she was quite
freed about the beginning of Feburary. But then for some few days she
complained of a slight heavy pain in her Head; which in a short time went off;
upon which ensued a very great noise in her Ears, with such a thickness of
hearing that she could hardly hear the loudest bawling in her Ears; which
thickness of hearing and noise continued for near three Months together.
Otherwise she was well in Health, and her Monthly Customs came kindly down.

I. IN this Patient the Instrument of Hearing was affected in the lower Part.

II. The Malady was twosold, Thickness of Hearing and Noise in the Ears. The
one is defect and difficulty of Hearing, wherein only loud Noises moved by the
External Objects are heard, soft Speaking is not at all perceived by the Sense
of Hearing. This is a troublesome Sound between the Ears themselves, excited by
no external Object.

III. The Cause of the thickness of Hearing is a Flegmatic Humor lying toward
the inner Parts of each Ear, and hindering a sufficient Influx of the Animal
Spirits to the inner Parts of the Ear partly by compressing the Acustic Nerve;
partly by hindering the free Motion of the Tympanum. For hence it comes to pass,
that gentle Noises hardly move the obstructed Tympanum, and the Air included
within it; so that the Motion by them made for want of Spirits is not
perceived, and consequently not communicated to the common Sensory. But loud
sounds more strongly move the Tympanum and the Air included within it, but yet
the Motion for want of Spirits, and by reason of the narrowness of the Acustic
Nerve is perceived no otherwise then only as slightly communicated to the
common Sensory.

IV. The noise or singing in the Ears, is caused by the Vital Spirits passing
the inner little Arteries of the Ears, and with their Motion moving also the
neighboring Air included within the inner Part of the Ear. Which motion, when
it cannot be freely made by reason of the containing Place, being narrowed by
the Phlegm which lies toward the inner Parts of the Ear: Hence it is that the
moved Air continually strikes against the Tympanum, and being repercussed by
that, offers it self to the common Sensory, like a singing or ringing Noise.

V. These Symptoms continued three Months, because the next Cause was fomented
by the Flegmatic Temperature of the whole Body. 2. Because the Phlegm sticking
in that affected Part is hard to be discussed.

VI. The fear is least these Maladies may turn to absolute Deafness. For that
the Flegmatic Humor may increase, and upon the dissipation of the thinner
Parts, thicken to that degree, that no Remedies will be able to attenuate and
discuss it. But if the Cure be undertaken in time there is some hopes, because
there is no distensive Pain, neither is the Hearing quite lost.

VII. The Body therefore must be Purged twice or thrice a week with Cochiae
Pills or Golden Pills, Powder of Diaturbith, Electuary of Hiera or Diaturbith;
or Infusions of Agaric, Diaturbith, Iallop, or other Phlegmagogues.

VIII. To abate the Phlegm of the whole Body, Decoctions of Sassafras,
Sassaperil and Guaiacum are most proper, to which add hot Cephalics at the end
of the Decoction. The Humors in the Ventricles of the Brain must be evacuated
by Masticatories, Errhines and Sneezing. And to corroborate the Brain, proper
Apozems and Cephalic Conditements must be prescribed.

IX. To disupate the remainders in the Head and Parts affected, a Fomentation
of hot and discussing Fomentations will be requisite, as Betony, Sage,
Rosemary, Marjoram, Calamint, Thime, etc. the Head being often fomented with a
large Sponge dipped therein. After which a Quilt of the same Cephalics will be no
less proper.

X. Afterward to attenuate and dissipate the Flegmatic Humors contained in the
Organ of Sense, some such Decoction as this may be prepared.

. Root of Wild Radish iij. Thime, Betony, Hyssop, Marjoram, Rosemary, creeping
Thime, Lawrel-leaves, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot an. M s. Seeds of Caroways,
Cummin, Lovage, Fenne^, an. s. Water q. s. Boil them according to Art.

While they are Boiling he may receive into his Ear the steam of the Decoction
through a Pipe placed in the Cover of the Pot, then let the Ears be fomented
with Sponges dipped in the said Decoction: and after Fomentation put into the
Ears, two Tents dipped in the Oil of Anise-seeds, Fennel or Caroways.

XI. This Cataplasm also laid upon the Ears in the Night time between two
Linen Clothes may prove very effectual.

. Marjoram, Sage, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot. an. M. j Seeds of Nasturtium,
Cummin, Fennel an. j. s. Reduce them to Powder, and to the Powder, add Onions
roasted under the Embers No. ij. one midling Turnep roasted, Flower of
Fengreek-seed j. Water q. s. Let them boil a little while, and adding Oil of
Dill, of Bitter Almonds an. j. make a Cataplasm.

XII. In the day time instead of this Cataplasm, let him lay warm to both Ears
this little* Bag.

. Marjoram M. j. Rosemary, Flowers of Camomil an. M. s. Seeds of Cummin,
Fennel, Caroways, Lovage an. ij. cut and beat these and put them into a silken
Bag.

XIII. If the use of these Remedies afford no ease, then make Issues in the
Neck and Arms, to divert the flegmatic Matter from the Ears through other
Passages.

XIV. Beware of Places exposed much to the Wind, especially the North. His Diet
must be easy of Digestion, condited with Marjoram, Lawrel-leaves, Creeping
Thyme, Rosemary, Betony, Carminative Seeds, or Seeds against Wind, Nutmeg, etc.
His Drink small. All Meats that fill the Head with Vapors must be avoided.
Moderate Sleep and Exercise, and a soluble Belly.

HISTORY. XXI. Of Bleeding at the Nose, the Murr, and loss of Smelling.
A Man about forty Years of Age, indifferent strong, and abounding with Blood,
sometimes drinking over hard was for sometime troubled with sharp and salt
Catarrhs falling down partly to his Nostrils, partly to his Lungs and Chaps,
which brought upon him a violent Cough, insomuch, that while he was once
Coughing very vehemently his Nose fell a bleeding, nor could the bleeding be
stopped for some hours: But that being stopped, and some Remedies given him for
his cold and the Catarrh, within two days his Cough ceased; but then the
bleeding returned by Intervals, especially if the Patient stirred more then
ordinary, and that in such abundance, that his life was in danger.

I. THE Malady is Bleeding at the Nose.

II. The Antecedent Cause is twofold. 1. Redundancy of Blood. 2. A sharp Humor
collected in the Head.

III. The Blood abounding in the whole Body being vehemently forced upward in
great quantity by the violent Cough, and distending and opening the Veins and
Arteries of the Nose, in respect of it self, becomes the containing Cause.

IV. Now the Blood was copiously, forced upward by the Cough, because the
descending Trunk of the Aorta Arteria was compressed and straightened by the
forcible Contraction of the Muscles of the Breast and Abdomen, so that much
less Blood could be thrust forward through it from the Heart, which therefore
was forced in greater quantity to the Head, through the ascending Part of the
said Artery, and so it distends all the Veins and Arteries of the Head.

V. Now that distending Plenty opens some Vessels in the Nostrils sooner than
in any other Parts of the Head, because they are there seated in a moist and
tender Part, and clothed with only a very soft and tender Skin.

VI. But because sharp and salt Catarrhs preceded, certain it is, that not only
their Distension, but Corrosion opened some Vessels in the Nostrils. Otherwise
had they been opened only by Distension, the Bleeding had not so often
returned; which now returns, because the Solution being made by Corrosion,
could not be so soon consolidated.

VII. If the Patient never so little overwalked or stirred himself, the
Bleeding returned, because that Motion heated, and more rapidly moved the
Blood, which therefore flowing hotter, and in greater quantity to the Nostrils,
could not be held in by the Extremities of the Vessels not yet well
consolidated; so that it forces its way out again.

VIII. This Returning Bleeding is somewhat dangerous, for fear too much loss of
Blood should turn to a Syncope, or that thereby the Liver should be over-cold
and weakened, and thence a Cachexy or Dropsy ensue.

IX. In the Cure, Blood-letting in the Right-arm is first to be done, and a
moderate quantity of Blood to be taken away, with respect to the strength of
the Person. The Belly is to be loosned with Rubarb mixed with Tamarinds, or a
Glister.

X. In the time of Bleeding, clap cold Water or Oxymel to the Neck and
Testicles, and Cupping-glasses, with much Flame to the Legs and Feet.

XI. Tie to the Forehead a Lock of Tow, with this Mixture.

. Bole Ammoniac, Terra Sigillata, Dragons Blood, red Coral, an. j. Volatile
Flower ij. White of one Egg, a little strong Vinegar. Mix them.

XII. Into the Nostrils blow this Powder.

. Trochischs of sealed Earth, Bloodstone, an. j. Frankinscence, red Coral,
Dragons Blood. an. j.

Or else make long Tents, and being moistened in the White of an Egg, roll them
in this Powder, and so put them up into the Nostrils. Or mix the same Powder
with the White of an Egg like an Ointment, and dip the Tents therein before you
thrust them up.

XIII. Simples also may be put up into the Nostrils, as green Horstail or shave
Grass, or Pimpernel or Plantain bruised, or Hogs or Asses Dung, and such like,
which are found by Experience to have wrought great Cures.

XIV. Nor are those things to be neglected that benefit by an occult quality;
to which purpose the Patient may wear the following Amulet about his Neck.

. Powder of a dried Toad ij. Bloodstone j. s. Trochischs of Sealed Earth, Moss
of human Skulls, an. j. red Coral s. Cobwebs j. Reduce them into Powder, and
then make them into a Paste, with Muscilage of Tragacanth, or the white of an
Egg, to be formed into a slat Cake, and sowed up in a silk Bag, and hanged
about the Patients Neck.

XV. While these things are doing, give him sometimes a Draught of this
Decoction.

. Roots of Tormentil, greater Consound, Snake-weed, an. vj. Knotgrass,
Pimpernel, Plantain, Shepherds Purse, Sanicle, Purslain, an. M. j. red Roses M.
s. White Poppy Seed v. Seeds of Quinces and Lettice, an. j. s. Raisins of the
Sun ij. Water q. s. Boil them into an Apozem of lbj. s. to which add Syrup of
Quinces and Sour Pomegranates, an. j. s.

XVI. Now and then let him take a small quantity of this Conditement.

. Trochischs of sealed Earth ij. Pulp of Quinces, Conserve of red Roses, an.
vj. Syrup of Poppy, Rheas q. s.

XVII. If these things will not stay the Bleeding, clap a Cupping-glass with
much Flame to both Hypochondriums, without Scarification. Or else give him
fourteen Grains of the Mass of Pill. de Cynoglossa, or Hounds-tongue, reduced
into three Pills. Or else this Amygdalate.

. Sweet Almonds peeled j. The four greater Cold Seeds j. White Poppy Seed iij.
Decoction of Barley q. s. Make an Emulsion of lbs. To which add Syrup of Poppy
j. s. Sugar q. s. Mix them for two Doses.

XVIII. Avoid a cold and dry Air, and a very light Being. Observe a cooling and
thickning Diet, and drink small Drink. Abstain from Exercise, nor cover the
Body too hot, sleep long, and keep the Belly Soluble.

HISTORY X. Of the Pose or Murr, and Loss of Smelling.
A Gentleman, about thirty years of Age, was wont to snuff up Powder of Tobacco
into his Nostrils, which caused him to sneeze. At length, being taken with the
Pose or Murr, yet he continued his Powder of Tobacco, which he took three or
four times a day, which made him void a great quantity of flegmatic Humors,
through his Nostrils and Palate; however, his Murr increased to that degree,
that he quite lost his Sense of Smelling. And then his Sneezing brought away
little or no Matter.

I. THis Gentleman lost his Smell by reason of that Pose, which is a cold and
flegmatic Distillation from the Ventricles of the Brain, and falling into the
Ethmoides Bone, and the Membranes belonging to it.

II. This flegmatic Matter, by reason of the Gentleman's frequent Sneezing and
Contractions of the Membranes of the Brain, and consequently the streightnings
of the Pores, and Detentions of the Vapors was copiously collected in the
Ventricles of the Brain, and expelled down to the Ethmoides Bone. The
diminutive Holes of which, when it was not able to pass, it so obstructed, that
no Odor could come to the inner Parts of the Nostrils, which caused the Loss of
the Smell.

III. Because this Pose which hinders the Smell continued long, the Cure proves
the more difficult.

IV. After due Evacuation of the Body, care is to be taken of the Head, which
is to be corroborated with hot Cephalics given in Apozems, Conditements,
Powders, etc. the better to attenuate and discuss the Vapors, ascending thither.

V. To open the Pores, Frictions of the Head, and Fomentations, with hot and
opening cephalic Decoctions. After which, put on a dry Quilt of the same
Cephalics upon the Head of the Party.

VI. Put up into the Nostrils, such things as are proper to cut and attenuate
thick Humors, as ^amphire, Vinegar of Squills, and Root of wild Radish bruised.

VII. Let him continue the Use of these things for some time, which if they
prove ineffectual, the only way will be to make an Issue in the Neck.

VIII. Let his Food and Drink be condited and intermixed with hot Cephalics,
and let him feed sparingly. Let his Sleep and Exercise be moderate, and let him
be sure to keep his Body open.

HISTORY XXII. Of the Toothache.
A Young Lad, about fifteen years of age, of a flegmatic Temper, having, after
hard Exercise, exposed himself bare-headed to the cold Air and the Wind, was
taken with a most terrible Pain in his Teeth, upon the Left-side, which
extended it self to the innermost and upper Parts of the Head. There was no
Swelling in the Gums of the the outside of the Cheek, no Redness or
Inflammation; only out of one of his Hollow Grinders he felt a certain serous,
salt, sharp Humor distill as cold as Ice.

I. THis Malady is by the Physicians called Odontalgia, or the Toothache.

II. The anteceding Cause was flegmatic and cold Humors gathered in the Body,
which by the Heat of Exercise being attenuated into Vapors, and carried to the
Head, and there not only detained by the External Cold shutting up the Pores,
but also being condensed into a scrous, sa^t and sharp Liquor, and not able to
pass through the Passages appointed for the Evacuation of the Excrements of the
Brain, fell upon the Jaw-teeth on the Left-side, and there caused a most cruel
Pain.

III. That this is a salt, serous, cold Humor, the Patient himself finds by the
Taste of the Drops that distill out of his Teeth into his Mouth.

IV. The Pain proceeds from hence, because the little Nerve inserted into the
Cavity of each grinding Tooth, together with the Periostium that surrounds
every Cavity, is corroded by the sharp Humor, and vexed by the extraordinary
Cold of it.

V. The Pain extends it self upward to the inner parts of the Head, because the
little Nerves of the Teeth, inserted in the Cavities, are Branches of the third
and sixth Pair. No wonder then that those Nerves being grieved, carry the Pain
to the inner Parts of the Head; besides that, it is very probable that that same
sharp and salt Humor falls down to the Teeth all the whole length of those
Nerves, through the Holes of the Cranium, from whence those Nerves issue forth,
and so not only the Particles which are inserted into the Roots of the Teeth,
but the whole Nerves from the Cranium to the Teeth, are infested with that
Humor.

VI. There was no Tumor in the outer Part of the Jaw, because the Humor which
caused the Flux, did not abound in quantity, but was only sharp, and very
little. Nor was there any Swelling in the Gums, because the Humor did not stay
therein, but issued out from the hollow grinding Teeth.

VII. Neither was there any Redness or Inflammation in the Gums or Jaw; for
though the Humor were sharp, yet it was actually and potentially cold, so that
it could not breed any Inflammation or hot Distemper.

VIII. This Pain is not to be contemned, for that being so terrible as it is,
and causing continual want of Sleep, and Commotion of the Humors and Spirits,
it may produce Deliriums, Convulsions, and continual Fevers.

IX. In the Cure, the Anteceding Cause is to be taken away, then the Containing
and the Original is to be removed, the Pain to be assuaged, and the Head to be
corroborated.

X. Let the Body be purged with one Dram of Powder of Diaturbith, or
Diacarthamum, or with these Pills.

. Mass of Pill. Cochiae, Golden Pills, an. j. Diagridion gr. iiij. with Syrup
of Stoechas, Make up vij. Pills.

XI. To evacuate the Humor contained in the Ventricles of the Brain, make use
of this Errhine.

. Juice of Mercury, Marjoram, an. s. of Beets j. s.

Or else instead of this, take the following Sternutory.

. Roots of Pellitory, White Hellebore, Leaves of Marjoram, an. j. black Pepper
gr. v. For a Powder.

XII. To strengthen the Head, open the Pores, and dissipate the cold Humor,
prepare this Quilt.

. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram, Sage, an. M. s. Flowers of Lavender, Melilot,
red Roses, an one small Handful; Nutmegs, Cloves, an. j. Frankincense, Mastich,
an. j. Beat them into a gross Powder for a silken Cap.

XIII. Also lay this Plaster upon both Temples.

. Frankincense, Mastich, an. j. Sagapen, Tacamahacca, an. j. s. Mix them and
spread them upon black Silk.

Nor will it be amiss to make use of Conditements and Cephalic Apozems of
Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, Betony, Conserves of Anthos, Sage, etc. Tobacco also
taken in a Pipe is an excellent Remedy.

XIV. Let the Patient also frequently wash his Mouth with this Decoction warm.

. Root of sharp pointed Dock j. Male Piony s. Marjoram, Sage, Hyssop, Thyme,
Betony; Rosemary, an. M. j. Fennel and Aniseseed, an. ij. Wine q. s. Boil them
to lb j.

XV. After he has washed his Mouth, let him put into the Hollow of the Tooth
with a little Cotton, one Drop of Oil of Basil or Cloves. In extremity of Pain,
a little Spirit of Wine may be held in the Mouth to the Teeth affected. But
this is not to be done often, for fear of hurting the Lungs.

XVI. To divert the Humor, apply a Vesicatory behind the Ear, or in the Neck,
and keep it open for some time.

XVII. These Remedies not availing in extremity of Pain, give the Patient
toward Evening three grains of Opiate Laudanum in a Pill, or thirteen grains of
the Mass of Cynogloss Pills, or two or three Scruples of Philonium Romanum.

XVIII. Let his Diet be condited with hot Cephalics, avoiding all salt, sharp
and acid Diet, that fill the Head with Vapors. Let his Drink be small: Let him
sleep long, exercise moderately, and keep his Body open.

HISTORY. XXIII. Of those Tumors in the Mouth called Aphtae.
A Woman of about thirty years of Age was taken with a continued Fever,
accompanied with an extraordinary Faintness; yet without any vehement Heat or
great Thirst, which in two days had brought her extremely low. Her Pulse beat
slow and unequal: Her Urine was like that of a Man in perfect Health. So that
she complained of no excessive Pain in any Part, but of an extraordinary
Weakness of her whole Body, which was such that she could not sit upright in
her Bed. The fourth Day, she perceived a Difficulty to Swallow, so that her
Drink would not go down her Throat and Gullet without Pain, Trouble and
Impediment. At the same time her Palate, Gums, Tongue and Chaps were full of
little white Pustles without number. Her Taste was also so far gone, that she
relished nothing that she eat.

I. THis Woman was seized with a Malignant Fever, accompanied with Aphtae,
which are certain Exulcerations in the upper part of the Mouth, with an
extraordinary Heat.

II. The Anteceding Cause were putrid Humors, sharp and malignant, contained in
the Body, which being attenuated by the feverish Heat, and carried through the
Arteries and occult Passages to the Mouth, and causing an Exulceration therein,
constitute the next Cause.

III. That these Pustles proceed from a certain malignant putrid Humor, is
plain from the putrid malignant Fever, preceding and joined with them. The
Malignity of which, appeared by the Faintness and Decay of Strength which the
Patient endured, whereas a Fever seems to show no such manifest Causes of so
much Weakness. Then again, that it was a flegmatic Humor, appeared by the
lesser Heat of the Fever, and the whiteness of the Pustles.

IV. This Humor, attenuated by the Fever, and coming sharp to the Mouth,
exulcerated the inner, rather than the other Parts, as the Palate, Tongue,
Gums, etc. because they are clothed with only a thin and soft Pellicle, which
are easily exulcerated by sharp and putrid Humors, whereas the former Parts
more easily resist the Corruption.

V. Now because that Pellicle which covers the inner Parts of the Mouth,
extends it self through the Jaws and Gullet to the Stomach. Hence also the
Gullet was beset with the same Pustles, which caused that Difficulty of
Swallowing, and painful going down of the Drink.

VI. Her Taste was lost, because the inner Pellicle of the Mouth, into which
the Gustatory Nerves are inserted, and by means of which, the Taste happens,
was so full of those little Ulcers, that the Gustable Objects could not come to
it. Besides that, the Tongue being grieved by the Ulcers, and infected with bad
Humors, could not well judge of Savors.

VII. These Pustles are more a Sign, than a Cause of danger. For they indicate
a malignant and dangerous Fever, upon the Cure of which, their Cure depends.

VIII. The Body therefore being well purged, and Blood being taken away, and
other convenient Remedies administered, the Mouth of the Patient must be
gargarized with this Decoction.

. Barley cleansed, Roots of Snakeweed, Tormentil, an. s. Licorice sliced iij.
Plantain, Purslain, Knot-grass, Oakleaves, an. M. j. Flowers of Mallows, red
Roses, Pomegranates, an. M. s. Water q. s. Make a Decoction to lb j. Add Syrup
of Mulberries and Dianucum, an. j. s. Mix them for a Gargle.

IX. After she has well gargled her Mouth, let her lick and wash the inside of
her Mouth with this Syrup.

. Syrup of Quinces, sour Pomegranates and dry Roses, an. j.

X. If the Pain grow sharper, let her hold new Milk in her Mouth, or rather
Whey, and change it often. Then let her lick Syrup of Quinces, or dry Roses
alone, and roll her Tongue about her Mouth, especially when the Pustles are
broken.

XI. Let her Diet be refrigerating, and such as resists Putrefaction; her Drink
small, or else Ptisans, and let her be sure to keep her Body soluble.

HISTORY II. Of the Aphtae Pustles.
AN Infant of two months old, when the Mothers Milk failed, was put to a Nurse
of a choleric Temper, but otherwise healthy and abounding with Blood and Milk.
After the Infant had sucked this Woman eight days it began to vomit up curdled
Milk mixed with choleric and flegmatic Humors, slept unquietly, and voided much
yellow and green Excrement. At last, the Mouth of it was full of white Pustles,
so that through Pain it could suck no longer, though it seemed very desirous of
the Breast. In the mean time there was no manifest Fever nor alteration of the
Pulse.

I. THE Cause of these Pustles was the Nurses serous, hot and sharp Milk, which
the weak Stomach of the Infant could not well concoct, but bred much Choler;
from which sharp Vapors ascending to the Mouth, exulcerated the tender
Pellicles of the Inner Part of the Mouth.

II. That there was a great quantity of Choler, was apparent from the yellow
and green Color of the Excrements.

III. The Milk was curdled in the Stomach by reason of the Acrimony of the
Choler, and the Crudities there bred. It was vomited up curdled, because Nature
being oppressed with that and other crude Humors, and provoked by the Acrimony,
endeavored as much as it could, to cast of that Molestation by vomiting.

IV. There was no Fever, because the Choler was not yet corrupted, nor was
carried to the Vena Cava, but as yet was voided sufficiently upwards and
downwards.

V. The Infant could suck no longer, because the Pain of the Pustles was
exasperated by sucking. But it desired the Breast to allay the Heat of the
Mouth, with the Moisture of the Milk.

VI. These Aphties newly come, and without a Fever, are easily cured; but being
delayed, there may be danger of a more deep and fatal Exulceration, and that a
Flux of the Belly and Fever will ensue upon Corruption of the Choler.

VII. In the Cure, the Nurse is chiefly to be considered, who by reason of her
choleric Constitution, breeds sharper Milk than the Infant is able to concoct.
Then the Infant it self is to be considered.

VIII. Therefore the Nurse is to be purged more than once or twice with
Choler-purging Medicaments; next to be let Blood. And some refrigerating Apozem
to be given her of Succory, Endive, Lettice, Borage, Sorrel, Tamarinds, the
four greater Cold seeds and the like. Also steep three drams of Rhubarb tied up
in a linen Rag in a pint of small Ale, and let her drink it twice or thrice a
Week, which will not only purge her, but the Child.

IX. Let her Meat be condited with Barley cleansed, Endive, Lettice, Asparagus,
Pom^citrons, Cherries, red Currants, etc. Let her forbear Onions, Radishes,
Mustard, Spices, and all hot things, as Honey and Sugar. Her Drink must also be
small, avoiding Wine, Mead, and all hot and windy Drinks.

X. Wash the Infants Mouth often with Syrup of Mulberries and Quinces; or of
dry Roses, or sower Pomegranates, etc. Also give it in a Spoon some thin Broth
or Panada wherein Currants have been boiled till they break, with a little Sugar.

XI. If these things avail not, the Nurse must be changed, and one more proper
for the Constitution of the Infant must be sought out.

HISTORY XXIV. Of the Tumor breeding under the Tongue called Ranula.
A Woman about thirty years of age, accustomed to feed upon a flegmatic Diet,
complained of a great Impediment in her Speech; otherwise every way healthy.
Under her Tongue appeared a soft, loose* indolent Tumor, of the same Color
with the Membranes under the Tongue, full of Blackish Veins, manifestly
distinguished at the String of the Tongue into the Right and Left Part, on both
sides about the bigness of a Nutmeg, and rising in height above the Teeth, and
by filling the Mouth, forcing up the Tongue to the Palate, and so not only
hindering the Speech, but incommoding the Act of Swallowing. This Tumor, at
first no bigger than a Tare, grew bigger and bigger every day; so that in three
or four weeks it swelled to the bigness aforesaid; and the Patient, not without
reason, was afraid of a Suffocation.

I. THis Disease, by the Greeks is called (...), by the Latins, Ranula; either
because it somewhat resembles a Frog; or rather because they that are troubled
with it* instead of speaking, are forced to croak like Frogs.

II. This Ranula is a soft and loose Tumor gathered under the Tongue, and
divided at the Bridle of the Tongue into a Right and Left Part.

III. The Extremities of the Salival Channels lying hid under the Tongue, are
affected in this Distemper, which, together with the Membrane of the Tongue
that rests upon them, are distended by the Spittle or thicker Slime, and hence
become so big.

IV. Now why they swelled in this Woman more now than at other times, was
because of the cooling Aliments to which she had long accustomed her self,
which had bred a more copious crude and viscous Phlegm, which partly falling
upon the Salival Channels, and not being able to pass the Pores of the
Frogresembling Kernels, augmented within them, and distending them with it
abundance, formed a soft Swelling, as it were cohering into two Bladders, and
distinguished by the Bridle of the Tongue.

V. Without doubt this Tumor was not a little augmented, because the extreme
Pores of those Channels and Kernels were also obstructed by some external
Cause, as washing the Mouth with cold Water, or astringent Meats and Drinks, by
which means the Spittle had not free Passage.

VI. The Humor was soft and loose, by reason of the Humor contained therein.
Indolent, because it lies in a moist Part; where, by reason of the small
quantity of Nerves which it receives, the Feeling is very obtuse. It is of the
same Color with the rest of the Membranes, because there is no Inflammation to
dye it of another Color: And it was augmented in a small time, because the
Passage of the Salival Slime was obstructed.

VII. The Danger of this Distemper is not great, if taken in time; otherwise
there may be some fear of a Suffocation.

VIII. Such a Patient must be purged every fifth or sixth day with Pill.
Cochiae or Golden Pills, Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra, Diacarthamum, Infusion of
Agaric, or any other Phlegm purging Medicine.

IX. To abate the quantity of Phlegm, and hinder the Generation of it, between
the days of purging, Apozems of the Roots of Elecampane, Acorus, Calamint,
Fennel, Thyme, Rosemary, Marjoram, Hyssop, Wind-expelling Seeds, etc. and
Conditments and Powders of the same to strengthen the Bowels.

X. And at the same time Topics may be applied to cut and attenuate the viscous
Humor, and open the Pores of the Salival Channels.

XI. The Patient also may wash her Mouth with this Decoction.

. Hyssop, Calamint, Marjoram, Flowers of Camomil, an. M. j. Anise and
Fennel-seed iij. White Wind q. s. Boil them to lbj. To the Straining add Syrup
of Hore-hound and Hyssop, an. vj.

XII. After washing, let the Ranulae be rubbed with this Powder.

. Dry Hyssop, Common Salt, an. ij. Calamint, and Root of Elecampane, an. j. for
a Powder.

XIII. If these things will not discuss the Tumor, it must be Chyrurgions Work
to cut the Tumor athwart with a deep Incision, and bring out the Matter therein
contained, and then to wash the Mouth with the aforesaid Water or some other
Astringent, wherein you may mix a little Alum.

XIV. If after Consolidation of the Wound, the Tumor return again, then make a
Cross-like Incision upon the Superficies, without hurting the inner Membrane,
and separating the upper Pellicle that lies upon it, lay bare the whole Vesicle
on both sides the Bridle of the Tongue, and cut it out as deep as may be, and
then close up the Wound. Otherwise you may take away the Vesicle by a potential
or actual Cautery. Neither is there any danger of any Damage to the Mouth,
though the Salival Channels be stopped up by this Cure; for Experience tells
us, that the Spittle finds other Channels and Passages for the moistning the
Mouth.

The Diet is the same as in other flegmatic Diseases.

Now because I do here assert a new Cause of the Ranulae, and another part to
be affected, than other Physicians do, and mention also the Salival Channels* I
think it necessary to tell what those Channels are.

These Channels were unknown, till of late found out in England by Doctor
Wharton and Glisson, and last Winter publicly shown at the Anatomy Theater at
Leyden, by Doctor John ab Horn.

The Substance of them is much like the Veins, but stronger. They are two in
number, and so wide in a Man, as to admit an ordinary Bodkin.

They rise with a broad Beginning from the great and remarkable Kernel, above
the middle Tendon, seated between the Flesh of the Digastric Muscle. And hence
carried upward about the middle of the Cheek, they abscond themselves between
two small Kernels there seated, which when they have past, they are carried
with a straight Channel along the Nerve of the seventh Pair, which they cut
like a St. Andrews Cross, and so somewhat toward the Fore-parts, near the
Bridle of the Tongue, they terminate and open into two peculiar Kernels,
covered with a thin and porous little Membrane, which are seated under the
Tongue, near the Frog-like. Veins, between the Flesh that joins the Tongue to
the neighboring Parts, and the Kernels that lie under the bottom of the Tongue.

Their Office is to power the Sal^ Moisture into the Frog-like Kernels, which
in them is contained as in a Sponge, and emptied into the Mouth through the
broad Pores of the Membrane that covers them, for the moistning of the Tongue
and Mouth.

HISTORY XXV. Of the Hydrocephalus, or Watery Tumor of the Head.
A Little Boy, about a year and a halfold, having been weaned six months, and
by his Parents, that were very poor, fed with raw Wh^y, Fruit and other bad
Nourishment, nor keeping his Head sufficiently warm in the Winter, within a
short time had the hairy Part of his Head and Forehead swelled out to his very
Eyes. Which Tumor, in a months space, increased to that degree, that his Head
was as big as a Man's Head, and yet his Face was not swelled; the Tumor was soft
and white, and the deep Prints of the Finger might for some time be seen in it.
The Child eat and drank indifferent well, he had no Fever, but was sleepy, and
moved the Members of his whole Body but dully and faintly. His Nostrils were
drier than usual, and he spit but little. He was loose, and voided much Urine.

I. THis Child's Disease, by the Physicians is called Hydrocephalus, which is a
Swelling of the Head caused by a Collection of serous Humors.

II. This serous and flegmatic Humor is collected within the Cranium, and lies
hid under the Skin, which is discerned by the Touch; there being only a soft
Tumor.

III. That it is a serous and flegmatic Humor, appears by the white Color of
the Skin, and copious, because it yields to compression without pain.

IV. The anteceding Cause are cold and most Humors in the whole Body, which
being raised beyond the Cranium, and condensed under the Skin, constitute the
containing Cause.

V. These Humors are generated, partly through bad Diet, partly through the
cold and moist Constitution of the Body; which weakens the Concoctions of the
Bowels, and causes the breeding of many flegmatic and serous Humors, which
being carried to the Head, are there attenuated into thick Vapors, and gathered
together till they come to a copious Body.

VI. These Humors cannot be evacuated through the Nostrils and Palate, because
their thickness has obstructed those Passages. Nor can they pass through the
straightened Pores of the Skin, as being straightened by the External Cold, so
that new Humors increasing every day, and none being evacuated, thence happened
such a Swelling in a Months space.

VII. However the Child fed, because his Stomach was not yet loaded with this
excrementitious Phlegm, as being copiously evacuated downwards by Urine and
Stool.

VIII. He had no Fever, because the Humors were not putrified, nor was there
any Malignity or Excess of Heat.

IX. He was sleepy, because of the cold and moist Temper of the Brain, which
renders the Nerves of the Sensory languid and unfit for the Passage and
Reception of the Animal Spirits; besides that, fewer Animal Spirits are
generated, in regard the vital Spirits cannot pass the straightened Arteries of
the Choroid Fold. Which Scarcity of Animal Spirits causes him also to move the
Members dully and languidly as he did.

X. His Belly was soluble, by reason of the great quantity of serous and
flegmatic Humors, that flowed down to the Intestines; the thinner Part of which
being mixed with the Blood, and separated from it in the Reins, causes a
greater abundance of Urine.

XI. This Disease is dangerous in tender Age that will not bear strong
Remedies, in regard of the ill Temper of the Head, the great Cachexy of the
whole Body, and the Quantity of the Humor.

In the Cure, the serous and flegmatic Humor collected in the Head, is chiefly
to be gently evacuated, the Bowels to be strengthened, and the Generation of
the Mistemper for the future to be prevented.

XIII. First, give the Child in a Spoon, an ounce of laxative Syrrup of Succory
with five or six grains of Jallop in Powder, or give him to Eat five or six
drams of Solutive Currants. Then give him a little old Treacle, and if you can
let him Sweat, also give him every day a little Conserve of Anthos, Balm, or
Flowers of Sage.

XIV. This done foment his Head with the following Fomentation warm.

. Betony, Rosemary, Basil, Thime, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Stoechas, an. M
j. Leaves of Laurel M. s. Seeds of Anise, Fennel, Cummin an. ij. White Wind q.
s. Boil them to (...) ij. For a Fomentation with a large Sponge taking Care not
to let it cool.

XV. The Tumor being dissipated by the use of this Fomentation, to remove the
other Distemper, anoint the Head Morning and Evening with this Ointment hot.

. Oil of Camomil, Alabastrin Ointment an. j. Oil of Nutmegs pressed iiij.
Powder of Castor, Storax, Benjamin, an. j. Mix them for an Ointment.

XVI. After anointing, put on the following Quilted Cap.

. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, an. M. s.
Benjamin, Cloves, Nutmeg an. j. s. Beat them for a gross Powder, to be sowed
into a Silken quilted Cap.

And let him wear this Quilted Cap for some time.

XVII. In the mean time to Corroborate the Bowels twice or thrice a day, let
him take a Spoonful of this Mixture.

. Tylet-Flowers-water, Lilly of the Valleys an. ij. ^innamon water vj. Syrup of
Stoechas j.

Or instead of this, let him now and them drink a little Hydromel. And to the
Region of the Stomach, Liver and Spleen, apply this Liniment.

. Oil of Laurel, Camomil, Matiate Ointment an. s. Oil of Nutmegs pressed j. s.

XVIII. If these things avail not, in three or four the most swelled places of
the Head, make a small Perforation in the Skin, with a little Lance, no wider
then is usual in Blood-letting, that the Serum may distill by degrees through
those little holes, which is to be dried up with warm Rags, till it ceases to
flow: then lay the before mentioned Quilt.

XIX. These Children must have drier Diet then ordinary; as Biscuit masticated.
Little bits of White-bread moistened in the Decoction of Raisins, or Hen-broath
and sweetened with a little Cinnamon or Sugar. Let him have thin Broths made
with Wheatflowre and Decoction of Raisins, to which add a little Wine. Let him
often drink Almond-Milk with a little Cinnamon Water. Let him abstain from
Sour Milk, Whey, Ale, Fruit, unless now and then a Baked Apple or Pear: Let
him sleep moderately, and keep his Body soluble and regular in his Evacuations.

THE CURES OF THE Chief Diseases Of the whole CHEST. WITH TEN CASES OF THE
PATIENTS.
HISTORY. I. Of the Pleurisy.
A Young Gentleman of twenty four Years of Age, having overheated himself in
the Tennis-Court, and being very dry, drank a large Draught of cold Ale. Upon
this he felt a Pain in the left side of his Chest, which within half an hour
grew so acute, that through the trouble and the intolerable Pain, he could
hardly breath. At the same time he had a strong Fever and a dry Cough, which
very much exasperated the Pain. But neither his Faintness nor his Thirst was
very great.

I. VArious Parts were affected in this Patient, the Pleura Membrane, the
Muscles of the Misopleuron, and the Heart, and consequently the whole Body.

II. The Diseases called the Pleurisy, which is an Inflammation of the Pleura
Membrane, and the Muscles of the Mesopleuron, accompanied with a Pricking Pain
in the Side, difficulty of Breathing and a continued Fever.

III. That it is a Disease appears by the pricking Pain, difficulty of
Breathing and the continued Fever* that it is no Inflammation of the Lungs, the
pricking Pain declares, which never is felt in that Distemper. That it is no
Tumor, Inflammation or other Pain in the Spleen, appears from the sharpness of
the Pain above the Diaphragma toward the Armpits, and the difficulty of
Breathing.

IV. The anteceding Cause was the great quantity of Blood in the Body. The
Original Causes, vehement Exercises, and pouring down cold Ale just after it.
The containing Cause is the over-large quantity of Blood contained in the
Pleura Membrane and the Mesopleuron Muscles, inflamed and corrupted.

V. The whole Body was overheated by Exercise, whence a strong and swift Pul^e
of the Heart, which attenuating the Blood, forced it in great quantity to all
the Parts, which so long as it had a free return through the Veins, never
occasioned any trouble. But being thickened by the cold Ale in the Veins of the
Left side of the Pleura, and the Veins themselves thereby contracted, it came
to pass that more past through the Arteries then could circulate through the
Veins, which caused that accumulation of Blood that bred that Tumor in the
Pleura: and because the Blood that flows from the Heart, has its own heat,
thence, with the increase of the Blood the heat increased, and thence the
Inflammation, which caused the Putrefaction, Part of which putrefying Blood
being carried through the Intercostal Veins to the hollow Vein, and so to the
Heart, caused the continued Fever, which however is only Symtomatical, as only
arising from the Putrefaction of the Inflamed Part, poured fourth into the
larger Vessels.

VI. Now in regard the Ribs must be dilated in Respiration; but by reason of
the Tumid Inflammation, of the distention of the Pleura Membrane and
Mesopleuron Muscles, they can hardly be dilated, thence difficulty of
Breathing, which is the more troublesome, because the Pleura, being ended with
a most acute Sense can endure no farther distention. So that the Patient to
avoid the Pain breaths slowly, which not being enough to cool the Lungs, causes
a Drought of the Chaps and Mouth.

VII. Sharp Vapors exhaling from the inflamed Part, infest the neighboring
Lungs, and by their vellicating the Aspera, Arteria cause a dry Cough.

VIII. This Disease is dangerous in regard the Heart is affected, and
Respiration is impeded: besides the fear of an Imposthume in the Breast.

IX. In the prosecution of the Cure, Blood-letting is first to be done in both
Arms, and the Patient must bleed freely. And if the first bleeding do not
relieve the Patient, it is to be again repeated within an hour or two, after a
third time if need require, with regard to the strength of the Patient: though
a small debilitation is not to be feared.

X. In the mean time his Belly must be moved with a Glister.

. Emollient Decoction x. Elect. Diacatholicon, Diaprunum, Solutive* an.. j.
Salt j.

Or else infuse two drams of Rubarb in Barley-water, and give him to drink, the
streining with one ounce of Syrup of Succory with Rubarb, or Solutive Rosatum.
Stronger Purges must be avoided.

XI. He may also three or four times aday drink a draught of this Apozem.

. Cleansed Barley, Roots of Asparagus, Grass an. j. Licor^ce sliced s.
Venushair, Borage, Lettice, Endive, Violetleaves an. M. j. Flowers of
Wild-Poppy, Violets an. P. ij. Four great Colder Seeds an. j. s. Blew Currants
j. Water q. s. Make an Apozem of lb j. s. with which mix Syrup of Poppy Rheas
and Violets an. j.

To allay the Cough let him take this Looch.

. Syrup of Wild-Poppy, of Venus-hair, of Violets an. j. Mix them for a Looch.

To allay the Pain, and to attenuate; discuss and Concoct the Blood collected
in the affected Part, Foment the Region of the affected Part, with this
Fomentation.

. Mallows Althea, Colewort, Chervile, Beats, Violet-leaves, Flowers of Camomil,
Elder and Dill an. M. j. Water q. s. Make a Decoction to (...) i j. For a
Fomentation.

Of the same may be composed a Cataplasm, by adding Meal of Lin-seed and
Barley, Oil of Almonds and new Butter.

XIV. Let him keep a Temperate Diet, and of easy digestion, Cream of Ptisan,
Chicken-broths prepared with Endive and Lettice, or else let him take some such
Amygdalate.

. Sweet Almons blanched ij. Four great Colder Seeds, White Poppy Seed an. j s.
Decoction of Barley q. s. Make an Emulsion of lb j. with Sugar q. s. to sweeten
it gently.

His ordinary Drink must be Ptsan: or small Ale, but not Sour, or such a Julep.

. Decoction of Barley lb j. Syrup of Wild Poppy and Violets an. j. Mixed them
for a Iulep.

Let him sleep long, if possible, and use no Exercise.

HISTORY II. Of an Empyema.
A Person about forty Years of Age, being seized with a terrible Pleurisy in
his left side, and not having any Remedies applied to him before the third day,
found little ease, so that the Distemper continued till after the fourteenth
day, being accompanied with a Fever and other bad Symptoms; from that time
forward he felt his Pain and his Fever much abated, only a ponderous heaviness
troubled him about the Ribs in the side affected. About the twentieth day the
Fever still continuing, though very slight, he felt a troublesome Ponderosity,
with a little Pain, upon his Diaphregma, chiefly on the left side; and if he
turned from one side to the other of a sudden, he felt a certain Humor to flow
down, the Fluctuation of which was manifestly to be heard in the motion of his
Body forward. He had also a dry Cough, but spit little or nothing; he could
hardly fetch his breath, especially if he lay upon his right side, he was faint
and weak, easily and often sweat: he loathed Victuals, and desired rather Drink
then Meat.

I THis Man was afflicted with an Empyema, which is a Collection of Corruption
in the Cavity of his Breast.

II. This Disease is known by the Signs preceding and present. The preceding
Signs are the Pleurisy it self. Then the Pain and Fever ceasing with any
manifest Evacuation by Spittle; whence that heaviness about the Ribs in the
side affected. The present Signs are, the heaviness upon the Diaphregma: the
fluctuation of the Humor upon Motion of the Body: and a Cough to no purpose,
with faintness, weakness, difficulty of Breathing, and loathing of Victuals.

III. The Matter was not Evacuated by Spittle. 1. because the Lungs of this
Patient did not stick close to the place affected. 2. Because the Matter in the
Cavity of the Breast, could not enter the Lungs through the Pores of the
Membrane investing the Lungs. 3. Because perhaps the Pores of this Man's Lungs
were so narrow, as not to admit such sort of thicker Humors.

IV. The Pain and Fever abated, because the sharp matter, of the Inflammation
was turned to Matter, and so rendered more gentle. The quantity of which Matter
contained within the Membrane, troubled the Ribs of the affected side, with its
Ponderosity. But upon breaking the Aposthume about the twenty fifth day, the
Matter flowing into the Cavity of the Breast, molested the Diaphragma, with its
weight, and the Fluctuation of it was easily perceived in the Motion of the
Body. For the weight hindered the depressed Diaphragma from moving freely, which
caused the Pain in Breathing; especially if he lay upon his right side, for
that besides the Diaphragma, the right Lobe of the Lungs is compressed by the
weight of the Matter lying upon the Mediastinum.

V. The slight Cough proceeds from the Vellication of the exterior Tunicle of
the Lungs, caused by the Acrimony of the Corruption. But nothing is spit forth
because the Matter touches only the outside of the Lungs, but never enters the
Aspera Arteria.

VI. The Patient is faint by reason of Respiration hindered; and weak, as having
been weakened by the acute preceding Disease. And the Stomach and Liver being
weakened by the same Cause, thence debility of Concoction and loss of Appetite;
and loathing of Meat; but drink is still desired, to quench the drought of the
Fever.

VII. This is a dangerous Distemper, 1. Because Respiration is damnified. 2.
Because it follows an acute Disease, that has much wasted the Body already. 3.
By reason of the Difficulty to Evacuate the Matter out of the Breast. 4.
Because if the Matter stay but a short time, it will putrify and corrupt the
Lungs. 5. Physic is uncertain; 6. Chyrurgery dangerous.

VIII. Therefore after a gentle Evacuation of the Belly, Expectorating
Medicaments are to be made use of; to try if the Matter may be drawn away that
way.

IX. To which purpose let him take this Apozem.

. Roots of Elecampane j. Florence Orrice ij. Licorice shaved s. Hyssop, white
Hore-hound, Venus-hair, Violetleaves an. M. j. red Cabbage M. ij. Anise-seed
ij. Four greater cold Seeds an. j. s. Raisins cleansed iij. Water q. s. Make
an. Apozem of lb j. s. To which add Syrup of Horehound, Hyssop, Oxymel an. j.

Let him take three or four Doses in a day. Now and then also let him take a
lick of the following Looch.

. Syrup of Horehound, Hyssop, Iujubes, an. j. Saffron Pulverized j. Mix them
for a Looch.

Turpentine also reduced to a Cream with White of an Egg in Barley Water, and
sweetened with Sugar, may be very proper in this Case. For though these
Medicaments be hot, yet the Fever being small, there is more regard to be had
to the Cause, which being taken away the Fever will soon go off.

X. If these or such like Medicaments, will not bring away the Matter in a
Fortnight, there is no more to be expected from Physic: So that the last Remedy
must be the Chyrurgeons hand.

XI. To that purpose the Chest is to be cut through, as far as the inner Cavity
with a sharp Penknife, under the Arm-pit, between the fifth and sixth Rib, so
as not to hurt the Intercostal Vein, Nerve or Artery, nor must the hole be very
large, but such as will admit a Silver hollow Pipe, which is presently to be
put in after the Incision, and so to be fastened that it may not fall out of it
self. The forepart also is to be stopped; So that the Matter may not flow out,
without the Chyrurgeons leave. Through this Pipe twice a day, half a Pint or a
Pint of Matter more or less, is to be let out according to the quantity of the
Matter, and the ability of the Patient to endure, and then the Pipe is to be
stopped again.

XII. When no more Matter flows forth, the Lung and inner Cavity is sometimes
to be washed with this mixture syring'd into the wound.

. Decoction of Barley v. Spirit of Wine iiij. Honey of Roses, Syrup of Horehound
an. j. Mix them for an Injection, to stay within for some hours, and then to be
drawn ^ut again through the Pipe.

XIII. If the continual Efflux of Matter shows that the Ulcer within is not
healed, abstergent and vulnerary Decoctions must be used, and Injections
moderately drying and abstergent. And the Pipe is to be kept in the Wound, till
no more Matter flow forth, and then to be taken out and the wound to be closed.

XIV. The Patients Diet must be attenuating and abstergent, as Meats condited
with Chervil, Hyssop, red Cabbage, Beets, Fennel, Almonds, Raisins. His Drink
sweetened with Sugar or Honey, or Hydromel. Moderate Sleep, and a soluble Body:
and let him be sure to avoid Passion and Anger.

HISTORY. III. Of a Cough.
A Merchant in the prime of his Years, taking no care of his Diet, and many
times traveling in cold and hot, in fair and fowl Weather, and many times ill
fortified against the external Air, the last Autum began to be troubled with a
Pose, and toward Winter with a terrible Cough that lasted all the Winter long.
Many times his Cough was extremely violent, especially toward the Evening, for
an hour together, at what time he brought up a great quantity of tough and
viscous Slime, which sometimes tasted saltish; he Cought very much after Meals,
insomuch that through the violent Agitation of his Stomach he brought up all he
had eaten, with a great Pain in his Breast and Abdomen. After Vomiting his
Cough ceased; he never spit Blood; he had no Fever, however his Body fell away,
and his strength wasted, yet not so, but that he still went abroad about his
business. Sometimes he was very Loose. His Appetite held indifferent good, and
he slept moderately well.

I. THE Lungs of this Person were chiefly affected, then the Stomach and
several other Parts of the Body suffered under the violent Agitation of the
Cough.

II. This Malady is called Tusis or a Cough, which is a violent forcing of the
Breath, caused by a swift Contraction of the Breast and Lungs, whereby what is
troublesome to the Instruments of Breathing is expelled by (...) force of
thein-breath'd Air.

III. This Malady needs no signs to discover it.

IV. The anteceding Cause of this Distempet is a Cold and Flegmatic disposition
of the Air contracted by bad Diet. The Original Cause was Heats and Colds,
violent and unseasonable Exercise. The containing Cause is Phlegm in the Lungs,
either by Defluction or Collection, partly twiching them with its Acrimony,
partly obstructing the Bronchia with its great quantity.

V. Cold Diet and of hard digestion bred Crudities and many saltish Humors,
which for want of Concoction became Acrimonious. The Brain was refrigerated by
the cold ^empestous Weather, and the Pores of the outward Head obstructed, so
that the Flegmatic serous Vapors ascending from the lower Parts, soon condensed
in the Ventricles of the refrigerated Brain, which not being able to pass
through the obstructed Pores, caused first a Pose. Afterward the fiercer Cold
of Winter increasing the quantity of those Humors, they being debarred their
usual Passages, by reason of their thickness, fell upon the Aspera Arteria and
Gristles of the Lungs, and hinder Rispiration: and the Acrimony of those Humors
farther molesting the Pellicle of the Aspera Arteria and Bron^hia, enforces
those Parts to a violent Exclusion of the provoking Humors.

VI. This Cough had lasted long for want of care of Diet, and taking Remedies;
whence a frequent defluxion of Catarhs to the Breast, the Cold of which in time
much refrigerated and weakened the Lungs, so that Vapors rising from the lower
Parts, and stopping in the Lungs, were easily condensed into a Viscous liquor,
that stopped up the Channels of the Lungs, and stuck like Bird-lime to the
sides of the Bronchia, which caused that violence of Coughing to shake off that
tenaoious Matter.

VII. The Cough was longer and more vehement, and threw off much more tenacious
Phlegm, in regard the Flegmatic Humors, that had been gathering together all day
and night, about the beginning of the day, abounded in so great a quanti^y,
that they could no longer be contained in the Head, but falling down upon the
Lungs and tickling the Bronchia not only with their Acrimony provoked the
Cough, but more plentifully filling the Bronchia contracted by the Vapors
condensed within them, and thence hindering Respiration irritated the Cough, as
being that by which Nature endeavored to throw off the trouble.

VIII. The Cough increased after Meals, because the Vapors being raised by the
swallowed Nourishment, and endued with some Acrimony fell upon the Lungs, and
there condensed stick to the refrigerated Bronchia, and tickling the sensible
inner Tunicle both of them, and the Aspera Arteria already prepared to ease
Provacation by the former Humors, exasperate the Cough; through the violent
Agitation whereof and Compression of the Muscles of the Abdomen, the Stomach
throws up all again; upon which the Cough ceases for a time, because there is
nothing in the Stomach from whence any more sharp Vapors can ascend to the
Lungs.

IX. And by reason of the same violent Motion, and over frequent distension of
the Muscles, some Pain is felt in the Breast and Abdomen. And that Compression
forcing the Meat and Drink unconcocted out of the Stomach, causes a violent
Looseness and dejection of the Nourishment.

X. There is no Fever, because there is no Putrefaction of the Humor, but the
Body is emaciated, and becomes very weak, because the violent concussion of the
Cough, weakens all the Parts of the Body; nor are they able to receive or
retain the Alimentary Blood flowing through the Arteries, sometimes loose,
sometimes compressed as they ought to do. 2. Because that violent Agitation
expells the Nourishment received before due Concoction; by which means all the
Parts of the Body are deprived of their due Nourishment, and consequently must
be very much weakened.

XI. The appetite continues, because the Stomach is in good order, undisturbed
by the Catarrhs: the disturbance of its Concoction being only accidental.

XII. He sleeps moderately; because the Flegmatic humor falls not in the Night
from the Head to the Breast; besides that the rapid Motion of the Animal
Spirits to the Organs of the Senses is for a while restrained by the Cold and
Plenty of the Humors; so that the Organs are at rest for a while for want of
copious Spirits.

XIII. Such a Cough as this threatens great danger by reason of the Saltness of
the Catarrhs, the Acrimony whereof in some Veins in the Lungs may be easily
corroded and broken, thence Spitting of Blood and Exulcerations. Beside that
the Cure is difficult, by reason the cold ill Temper of the Brain and Lungs is
of a long standing; not easy to be removed.

XIV. In the Method of the Cure, 1. The vehemence of the Cough, and the
Acrimony of the Catarrhs is to be allayed. 2. The Te^acity of the Spittle is to
be attenuated, concocted and brought to Maturation. 3. The cold ill temper of
the Lungs and Head is to be amended, and the Parts to be Coroborated. 4. The
falling down of the Catarrhs to the Lungs is to be prevented.

XV. After Purgation with Chochi^ Pills or Golden Pills, Electuary of Hiera
Picra or Diaph^con, etc. this Apozem is to be prescribed.

. Roots of Elecampane, Acorus, Florence Orrice an. s. sliced Licorice, Barley
cleansed an. vj. Scabious, Venus Hair, White Hore-hound, Betony, Coltsfoot an.
M j. Oak of Jerusalem M. s. Iuniper-berrys s. Seeds of Anise and Fennel an. ij.
Fat Figs No. ix. Raisins cleansed ij. Water q. s. Boil them to lb j s. Add to
the straining Syrup of Stoechas, Horehound, Oxymel, Pectoral Magistral an. j.
Mix them for an Apozem.

To which you may afterward add for the swifter Consumption of the Phlegm
Sassaperil, Sassafras and China-root.

Also the Patient may make use of this Looch.

. Syrup of Hyssop, Horehound, Oxymel, Magistral an. j. Syrup of Stoechas s.

Instead of which he may now and then take one of these Tablets.

. Powder of the Root of Elecampane j. Florence Orice ij. Licorice j. Saffron
gr. xiv. Sugar dissolved in Fennel-water ij.

XVI. If after all the Cough still remain, give him this Bolus twice a week as
he goes to Bed.

. Philonium Romanum. Nicholas's Rest, Mithridate of Damocrates an. j. Mix them
for a Bolus.

At other times let him use his Apozen^ and Tablets.

XVII. To corroborate his Head, let him wear this Cap.

Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary P ij. Flowers of Red Roses and Lavender an. P. j.
Nutmeg, Benjamin, Cloves an. ij. Beat them into a gross Powder for a Quilt.

XVIII. If after all this, there be no abatement of the Catarrh and Cough, then
to divert and evacuate the flowing humor, make an Issue in the Arm or rather
in the Neck.

XIX. Let him keep his Head and Breast warm, against the Injuries of the cold
and moist Air. Let his Diet be of easy Digestion and good Nourishment,
seasoned with Turnips, Chervil, Hyslop, Marjoram, Betony, Baum, Rice, Barley
cleansed, Spices, Raisins, Sugar and such like Ingredients. Let his drink be
middling, not stale, Hydromel anchosated, or sweet Wine moderately taken: and
let him avoid all acid, sharp, salt and sour things. Let him be moderate in
his Sleep and Exercise: and take care to keep his Body open.

HISTORY IV. Of an Asthma.
A Young Man, thirty years of age, of a strong Constitution, but careless of
his Diet, and living a sedentary Life, some years ago, having overheated
himself with Walking, and presently opening his Breast, and throwing aside his
Clothes, fell a drinking cold Rhenish-Wine, and presently was taken with a
Difficulty of Breathing, which made him pant and heave; and the next day, the
Malady still increasing, he was in such a Condition, that the third Day he
could not breath, unless he stood upright; so that for fourteen Days he could
not lie in his Bed, but was forced to sit or stand whole Days and Nights
together; but he was more troubled in the Night than Day time. After a little
Cough happening, which brought up a good quantity of tough and viscous Phlegm,
his difficulty of Breathing abated, and he recovered his former Condition. From
that time forward, he was often afflicted with the same Distemper by Intervals,
sometimes more, sometimes fewer Days together, more especially if he exposed
himself to the Air, when very hot, or drank cold Rhenish; and this he further
observed, that when the North Wind blew, he was presently seized with this
Distemper, unless he had a great Care of himself, and that rather in the Summer
and Autumn, than in the Winter. During this Malady, his Stomach was
indifferent, but he could hardly eat for narrowness of the Parts, and after
Meals his Difficulty of Breathing grew worse. He had a great Inclination to
Sleep, but no sooner had he closed his Eyes, but he waked with Terror and
Faintness, so that during the Fit, he could not sleep for some Days and Nights
together. His Belly and Breast seemed to be distended by Wind, sometimes he
felt a heavy Pain in his Head, with a Chilliness in the hinder Part toward the
Neck. And about this time he had another terrible Fit, not without danger of
Suffocation. He had no Fever, nor complained of any Pain in any other Parts of
the Body.

I. THis Man's Distemper is an Asthma, which is a difficult panting and heaving
Respiration; and it was indeed the highest degree of this Distemper, which we
call Orthophnaea, which is an extraordinary Difficulty of Breathing, in which
the Patients cannot sleep, but standing upright, becuse of the Narrowness of
the Respiratory Parts.

II. The antecedent Causes of this Distemper were flegmatic Humors, abounding
in the Body. The Original Causes were Heat and Cold. The containing Cause is a
tough and viscous Humor accumulated in the Bronchia of the Lungs, and fastened
to them.

III. The flegmatic Constitution of the whole Body causes a Redundancy of cold
crude and flegmatic Humors therein. Especially in those Parts, which being cold
of themselves, are over-chill'd by some external Cause; so that the Body being
overheated by viblent Exercise, the Blood and Humors are more swiftly moved,
and many Vapors excited in the lower Parts, which by a sudden Cold are
condensed, and collected in the Brain in greater quantity. But in regard the
Bronchia are cold of themselves, and more refrigerated by the Cold of the
In-breath'd Air, they fasten to them like a tough Bird-lime, and contracting
them, cause difficulty of breathing. To which, the Access of a Defluxion from
the Brain, causes a greater Contraction, consequently a greater Difficulty of
breathing, attended with Wheezing. Nor can the Patient breath but standing
upright, the Lungs being pendulous, are most easily dilated in that Posture,
and the Bronchia are more open in that Situation.

IV. The Distemper is still worse toward Night, because the nocturnal Cold
thickens the Flegmatic Humors, and renders them more tenacious, by which means
they become more obstructive to the Bronchia.

V. At length, when the tenacious Matter is abated and thrown off by coughing,
then the Obstruction of the Bronchia abates, and the Difficulty of breathing
ceases till the condensing and falling down of new Vapors.

VI. Which was plain, because the North Wind was so hurtful to him; the reason
of which was because that Wind straightened the Pores, condensed the Humors and
Vapors, and chilled the Head and Lungs. And because the Body is hotter, and
raises the Vapors more copious in the Summer, therefore the sudden Chilliness
of that Wind more suddenly condenses and fastens them to the colder Bronchia.

VII. The Stomach of the Patient continued good, because neither the inbreathed
Air, nor the Defluxions from the Head offended the Stomach. But the Difficulty
of breathing was worse after Meals, by reason of the Vapors raised by the
Concoction of the Stomach, which ascending to the middle and upper Belly, are
condensed in both, and in the one fasten themselves to the Bronchia.

VIII. He cannot sleep, because he is forced to satisfy the Necessity of
Respiration, in the Dilatation of the Breast; which failing in Sleep, and
consequently Respiration, he is waked with Terror and Faintness, and compelled
to wake that he may breath, and to breath with violence, that he may live.

IX. The Belly and Breast seem to be distended by Wind; though it be not Wind,
but the continual and copious Flux of the Animal Spirits, for the Relief of the
Lungs, which distends the Respiratory Muscles, which makes him think they are
distended with Wind.

X. The heavy Pain in his Head proceeds from the abundance of Cold Humors
collected in his Head. And thence that Chilliness in the hinder part of it.

XI. There was no Fever, in regard that neither the Blood nor Humors were
corrupted. Nor Pain in any other Part, the sharp Humors being all got together
in the Head and Lungs of this Patient.

XII. This Disease is dangerous, as threatening a Suffocation, especially i^ a
new Defluxion fall from the Head upon the Lungs during the Continuance of the
Malady.

XIII. In the Method of Cure, to the containing Cause must be removed that
obstructs the Lungs. 2. The next things required, are to hinder the Defluxions
of Catarrhs to the Lungs. 3. To reform the cold ill Temper of the Head and
Lungs. 4. To change the Flegmatic Disposition of the Body, and abate the cold
Humors abounding in the whole.

XIV. In the first place, let him take a common Glister, or a Suppository: Let
him use a thin Diet, and Sauce his Meat with Hyssop, Sage, Betony, Saffron,
Anise, Fennel, Raisins and the like.

XV. Let him often take a Spoonful of this Syrrup.

. Syrup of Hyssop, Horehound, Preserved Ginger, and Roots of candied Elecampane
an. s. Compounded Magistral Oxymel j. Mix them.

Also in the Morning, and about five a clock in the Afternoon, let him take one
dram of this Powder in a little Malmsey Wine, Hydromel or Broth.

. Roots of Elecampane j. Root of Florence, Orrice, Seed of Bishops-weed, an. j.
Benjamin, Saffron, an. j. Musch gr. j. White Sugar Candy iij. To which add Oil
of Anise, drops iiij. or v.

XVI. The Fit ceasing, let him be purged once a Week with Cochiae or Golden
Pills, Hiera Picra, or some Phlegmagog Infusion. Blood-letting is not
convenient.

XVII. Upon other days let him use this Apozem.

. Root of Elecampane, Fennel, an. j. Acorus and Licorice sliced an. v.
Marjoram, Scabious, Venus Hair, Hyssop, white Horehound, Savine an. M. j.
Juniper Berry s. Anise and Fennelseed an. ij. s. Raisins cleansed ij. Water q.
s. Boil them to lbj. s. Add to the Straining Magistral Oxymel, Syrup of
Stoechas, Horehound an. j. Mix them for an Apozem.

XVIII. Also let him often take a small quantity of this Conditement.

. Specier. Dianthos, Diambr. an. j. Root of Elecampane candied, conserve of
Flowers of Sage, Anthos, an. v. Syrup of Elecampane q. s. Mix them for a
Conditement.

XIX. To evacuate the Phlegm out of the whole Body, Decoctions of Saffafrass and
Sassaperil are very proper, adding at the end some proper Cephalic and Pectoral
Ingredients to corroborate the Head and Lungs. Also let him wear a Cephalic
Quilt upon his Head; and lastly, let him make an Issue in one Arm, or in the
Neck.

XX. If the Patient mend upon the use of these Medicines, for removal of the
farther Cause of this Mischief, let him take every other day in a Morning a
Draught of this medicated Wine.

. Root of Elecampane dry s. Of Florence, Hyssop, Ialop an. j. s. Hyssop, white
Horehound an. M. s. Juniper Berries s. Anise and Fennel-seed, an. j. s. white
Agaric v. Lucid Aloes iiij.

Tie them up in a Bag, and hang them in four or five pound of Whitewine.

XXI. For preservation, let him use this Bolus twice a Week, for three Weeks
together.

. Venice Turpentine iij. white Sugar ij. Mix them for a Bolus to be swallowed
in a Wafer moistened in Malmsey Wine.

XXII. His Diet has been already prescribed. His Drink must be small, his Sleep
and Exercise moderate, and let him be sure to keep his Body soluble and regular.

HISTORY. V. Of the Quinancy.
A Young Man, about thirty years of Age, fleshy, strong and Plethoric, having
overheated himself with hard Labor, and being very thirsty, drank a large
Draught of small Ale, brought him out of a cold Cellar. So that not able to
endure the Coldness of the Drink in his Chaps, he was forced to take the Pot
from his Mouth. Soon after he felt a certain Narrowness, with a Burning in his
Chaps, and from thence some kind of Trouble in Breathing and Swallowing, which
still more and more increased. After seven or eight hours, a strong Fever
seized him, with a strong, thick and unequal Pulse, and the Difficulty of
Breathing and Swallowing increased to that degree, that he could hardly breath
either sitting or standing, and his Drink presently flew back out at his
Nostrils. His Mouth was dry, with an extraordinary Thrist, which because he
could not swallow, no Drink could allay. His Tongue looked of a dark Color,
and being depressed with an Instrument, in the hinder Part an intense Redness
appeared; but no remarkable Tumor was conspicuous, because it lies in a lower
Place. The Frog-like Veins were thick and tumid. His Speech so obstructed, that
he could hardly be heard: Restless, he tumbled and tossed, and was mighty
covetous of the cool Air: Without there was no Swelling, but an unusual Redness
about the Region of the Chaps.

I. THis terrible Distemper is called Angina, or the Quinancy, Which is a
Difficulty of Breathing and Swallowing, proceeding from an Inflammation and
Narrowness of the upper Parts of the Throat, Larynx and Chaps, and always
accompanied with a continued Fever.

II. This is no bastard Quinancy Swelling of the Tonsilae, with Redness caused
by a Catarrh, but a real Angina, bred by a mere Inflammation.

III. The anteceding Cause of this Malady, is Redundancy of Blood, which being
stirred by the original Causes, and copiously collected in the Chaps and
Muscles of the Larynx, and there putrefying, becomes the containing Cause. But
the original Causes were hard Labor and cold Drink; the one exciting the Heat,
the other chilling too soon.

IV. For the Body and Heart being heated by hard Labor, the Blood was rapidly
moved by the strong and thick Pulsations of the Heart, and swiftly passed
through the Vessels; but the Blood in the little Veins about the Chaps being
thickened by the coldness of the cold Drink, and the Roots and Orifices of the
little Veins being likewise so straightened, that the Blood sent continually
from the Heart, was not able to circulate through those Passages, which caused
a Detention of much Blood therein; thence proceeded the hot Tumor, which
streigthned the Passages of Respiration and Swallowing, and the Blood now no
longer under the Regulation of the Heart, became inflamed and putrified, and
part of it communicated to the Heart, kindled a continued Fever, about seven
hours after, when the Matter was sufficiently enflamed, and the effervescency
was become grievous to Nature.

V. The Fever made the Respiration more difficult, because the boiling Blood
required more Room, and by that means increased the Tumor and Narrowness of the
Passages; besides that, the feverish Heat requires more Respiration.

VI. His dryness of Mouth, and extreme Thirst, proceeded from the hot Vapors
exhaling partly from the Inflamed Part next the Mouth; partly from the Heart
and lower Parts, by reason of the Fever. Nor can he swallow his Drink, because
the upper Part of the Ossophagus is so compressed and strengthened by the
inflamed Tumor, that nothing can pass that way, so that the Drink is forced to
find another Passage back through the Nostrils.

VII. The Intense Redness that appears in the Chaps proceeds from the abundance
of Blood in those Parts, which being denied free Passage through the Frog-like
Veins, is the Cause that they are swelled too.

VIII. The Speech is disturbed by reason of the Inflammation of the Muscles of
the Larynx, and Difficulty of Breathing.

IX. There was no Tumor conspicuous without, because the whole Inflammation lay
hid about the Larynx, Ossophagus and Chaps, nevertheless a certain Redness
extended it self toward the outward Parts adjoining to them.

X. This is an acute and dangerous Disease, which must be either speedily
cured, or sudden Death ensues; for that the Inflammation and Tumor increasing
will cause a Suffocation. The Fever augments the Danger, for that the Patient
being not able to swallow any thing, the internal Heat cannot be quenched by
Drink, nor the Debility of the Body be repaired by Nourishment. However there
is some hopes, because the Inflammation does not lie altogether hid in the
Miscles of the Larynx, but extends it self to the outward Parts, where Topics
may be applied; besides that, the Redness promises an Eruption of the
Inflammation toward the outward Parts, to the great Benefit of the Patient.

XI. In the Method of Cure it is requisite, 1. To hinder the violence of the
Blood flowing to the Parts affected. 2. To discuss the Blood already collected
therein. 3. To promote Maturation. 4. To prevent Suffocation by Chyrurgery.

XII. The first thing therefore to be done is to let Blood freely in the Arm.
And if once letting Blood will not suffice, to open a Vein in the other Arm,
and a third time, if need require. Also to draw a good quantity of Blood from
the Frog-veins.

XIII. In the mean time the Body is to be kept open with emollient Glisters.

XIV. Let the Patient make frequent use of this emollient and discussing
Gargarism.

. Sliced Licorite iij. Two Turnips of an indifferent bigness, Scabious, Violet
Leaves, Mallows, Mercury, Beets an. M. j. Flowers of Camomil, pale Roses, an.
M. s. Citron Peels s. Water q. s. Boil them to lbj. s. Add to the Straining
Syrup of Dianucum ij. Diamorum j. Honey of Roses s. Mix them for a Gargarism.

If the Tumor seem to tend to Suppuration, add thereto,

Cleansed Barley j. s. Leaves of Althea M. j. s. Figgs no ix.

XV. Outwardly apply this Cataplasm.

. Root of white Lillies j. s. Leaves of Beets, Mallows, Mercury, Althea,
Flowers of Camomil, an. M. j. Pale Roses M. s. Fengreek Meal j. s. The inner
Part of one Swallows Nest powdered, Water q. s. Boil them into the Form of a
Poultis; to which add Oil of Camomil ij. Mix them for a Cataplasm.

If there be any likelihood of Maturation, add thereto,

Fat Figs no vij. or viij. Meal of the Root of Althea, Hemp Seed, Pulp of
Cassia, Oil of Lillies an. j.

XVI. So soon as the Patient is able to swallow, purge him gently with an
Infusion of Rhubarb, Pulp of Cassia, Syrup of Roses solutive, or of Succory
with Rheon.

XVII. Then give him this Julep for Drink.

. Decoction of Barley lbj. s. Syrup of Diamoron, Dianucum and Violets an. j.
Oil of Sulphur, a little to give it a Sharpness. Mix them for a Iulep.

XVIII. If the Imposthume break, let the Patient, holding his Head down, spew
out the purulent Matter, and cleanse the Ulcer with a Gargarism of the
Decoction of Barley, sweetened with Sugar, Honey, or Syrup of Horehound or
Hyssop, of which Syrups a Looch may be made. Afterward let him use a Gargarism
of Sanicle, Plantain, Egrimony, Cypress Nuts, red Roses, etc. sweetened with
Syrup of dry Roses and Pomegranates.

XIX. If while these things are made use of, the Difficulty of breathing
increase, so that a Suffocation may be feared, before the Matter can be
discussed or brought to maturity, the last Remedy is Laryngotomic or Incision
of the Larynx; concerning which, consult Casserius in his Anatomical History of
the Voice. Aquapendens in his Treatise De Perforatione Asperae Arteriae; and
Sennertus's Institutions, L. 5. P. 1. Sect. 2. C. 7.

XX. When the Patient can swallow, let his Diet be Cream of Barley,
Amygdalates, thin Chicken and Mutton Broth boiled with Lettice, Endive,
Purslain, Sorrel, Damask Prunes, etc. Let his Drink be small Ale, refrigerating
Juleps and Ptisans: Keep his Body soluble and quiet.

HISTORY VI. Of a Peripneumony, or Inflammation of the Lungs.
A Strong Young Man, having overheated himself with drinking Wine, after
Midnight drank a Pint of cold Water, and so exposing himself to the cold
nocturnal Air, went home. Presently he felt a Difficulty of Breathing, which
every moment increased without any acute Pain in the Breast. However he felt a
troublesome Ponderosity in the middle of his Breast, toward the Left-side. He
had a little Cough, which after molested him, and caused him to spit bloody and
frothy Matter, but not much. He had a great Redness upon his Cheeks. About
three or four Hours after, a strong and continued Fever seized him, with an
extraordinary Drought and Dryness of his Mouth. His Pulse beat strong, thick
and unequal, and his Head pained him extremely; and his Difficulty of Breathing
increased to that degree, that he was almost suffocated.

I. THE chief Part here affected, was the Lungs, especially the left Lobe, as
appeared by the difficulty of breathing, and the heaviness in the middle of the
Breast toward the Leftside. By consequence also the Heart and the whole Body.

II. This Disease is called Peripneumonia, which is an Inflammation of the Lungs
with a continued Fever, difficulty of Respiration, and a ponderous trouble in
the Breast.

III. A Plethora is the antecedent Cause of the Disease. The next Cause is
greater Redundancy of Blood forced into the Substance of the Lungs, then is
able to circulate. The original Cause, was too much overheating, and too
sudden refrigeration.

IV. The Wine overheated the Body, thence a strong and thick Pulsation of the
Heart, by which the Blood attenuated by the Heat, was rapidly forced through
the Arteries into the Parts; but being refrigerated by the actual Coldness of
the Water drank, and the in-breath'd Air, and not able to pass through the
obstructed Passages of the Pulmonary Veins and Arteries, begets that remarkable
Swelling, accompanied with an Inflammation; partly through the Increase of the
Blood, partly by reason of its Corruption and violent Effervescency.

V. Now the Bronchia or Gristles of the Lungs being compressed by this Tumor of
the Lungs, the Respiration becomes difficult, and that Difficulty more and more
increases, because every Pulse adds some Blood to the Tumid Part.

VI. Then, because the Lungs being swelled and distended, must needs be more
heavy, thence that troublesome Ponderosity is perceived in the Breast,
especially toward the Left-side, because the Inflammation possesses the sinister
Lobe. However, there is no great or acute Pain, because there are no large
Nerves in the Substance of the Lungs, which therefore have no quick Sense of
feeling; and as for the inner Tunicle of the Bronchia, which most acutely
feels, it is hardly affected with this Distemper, only the sharp Heat of the
putrefying Blood somewhat tickling it, and the thinner Particles of the Blood
being squeezed into it, provoke a little Cough, accompanied with a little
spitting of Blood.

VII. The Cheeks are red, by reason of the spirituous Blood boiling in the
Lungs, which insinuates it self and its Vapors into the spungy Substance of the
Cheeks; besides that, there is a hot Exhalation from the inflamed Lungs
themselves, with which fierce Vapors break forth out of the Chaps, and lighting
within the Mouth into the Cheeks, make them much hotter, and increase the
Redness.

VIII. The continued Fever proceeds from the Blood, putrefying in the Lungs,
and communicated continually to the Heart; which did not appear at first, till
after three hours, that the Blood being increased in quantity and heat, began
to putrify and be inflamed; and then the Mouth became dry by reason of the
fervid Exhalations drying the inside of the Mouth. The Pulse was strong and
thick, by reason of the quantity and heat of the Blood. Unequal, because of the
unequal Mixture of the putrid Particles, sometimes more, sometimes less
communicated to the Heart.

IX. At the beginning of the Fever, the Difficulty of breathing increased
almost to Suffocation, because of the greater quantity of Blood forced into the
Heart by stronger Pustles; partly, because the Blood now putrefying and boiling
in the Lungs, wants more room, and therefore causes a greater Compression and
Contraction of the Bronchia.

X. The Pain in the Head is caused by the sharp Humors caused by the Wine
excessively drank, and vellicating the Membranes of the Brain; partly by the
hot Blood, and its sharp Exhalation, forced by the Motion of the Heart into the
same Membranes, somewhat chilled by the Cold of the Nocturnal Air.

XI. This Disease is very dangerous, by reason of the Difficulty of breathing,
and the Excess of the Fever. Besides that, the Bowel is affected, which is next
the Heart, and without the use of which, it cannot subsist.

XII. Therefore in the Method of Cure, a Vein is first to be opened in the Arm,
and a good quantity of Blood to be taken away, and the same Bleeding to be
repeated twice or thrice, if need require, which though it weaken the Party,
yet it is better he should be cured weak, than die strong.

XIII. In the mean time let his Belly be moved with some ordinary Glister, as
the Infusion of Rhubarb, Syrup of Roses solutive, Succhory with Rheon,
Decoction of Pruens or solutive Electuary Diaprunum, or some such gentle
Purgatives, for stronger must be avoided.

XIV. To quench his Thirst, give him some such Julep.

. Decoction of Barley lbj. s. Syrup of Poppy, Rheas, of Violets, Pale Roses,
an. j.

XV. This Apozem may be prescribed to take of it three or four times a day.

. Roots of Succory, Coltsfoot, Asparagus Grass, an. j. Sliced Licorice s.
Violet-leaves, Endive, Coltsfoot, Lettice, Venus Hair, Borage, an. M. j.
Flowers of Poppy, Rheas p. ij. Four greater Cold Seeds an. j. Blew Currants j.
Water q. s. Boil them to lbj. s. Then add to the Straining Syrup of Poppy,
Rheas, of Violets and pale Rases an. j. For an Apozem.

Of the same Syrups equally mixed with a little Saffron added, may be made a
Looch to alleviate the Cough.

XVI. If the Inflammation come to maturation, which will appear by the purulent
Spittle, and the Diminution of the Fever, then first let him take abstergent
Apozems of Elecampane, Horehound, Hyssop, Scabious, etc. also Looches of Syrup
of Venus Hair, Horehound, Hyssop, etc. And when the Ulcer is sufficiently
cleansed, then come to Consolidation.

XVII. Let the Patients Diet be Cream of Barley, Chicken and Mutton Broth, with
cleansed Barley, blew Currants, Endive, Lettice, Damask Pruens, and such like
Ingredients, boiled therein, or Almond Milk: For his Drink, small Ale, or the
aforesaid Julep.

HISTORY VII. Of Spitting Blood.
A Lusty Young Man accustomed to a salt, hard and sharp Diet, having many times
exposed himself bare Headed to the Cold of the Winter Air, and thence
contracted first a terrible Pose, with a heavy Pain in his Head, was after
molested with a violent Cough, caused by sharp Catarrhs descending upon his
Breast, that brought him to spit up a great quantity of Blood, and that not
without some pain. At first a Physician being sent for let him Blood in the
Arm, and took away a good quantity, which appeared cold, very thin and ill
colored, and something but very little coagulated; the Blood-letting stopped
his spitting of Blood for two days, but afterward it returned again. His
Appetite failed him, and his strength decayed; but he had no Fever.

I. THE Primary Malady that afflicted this Man is called by the Greeks (...),
by the Latins Sanguinis Sputum, or spitting of Blood.

II. In general it is a Symptom of Excrements flowing from the Lungs and the
Vessels belonging to it; but the Disease which follows that Symptom is a
Solution of the Continuum.

III. The Part Primarily affected is the Lungs, with it is Vessels, which
appears by the Cough, and the Blood spit out with the Cough: which comes away
without Pain, because of the little sense of Feeling in the Lungs. The Pose and
falling down of the Catarrhs, show the Head to be affected in like manner.
Secundarily, and the other Parts suffer nothing, but only as they are wearied
by the violence of the Cough, and weakened by that, and the Evacuation of the
Blood.

IV. The anteceding Causes are the sharp and crude Humors, descending from the
Head to the Lungs, which vellicating the respiratory Parts by their Acrimony,
cause a terrible Cough, and by their Corrosion, a Solution of the Continuum.
The Original Causes are the External Cold, the obstruction of the Pores of the
Head, and what ever others that cause a Collection of crude Humors, or an
endeavor to expel them being colected.

V. Disorderly Diet and ill Food bred a great quantity of bad and sharp Humors
in the Body, and made the Blood it self thin and sharp; hence many sharp Vapors
were carried to the Head, which wont to be evacuated through the usual Passages
and Pores, which being stopped and contracted by the Cold, the Humors likewise
condensed, with their viscous Slime beset the Spongybones of the Nostrils, and
so caused the Pose, which was attended with a heavy Pain in the Head, while the
detained Humors distended the Membranes of the Brain; afterward descending to
the Aspera Arteria and Lungs they induced a violent Cough, and Corrosion of the
Vessels, upon which ensued a Solution of the Continuum, while the Vessels were
broken and opened by the Violence of the Cough.

VI. That the Blood abounded with bad and sharp Humors appeared from hence,
that being let out of the Veins, it was thin and ill colored.

VII. This spitting of Blood returned again, because that when the opened
Vessels are emptied, there is some time required before they can be filled
again: but no sooner are they swelled with more Blood, but it bursts out as
before.

VII. Now the reason why the Blood stopped for two days after the Blood-leting,
was because by that Evacuation the Heart was debilitated and the Pustles grew
weaker, so that less Blood was forced out of the right Ventricle of the Heart
into the Lungs. But after two days the Heart gathering strength and filling the
little Vessels of the Lungs with Blood, the violence of the Cough easily forced
it out again.

IX. The Appetite was lost, through the continual Agitation of the Cough, and
weakness caused by the Evacuation of so much Blood; which caused a Debility of
the whole Body and Bowels together with the Stomach. Besides that bad Diet had
bred several crude Humors in the Stomach, which had dulled the Appetite and
weakened Concoction.

X. The decay of strength proceeded from loss of Blood and the Bodies being
wearied by the violent Agitation of the Cough.

XI. This Disease is very dangerous. 1. In respect of the Part affected; since
no man can want Respiration. 2. In respect of the Cause; which is partly a
Corrosion, partly a Rupture of the Vessel. 3. In respect of the difficulty of
the Cure, which requires rest, which is not to be expected in the Respiratory
Parts. Neither can the Solution be taken a part, but the Flux of the Catarrhs,
and the Cough must be cured together. Therefore says, Faventinus, Blood being
spit from the Lungs with a Cough, the broken Vein cannot be closed but with
great difficulty. For when any little Vessel of the Lungs is opened or broken,
an Ulcer follows, which brings a Consumption that soon terminates in Death. All
the hopes of this Patient consisted in his Age and strength.

XII. In the method of the Cure, the Cough is first to be allayed. 2. The Blood
to be diverted from the Lungs. 3. The broken Vessels to be consolidated. 4. The
descent of the Catarrhs to be prevented. 5. The crude and sharp Humors to be
hindered from gathering in the Head. 6. The depraved Constitution of the Blood
and Humors to be amended.

XIII. After Glystering, or some Lenitive Purge given at the Mouth,
Bloodletting is most proper, which is to be repeated as necessity requires;
especially when the Patient perceives any heaviness in the lower Part of the
Breast, for the Blood-letting hinders the repletion of the Vessels of the
Lungs, and their being forcibly opened by the quantity of Blood.

XIV. To thicken the Blood and the Catarrh, and allay the Cough,

. Haly's Powder against the Consumption ij. s. Red Corral prepared j. Decoction
of Plantain, j. Syrup of Comfrey s. Mix them to be drunk Morning and Evening.

Let him often in the day use the following Looch and Amigdalate.

. Syrup of Comfrey, dry Roses, Coltsfoot an. vj. Of Poppies iij. Mix them for a
Looch.

. Sweet Almonds blanched ij. s. Lettice Seeds s. Decoction of Barley q. s. Make
an Emulsion of lb j. with which mix with white Sugar q. s. For an Amidgdalate.

XV. To divert the Catarrh, make an Issue in the Arm or Neck, and apply
Cupping-glasses to the Scapula and Back. And to prevent the Collection of crude
Humors, let him wear a Cephalic Quilt, composed of Ingredients to heat and
corroborate the Head, dry up the Humors and open the Pores; and to open the
Passage of the Nostrils, let him take some gentle Sternutory.

XVI. When the Cough is thus removed, and the Blood-spitting stopped, proceed
to the farther consolidation of the corroded and broken Vein. To which purpose
the Patient must be gently Purged by Intervals, to evacuate the sharp Humors by
degrees. In the mean time let him drink this Apozem thrice a day.

. Barley cleansed j. Roots of the greater Consownd, Tormentil, Snake-weed,
sliced Licorice an. vj. Sanicle, Herb Fluellin, Winter-green, Coltsfoot,
Egrimony, Ladies Mantle, Plantain. an. M. j. Red Roses M. j. Heads of white
Poppy ij. s. The relics of pressed Grapes, iij. Figgs No. v. Make an Apozem of
lb j. s.

Instead of this he may take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Conditement,

. Haly's Powder against a Consumption j. s. Coral Prepared, Boodstone,
Hartshorn burnt an. j. s. Conserve of Red Roses ij. Syrup of Comfrey q. s.

XVII. His Diet must be of good Juice and easy Digestion, and somewhat of a
clamy Substance, as Veal, Lamb, Mutton, and Broths of the same, ordered with
Barley, Rice, Reasons, etc. More especially Goats Milk. Let his Drink be sweet
Ale, not too small, let him not any way strain his Voice: and for his Body let
him keep it so soluble, that his Stools may be easy.

HISTORY VIII. Of a Consumption.
A Lusty Young Man, twenty two Years of Age, having for a long time lived
disorderly, at first felt for some time a heavy pain in his Head, which seeming
to abate about Winter, presently he began to be molested with a Defluxion of
sharp Humors to the Lungs, and thence with a violent Cough, which brought up
every day a great quantity of thick tough Phlegm, after he had been troubled
with this Cough for some Months, at length he brought up Blood mixed with his
other Spittle: and about three Weeks or a Month since purulent matter was
observed to be mixed with his Spittle, sometimes without, sometimes mixed with
Blood, of which he hauk'd up every day more and more. However his Spittle had
no ill smell; he had also a continual slight Fever, but attended with no signal
Symptoms, his Nostrils were dryer then usually; and out of which there came
little or nothing to speak of; he was much Emaciated and very Feeble. His
Appetite lost, or very little: and his Cough frequently interrupted his sleep.

I. SEveral Parts of this Young Man's Body were affected; The Head, as appeared
by the Pain therein, and the Catarrhs. The Lungs, as appeared by Cough and
Spittle; and the Heart, as was manifest by the Fever; and consequently the
whole Body was out of Order.

II. This Disease is called Phtisis, or a Consumption, Which is an Atrophy or
wasting of the whole Body, proceeding from an Ulcer in the Lungs, with a
slight lingering Fever.

III. The remote Cause of this Disease was disorderly Diet, which bred many
sharp and viscous Humors in the Body; and the going carelessly uncovered in the
Winter time, bred a cold ill temper in the Head, which contracted and stopped
the Pores of it: by which means the Vapors ascending from the lower Parts,
condensed in the Brain, and for want of passage, begot a heavy Pain in the
Head, being as yet more ponderous than acrimonious, and lodged in the less
sensible Ventricles of the Brain.

IV. The same Humors with their viscosity had obstructed the usual Passages of
the Nostrils and Palate, and so finding no other way, fell down upon the Lungs
and Aspera Arteria, which caused the Cough; at what time the Headache abated,
because the condensed Humors having found out a new Channel, were no longer
troublesome to the Head.

V. By the Acrimony of the Catarrhs some Corrosion was made in the Lungs; and
thence, the violence of the Cough preceding, an effusion of Blood mixed with
the Spittle, yet not very much, because none of the larger Vessels were either
corroded or dilacerated by the fury of the Cough. Suppuration and an Ulcer
followed the Corrosion; whence the Purulent matter spit up; which became still
more and more, as the Ulcer increased. However as yet it has no ill smell,
because the Ulcer is not come to that degree of Putrefaction.

VI. the slight Fever proceeded from the Humors putrefying about the Ulcer.
For the Blood forced from the right Ventricle of the Heart, cannot but receive
some infection from the putrified Humors about the Ulcer, and carry it to the
left Ventricle, where it kindles that Fever; which is but slight, because the
Putrefaction is not great. But continual, for that every time the Heart
dilates, something of that Putrefaction falls into the left Ventricle.

VII. The Nostrils are dry, because the Flegmatic humors have found out other
Passages to the Breast, and none come to the Nostrils.

VIII. The Patient is emaciated, because the Blood is corrupted by the putrid
Humors continually heated in the Heart, and mingled with the Blood, which is
thereby made unfit for Nourishment, and incapable of Assimulation with the
Parts.

IX. The Appetite decays, because the Stomach not being nourished with good
Blood, grows weak and breeds bad Humors; besides that the continual and violent
Agitation of the Cough destroys the natural Constitution of it, so that it is
not sensible of that Corosion which begets Hunger, neither can it conveniently
retain nor concoct the Nourishment received.

X. By what has been said, it is apparent that the Disease is a Consumption;
the certain Signs of which are Bloody and purulent Spittle, a soft and lingering
Fever, and a wasting of the whole Body.

XI. This Disease is very dangerous; 1. Because the Ulcer is in such a Bowel,
the use of which cannot be spared. 2* Because it is in a Spungy part that is
not easily consolidated. 3. Because attended with a Fever that drys up the
whole Body. 4. Because there is a great wast and decay of strength. 5. Because
the Cure of the Ulcer requires rest, whereas the Lungs are always in continual
Motion. 6. Because the Medicaments do not come to the Lungs with their full
Virtue but through various Concoctions. 7. Because a Fever and an Ulcer require
different Remedies.

XII. The Method of Cure requires, 1. That the cold ill Temper of the Head be
amended, the generation of cold Humors, and the defluctions of cold Humors, and
the Cough be prevented and allayed. 2. That the Ulcer be cured and the Fever be
removed.

XIII. First, Therefore the defluction of the Catarrhs is to be diverted from
the Breast by Issues in the Neck or Arm. The Head is to be corroborated, the
redounding cold Humors are to be dried up, and the obstructed Pores to be
opened. To which purpose the Temples and Bregma are to be anointed Morning and
Evening with Oil of Rosemary, Sage, Amber, Nutmegs, etc. Let him also wear a
Quilted Cap stuffed with Cephalics, for some time.

. Leaves of Marjoram and Rosemary an. j. s. Flowers of Rosemary, Lavender,
Melilot an.. j. Nutmegs ij. Cloves, Storax an. j. Beat them into a gross Powder
for a Quilt.

XIV. The Belly is to be gently moved with Manna or Syrup of Roses Solutive.

XV. Then to facilitate Excretion of the Spittle with such Remedies as at the
same time may heal the Ulcer.

. Syrup of Venus-hair, of Comfrey, of dried Roses an. j. Mix them for a Looch.

Or such kind of Trochischs,

. Flower of Sulphur, Powder of sliced Liconice an. j. Root of Florence Orrice
ij. Haly's Powder against a Consumption iij. Benjamin, Saffron, an. j. White
Sugar v. With Rose Water q. s. Make them into a Past for Trochischs.

XVI. If the Cough continue very violent, add to the Looches a little white
Syrup of Poppy. Moreover to allay the Cough and recover strength, let him
frequently take of this Amygdalate.

. Sweet Almonds blanched ij. s. Four greater Cold Seeds an. j. Seed of white
Poppy iij. Barley water q. s. Make an Emulsion to lb j. To which add Syrup of
Popies ij. Sugar of Roses q. s.

XVII. Afterward for the more speedy closing the Ulcer, use this Conditement.

. Haly's Powder against a Consumption, iij. Old Conserve of Red Roses j. s.
Syrup of Comfrey, For a Conditement.

XVIII. Let his Food be easy of Digestion, and very nutritive, as potched
Eggs, Veal, Mutton and Chicken-Broath, with cleansed Barley, Raisins, Rice,
Almonds, Chervil, Betony, and such like Ingredients: also Gellys of the same
Flesh. Let him drink Goats Milk Morning and Evening warm from the Udder, and
not eat after it for some hours. Let his Drink be Ptisans sweetened with Sugar
of Roses. Let him sleep long, keep his Body quiet, and his Belly solule.

HISTORY IX. Of a Syncope.
A Man forty Years of Age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, after he had fed largly
upon Lettice, Cowcumbers, Fruit, Whey, and such like Diet all the Summer long
at length having lost his Stomach became very weak with a kind of sleepiness
and numness, and a Syncope which often returned if any thing troubled or
affrighted him: which Syncope held him sometimes half an hour, sometimes longer
with an extraordinary chillness of the extreme parts, and much cold Sweat; so
that the standers by thought him Dead. Coming to himself he complained of a
Faintness of his Heart, and with an Inclination to Vomit voided at the Mouth a
great quantity of Mucous Phlegm; no Fever nor any other Pain.

I. MAny Parts in this Patient were affected, and many times the whole Body,
but the Fountains of the Disease were the Stomach and Heart, whence all the
rest proceeded.

II. The most urging Malady was a thick Syncope, which is a very great and
Headlong prostration of the Strength proceeding from want of heat and Vital
Spirits.

III. Now that it was a Syncope and no Apoplexy is apparent from the Pulse and
Respiration, both which cease at the very beginning; whereas at the beginning
of an Apoplexy they continue for some time.

IV. The remote cause of this Syncope is disorderly Diet, crude and cold, which
weakens the Stomach, that it cannot perfect Concoction; and thence a vast
quantity of viscous Phlegm which adhering to the upper Orifice of the Stomach
begets in that cold and moist Distemper which destroys the Stomach. And because
there is a great consent between the Stomach and the Heart by means of the
Nerves of the sixth Conjugation, inserted into the Orifices of the Heart and
Pericardium; hence the Heart becomes no less languid, and fainting, sometimes
suffers a Syncope. For that Flegmatic Blood affords very few Spirits, for want
of which the strength fails, and sometimes is ruined altogether.

V. And not only the Animal, but the Vital Actions fail, for the Vital Spirits
failing in the Heart, the Animal fail also in the Brain. And the Motion of the
Heart failing, the Motion of the Brain fails, which renders the Body numbed and
sleepy, though the Syncope be over.

VI. In this Syncope the Patient lies like a dead Man, by reason of the
extraordinary Prostration of the Strength and Vital Actions. The External Parts
are cold, for want of hot Blood from the Heart. There is a cold clammy Sweat,
in regard the thin Vapors, which otherwise used insensibly to exhale through
the Pores of the Skin, are suddenly condensed by the sudden want of Heat, and
so sticking viscous to the Skin, begets a cold Sweat. Nor is there hardly any
Respiration to be perceived, for that the fainting Heart sends no hot Blood to
be cooled in the Lungs; besides that, the Motion of the Heart and Brain
failing, few or no Animal Spirits are sent to the Respiratory Muscles.

VII. The Syncope ceasing, the Languor of the Heart remains, by reason of the
great quantity of Phlegm contained in the Stomach, which flows out at the Mouth
with a kind of nauseating.

VIII. This is a dangerous Malady, as well in respect of the Principal Bowel
affected, as in respect of the Cure, in regard of the Weakness of the Patient.

IX. The Cure is as well to be begun during the Syncope, as when it is over.

X. During the Syncope, the extreme Parts are to be rubbed with Musk, Amber,
Benjamin, green Baum bruised, and such other odorous Smells are to be held to
the Nostrils, either alone, or mixed with Wine or Spirit of Wine. A little of
Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, Spirit of Wine, Cinnamon Water, or Hippocrass is to be
powered down his Mouth with a Spoon; and the Region of the Stomach to be
somented with this Epitheme warmly applied.

. Rosemary, Baum, Mint, Leaves of Laurel an. M j. Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cloves an.
j. s. Fennel Seed ij. Generous Wine q. s. Boil them according to Art to lbj. To
the Straining add Spirit of Wine ij. For an Epitheme.

XI. When the Syncope is past, the Phlegm accumulated in the Stomach is gently
to be removed. To which purpose let him take this Bolus.

. Electuar. Hiera Picra ij. for a Bolus.

Or this Powder,

. Root of Ialap, Cinnamon an. j. Diagridion gr. iiij. Make them into Powder.

XIII. Afterward to strengthen the Heart and Stomach, and gently to purge away
the Phlegm, this medicated Wine is very proper. Of which, let the Patient take a
Draught every Day, or every other Day.

. Root of Elecampane s. Acorus, Galangale an. ij. Baum, Marjoram, Tops of
Wormwood, an. M. s. Orange Peels, Juniper Berries an. M. s. Fennel and
Anise-seed, an. j. s. Agaric, Lucid Aloes an. j. Choice Cinnamon ij. s. Cloves,
ij. Put these into a Bag, to be hung in lbiiij. Of odoriferous Whitewine.

XIV. In the day time, let the Patient now and then drink a little Hippocrass
or Hydromel, after a little Bag of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves and Grains
of Cardamum has been hung. Or take now and then a small quantity of this
Conditement.

. Specier. Diambrae, Sweet Diamosch, an. j. s. Orange-peels, Roots of
Elecampane, Ginger condited an. s. Conserve of Anthos v. Oil of Cinnamon, and
Cloves an. gutt. ij. Syrup of preserved Ginger q. s. For a Conditement.

Or let him use these Tablets.

. Choice Cinnamon ij. Mace, Cloves, White Ginger an. j. Specier. Diambrae j.
Sugar dissolved in odoriferous Wine iij. For Tablets.

XV. Outwardly apply this little Bag to the Region of the Heart and Stomach.

. Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Storax, Benjamin, an. j. s. Leaves of Marjoram and
Rosemary, an. M. s. Reduce them into a gross Powder to be sowed into a little
Bag.

Lastly, that which is called the Amber Apple; or Storax, Benjamin, Grains of
Cardamom, Cloves or other odoriferous Spices somewhat bruised, and tied up in a
thin piece of Silk, or put into an ivory or silver Box perforated, will be very
proper to smell to.

XVI. When the Patient begins to recover Strength, let him take a spoonful or
two of this Mixture.

. Strong Rhenish-wine iiij. Cinnamon Water j. Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae vj.
Confection of Alkermes j. s. Perl'd Sugar, q. s. to a moderate Sweetness.

For want of this Composition, let him take a little generous Wine, or Spirit
of Wine, or Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae.

XVII. Let his Chamber be strewed with odoriferous Herbs, as Baum, Thyme,
Marjoram, Rosemary, etc. or else be perfumed with Cephalic Spices.

His Diet must be sparing, easy of Digestion, and very nutritive, as the
Juices and Gravies of Chickens and Partridges, Gellies of Mutton, Veal and Hens
prepared with Baum, Rosemary, Sage, Roots of wild Raddish, Anise and
Fennel-seed, Nutmeg, Cloves, Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, etc.

His Drink must be midling Wine, Hydromel or Ale moderately taken, tinctured
with a little Wormwood. Nor will it be amiss to take now and then a little
Wormwood-wine or Hippocrass, or a spoonful of Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, or
Spirit of Juniper Wine, Cinnamon or Fennel Wine. His Sleep and Exercise must be
moderate and gentle, and his Excrements must have their due and regular Course.

HISTORY X. Of the Palpitation of the Heart.
A Lusty young Man, about thirty four years of Age, but somewhat Scorbutic, and
for a long time accustomed to salt Meats dried in the Smoke, and pickled in
Vinegar, and other Food of hard Digestion, many times complained of a
troublesome Ponderosity in his left Hypochondrion. Afterward, about three or
four hours after Meals, he felt a strong Palpitation of his Heart, accompanied
with a strong Pulse, very unequal, and sometimes intermitting for two or three
strokes together; at what time he was seized with an extraordinary Faintness.
This Palpitation lasted for half an hour, then ceased again; after which,
slight, but frequent Palpitations often returned. His Appetite was indifferent,
and his Stomach digested well. He slept also very well, only sometimes he was
troubled with frightful Dreams.

I. THE Part most manifestly affected in this Patient, was the Palpitation of
the Heart, which is a disorderly, and over vehement Motion of the Heart.

II. The Proximate Cause is a salt and sharp Humor mingled with the Blood,
which being mixed with the Chylus, concocted out of sharp and salt Food, and
three or four hours after Meals, poured forth into the hollow Vein, and sliding
with it into the Heart, causes a disorderly and vehement Fermentation in the
Chyle, which is to be turned into Blood. For the sharp and salt Particles of
the Chylus, together with the Veiny Blood impregnated with that sharp Humor,
falling into the Heart, too much augment the Fermentation; whence that vehement
and disorderly Dilatation and Contraction of the Heart, which causes that
Inequality and strong beating of the Pulse.

III. Now in regard there are many fixed and thicker Particles mixed with the
thinner Particles of that salt and sharp Humor, which cannot be so soon
dissolved and attenuated in the Heart; therefore, while the Heart is busied in
the Dissolution and Dilatation of them, the Pulse intermits for a stroke or
two, whence arises the Faintness, for that no Spirits are forced to the Parts
while the Pulse ceases.

IV. This vehement Palpitation lasts half an hour, because in that space all
the Chylus of one Meal, or the greatest part of it, is mixed with the Blood in
the hollow Vein, and passes through the Heart, and the Remainders more or less,
cause those slighter Palpitations afterward.

V. Now the reason why that sharp Humor continually flowing with the Veiny
Blood to the Heart, does not cause a continual Palpitation, is, because the
Particles of the Blood and sharp Humor fermented in the Heart, are many times
more equal, more mitigated, and less sharp, so that such vehement
Effervescencies cannot be excited in the Heart, especially if they fall into
the Ventricles by degrees, and in lesser quantity. But when the Body being
heated by exercise, the Blood more copiously and rapidly passes through the
Heart with its sharp Particles mixed with it, then the Heat increasing, and the
sharp Humors abounding, the Effervescency increases, and thence the vehement
Palpitation, which abates upon Rest, and Diminution of the Heat, and
extraordinary Motion of the Blood.

VI. This salt and sharp Humor is bred through a particular Depravity of the
Spleen, and emptied out of it into the Liver, through the Spleenic Branch,
where it is concocted with the sulphurous Juice, and mixed in the hollow Vein
with the Blood flowing to the Heart. The Vice of the Spleen is a depraved and
salt ill Tempet, with some Obstruction, causing that troublesome Ponderosity.

VII. The Stomach still craves and digests well, because it is not affected,
besides that, the same sharp Humors carried with the Blood through the Arteries
to the Tunicles of it, raise a Fermentation within it.

VIII. He sleeps well, but troubled with troublesome Dreams, because that
Vapors ascending to the Brain do cause Sleep, but being somewhat sharp, they
twitch the Membranes of the Brain, and the beginnings of the Nerves, and so
disordering the Fancy, procure frightful Dreams.

IX. This Disease is dangerous, because the Heart is affected, and because the
depraved Disposition of the Bowels is not so soon reformed.

X. The Cure aims at three things. 1. To correct the Depravity of the Spleen.
2. To attenuate and concoct the salt and sharp H^mors in the Brain. 3. To
corroborate the Heart.

XI. First then, let the Patient be three or four times purged with Pill.
Cochiae, Hiera Pills, or Golden Pills, Electuary of Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra,
Confection Hamech, or Infusion of Senna Leaves, Agaric, etc.

XII. Afterward let him take this Apozem.

. Roots of Elecampane, Fennel, an. j. Of Capers, Tamarisch, an. s. Germander,
Dodder, Fumitory, Borage, Motherwort, Water Trefoil, an. M. j. Baum M. ij.
Citron Rind, Juniper Berries, an. v. Fennel-seed iij. Blew Currants ij. Water
and Wine equal Parts. Boil them to an Apozem of lbj. s.

XIII. After he has taken this, let him drink every Morning a Draught of this
medicated Wine.

Roots of Acorus, Elecampane an. j. Of Capers and Tamarisch an. ij Water
Tresoil, Germander, an. M. s Orangepeels, s. Juniper Berries vj. Choice
Cinnamon j. s. Cloves j. Fennel-seed ij. Lucid Aloes, white Agaric an. iiij.
Make them into a Bag to be sleeped in Wine

XIV. In the Afternoon; let him take the quantity of a Nutmeg two or three
times.

. Specier. Diambrae, Sweet Diamosch, an. j. Orange-peel and Root of candy'd
Elecampane, Conserve of Anthos, of Flowers of Sage and Baum, an. s. Syrup of
Elecampane, q. s. for a Conditement.

XV. Let him keep a good Diet upon Veal, Lamb, young Mutton, Pullets, Rabbets
and Partridges, etc. The Broths of which, must be prepared with Rosemary,
Borage, Baum, Betony, Hyssop, Calamint, creeping Thyme, Leaves of Laurel, Root
of wild Raddish, Rinds of Citron and Oranges, Seeds of Anise and Fennel,
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger, etc. Also gravelly River-fish, Turnips and
new-laid Eggs. His Drink midling Ale, with a little Wine at Meals. Moderate
Sleep and Exercise, and a soluble Belly.

THE CURES OF THE Chief Diseases OF THE LOWER BELLY. WITH THE CASES OF THE
PATIENTS IN THREE HISTORIES.
HISTORY. I. Of a Preternatural Ravening Hunger.
A Young Man, twenty eight years of age, of a healthy Constitution, but
somewhat Mel^ncholy, and a great Lover of hard, salt, and acid Diet, was
sometimes seized with a very great and extraordinary Hunger, so that unless he
presently drank two or three Draughts of strong Ale or Wine, and eat a piece of
Bread or other Meat, he complained of a Dimness of Sight, accompanied with a
slight Vertigo, and presently became so weak, that not being able to stand, he
fell into a Swoon. From which, when he recovered, and had refreshed himself
with Bread and Wine, he continued free from that excessive Hunger for some
days. This Distemper suddenly came upon him, sometimes in the Morning when he
was fasting; sometimes an hour after Meals, before his Stomach was well
emptied, without any Nauseousness or Vomiting.

I. THE Stomach of this Man was affected in the upper Part of the Stomach: and
the Disease is called Bulinus; Which is a Preternatural and Insatiable hunger
seizing a Man on a sudden with Weakness and Swooning.

II. The remote Cause was a Melancholy Disposition of the Body, and such a
Diet as somewhat vitiated the Concoction of the Spleen; which bred many sharp
and Acid Humors in the Body ill concocted by the Spleen, which being carried to
the Ventricles, and adhering to the upper Part of it near the Stomach, twich'd
it after a peculiar manner, and by means of a certain acid Distemper and
Constriction caused an extraordinary Hunger.

III. The swooning follows together with a notorious weakness, because of the
great consent between the Stomach, the heart and the Brain, by means of the
vagous Nerves, which are inserted into the Stomach, and upper Part of the
Ventricle, with infinite little Branches; which being ill affected about the
Stomach, by Sympathy, the Heart and Brain are affected. Now the Brain being
affected, presently the Animal Spirits were disturbed, which caused the dimness
of Sight, and the Vertigo. The same disorderly and sparing Influx was the
occasion of the weakness and faintness of the Heart, which is the reason it
makes lesser Vital Spirits, and sends a lesser quantity of Arterious Blood to
the Heart.

IV. Now whether a few hours after Meals or Fasting, it is all one; for at
whatever time that subacid Juice flows into the Ventricle, and knaws the upper
Part of it, that vehement Hunger seizes.

V. The Patient is so corroborated with strong Ale or generous Wine, and the
Distemper is presently mitigated, because such sort of Liquor refreshes both
Animal and Vital Spirits, and washes off, nay sometimes concocts and digests
the acid Humor sticking to the Tunicles of the Ventricle, and breaks the sour
Force of it, till there be a sufficient quantity of the same Humor collected
again to make the same Vellication.

VI. The danger of this Distemper is, least the Patient should be seized at any
time with this raving Hunger, where Meat and Drink are not to be had, and so
should be carried off in a Swooning Fit.

VII. Therefore a Person thus affected ought never to Travel without a
sufficient Provision of strong Wine and Food along with him; that he may have
his Weapons ready to resist the sudden Invasion of his Enemy.

VIII. Moreover let him be gently Purged with Electuary of Hier a Piora, Cochia
or Ruffi. Pills, avoiding strong Purgations: or if he be easy to Vomit, let
him take a Vomit of Asarabacca.

IX. To strengthen the Ventricle and Spleen, and mend Concoction, let him take
this Apozem.

. Roots of Elecampane, Tamarisch, Capers an. vj. Galangal s. Germander, Dodder,
Agrimony, Ceterach, Baum an. M. j. Leaves of Laurel, M. s. Orange Peels s.
Iuniper-berries vj. Fennel-seed ij. s. Blew Currants j. s. Water and Wine equal
Paris. Make an Apozem of lb j. s.

To the same purpose also, let him take this Conditement.

. Specier Diambrae, Abbots Diarrhodon an j. Elecampane Roots and Orange Peels
Candy'd, Conserve of Anthos and Flowers of Sage an. s. Syrup of Elecampane q.
s. For a Conditement.

X. Let his Diet be of good and easy Nourishment and Digestion. Mutton; Lamb,
Veal, Pullets and River-fish, the Broaths of which must be prepared with
Rosemary, Betony, Anise and Fennel-seed, Nutmegs, Cloves, Wild Carrots, etc.
Let his Drink be clear Ale, and middling Wine. Moderate Exercise and Sleep.

HISTORY. II. Of a Canine Appetite.
A Maid about Thirty Years of Age, of a Melancholy and somewhat Pensive
Disposition, accustomed to Salt, Acid, Sour, smoaked Meats of hard digestion,
for a whole Year was troubled with an insatiable hunger without Swooning. All
manner of Victuals she devoured most greedily, but drank moderately after it;
when her Belly was full, her hunger never ceased, but was somewhat abated.
After eating she flung up all again, which in a short time became so Sour in
her Stomach, that the Sour smell offended the standers by; and the Maid her
self confessed that they came up sharper then juice of Limons. After that
Evacuation she fell to again, and then again brought up what she had eaten: and
day and night she would have done nothing but eat and Vomit, had not her
Poverty enjoined her a most troublesome and tedious abstinence, in the mean
time however she grew very Lean.

I. THIS Distemper is called Canina Appetentia, or a Cane or Doglike Appetite,
Which is an unsatiable Hunger without swooning proceeding from an acid ill
Temper of the Inferior Stomach: wherein the Nourishment so greedily devoured is
presently cast up again, and then other Nourishment devoured without any
abatement of Hunger.

II. It differs from a Bulimia, for that there is a Prostration of the strength
without Vomiting; but many times with Swooning; in the other there is Vomiting
without any signal weakening of the Body.

III. The Ventricle of this Maid was affected, especially in the lower Part.

IV. The containing Cause is an acid and viscous Humor bred through the defect
of the Spleen, and infused in the Ventricle, which vellicating the Ventricle
with it is acidity, causes an insatiable Appetite after all sorts of Nourishment
to appease that Vellication. Which Nourishment being infected by the Humors
with the same acidity, causes the Vellication to be more troublesome; upon
which great plenty of Spirits being determined to the Inferior Fibers of the
Ventricle, causes a Contraction of the lower Tunicles of the Ventricle, and so
by the help of the Muscles of the Abdomen, a strong Expulsion of the
Nourishment received: which not being able to dissolve or eject the acid Humor,
still firmly impacted in the Tunicles of the Ventricle, which is rather
fomented by the Spleen, it happens that the same raging Hunger still continues
after Vomiting.

V. There is no Swooning in this case, because there is no great consent
between the lower Part of the Ventricle and the Heart and Brain.

VI. Because this Raging hunger accompanied with Vomiting, hinders due
Nutrition, and Atrophy and wast of the Natural strength is to be feared.

VII. In the Cure the Body is osten to be Purged with Aloes, Hiera Picra,
Infusion of Agaric, and other bitter things, and two or three Vomits with
Leaves of Asarabacca.

VIII. Then such things are to be prescribed, which corroborate and cleanse the
Ventricle and Spleen, and promote Concoction by consuming the acid Crudities,
such as are prescribed against the Bulimia; and the same Diet must be observed.

HISTORY. III. Of Difficult Concoction of the Ventricle.
A Certain Person Forty Years of Age, accustomed to Salt, Smoaked, Acid Meats,
and of hard Digestion, after he had struggled with a Quartain Intermitting Ague
for Eight Months, at length being freed from that, slowly recovered strength
because his Ventricle difficultly digested the nourishment which it received:
for that after Meals he was troubled with a great distention in the Region of
the Ventricles, and Hypochondriums; which was eased sometimes by sending forth
violent and loud Belches; and the fewer of those he sent forth, the more he was
troubled. Sometimes he did not belch at all; and then he felt his Meat to
fluctuate in his Stomach, and the next day he threw it up raw and unconcocted,
with some relief of his trouble; and so he remained free as long as his Stomach
was empty: but after feeding the same molestation returned* His Urine was thick
and pale, with a copious sediment, thick and palish. No Fever could be
perceived; but his Pulse was weak and unequal, and his natural strength decayed.

I. HERE the Ventricles, which performs the first Concoction and Chylification
was infected; which occasioned a difficult Concection of the Nourishment by the
Greeks called (...), proceeding from a cold ill Temper of the Ventricle and
chylifying Bowels.

II. Ehe Proximate Cause of this Evil, is the unaptness of the Ferment, to
promote fermentaceous Concoction in the Ventricle, by reason the subacid and
saltish Particles of it are less fixed, and not reduced to that fluxibility and
tenuity, as to penetrate the Particles of the Aliments, stir up the Spirits
latent therein, and separate them from the thicker mass.

III. That defect of the Ferment is contracted through the depraved and
over-cold disposition of the chylifying Bowels, the Liver, Spleen and
Sweetbread; for which reason they do not sufficiently concoct the Ferment which
is to be prepared, nor reduce it to a due fluxibility and tenuity; but make it
over-fix'd and crude; which being communicated to the whole Body begets
Crudities, 1. In the Blood, which is therefore difficultly and unequally
dilated in the Heart, so that few and those thicker both Vital and Animal
Spirits are generated, whence a decay of Strength and dejection of the Mind. 2.
In the Salival Kernels of the Chaps, and others of the Head, where the
fermentaceous falival Juice being bred raw, and so falling into the Stomach,
becomes unfit to make a due Fermentation of the Nourishment. And the same is to
be said of all the other sermentaceous Juices flowing through the
Choler-receiving and Pancreatic-Channel into the Duodenum, and thence in good
part ascending to the Ventricle to promote Concoction. Which is the reason they
make no Fermentation, so that the Nourishment fluctuates in the Stomach, and is
vomited up raw. Or else they only cause a flatulent dilatation of the Aliments,
whence a great distention of the Ventricle, the occasion of those loud Belches,
by reason of the Viscosity of the crude Matter therein contained.

IV. The depraved disposition of the chylifying Bowels was contracted by
disorderly Diet, and the long use of Meats thick, sharp and hard to be
digested; out of which an unconcocted Chylus, and out of that a crude and not
easily dilated Blood was generated, which being carried to the chyllfying
Bowels could not be mastered conveniently by them, and so by degrees they
became debilitated and vitiously disposed.

V. By reason of an ill concocted Chylus, and the crude humors collected and
bred in the Ventricle, it acquired a cold ill Temper, which rendered it unable
to perform its duty, by bringing the sermentaceous Matter sticking to its
Tunicles, to any farther perfection.

VI. A great part of the Flegmatic humors abounding in the Blood passes through
the Reins, hence the Urine becomes pale and thick, and the sediment like it.

VII. There is no Feyer, because no Putrefaction, nor excessive Sulphurous
Effervescency.

VIII. This is a dangerous Disease, because it threatens an utter decay of the
natural strength for want of Nourishment.

IX. In the Cure, the Body is to be often purged with Hiera Picra,
Diaphaenicon, Cochiae Pills, Infusion of Agaric and the like.

X. Then this Apozem is to be prescribed, of which he is to take three or four
times aday.

. Roots of Elecampane, Calamus Aromatic an. j. Roots of Zedoary and Tamarischs
an. s. Germander, Dodder, Baum an M. j. Leaves of Laurel, Marjoram an. M s.
Iuniper-berries, Orange-peels an. s. Anise and Fennel seed an. ij. Raisins
cleansed ij. Water and Wine equal parts. Make an Apozem of lb j s.

XI. The Stomach and other Bowels are to be corroborated with some such
Conditement.

. Ginger condited, Candied Elecampane root, Candied Orange-peel, Conserve of
Anthos and Flowers of Sage an. s. Oil of Juniper j. of Anife, gut. viij. Oil of
Cinnamon and Cloves an. gut. j. or ij. Syrup of Elecampane q. s. For a
Conditement.

XII. If after this the Distemper do not abate, give the ensuing Vomit.

. Leaves of green Asarabacca iiij. Rhaddish water ij. Squeeze out the Juice
according to Art; then add, Vomitive Wine jij. Oxymel of Squils s.

XIII. Then Prepare a Medicated Wine, of which let him drink a draught every
Morning, between whiles taking a small quantity of the foresaid Conditement.

. Roots of Elecampane s. of Zedoary ij. Germander, Marjoram, Cardu^s Benedict.
an. M. s. Orange-peels and Iuniper-berries an. iij. Anise and Fenel seed an. j.
Cloves, Cinnamon an. ij. Lucid Aloes iiij. Hang them in a bag in (...) iiij. of
White Wind.

XIV. Forbear Pork, pickled and smoaked Meats, but observe a Diet of good juice
and easy Concoction prepared with Horse Radish-root, Majoram, Rosemary, Sage,
Lawrel-leaves Anise and Fennel-seeds, Pepper, Cloves and Spices. Let his Drink
be middle Ale and Wine, and sometimes after Meals, let him take a spoonful of
Spirit of Wine, or Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae. Let him sleep and exercise
moderately, and let him sometime anoint the Region of the Ventricle and
Hypocondriums with Oil of Nutmegs, and cover it with the Skin of a Vulture or
Wild Cat: and let the Excrements of his Body be duly and regularly evacuated.

HISTORY IV. Of a Hypochondriacal Passion, with a Nauseating and Vomiting.
A Young Man in the Flower of his Age accustomed to hard, salt and acid Food,
living an idle Life, for a long time nauseating some sorts of Nourishments,
sometimes had no Stomach, sometimes had too much, but with difficulty retained
and digested the Aliment received, with rumbling distention and pain in his
Stomach, and many times was cruelly griped in his Guts, and all the lower Part
of this Belly with an extraordinary rumbling. But these Evils were for some
time abated by the copious breaking of Wind upward and downward. Sometime a
saltish Liquor was wont to void it self at his Mouth, with an extraordinary
nauseating and a slight Vomiting, especially in the Morning, though it many
times happened at other times of the day, and upon that evacuation he was
somewhat better. But about a Month since all these ill accidents began to grow
worse. For his Vomiting was often and violent, so that he threw up whatever he
swallowed with a great force; which though they had not been long in his
Stomach, yet they came up very acid, and which was more to be admired,
sometimes after dinner he brought up two or three ounces of a transparent
Liquor only, as he said himself, Saltish and Sowrish. Yet he retained both his
meat and drink, and after that Liquor was come up, retained and digested them
very well; when he did not Vomit, the Gripings and Rumblings of his Belly were
more troublesome. He had no Fever but was thoughtful and sad; several Scorbutic
Spots appeared also upon his Skin, and his Body waxed lean.

I. HERE several Parts were ill affected, chiefly the Stomach, Guts and
Sweetbread.

II. This Disease is called a Hypocondriacal Affection, which is an acid ill
Temper of the Sweetbread, Ventricle, Intestines and Parts a^joyning.

III. The Primary cause proceeds from a saltish and acid ill Temper of the
Sweetbread, contracted by irrigular Diet, by which the Pancreatic Juice became
too salt and acid, and that at one time more then another, according to the
nature of the Aliments received into the Stomach.

IV. This Juice flowing out of the Sweetbread into the Duodenum, and ascending
good Part of it into the Ventricle, corrupts the Ferment of it, and so causes
bad Concoction* But if it fall into the Stomach infected with any stinking and
depraved quality, then it causes loss of Appetite and nauseating, and sometimes
vomiting. But if it flow in over acid, then it begets outrageous hunger.

V. From this vicious Concoction and Fermentation arise Distensions, Pains,
Rumblings, and much Wind, which being belched upward, in some measure abates
the Distention.

VI. But if that vicious Juice fall altogether down to the Intestines, then the
Deco^tion is better, the nauseating less; However a vicious Effervescency
excited in the Guts, from whence Wind, Rumblings, Roarings, Pains and
Distensions of the Intestines.

VII. The Liquor flowing out at the Mouth with a nauseousness is the Pancreatic
Juice carried up to the Head, and through nauseousness ejected out at the Mouth
together with the Salival Liquor.

VIII. Which Pancreatic Juice growing afterward more sharp and depraved, and
more violently twinging the Stomach, causes a frequent and violent Vomit. Which
if it happen after Meals to break forth through those Aliments into the upper
Part of the Stomach, as it causes a great nauseousness alone, is vomited up
alone, the Aliments remaining in the Stomach, where they are well digested,
that vicious Ferment being Evacuated.

IX. There is no Fever because no Putrefaction.

X. He is thoughtful and sad, for that by reason of the acid Humors mixed with
the Blood, the many Animal Spirits are generated somewhat thicker in the Brain,
so that they do not pass so cheerfully and orderly through the narrow Pores of
the Brain, which makes the Patient thoughtful and musingly Melancholy.

XI. The Body is emaciated, because the first Concoction is not well performed,
which infects the Blood with a Scorbutic quality, that renders it more unapt
for Nutrition.

XII. This Disease is dangerous for fear of an absolute Atrophy, and
Consumption of the Natural strength.

XIII. Therefore in the Cure let the Patient be Purged once in eight days, with
an Infusion of Senna, Agaric, etc. adding thereto a little Electuar of Hiera
Picra or Diaprunum: or with Chochia Pills, Extract of Catholicon, Powder of
Diaturbith and the like. Blood-letting signifies little in this Case where
there is no Fever.

XIV. If his inclination to Vomit continue, give him some such Vomitory.

. Fresh Leaves of Asarabacca iij s. Radish-water an. ij. squeez out the Juice,
then add Antinomiate Wine iij. Oxymel of Squills s.

XV. Let him take three times a day some convenient Apozem, like this that
follows.

. Roots of Tamarisch, Capers, Polypody of the Oak, Elecampane an. vj. Germander
M. j. s. Baum, Betony, Borage, Dodder an. M. j. Leaves of Laurel, Water Trefoyl
an. M. s. Orange-peels vj. Anise and Fennel-seed an. j. s* Raisins cleansed ij.
Water q. s. Make an. Apozem to lb j. s.

XVI. Between whiles let him take a small quantity of this Conditement.

. Roots of Elecampane, Orange-peels Condited, Conserve of Borage, Baum, Flowers
of Sage an. s. Oil of Anise drops xij. Syrup of Elecampane q. s.

XVII. In a great distention of the Maw and Intestines, with Faintness and
Pain, such a Bolus will be very proper.

. Treacle j. Crabs Eyes prepared j. Oil of Annise drops iiij. Mix them for a
Bolus.

XVIII. Instead of his Apozem sometimes in a Morning fasting, give him a Dose
of this Powder in Ale or Broth.

. Crab's-eyes prepared ij. Red Coral prepared s. Amber prepared s. Make a Powder
to be divided into four Doses.

XIX. Let his Diet be of good and easily digested Nourishment, avoiding all
dried, smoked, acid, sour, rank and crude Victuals. Let his Drink be sound
stale Ale, and small Wine but not acid. Let him Sleep and Exercise moderately,
and evacuate duly and regularly.

AN INDEX OF MATTER Contained in the TREATISES OF THE Smallpox and Measles AND
THE CURES and DISPUTATIONS following.
AGue Tertian, 134, 140 Ague Bastard, 135, 151, 156 St. Anthonie's-fire.
Apoplexy 185 Appetite lost, 113 Apthae, 204, 205 Arabian's Opinion of the
Causes of the Small Pox. 4 An Asthma, 44, 216 The Author rejects the Opinions
of all the Physicians concerning the Smallpox, 6 Avicins Opinion concerning
the Causes of the Smallpox. 4
B.
B^thing in the Smallpox dangerous, 37 Belly-bound, 150 Blear ey'dness whether
contagious, 109 Bleeding at the Nose, 52, 116, 200 Blindness, 197 Bloodletting,
when to be admitted in the Smallpox. 13, 34 Bloodshot Eyes, 195 To break the
Pox more speedily, 19, b. Breath stinking. 83 A Burning, 64 Burstness of the
Guts, 86. With a Gangrene, 122
C.
Camphire debilitates Venery, 79. a. b. A Canine Apetite, 233 Carus, 178
Catalepsis, 179 A Catarrh, Chimical dissolutions of little use, 15, a.
Chyrurgical Helps for the Smallpox, 12 Cinnamon water, the use of it in the
Smallpox, 35 Cholic, 98, 137 Coma, a Disease so called, 174 Ill consequences
of catching of Cold in the Smallpox, 26, a. b. Concoction difficult, 234 A
Consumption, 75, 123, 224 Convulsions Epileptic, 133 Convulsion, 189 Coverlets
red, contribute to expel the Smallpox. 15 A Cough. 158. 214 Cupping-Glasses
improper. 13 Cure of the Measles. 24. a
D.
Deafness. 160 The Diagnostic Signs of the Smallpox. 7 Diagnostic Signs of the
Measles. 23. b Diaphoretics for the Smallpox. 14 Diarrhea. 120 Duncan Liddel
defends the Opinion of the Arabians. 5 What Di^ convenient in the Smallpox. 10
A Disentery. 59, 61, 73, 74 A Dysury. 47
E.
Emplasters hurtful. 15 Empyema. 212 Epilepsie. 190 Epileptic Convulsions, vid.
Swoonings. Epithemes hurtful. 15 Evacuations monthly, dangerous in the
Smallpox. 32. a. b Expuls^oes, the several Sorts. 14 External Parts, how to
cure. 19. a. Exulcerations, how to cure them. 22. a. Eyes, how to preserve. 20
Eyelid seized by the Smallpox, how to cure. 37 Eyelids closed by a Wound. 46
F.
Face swelled with a Fall. 142 Fever Malignant. 69, 70, 72 Tertian
Intermitting. 115 Female Purgations suppressed. 61. 80. 91 Fernelius of the
Smallpox. 5 Figs, the use of them in the Smallpox. 15. b The Virtues of them.
16. a Fissure of the Skull. 102 Fomentations hurtful. 15 French Pox. 118
G.
Gallic Fever. 66 Gargles. 19. b Gentilis of the Smallpox* 5 Giddiness. 181 A
Gonorrhea. 37 Gout in the Knee. 97 Gou^. 154
H.
Headache. 80, 103, 128, 163 Hickup. 104 Several Histories of the Smallpox,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, etc, and Measles. 38 Hoarsness. 49 House-Swallows. 13 A
Hurt upon the Shin. 78 The Hydrocephalus. 208 Hypochondriachal Passion. 235
Hysterical Suffocation. 111
I.
Imagination, the Strength of it. 29 Inflammation of the Lungs. 41, 221
Internal Bowels may be seized by the Smallpox. 27. a Internal Parts, how to
^re. 15. b The Itch. 52, 160 Itching in the Measles, how to prevent. 24. a
K.
Kidneys pained. 95 King's Evil. 143
L.
Lethargy. 176 What Lotions to be rejected. 22. a
M.
Madness. 173 Of the Measles in General. 1 Of the Measles in Specie. 23. a
Melancholy, 167. Hypochondriac. 169 Mercurialis of the Smallpox. 5 Milkie,
which the best for a Consumption. 76. b Milk in a Virgins Breast. 132
Mortification of the Legs and Thighs by Cold. 54 The Murr. 200, 201
N.
Nature to be observed in the Cure of the Smallpox. 28. a. b Nephritic
Passion, 63. Pains. 125, 132 The Nightmare. 183 Noise in the Ears. 198
O.
An Ophthalmy. 108, 194 Oils hurtful. 15
P.
Pain extreme under the Breast Bone. 127 Palpitation of the Heart. 228 Palsy.
50, 187 Perforation with a B^dkin dangerous. 21. b Pestilential ^ever. 36
Pharmacutic Remedies. 13 A Frenzy. 165 Pin and Web. 195 Pitting, to prevent.
21. a Pits, to take them away. 22. b The Pleurisy. 210 The Pose. 200, 201 Of
the Smallpox in general. 1 Of the Smallpox in specie. 3 The Causes of the
Smallpox. 4 The preservative Physic. 9 The prognostic Signs of the Smallpox.
8 Prognostic Signs of the Measles. 23. b Purgatives, whether proper or no. 13
Purging, violent. 82 Purples. 24. a. b. 32
Q.
Quicksilver good for the Worms. 153 Quinancy. 218
R.
The Ranula. 206 a Red Spots, how to take them away. 22. a Remedies not to be
changed when truly applied. 28. b
S.
Saffron, the Use of it in the Smallpox. 35 A Scald. 46 Scars, to prevent. 21.
a S^iatica. 146 Scurvy, 128. When first known. 129 Secondines suppressed. 91
Sennertus of the Smallpox. 6 Sheeps-dung expells the Measles. 38 Smallpox may
sometimes scize the same Person twice or thrice. 32 Smallpox and Measles both
together. 39 Smelling lost. 200, 201 Sower things hurtful in the Smallpox. 15.
b Spitting of Blood. 89, 110, 222 Spleen obstructed 55, 137, 144 Stomach
decayed, 84. Fowled. 161 Stone. 131 Strength of Imagination. 29. a Sudorificks,
how to be used in the Smallpox. 15. a Superfetation. 114 Suppression of the
Courses. 48 Swelling in the Forehead by a Fall. 97 Swoonings dangerous, unless
the Pox appear presently. 31. a A Syncope. 226
T.
Of the Therapeutics Cure. 10 Thunder-strook. 157 Timorous People must avoid
coming near those that are sick of the Smallpox. 30. a Topics, when useless,
23 a. When useful. 33. a Toothach. 43, 65, 202 Trembling. 188 Tumors in the
Mouth. 204, 205
V.
Virgins Milk proper to take off the red unseemly Color. 23. a Vomiting, 77.
With pain in the Stomach. 155 Urine suppressed 58, 88 Uterine Suffocation. 121,
159
FINIS.

