A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE Evangel of JESUS CHRIST According to MATTHEW.

By DAVID DICKSON, Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and Professor of
Divinity in the University of GLASGOW.

PHIL. 2. VER. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Let this mind be in you, which was also
in Christ Jesus: Who being in the form of God, though it not robbery to be
equal with God, But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. And being found in fashion
as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name: That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. And that
every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of
God the Father. The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange. 1651.

TO THE Right Honorable and truly Noble, MY LORD, EARL OF LOUDOUN, LORD OF
MAUCHLIN and TARINZAN, etc. High Chancellor of SCOTLAND, etc. And to His
Honorable and Hopeful Eldest Son, my Lord MAUCHLIN, Grace, and Peace.
Right Honorable.
IT is a sweet and remarkable Providence, that within these not many years,
such a multitude of Impressions of the holy Scriptures are vented among these
three united Kingdoms, and so many thousands are of Scots and English, who
delight not only to have the holy Bible in their possession and houses; but
also to carry it in their pockets, for reading of it upon all occasions: This,
as it speaks much of the desire after divine Knowledge, raised up by God in
peoples hearts; and as it promises much of the spreading of the light of the
Gospel in these Dominions, (especially the Lord having now seconded his own
Work, by drawing, from the fountain of his own free grace, the body of these
Kingdoms into a solemn Covenant, for purging of all his holy Ordinances, and
promoving of sound Religion) so does it call aloud to all the Pastors of his
Flock, and to all the godly learned, by all means to lead the Lords people in
upon the right understanding of the Scriptures, left the plain and marvellously
consonant word of God be mistaken and wrested, by the instability and
unskilfulnesse of such as have not their senses exercised to discern the single
meaning of the Lords Voice, and the admirable harmony of his heavenly Speeches.
Many worthy men of God (it is true) have profitably taken pains to this
purpose, and some have written large Commentaries upon sundry Books, and
parcels of Scripture; others have translated out of Latin the Commentaries of
others: But of those worthy men's Labors, only such as have much leisure, and
patience to read, can make use: Others have written short Paraphrases of harder
places; others, Expositions of hard words; others have minded herewith some
sweet notes and observations, all of them contributing one with another to the
common good, so much as each sort of Writing could carry: Yet besides all these
laudable ways of explication of Scripture, it seems that these dangerous
Times, (wherein so many diverse errors are privily crept in, and begun openly
also to avow themselves) do call for such an Explanation of the whole Bible, as
might not only show the scope of each Book and Chapter, with the cohesion of
the Verses, and the meaning of the Words; but also propone the special heads
of Doctrine in each place, whereby people might see the whole grounds of
Religion in the Text, and be guarded against all damnable errors (in which
those persons are easily ensnared, who know not the Scriptures, nor the power
of God) and all this to be in such brevity and cleerness, That men in their
daily set-reading of the Lords word, might in the space of half an hour peruse
a competent portion of Scripture, thus explained.

I say, Set-time for their private reading, because, albeit every man is not
set apart for the Word and Doctrine, but most part have, by Gods appointment,
civil callings and necessary employments about the matters of this life, each
calling and employment having its own work, and each work requiring his own
time, so that there remains little time beside unto many; yet that man is too
much busied in temporal affairs, and more involved in the World then he can
answer for, who does not daily redeem so much time, as the necessary exercise
of Religion in the Word and Prayer does require; beside secret ejaculations of
Prayer unto God, mixed with his affairs, and the Mason-like-looks of his
Conscience, levelling its eye to each action, to see if it be conform to the
Rule: for presuppose a man were employed as much as a King, and had so many
Realms to govern as were under David K. of Israel, yet could he not be excused
for this, to neglect Gods word and prayer; for Dav. oftener then once a day,
yea, and in the night also found time to call on God, and praise his name, and
verse himself in his Word, Ps. 119.55, 62, 164. Let the men of this world, who
have their portion in this life, and have set up in their hearts the filthy
idols of worldly profit, pleasure and preferment, for gaining and keeping
whereof, they make use not only of all men, but also of God and Religion, so far
only as they may be suitable and serviceable to their base ends; Let such men
(I say) neglect reading the Scriptures, and all serious following of religious
exercises: But let not the children of God do so, who hold their standing here,
and the hopes of eternal life hereafter by faith in Christ, for promoving of
whose cause and Kingdom, they are resolved to bear his Cross, were it even to
the doors of Heaven, if so GOD please, and to lay it down on the threshold with
thanks and praise, that ever they were counted worthy to suffer for his Name;
let not these blessed Souls walk in the way of the ungodly, but rather delight
themselves in the Law of GOD, and meditate therein night and day, Psalm. 1.2, 3.
For the service of such saints, and facilitating of their reading of holy
Scripture, I come forth (as before in the brief Explanation of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, so now in the brief explanation of the Evangel according to
Matthew) to call yet again unto the Godly Learned, to stir up themselves for
contributing one with another, unto some such brief explanation of the whole
Bible, as their Godly wisdom shall agr^e upon a mould, this or any other:
because apparently, it is but little, and not considerable; which any one man
alone can overtake in this Work.

As for this Piece, such a one as it is, There is great reason why it should
bear your Honorable Name in the title of it, it being a part of the fruit of
your Lordships labor, who as One eminently careful of the purity of Gods
ordinances, has with others of our Renowned Nobility, faithful Gentry and
Burrows, run the hazard of all things in this life, and of life it self, to
purge the land from superstition, and Heresy, and to give freedom, not only
to the preaching of the Truth of the Gospel, but also unto Pens and Presses for
propagation of it. What singular Proofs of Integrity, and inflexible Constancy
your Honor has given in this great work of uniting these three kingdoms more
nearly unto God, and among themselves in the matters of Religion, it is so well
known, that I need say nothing, but bless God for the raising up of so many
precious Sons of Sion to take their Mother by the Hand, in the day of her
calamity, and give thanks to his Majesty for your Lordships in particular.

ANd as for Your Honor, My Lord Mauchlin, I could not but join your Lordships
Name with Your Noble Father in this Dedication; partly, because you follow up
so hard after his footsteps, that your gracious and prudent Behavior,
observed by all Beholders, has drawn from your Condesciples in Philosophy a
more ample elogy, then either your Lordships Modesty, or my measure of
Commendation of men will suffer me to repeat; partly, that your Lordship may be
thus yet more engaged to drink in, and maintain that Doctrine of Salvation by
Christ, which gives the text of his Testament for a Pawn and Pledge of its
verity; The love and fruitful Profession whereof, that it may b^ the constant
Glory of the House of Lo^doun, is the hearty prayer of

Both your Honors affectionate Servant, in the LORD, DAVID DICKSON


To the honest-hearted Reader.
BEside what I have said in the Epistle Dedicatory, I must acquaint thee
(worthy Reader) yet further with my purpose and way in this Piece: The special
intent of the putting forth of it, is not only that measure of edification
which thou may reap by this small Work; but also, that in satisfying the
desire of sundry worthy men of GOD, who have ^bt^st^d me to make proof, how
some other place of Scripture may be fitted for the Churches edification after
the mould of the Short Explanation of the Epistle to the Hebrews, I may engage
them all (if it be possible) and others also with them, who are more able then
I am, to quicken and prosecute, as partners, the motion made by me heretofore,
and now renewed, to wit, That by the consent of a number of able Workmen,
dividing the task among them, some such brief Explanation of the whole Text of
Scripture, containing the chief Doctrines, in a way accommodate unto the
capacity of common people, may see the light, for the settling of saving Truth
in their hearts, by the force of divine Faith, closing immediately with the Text
of Scripture. Then which Work, I conceive there can be no one mean, after
powerful Preaching, more forcible for rooting out of Errors, and manifesting
unto all men the true Religion which we profess in Britain, and by Covenant
are obliged to maintain and propagate according to our power.

In this Explanation of the Gospel according to Matthew, I have labored to fit
the mould so, that the deduction of the Doctrines from the Text, may be more
obvious to the Readers up-taking, then it is in the Short Explanation of the
Epistle to the Hebrews.

I have contented my self with some few observations upon each Text, which
might serve most for the clearing of the place; leaving to every Reader, as he
has time for Meditation, and ability of Gifts, to observe what further the
Text may afford, it being sufficient for my design, that thou find so much
clearness and sweetness in the Lords Word by what I offer to thy taste, as
may make thee more in love with the daily reading of the Scripture, and the
Learned and Able may be stirred up to help thee with more Stuff of this kind.

I point ordinarily at some words in the Text, for a Ground of the Doctrine
proponed: from which words, if the Doctrines do not immediately arise, and
formally follow; yet from these words such Doctrines may be inferred, after
some little larger Explication of them, as these illate Particles, FOR and
THEREFORE, do at least import.

The History being all along most part plain, I have forborne to trouble thee
with large Contents or Analysis, or Exposition of words, and have insisted
only where some difficulty is, and that so long only as was necessary to give
some light; hasting in all other places unto the Doctrine, and couching in them
frequently so much Exposition of the words as I could with clearness and
brevity, of which I have had a special care, resolving with my self, that as
larger Commentaries serve only for them who have Leisure and love to read
much, so this sort of Writing must be for those only, who (for one reason or
other) must either have something in short, or nothing at all. If this Mould
seem unto thee fit for opening of the sealed Book, pray with me, that the Lord
would fit, and stir up a sufficient number of Instruments for hastening forth
this wished-for Work, unto thy Edification; and I will remain.

Thine, to serve thee, for CARIST'S cause, D. D.

Before the Evangel written by MATTHEW, a Title is prefixed, common to it, and
all the rest of the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, which is this:
THE NEW TESTAMENT (Or COVENANT) OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.
THe whole Bible is commonly called by the name of Old and New Testament, or
Covenant: one word signifying both Covenant and Testament, as it were, A
Testamentary Covenant. The reason why the holy Scriptures written before and
since Christ came, are called by the name of Covenant, is, because the Covenant
of Redemption between the Father and the Son for purchasing of salvation, and
saving graces to the Elect; and the Covenant of Grace made with the Church
through Christ, for application of all purchased graces leading unto salvation,
are the sum and subst^nce of the (...) Bible. The reason why the Scriptures are
called also by the name of Testament, is, because the Son of Go^ having
undertaken to lay down his life (which now he has pe^fo^m^^) as the P^ce of
Redemption, and so having made all things belonging to life to be his own by
paction, he does by way of Legacy, dispone and bequeath unto the children of
promise in the holy Scriptures, as in a written and sealed Testament,
whatsoever by his death he has purchased unto them, that whosoever in the
sense of sin, and fear of wrath do flee unto Christ, may lay claim unto
righteousness and eternal life, as Heirs of Christ, and may seek with
confidence, not only to have the first fruits of his conquest in this life,
but also to have the full possession thereof in the life to come; and that as a
Legacy left unto them by Christ. But because these heavenly Mysteries are not
so clearly and fully set down in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, as
they are now revealed in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles: Therefore
the Books of Scripture written before Christ came in the flesh, are called the
Old Covenant, or the Old Testament; and these which are written since he came,
are called the New Covenant, or the New Testament of our Lord Jesus.

The special Title prefixed to this Evangel, is, THE GOSPEL By, or According
to MATTHEW.
THis Book is called the Gospel or glad Tidings, because the doctrine contained
in it concerning our redemption from sin and misery, by Christ the Son of God,
is the most joyful news that ever the world did hear; especially, after that
the Law and Covenant of works have discovered unto us the vileness of sin, and
the unsupportable burden of Gods wrath due to our sin: It is called The GOSPEL
by, or, according to Matthew, (who also was called Levi) because God in a
special providence did make choice of him to write this Evangel to the world,
as of one who had found in a special manner by experience in his own person,
the power of life, and riches of grace is Christ, making him not only of a
sinner a Saint, but also of (...) Publican an Apostle.

CHAP. I.
In this Chapter is contained the Genealogy of JESUS CHRIST, as he is Man, unto
verse. 18. And five evidences of his holy and wonderful incarnation, from verse.
18. to the end.

Verse. 1. THe Book of the generation of JESUS CHRIST, the son of David, the son
of Abraham.
IN this Title of the Genealogy, Or Roll of the Pedigree of Christ, the
Evangelist holds forth unto us these things: The person of whom we have to
take notice here, is not a mere man, but the Savior of men; for the
inscription calls this Ro^l, The book of the generation of JESUS CHRIST, such
a man as is true God also, and worthy to be called, in the most proper and
strict sense, JESUS the true SALVATOR and DELIVERER of men from sin and wrath;
which still properly taken, belongs only to him who is almighty God, and
JESUS in effect. 2. This person JESUS is thoroughly able and fully furnished for
accomplishing the work of man's salvation, and one who is anointed unto the
offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, to bring about, and perfect the salvation
of his own: for this JESUS, is that CHRIST, the eminently anointed SAVIOR. 3.
He is the Savior of Jew and Gentile, who in his Hebrew name JESUS, and his
Greek name CHRIST, does lift up a Banner of love unto both, That the Hebrews
and Grecians, the Jews and Gentiles may come to him for salvation, the one no
less then the other. 4. As the Lord did promise in Paradise in the assumed
seed of the woman, to tread down the head of the serpent, and did renew his
promise in Abraham's seed, to bless all the nations of the earth, and in David's
seed to reign and rule over the true Israel of God for ever, so has he
performed; yea he has carefully provided, not only to make his promise good,
but also that the degrees of his lineall descent according to his human^ nature
should be marked; partly in the holy Scripture from Abraham unto the Jews
captivity in Babylon; and partly in the public registers of the family and
posterity of David, from the captivity unto his birth; Th^rfore he is called
the Son of Abraham, ^he Son of David: and mention is made of a Book or Roll,
drawn forth of the records. This Register was from age to age so punctually
filled up in every family, and made notour to all men, Ezra 2.62. that not only
David's posterity was known thereby, and according to it was taxed by Caesar in
Beth-lehem; but also all the rest of the families of the Hebrews then in Judea,
could reckon their genealogy by the public records, and were taxed in their
several places accordingly. Luke 2.3, 4, 5.

Verse 2 Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas, and
his brethren.

3 And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar, and Phares begat Esrom, and Esrom
begat Aram.

4 And Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Naasson, and Naasson begat
Salmon.

5 And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab, and Booz begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat
Iesse.

6 And Iesse begat David the king, and David the king begat Solomon of her that
had been the wife of Urias.

7 And Solomon begat Roboam, an^ Roboam begat Abi^, and Abi^ begat Asa.

8 And Asa begat Iosaphat, and Iosaphat begat Ioram, and Ioram begat Ozias.

9 And Ozias begat Ioatham, and Ioatham begat Achaz, and Achaz beg^^ Ezekias.

10 A Ezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses begat Amon, and Amon begat Josias.

11. And Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren, about the time they were
carried away to Babylon.

12 And after they were brought to Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel, and
Salathiel begat Zorobabel.

13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Elia^im, and Eliakim begat Azor.

14. And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud.

15. And Eliud begat Eleazear, and Eleazear begat Matthan, and Matthan begat
Jacob.

16 And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is
called Christ.

17 So all the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen generations: and
from David until the carrying away into Babylon, are fourteen generations: and
from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ, are fourteen generations.

This Catalogue of the posterity of David being so notourly known from the
public Registers and records of the families of David, that no doubt nor
question was made of Christ's descent from David, no not by his enemies,
Therefore the Evangelist does not scrupulously name here every one of his
Ancestors, but only draws the line along so far, as it might suffice for the
churches edification: and by so much as is here set down he does teach us these
things: 1. Jesus Christ is the very true Messiah promised to the fathers, who
now in the fullness of time, has assumed humane nature of the seed of Abraham,
and David, whose Son he is called, according to the flesh: and this he points
at, when he says, Abraham begat Isaac, etc. 2. For our confirmation in the
faith of Jesus Christ, we should acquaint our selves with the prophesies which
went before of him, and with the history of his Ancestors, here recorded from
the Scripture of the Old Testament, and in special from Abraham to the
captivity of Babylon. 3. Seeing it is a hard matter to believe, that God should
so empty himself for us, and become a man like unto us, we should receive so
many impressions of the verity of his humane nature, as there are several
names of his Ancestors according to the flesh, named in this Catalogue: for to
this end we are led from one to another, by he begat, and he begat. 4. No man
should be astrayed to offer himself to be ingrafted as a branch in Christ,
because Christ has been pleased to be a branch of poor Ruth, a Gentile, as
well as of rich Booz: of unlearned persons as well as learned, of ignoble and
mean persons as well as Kings: yea and of persons blotted with notorious faults,
as Rachab and Tamar, no less then of holy Patriarchs and Prophets, such as
Abraham and Isaac. 5. As he has separated our nature in his own person, from
all the pollution of his Ancestors here recorded, so he can sanctify our
persons and nature, how polluted soever our persons have been. 6. By summing up
the generations from Abraham unto Christ in thrice fourteen, he teaches us,
that notwithstanding so many notable changes were made in that people,
especially about the period of each fourteen Generations; yet was the promise
of the Messiah coming, and the lineall descent of the blessed seed still kept
on foot, till our Lord was born, and by this same means, he gives us to
understand, that in the greatest commotions of kingdoms or commonwealths, no
promise made to the Church shall be shaken.

Verse 18. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: when as his Mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph (before they came together) she was found with
child of the holy Ghost. In the second part of the chapter we have five
evidences of Christ's wonderful incarnation. The first is, the Virgin Mary is
found with child of the HOLY GHOST; wherein these truths offer themselves. 1.
Albeit Christ as God be eternal, and has no mother, yet as he is a man he
has Mary his Mother in her virginity, For before they came together she was
found with child of the HOLY GHOST. 2. This wonderful conception was no less
true and real then any ordinary concep^ion could be: for by ordinary evidence
She is found with child, which was observed by those that did not know that it
was of the holy Ghost, till afterward. 3. We should neither speak nor think of
this holy conception, without the remembrance of the wonderful operation of
the Holy Spirit: for to preveen all unworthy and unbeseeming, thoughts of this
transcendent mystery, no sooner does the Evangelist make mention of the Virgins
being with Child, but immediately he subjoyneth, of the Holy Ghost, To teach
us, to beware to think any thoughts of this great mystery of Godliness, the
incarnation of the Son of God, except by the conduct of the Holy Ghost, who
must form right thoughts of Christ in our hearts, and lead us along through
this following history in all saving truth. 4. The LORD has a care of the same
and estimation of those in whom he minds to honor himself; for it is provided
by God so, that the Virgin Mary, being with child of the promised Messia, shall
be espoused to her husband Joseph, that no exception could be taken against
her, by such as did not believe the mystery.

Verse. 19. Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make
her a public example, was minded to put her away privily. The second evidence,
is Joseph's perplexity, who being certain of the real conception of the Virgin,
and uncertain of the holy Manner of it, either because he was not informed by
the Virgin how the matter was, or because, if he was informed, he did not fully
believe; he is put to a perplexed deliberation what to do; There was on the one
hand such evidence of purity and holiness in the carriage of the blessed
Virgin, that Joseph could not find a reason in Justice to make her a public
Example, and for this part of his resolution he is commended as a just Man: On
the other hand there was such certainty of her being with child, and that the
child was not his, that he minded to put her away privily. Doct. 1. GOD by
perplexities can prepare the hearts of his own for a clearer satisfaction in
matters of highest concernment; for this exercise of Joseph is made a Harbinger
to the revelation, and satisfaction which afterward he received: 2. Our LORDS
sufferings began very early, even ere he was born, when the Virgin Mother
comes under suspicion for his incarnation, and comes under this hazard, to be
put away privily for his cause. 3. No wonder CHRIST have hard entertainment in
the world before he be known, when even his own, according to election, do
refuse him, till he manifest himself to them; For Joseph is about to reject the
Mother and the child, before he knew the mystery.

Ver. 20. But while he thought on these things, behold, the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her, is of the
holy Ghost. The third evidence, is the Testimony of the Angel, revealing the
truth to Joseph. Doct. 1. No less then divine revelation can satisfy a soul
in matters concerning Christ: Joseph must be taught from Heaven, before he be
clear about the incarnation of the Son of GOD: 2. The Lord can turn the doubts,
and fears and perplexities of his own, into an advantage unto themselves and
others also, and into a clearer manifestation of his own glory: for now the
incarnation of the Son of God is more clear to Joseph, and to the church, that
the Lord did reserve the revelation thereof to himself, then if Joseph had
never made question about it: 3. The Lord uses to show himself in a necessary
nick of time, while the Virgin is in hazard to suffer, and Joseph about to put
her away, mean while the Lord interposeth himself; for while he thought of
these things, the Angel appeared: The Angel calling Joseph, Son of David, does
oblige Joseph to serve the chief of all the sons of David, the renowned
branch, and true root also of the house of David, for whose cause the posterity
of David was kept undestroyed, when other families were confounded. Then he
discharges Joseph's suspicion which he had of Mary, assuring him, that that
which is conceived of her, is of the holy Ghost, and this he says not to
seclude the operation of the Father and the son, whose work is always one with
the work of the Holy-Spirit, by whom the Father and the Son do work, whatsoever
they work among the creatures, being all three one God, as undivided in
essence, so inseparable in operation: But this work is attributed to the holy
Ghost, to seclude the ordinary way of generation of man, and to assure us of
the sanctification of the substance of the Virgin, assumed by Christ, and of
the freedom of Christ; humane n^^ure both from original sin, and also from all
possibility o^^sinning, by reason of the personal union of the humane nature
with the Divine, made by the Holy Ghost. 4. As Christ is the Son of David by
lineall descent, through Mary his Mother, so also by law, through Joseph his
supposed father, and father in law, who was descended from David; for the Angel
calls Joseph, Thou Son of David. 5. The Lord in due time clears the
righteousness of such as suffer in their name and estimation for Christ, for
Mary's chastity is now made manifest from Heaven, Fear not to take unto thee
Mary thy wise; for that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost.

Verse 21. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name JESUS:
for he shall save his people from their sins. For the further confirmation of
J^seph, the Angel shows to him, how that the conception is of a man child,
and gives order to call him, after he is born, with the reason thereof: hereby
teaching us these Truths: 1. As Christ was really part^ker of our flesh and
blood in his conception, so Mary his Mother did bring him forth as really and
kindly, as ever woman bare a child, for it is said, She shall bring forth a
Son, The word in the Original speaks this plainly. 2. The Son of the Virgin
Mary is the only true Jesus, recommended unto us from heaven, to be taken
notice of as the true Savior: All who had this name before him, were but
shadows and types of him, at the best, for of Christ it is said, Thou shall
call His name Jesus, for he shall save: 3. Natural and civil relations of men
and women unto Christ, did not take away their obligation, and necessity to
believe in him, and to confess him unto salvation, as other sinners must do,
but rather augmented the same; for to Joseph it is said, Thou shall call his
name Jesus, to wit, not only as Foster-father, giving this name to him, but as
a Believer in him, and confessor of him, avowing him to be the true Savior,
because He shall save his people from their sins. 4. The Son of Mary, Jesus
Christ, God incarnate, purchases and gives salvation by his own proper worth
and power* for of him it is said absolutely in the strictest sense, He himself
shall save his people. 5. Jesus is not to save every man, but only his own
people, for whose ransom he made paction with the Father, in the covenant of
redemption: for it is said, he shall save his own people. 6. The Redeemed are
no less sinners, and lost in themselves then others are, for it is said, He
shall save his own people from their sins. 7. These things are spoken to Joseph
to move him to consecrate himself to the service of Jesus, whereby we learn,
that except Christ be known as the Savior, a man cannot heartily do him
service, nor endure trouble for him? Therefore is Joseph instructed to expect
salvation from him, in saying, Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall
save his people.

Verse. 22. (Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
of the Lord by the prophet, saying,

23. Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and
they shall call his name, Immanuel, which being interpreted, is God with us.)

The fourth Evidence of the incarnation, is, the manifested accomplishment of
the prophecy of Esaias 7.14. Wherein the Prophet, for the comfort of the church,
gives assurance, that not only God should save Israel from their enemies, whom
misbeleeving Ahaz did too much fear, but also that the Redeemer of Israel
should verily be incarnate, and assume humane nature in a wonderful manner.
Doct. 1. The mystery of Christ's wonderful conception was not altogether hid
from the church under the old Testament, for it is here foretold by Esaias, that,
a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son. 2. It was foretold
that the child born, should be God and Man in one person, Immanuel, that is,
God with us, God manifested in the flesh, God in our nature, God reconciling us
to himself. 3. It was foretold that he should be believed on, and acknowledged
to be God incarnate; for it is said, They shall call his name Immanuel, which
is fully seen to be accomplished, when this child Jesus is born, who is the
Savior of his people from their sins; For who except God can redeem and save
men, who can make the redeemed his own proper and peculiar people, except God?
Who can by his own merit, and effectual power save from sin, except God? only
such a Jesus, as is verily God, really Immanuel, God incarnate, the true
reconciler of God and Man.

Ver. 24 Then Joseph being raised from sleep, did as the Angel of the L^^d had
bidden him, and took unto him his wife:

25. (...) knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son,
^na^^^^led his name Jesus.

The (...) evidence of Christ's holy and wonderful incarnation^^ the quiet
faith, and ready obedience of Joseph, after tha^^^ is now taught of God. Doct.
1. From time that a m^^^b^ sure of Gods Word and Warrant, he should dispute no
m^re, but stop his ear to all carnal reasoning; for God having solved Joseph
of his doubts, and given him assurance that Christ is the promised Savior, he
did as the Angel had bidden him. 2. A soul that knows the worth of Christ,
will be glad, according to its power, to do service to him, or to any of these
who belong unto him; for now Joseph as a foster-father takes home, under the
shadow of matrimony, both Mother and Child. 3. When says beholds the Majesty
of Jesus, it breeds fear and respect in the Believer toward him, and brings
all his affections in subjection to him; for Joseph understanding that the
Virgin is with child, that the promised seed is now come to destroy the works
of the devil, and that the holy one of Israel is now incarnate in the Virgins
womb; he bears our LORD at such reverence, and so sanctifies him in his
heart, that he suffers the Virgin to remain a Virgin; for it is said, He knew
her not till she had brought forth her firstborn Son, which is sufficient for
evidencing the accomplishment of the prophecy, Isaiah 14.

CHAPTER. II.
Christ being born in Beth-lehem, is honored from heaven, and earth, by the
wise men's coming to worship him, to verse. 12. And by the wonderful
disappointing of Herod's bloody plot against him.

Verse 1. NOw when JESUS was born in Beth-lehem of Judea, in the days of Herod
the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem.
WE hear no more of these wise men but what we collect from Matthew, That they
were of the Gentiles, men of learning and wisdom, men of wealth and
reputation; the circumstances of their coming are set down here, They came from
the east to Jerusalem, when Christ is born in the days of Herod the king,
wherein we have these things observable. 1. The place of the nativity of Christ
well agrees to the prophecy of Micah 5.2. Jesus is born in Beth-lehem the
city of David, which is in Judea, so called to distinguish it from Beth-lehem
in Galilee: 2. The time when he should be born agrees also to the Prophets,
Genesis 49.10. to wit, before or about the time of the Scepters taking altogether
from Juda: That is, before the tribe of Juda did cease to be a tribe, before
this tribe was dissipate, and so destitute of all sort of government, which
came not to pass till after our Lords death: For now Herod is king in Judea,
who had slain the Elders of the house of David, to confirm the kingdom in his
own hand; yet the tribe remained, and had the own order within it self, for the
regulating of the common things pertaining unto the several families thereof,
as appears in the taxing of the family of David in Beth-lehem: But after
Christ's coming, and ending of the work of redemption, for which he came, the
tribe of Juda was so cut off and confounded, that it never had a face of a
tribe again unto this day, therefore the Messia is now come. 3. When such as
should glorify God do it not, but do misken Christ, He can raise up others in
their room, by whom he will honor himself; for though the wise men of the
Jewish Church do not observe the time of Christ's coming, yet God prepares
witnesses for himself from among the Gentiles, Behold a number of wise men
come from the east to honor him, whether from Chaldea, or Persia, or how many
they were, or what were their names, it is not material to us, It is
sufficient that Christ is honored by them, and that they are the first fruits
of the Gentiles their conversion unto Christ. 4. The Lord fails not to make
the best of all means for his own glory; to make these men's testimony famous,
and most fit to check the security of the Jews, they are led in a providence to
Jerusalem to ask for Christ.

Ver. 2. Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen
his star in the east, and are come to worship him. When these men are come to
Jerusalem, they ask where Christ is, and posesse their faith in him, and their
purpose to worship him. Doct. 1. Though Christ's kingdom be not of this world,
yet is he King of Saints, the true King of Israel, to whom the throne of David
was promised, that he should fit thereon, and reign over souls for ever, for he
is that born King of the Jews. 2. Saving faith looks through all clouds of
humane infirmities in Christ, and pitcheth upon some point of excellency in
him; For these men by faith in a babe new born, behold the promised Messiah,
and the King of Israel: They ask for the King of the Jews, giving to him the
ordinary style of the Messiah* 3. The least spunk of saving knowledge does set a
man on work to seek after Christ, for where is he? say they. 4. Faith, ere it
want Christ, will hazard all to come by him; for these men confess him with the
danger of their life, to be the born King of the Jews, and do ask for him in
Jerusalem, even when, and where Herod a stranger is reigning as King. 5. Though
Christ came in the shape of a servant, and humbled himself to be born of a mean
Damsel, yet is his honor to be seen in heaven and earth, for a star is created
to give warning to the world, that the bright morning Star is arisen: and from
the east, wise men do come to confess him. 6. Though God give signs and
evidences of Christ's coming, yet every man does not see or observe them, but
such only as God does reveal them unto; for only these wise men are they who
get a right sight of this star, we (say they) have seen his star in the cast.
7. Faith in Christ and love to him, will spare no pains nor travel to come at
him; for these men are come from a far, from the east to s^e him. 8. Faith
sees Christ to be God, and that makes men to overcome a world of
difficulties, in seeking to have communion with him; for we are come to worship
him, say they: to wit, with religious worship, due to the promised M^ssiah, the
Redeemer of souls.

Ver. 3. When Herod the King had heard these things; he was troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him. At the hearing of these news Herod is troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him, he for fear to lose his kingdom, and they for fear of wars
betwixt two Kings. Doct. 1. It is no new thing, that Kings are jealous of
Christ, when they hear he is a King: They can hardly conceive how his Kingdom
shall not pre-judg their reign, albeit indeed their Kingdom has no such
friend as he is, therefore Herod when he heard, was troubled. 2. Worldly men,
settled in their honors, ease, and wealth, are feared to be troubled about
Christ, and could be contented to sit quiet without him; for all Jerusalem here
is troubled also, more fearing temporal inconveniences, by occasion of Christ's
nativity, then rejoicing in the hope of salvation through him.

Verse. 4. And when he had gathered all the chief priests and Sribes of the
people together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. Herod
dissembleth his fear, and pretends zeal to bring the knowledge of Christ to
light, and to this and he calls an assembly of the church, to enquire what
the Scripture spoke of the place of his nativity; Then which there could not be
any act more plausible to the people, more acceptable unto these strangers, or
a more specious show of religious respect unto Christ. In Herod we have the
portrait of Christ's enemies, he dissembleth like a crafty fox, waiting for the
prey, so do they; He befriendeth the wise men who are seeking Christ, so far as
it may serve for his own ends, so do they. He abuses the churchmen and their
assembly, calls for a meeting of the chief priests and Scribes, proponeth
questions to be solved, as if he minded to make good use thereof: In special,
asking of them where Christ should be born, as if none were readier to serve
him then he, mean time he was seeking to find him out to kill him: so do they.

Ver. 5. And they said unto him, In Beth-lehem of Judea: for thus it is written
by the Prophet;

6. And thou Beth-lehem in the land of Judah, art not the least among the
princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my
people Israel.

The Priests and Scribes of the people assembled, answer the question from
Scripture. ^oct. 1. As it is the duty of the churchmen to assemble readily,
when matters of Religion, and questions concerning Christ are moved in the
church; so they ought to determine questions, according to the Scripture,
without seed or favor: for being conveened, they answer, It is written, in the
text cited by the assembly. Matthew and Micah do agree in substance, That
albeit Beth-lehem was a small city, of no great wealth nor estimation among the
cities of Israel, yet it was not little in effect, but a city of renown;
Because in it was born the Governor of Israel, the King and Captain of the
Lords people, Christ Jesus. Doct. 1. Scripture consists not in letters, or
syllables, but in sense and meaning for in citations of Scripture here and
elsewhere, the Evangelists stand not for words, but rest upon the sense. 2.
The meanness and baseness of any thing whereof Christ makes use, should offend
no man; for He can make a little Beth-lehem the place of his nativity. 3. His
presence dignifieth the place, wheresoever he is, for Beth-lehem, how small
soever, is not the least city, because Christ is born in it. 4. Christ's
special subjects are the Israel of God, and Christ's office is to be a
Governor, a Chieftain, and a Guide to the Elect, governing and feeding them;
for he shall rule my people Israel, for he shall rule them as a pastor, or
shepherd, does the word import. 5. God can make use of his foes for the
furtherance of his own purpose, whatsoever be their intentions; for by the
means of Herod, and the Scribes, who were small friends to Christ, Gods purpose
for clearing of the fulfilling of the prophecy, about the place of Christ's
nativity is brought about. 6. The Lord can so dispose of means for the benefit
of such as are seeking Christ, that if one mean be withholden, another more
profitable shall be furnished; For the wise men, though they want the sight of
a star for a while, which they saw in the East, verse 2. yet first they are led
to Jerusalem, verse 1. and then to the light of the Scripture, in the answer of
the Priests, verse 5, 6. that their faith might be builded on Christ, in the
ordinary and surest way: In particular, God does offer unto them a notable
point of light, in the answer of the Priests and Scribes concerning Christ's
Godhead and Eternity. For in the text cited here by the assembly, Micah 5.2.
it is written, that Christ his going forth is from of old, from everlasting,
which served to teach them, that the Eternalll generation of the Son must
always be remembered, when his being born as a child is spoken of; which could
not but be useful, and comfortable unto them at that time.

Verse 7. Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them
diligently what time the star appeared.

8 And he sent them to Beth-lehem, and said, Go, and search diligently for the
young child, and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come
and worship him also.

Herod goes on to follow his bloody plot against Christ, and under pretense of
a purpose to honor and worship him, he intends to murder him. Doct. In
Herod we see yet more of the ways of the Enemies of Christ. 1. He carries on
his design closely, lest any man should smell his intention, so do they. He
calls the wise men privily, so do they. 2. Though he has learned more of
Christ then before, yet because his knowledge is not sanctified, his malice is
not abated; therefore the love of earthly things sets him on to follow his
design against Christ so much the more eagerly, and so is it with the crafty
politicians of this world. 3. When he has gained one point about the place of
Christ's birth, he goes about to gain another concerning the time of his birth
also, that he may draw so much nearer, for the surprising of Christ: so do
they, haling in the cords of their net by parts. 4. He covers his purpose of
murder, under pretense of a purpose to worship Christ; he professes to have
faith in Christ, and to be of the same mind that the wise men are of, and that
his resolution is out of the same affection with them to worship him; so do
they, drawing near in profession of Religion, that they may more easily betray.
5. To make all fast, he abuses the simplicity of Christ's friends, and thinks
to make them ignorantly to betray Christ into his hands; So do they, Go search
for the child, says he, and bring me word. 6. Mean time as God blind-folded
him in his deepest policy, and suffered not his wicked wit to direct some of
his servants, under pretense of convoying the wise men, to go along with them,
to murder Christ, so does God disappoint Christ's enemies in their deep plots;
for it is easy to God to make fools of his foes, when he pleases. Herod sent
the wise men to search out Christ, but we read of none sent along with them.

Verse. 9. When they had heard the king, they departed, and ^o, the star which
they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where the
young child was.

Ver. 10. When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

The wise men do follow the direction of the Scripture, and go toward
Beth-lehem, having (so far as we read) neither convoy, or encouragement of any
company. Doct. 1. If we love to find Christ, we must resolve to go after him
alone, or in company, either with, or without encouragements from men, as God
shall dispose, 2. God is not inlacking to such as are on the way to seek
Christ; but will renew directions, and encouragements unto them, as they stand
in need; for the star which for a time disappeared, now appears again to
them, for their comfort. 3. What one mean does not reach, God supplieth by
another mean; for the Scripture had told them of Beth-lehem, but had not
descended so low as the particular house; but God supplieth the rest by the
direction of the star, which now goes before them in the way, and stands above
the house where our Lord lay. That this star was none of the ordinary, but made
of purpose for this particular service, appears by the motion of it. 4. These
means which do lead a man most certainly unto Christ, should be the matter of
his special joy: The joy which arises from finding of Christ cannot be
expressed, for it is said, They rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

Verse 11. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child
with Mary his Mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had
opened their tressures, they presented unto him gifts, gold, and frankincense,
and mirrhe. The wise men at length do find Christ, and do not stumble at his
outward infirmities, base lodging, or any other thing; but do worship him as
their God and Savior, consecrating themselves, and all they have to his
service. Doct. 1. Such as seek Christ in truth, shall find him at length. 2.
Such as believe what the Scripture speaks of Christ, will see Christ his
Godhead in his deepest humiliation, and by faith will pierce through all
impediments; therefore was it that they fell down and worshipped the child. 3.
Riches, and wisdom, and honor, and all that we have, ought to be laid down at
Christ's feet, and offered to the service of Christ, as the fountain and owner
thereof; for They opened their treasures, and presented unto him gifts, gold,
and frankincense, and mirrhe.

Verse. 12. And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not return to
Herod, they departed into their own country another way. Now the Lord
discovers Herod's plot and disappointeth him. Doct. 1. Wicked men may keep
their design against Christ close from the knowledge of men, but cannot hide
their counsel from God, he perceives Herod's mind perfectly. 2. The Lord is
watching over the just, and will not suffer their honest simplicity to be so
far abused by the enemy, as ignorantly to betray Christ into his enemies hands,
therefore he forewarnes these wise men that they should not trust Herod, nor to
go toward him any more, but return home another way. 3. Such as believe in
Christ, the longer they follow him, the more confirmations of faith they find;
as here, beside all the former, God gives this revelation also unto these wise
men, and their life also for a prey from the rage of Herod.

Verse. 13. And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord
appeareath to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise and take the young child, and his
mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there, until I bring thee word: for
Herod will seek the young child to destroy him. The wise men are gone, now
Christ is sent away also. Doct. 1. Our Lord was persecuted so soon as he was
known in the world, he is sought to be slain, who came to save men; for Herod
does seek to destroy him. 2. He who is the ancient of days, the everlasting
Father, according to his Godhead, is called a young child, according to his
man-head, as Isai. 9.6. did foretell, for Herod shall seek the young child. 3.
The Lord will have ordinary means used when they may be had: He will save
Christ by flight, and will do no miracle needlessely; therefore Go flee into
Egypt, says the Angel. 4. It is safe to wait for the Lord in all things, and
to attend his providence; Be thou there till I bring thee word, says the Angel
to Joseph.

Verse. 14. When he arose, he took the young child and his Mother by night, and
departed into Egypt. Joseph obeys speedily. Doct. 1. When our direction is
clear, our obedience should be speedy, and without delay, as Joseph being
warned, arises by night, and makes for his journey. 2. When Christ is known,
he will be more dear then any thing else, for as the child is first in Joseph's
commission, verse 12. to take care for him, so in his obedience here the child
is before the Mother; for it is said, He took the child, and his mother. 3. Any
place, if God send us there, if Christ be in our company, is good, even Egypt,
for Joseph departed into Egypt, being sent thither.

Verse. 15. And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called
my son. That we may see how the prophecy is fulfilled, the meaning of the
words of Hosea, is in effect, as if it had been said, O church of Israel, when
thou was in thy infancy, I so loved thee, that I brought thee out of Egypt, as
my adopted Son, and in thee I called out of Egypt my only begotten Son, who as
the promised seed of Abraham, was in thy loins; and as in thy bondage in
Egypt, I intended to fore-shadow and signify the sufferings of my Son, and his
fleeing out of Canaan into Egypt, so also in the calling of thee, my adopted
Son out of Egypt, I intended to fore-shadow and signify the calling of my only
begotten Son out of Egypt, that he should perfect the work of redemption in the
midst of the land promised unto thee; yet notwithstanding of all this, thou
have been unthankful unto me. Thus Christ's going down to Egypt, and bringing
back out of it, is a fulfilling of the Prophecy; and withal, this shows
unto us, that in all the Lords work about Israel, be had a special eye upon
the promised seed, upon the Messiah, who was to come out of that people,
fore-shadowing something of him, or accomplishing something foresignified of him:
Therefore it should not seem strange unto us, that the Evangelists do apply
sundry such speeches of the old Prophets unto Christ, who was mainly aimed at,
and born witness unto in the Law and Prophets.

Ver. 16. Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was
exceeding wrath, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in
Beth-lehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men. Now
Herod finding himself disappointed, bewrays his cruel design against Christ.
Doct. 1. God turns the wisdom of his enemies into folly, Now Herod did find
himself mocked. 2. Wicked heads do take it hardly, if every instrument whom
they employ, and abuse, do not serve their base designs; for Herod is wroth
with the wise men, as if they had mocked him. 3. Enemies of Christ when fraud
does fail them, do fall to open rage; now Herod sends forth to slay Christ, if
he can find him. 4. Satan and his instruments do labor to overthrow such as
are likest unto Christ, if they cannot overtake himself; Therefore Herod
causes to slay all the young children in Beth-lehem, who were nearest in age
unto Christ. 5. Wicked men do not reverence Gods providence in disappointing
their wicked purposes, but are incensed the more to do mischief, as Herod's
course does show here.

Verse. 17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet,
saying.

18. In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because
they are not.

The Evangelist applies to this passage of Gods providence, the words of the
Prophet, Ier. 31.15. Who does foretell, that as the captivity of the ten tribes
had once made the state of Israel, as it were their mo^her, to morn; so should
the calamity of Israel, make that st^^e to mourn again, for the murder of so
many children in and about Beth-lehem; and yet this comfortless sorrow should
be swallowed up by the consolations of Christ come into the world, as may be
seen Ier. 31. comparing verse. 15, 16. with 10, 11, 18, 22. in the last of these
verses, the incarnation of the Messiah is pointed at expressly. Now this
prophecy is here accomplished, Rachel indeed here mourns, and no consolation
can be sufficient to assuage this sorrow, except that consolation only which
comes by the Gospel, and by the incarnation of the Son of God. Doct. 1. It is
a good way for making use of Gods providence, to compare events with the
predictions of Gods word, and to mark where we see accomplishment answerable,
that we may say with the Evangelist, Thus is it fulfilled what the Lord has
spoken. 2. The troubles of the Lords people are foreseen, and weighed in a
balance, and comfort is prapared for them; for the weeping of Rachel is
foretold of the Lord before it come, and consolation is prepared for it in
Christ, as the place in Jeremiah cited gives evidence.

Verse. 19. But when Herod was dead, behold, an Angel of the Lord appears in a
dream to Joseph in Egypt.

20. Saying, Arise and take the young child, and his mother, and go into the
land of Israel, for they are dead which sought the young childs life.

Now Joseph is called back from Egypt. Doct. 1. The Lord does remember his own
in trouble, to comfort them in due season; for so soon as Herod dies, the
Angel carries news. 2. The death of Persecutors is the delivery of the
persecuted, therefore says the Angel, Arise, for he is dead that sought the
Childs life.

Verse. 21. And he arose, and took the the young child, and his mother, and came
into the land of Israel.

22. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea, in the room of his
father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of
God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee.

Joseph is afraid of Archelaus, and is delivered of his fear. Doct. 1. No
wonder the Children of wicked parents be suspected, till their regeneration
appear; therefore Joseph is afraid of Archelaus Herod's Son, that he shall be
father-like, or father-worse. 2. When God will comfort a man, he removes one
doubt as well as another, as this fear is removed by another revelation from
heaven. 3. The Lords warrant and clear direction does quiet the mind; Therefore
Joseph being warned by the Angel, turned aside into Galilee.

Verse. 23. And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene. In
Christ's abode at Nazareth, The Evangelist observes Gods providence, intending
thereby that he should be called a Nazarite, that is, one separate from sinners.
Sundry types of Christ did foresignifie and promise that he should be called
indeed a Nazarite, or one separate, for Joseph is called the Nazarite of his
brethren, or one separate from his brethren, Genesis 29.26. first in regard of the
measure of love which his Father bare unto him; next, he is separate from his
brethren, in regard they sold him unto the Gentiles; and thirdly, he is
separate in Gods providence from his brethren, that he might prepare a place
for them, and preserve the life of his own people: in Joseph was Christ
sore-shadowed, and promised to be such a Nazarite, separate in all these
respects. Again in the typical law of the Nazarite, Numb. 6. it is
foresignified that Christ should be separate from sinners, and dedicate unto
holiness, dead unto the pomp and pleasure of this world: that he should be the
ornament and flower of Religion, and the true pattern of piety to all the
Israel of God. Moreover in the type of Samson it is foresignified, Judge. 13.15.
That Christ should from his birth be a Nazarite unto God; who by his power and
sufferings, should overcome his enemies, and bring delivery to Israel: Now
Christ his dwelling at Nazareth, and his being called a Nazarene from his
dwelling, was a fit mean to call to men's mind the perfections of the Nazarite
in him, and to make them see the accomplishment of the foresaid prophesies in
him: And therefore does the Evangelist mark the providence of God, in directing
his dwelling to be in this little town Nazareth, whereby occasion might be
given to all men, to observe and perceive in Christ, the fulfilling of the
prophecies, which foretold, that he should be really a Nazarite. Doct.
Whenever we hear him called Jesus of Nazareth, let us remember that he is
that true Nazarite, that promised pleasant Plant, that Holy One of Israel,
separate from sinners; the true Deliverer of Israel from their enemies, who
has broken the bars of death, and hell, and by his death has overcome the
devil, and accomplished everything, which in the types were foreshadowed of
him.

CHAP. III.
The Evangelist passes over our Saviors life in private, and i^ts down how
John the Baptist, by his Ministry, as the forerunner of our Lord, does prepare
the way for the receiving of him, to verse. 13. How Christ by him is baptized,
and how Christ is magnified from heaven, in his entry into his public office.

Verse. 1. IN those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of
Judea.
WHile Christ is dwelling at Nazareth in Galilee, at the time appointed of God,
John Baptist is sent forth to preach in the wilderness of Judea, that is, in
the Mure lands, and Hilly country of Judea: John is called the Baptist,
because he was the first that did baptize; her^by distinguishing him from John
the Apostle. Doct. 1. God has set times wherein he will have every thing which
was foretold to come to pass, therefore it is said, In those days; to wit, of
which Isaiah did speak, chap. 40 3. while Christ is dwelling at Nazareth, this
appointed work is done. 2. How basely soever the world count of preaching, yet
is it the only ordinary way to prepare souls for receiving of Christ;
Therefore it is said, John came preaching. 3. It is in Gods choice to send the
preachers of the Gospel, to what place he will, for John is sent to preach in
the wilderness of Judea, and not in Jerusalem.

Verse. 2. And saying, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. The
sum of John's preaching was to move men to repent, because the kingdom of
Gods grace offered in the Gospel, was now ready to receive the penitent. Doct.
1. The Gospel finds men mad, and out of their wits, in an evil way; when it is
sent unto them, they are men who must return to their wits, as the original of
the word repent imports. 2. The end of the preaching of the gospel is to
persuade men unto repentance, for repent is John's main scope. 3. The grace of
God offered in the gospel is in effect the Kingdom of heaven, for it opens the
way unto it, and enters the man not only in the right, but also in the begun
possession of the Kingdom of heaven. 4. There can be no greater allurement to
move a man to change his evil course, and turn unto God, then the offer made
unto the penitent, of the Kingdom of grace and glory through Christ: for this
is the motive which John uses, saying, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is
near. 5. Both ability and exercise of repenting, is brought about by the
preaching and power of the gospel; for to beget both, John is sent to preach
this doctrine, saying, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand.

Verse. 3. For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The
voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight. John's calling and authority to preach, is described to be from
heaven, according to the prophecy past of him, Isay 40.3. Doct. 1. The calling
and authority of a preacher is chiefly to be looked unto, that he take not this
honor to himself, but be called thereto warrantably, for Matthew here shows
the warrant of John his calling out of Isaiah. 2. A called preacher should
labor that the heart of the hearers be prepared for more and more lively
receiving of Christ; for this is John's scope, to prepare the way of the Lord.
3. He should not keep silence, but in open audience discharge his commission
plainly, not in obscure or high terms: fully, keeping back nothing of the
Lords revealed counsel, and boldly, not fearing what flesh can do unto him;
for this much is imported in John's crying voice. 4. He should labor to bring
down the pride of impenitent hearers, and to lift up the dejected soul of such
as in the sense of their sin and unworthines dare not believe; for this is to
make the Lord his paths straight, enjoined by John.

Verse. 4. And the same John had his raiment of camels hair, and a leathern
girdle about his loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey. He shows the
austerity of John's way and manner of living, fitted for his extraordinary
commission. Doct. 1. Such as the Lord does call to the Ministry, he fitteth
them unto the work, and unto the times wherein he does employ them: such
austerity was fit, in a Nazarite, sent forth to waken a world besotted in
security. 2. Ministers in their outward manner of living, should so behave
themselves, as loast exception may be taken against them, and as their work in
their hand may be most advanced; for so did John Baptist.

Verse. 5. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan,

6. And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.

As for the success of John's Ministry, there is no small confluence of the
people unto him. Doct. 1. When the Lord minds to fish souls, he can make
them swim thick about the net of the gospel; for all Judea went out to John's
Baptism. 2. It is not unusual to the Scripture, to take All, for all sorts and
ranks of people, all Judea, and all the Region, for all sorts of people, out of
Judea and the Region about Jordan. 3. Ministers in receiving in of members of
the church, must be content with the profession of repentance and faith, joined
with submission to the ordinances, and not pry in narrowly on their hearts and
consciences, for John did not take auricular or particular confession of sins,
it was impossible, the multitudes coming to baptism being so great, but such as
confessed their sins in general, and desired Baptism, were admitted by him,
and baptized in the river, whether by sprinkling water on them, or dipping
them, the word does not determine, for it is so large as to give room to
either; but that it was sprinkling, is most likely, for thus most conveniently
so great multitudes could be baptized of John confessing their sins.

Verse. 7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his
baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee
from the wrath to come? This is a special Sermon in the peoples audience,
directed by John to the Pharisees, (the most precise sect among the Jews, who
sought to be justified by their works) and to the Sadduces, (the most
licencious sect of the whole, who believed neither resurrection of the body,
nor immortality of the soul) wherein John exhorts them to uprightness, and
bringing forth of good fruits by five reasons: The first is, Ye have been
hitherto wicked vipers, and it is a wonder that ye are fled from wrath,
therefore now bring forth good fruits, verse 7, 8. Doct. 1. How powerful is
the preaching of truth, when the Lord is pleased to bless the same, for here
many even of the Pharisees and Sadduces came to John's Baptism. 2. Such as
profess to believe the word, and to repent of their sins, to submit to Gods
ordinances, cannot be excluded from entering into the society of the church, for
John does not exclude these Pharisees and Sadduces, the worst of men, from
entering into the christian church by Baptism, of whom he could have no more
but profession of faith and repentance. 3. Notorious sinners may and should, in
their receiving into the church, after any pollution by scandal, be put in mind
of their former evil life, that they may be humbled the more, and be more holy
for time to come: for John does not stand to call these Pharisees Generation of
Vipers, which is the name of the worst sort of serpents. 4. It is a rare thing
to see sectaries converted; for John wondereth at their coming, and says, Who
has forewarned you to flee? 5. Wrath does follow on all the wicked, who either
live Belly-gods and Epicures, as the Sadduces; or do seek to be justified by
their own works, as the Pharisees; for who has forewarned you, says he, to
flee from the wrath to come; 6. Coming to Christ and subjection to his
ordinances is the way to eschew wrath: for that here is called Flying from
wrath. 7. When Gods glory, peoples edification, and salvation do require that
public faults should be publicly rebuked, then the credit of the party to be
reproved, is not to be stood upon; for John does not stand in this case, to
brand these too much esteemed sectaries, with the style of Generation of
Vipers, to the end they may be humbled, and the people drawn off the following
of their former erroneous courses.

Ver. 8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance. John having admitted
these Pharisees and Sadduces into the church by Baptism, now he instructs
them as disciples. Doct. 1. The severity of the faithful pastor should be
mixed with love and care, to have men saved; for John so reproves what is
bypast, as he gives them direction for time to come, saying, Bring forth
fruits. 2. Men must not be secluded or suspended too long from the society of
the visible church, but upon their profession of repentance, and faith in
Christ, and subjection unto his ordinances, must be admitted, and then
commanded to prove themselves sincere, by such fruits as may evidence the truth
of their repentance: for so does John, saying, Bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance.

Verse. 9. And think not to say within your selves; We have Abraham to our
father, for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. The second reason: I assure you, least you deceive your
self, that the prerogative of being Abraham's children, will not avail you,
except you be sincere children, careful to do good works, therefore Bring
forth fruits. Doct. 1. Carnal confidences are great impediments unto true
repentance, and must be renounced by such as would be found sincere: Therefore
says John, Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father. 2. Gods promises unto the children of Abraham may be fulfilled, and yet
all such of the children of his flesh, as are profane, may be cut off: for John
says, Think not to say, Abraham is our father. 3. Rather then God should not
perform his promise, he will work miracles, he will convert such as there is no
more hope of, then of stones; for John says, God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham.

Verse. 10. And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore
every tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire. A third reason: If you be barren, or bear ill fruits, you shall be cut
down and perish; Therefore bring forth good fruits. Doct. 1. When the Gospel is
preached, as mercy is offered, so destruction should be most severely
threatened, if use be not made of the Gospel; this is John's way, saying, Now
also is the ax laid to the root of the trees. 2. The preaching of the Gospel of
Gods mercy, requires, of such as embrace the faith, necessarily a holy life
and good fruits. 3. Such as profess to receive the Gospel, and do not study to
bring forth good fruits, shall perish; for it is written, Every tree that
bringetth not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

Verse 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes
after me, is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. A fourth reason: Beside this
outward Baptism of water by me, you must have another Baptism of the Spirit by
Christ: Therefore seek after it, that you may bring forth good fruits; wherein
John abaseth himself, and cries up Christ. Doct. 1. Outward Baptism is indeed
Gods ordinance, yet it is not to be rested on, but a further baptism is to be
sought after; therefore says John, I baptize indeed with water, but, etc. 2.
The more a man be in estimation for his office or gifts, the more need had he
to keep him within his own bounds, in a due distance from Christ, and not to
incroach upon his Masters glory: for so does John here, understanding that some
of the people had too high estimation of him, I baptize you with water, says
he, but he that comes after me is mightier then I. 3. The proper element of
Baptism, is not oil, salt, or spittle, but only water, and no other thing,
therefore John says, I baptize with water. 4. One of the ends of baptism, is
to seal up the covenant of repentance; whereby the party baptized may be
obliged to follow the course of repentance, and may also have the promise of
God, for furnishing grace to repent, sealed unto them also, therefore says
John, I baptize you UNTO REPENTANCE. 5. The more knowledge a man has of
CHRIST, the lower will he abase himself before him, and exalt Christ the
higher, this moves John to say, He that comes after me, is mightier then I,
etc. 6. The most excellent of men are not worthy of the meanest employment of
service to Christ, that is it which John says, Whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear. 7. There is a two fold baptism, one of water poured upon the body by the
Minister, another of the Spirit, poured forth upon a man's soul by Christ, and
these two may be in time distinguished; for John says, I baptize with water,
but he shall baptize with the holy Ghost. 8. Whosoever are baptized inwardly by
the Holy Spirit, are also baptized with fire, that is, by a more penetrative
power and virtue, then what water at first does show; which virtue must go
through the whole man, unto through mortification of sin; that is it which by
way of explanation is imported, when he says, with the holy Ghost and with
fire, taking baptism by fire here, not for any extraordinary gift of miracles,
but for that which is common to the Regenerate.

Verse. 12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
gather his wheat into the garner: but he will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire. A fifth reason: Though now the fruitful, and unfruitful be
joined one with another in the visible church, as chaff and corn are mixed on
the floor, yet Christ will sever the one from the other, and will take the
Fruitful to Heaven, and will cast the unfruitful in hell. Therefore Bring
forth good fruits. Doct. 1. The visible church is like a corn floor, wherein
good and bad, as chaff and corn are mixed together, for so does the comparison
import. 2. Christ as the perfect Husband man will so sever the one from the
other, that not one of the wicked shall be in company of the Godly; for, He
will thoroughly purge his floor. 3. Christ has means at hand to make the
separation: he has his word, and church censures, and afflictions, and trials,
by persecution, and death, and the day of judgment, when he shall fully perfect
the separation; for his Fan in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
floor. 4. The upright and Fruitful shall be gathered unto heaven, the
unfruitful as chaff e cast in hell, not one of the Godly shall perish, not one
of the wicked shall escape perdition, for he will gather his wheat, and burn
the chaff.

Ver. 13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be baptized of
him. The second part of the chapter concerning Christ's baptism, wherein first
we mark a providence of Christ's education, in another part of the country then
John Baptist lived in; where John's commission to baptize in the name of Jesus
appears to be divine so much the more, that our Lord and he had never seen
one another in the face before now, not till now Christ comes from Galilee to
Jordan. 2. Our Lord was pleased to be baptized for his own reasons; namely,
that he might countenance and bless his ordinance unto us, as he did
circumcision unto the Jews, and that he might present himself among sinners as
our surety, and offer himself to the father to be baptized with the baptism of
affliction for our ransom.

Ver. 14. But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me? This offer of Christ to be baptized astonished John so far, as
he forbade Christ to be baptized, in regard he knew Christ needed not baptism.
Doct. 1. The clearest sighted of Gods Servants do not see the deep of the Lords
work, till he reveal it; therefore was it that at first John refused to baptize
Christ. 2. Albeit it be sufficient to be once baptized outwardly, yet baptism
of the spirit must be renewed frequently: for John already endued with the holy
spirit in an eminent measure, says; I have need to be baptized, that is, yet
again to receive a larger measure of this baptism: yea the more of this grace
is bestowed upon any man, the more is he sensible of his need, and desirous of
a further measure of it, for none more holy then John, and none more desirous
to be more holy then John, I have need to be baptized, says he. 3. Christ is
the despenser of the Inward baptism of the spirit, I have need, (says John) to
be baptized of thee. 4. When Christ's excellency, and his low dismission of
himself are compared, it is a wonderful thing to the beholder; therefore
says John by way of wondering, Come thou to me?

Verse. 15. And Jesus answering, said unto him, suffer it to be so now, for thus
it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him. Christ will
have John to consider the time of his Lords humiliation, and what belonged to
them both in regard of their office. Doct. 1. Some things were necessary to be
done by Christ in the time of his humiliation, which otherwise was unbeseeming
the dignity of his person; Therefore, says Christ, suffer it be so now. 2. It
is a thing both right and comely for each man to do what his calling requires;
for, It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, says Christ. 3. When the
Lord makes his will clear unto us, we should renounce our will, and follow his,
whatsoever blind zeal, or carnal humility shall speak to the contrary; for when
John was informed of Christ's mind, then he suffered him.

Verse 16. And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the
water: and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a dove, and lighting upon him. As Baptism was the figure of
death unto Christ, so his speedy coming upon dry land, did fitly foreshadow,
that he could not be holden long of death, Therefore it is marked, That
straight way he went up out of the water. Now after his Baptism, three wonders
do appear: The first, a vision of the opening of the Heavens toward Christ,
and to him, to show, that as he came down from Heaven, so he should return unto
it, and that Heaven closed against us is made open through him unto these for
whom he presented himself upon Baptism: The next wonder is, The Spirit of God
descended like a dove, and lighted unto him, by this visible sign of his
presence, showing, that Christ is that meek and gentle One, that innocent and
harmless One, that most loving and lovely dove, in whom the Holy Spirit has
his constant residence; in and through whom alone, we are to receive of the
gifts of the Spirit, and out of his fullness grace for grace: of this wonder it
is said, that he, meaning John Baptist, saw this, to wit, in a more special
manner, then the rest of the multitude: for this was the sign promised unto
John, John 1, 31, 32, 33. whereby he should be certified of the person of the
true Messiah.

Ver. 17. And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased. Now follows the third wonder, unto the observation whereof we
are stirred up by a new Lo, or Behold; for we are dull to conceive heavenly
things. 2. Beause we cannot conceive what the Lord does, except he declare his
mind by his word, A voice speaks from Heaven. 3. Of this man, now baptized,
and demonstrated by the glory of the opened Heaven shining on him, and by the
residence of the holy Ghost upon him, in the similitude of a dove, the Father
says, This is my Son, to wit, my Son, properly so called, my native and only
begotten Son by eternal Generation: This is he who from all eternity was with
God the Father, and was God, John. 1. 1. and who, Heb. 1, 2, 3. is called, The
brightness of the Fathers glory, and the express image of his person. 4. The
Father testifies of this person, that he is his beloved Son, beloved in a
singular way, as his Native Son; Beloved for himself and for his proper worth,
being God and Man in one person. 5. God loves Christ, and is well pleased with
him, as he stands in our room; for as he stood now in his office of the
Mediator and surety for us, offering himself for us unto death in Baptism, the
Father was well pleased and satisfied with him, as with a perfect ransom for
our redemption; beside or above which he craved no more, but rested so fully
contented with the Son, and with all these in whose name he did offer himself,
that he made open proclamation of it from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased: The demonstrative particle in the original
twice repeated, imports as much, as he is that Son, that beloved One by way
of Excellency, to wit, that Son spoken of in Paradise, shadowed forth in the
sacrifices and other figures of the Law, prophesied of by the Prophets, and
declared by them to be Jehovah our righteousness, and waited for by all the
Faithful before his coming, as the consolation of Israel, namely the
consolation of such as were baptized by John for salvation in him: and thus we
have the glorious mystery of the Trinity most clearly revealed: for the
eternal Father, the first Person, by a voice from heaven speaks of his
eternal Son now incarnate, the second Person; and the Spirit of God the third
Person, proceeding from the Father and the, Son, descends in the similitude
of a Dove, all three thus distinguished, remaining One infinite and undivided,
God blessed for ever, Amen. By this also we have the covenant of Redemption
laid open to us, for The Son incarnate offers here himself Redeemer, and
suerty for the Elect, to be baptized unto death, The Father accepts the
offer, and declares himself well pleased in him; and so it rests, that we
(being unable to pay our debts by our selves, or to do any thing of ourselves,
which may please God, or profit our souls) betake our selves unto Christ, who
is surety for all those who come unto him.

CHAP. IIII.
Our Lord prepares himself for his public Ministry by a conflict with Satan:
to verse. 12. Then returning unto Galilee, he takes up his dwelling at
Capernaum, and preaches the Gospel verse. 17. calls four Apostles, verse. 23.
and manifests his power in the miraculous manner of relieving all sort of
miserable persons.

Verse. 1. THen was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of the devil.
AFter that our Lord is baptized, and publicly installed in his office, he is
moved by the spirit, to enter the lifts with Satan and his temptations. Doct 1.
The experience of temptations is a fit preparation for a profitable discharge
of the holy Ministry, for this exercise was a sitting of Christ unto his
office. 2. All men are subject to temptations, and no man needs to be
discouraged for them: for even Christ our Lord was tempted, and that to the end
he might conquer Satan, who had overcome us, and might give us also the victory
over him, and comfort in all our temptations, while we behold the power of
holiness in him, who neither had sin in him, nor could be drawn by temptation
unto sin. 3. Whatsoever exercise we go about, especially where hazard and
danger appears, we should be sure to have warrant for our engaging: for even
Christ went not into the wilderness to be tempted, but as he was led of the
holy spirit, dy^ing unto him what belonged unto his calling.

Ver. 2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward
an hungered. In every part of our Lords humiliation, he lets out some spark of
his Godhead, that when he is seen to be Man, he may be known to be God also,
he will fast, and uphold himself without meat or drink forty days and forty
nights, not only to fulfill what the type of Moses, and Elias their fasting did
foreshadow of him, but also as the Son of God, to show forth his divine power,
able to sustain the humane nature under every burden which the Father should
lay upon it. 2. Whatsoever power it pleased our Lord to put forth in his humane
nature, yet did he not abolish the verity thereof, but did keep unto it all the
natural properties; and in the time of his humiliation did subject it also to
all common, and sinlesse humane infirmities: Therefore having so miraculously
sustained himself so long a time, He afterward, was an hungered.

Verse. 3. And when the tempter came to him, be said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread. The temptations and assaults of Satan
are three; The first to provide for his bodily wants by an unlawful mean, for
to work a miracle at Satan's direction, was not a lawful mean of providing food
to himself. Doct. 1. No wonder men find themselves daily solicited by Satan
unto sin; For Satan's style, from his continual practice, is the Tempter, and
it is his trade to tempt. 2. It is possible that such as God does love dearly
may be troubled with bodily apparitions of Satan; for the Tempter is permitted
to appear to Christ himself, and to speak to him. 3. It is no wonder to find
Satan calling in question the Adoption or Regeneration of any of Gods children,
for he dare call in question the Sonship of the Son of God, notwithstanding
that within few days before this, the Father and the Holy Spirit from heaven
had born witness in open sight and audience unto it, If thou be the Son of
GOD, says he. 4. Satan sits his temptations unto men's present case and
condition; for, Christ being hungry is tempted to provide bread, in a way which
the tempter does prescribe. 5. In tempting, Satan pretends to be careful of
helping the tempted party to a better condition; for here he will seem desirous
both to have bread provided for Christ in his need, and also to see him made
manifest to be the Son of God by such a miracle; for he says, If thou be the
Son of God, command these stones to be made bread. 6. Satan's temptations are
more then once, a number linked together, for here he tempts first to misbeleeve
the word of God lately spoken of him: then to suspect and doubt of his Fathers
provident care over him; Thirdly to provide for himself by indirect means;
Fourthly, to abuse his, power of working miracles, in taking directions from
Satan, and committing such like other sins.

Ver. 4. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Our Lord
answers this temptation by Scripture. Doct. 1. Satan's temptations must not be
neglected, but carefully answered, and that by Scripture, as the only mean to
overcome him; for, It is written, says Christ. 2. Howsoever God has appointed
means of entertaining men's life, yet the power of sustaining life is not in the
means, but in Gods powerful word, or commanded blessing, conveyed by means, or
without means, as he pleases; for, Man lives not by bread only, but by every
word that comes out of his mouth. 3. Seeing means of life, albeit we had them,
cannot avail us, except God give his blessing, we should attempt nothing about
them without Gods warrant; for else we do offend God, and provoke him to
withdraw his blessing; this is the reason why Christ rejects the temptation,
by this Scripture, saying, Man lives not by bread, etc.

Ver. 5. Then the devil takes him up into the holy city, and sets him on a
pinnacle of the temple,

6. And says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it
is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands
they shall bear thee up, least at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

The first temptation being rejected by Scripture, Satan makes a new assault,
and pretends Scripture in his second temptation. Doct. 1. Albeit Satan get
the foil, yet he will set on again. 2. God may give Satan so far power over the
body of one whom he loves dearly, as to carry it out of one place to another,
for Satan is permitted to transport Christ's body from the wilderness to the
city, and to lift it up, upon a pinnacle of the Temple. 3. Satan's power in this
kind is limited, so as he cannot hurt, nor molest further, then he is limited:
He may lift up Christ's body on a pinnacle of the Temple, but he has no power to
cast him down. 4. Where the ordinances of God are, and where he promises his
Presence, that Place and that Society, is to be accounted holy, albeit many of
the People in that Place and Society be defiled. Jerusalem, though defiled now
exceedingly, yet retains the name of the holy city. 5. Satan will readily
press the same point by sundry means, and crave unreasonable proofs of a man's
adoption one after another: for the second time he says, If thou be the Son of
God. 6. As Satan tempts at one time to use unlawful means to preserve life,
so at another time he will tempt a man to neglect means of preserving life: at
one time he will tempt us to distrust Gods care of our preservation, at another
time to presume upon Gods care, without a warrant; yea sometime he will tempt a
man to put hand in his own life, and will color it with some pretense; for,
Cast thy self down, etc says he. 7. Satan can transform himself into an
Angel of light, and pretend Scripture for his temptation, It is written, says
he. 8. When Satan cites Scriptures, he wrests the meaning, or hides the word
which might show the meaning; for Psalm 92.11, 12. It is said, The Lord shall
keep thee in all thy ways, that is, in thy warrantable walking: Satan keeps up
these words.

Ver. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God. Christ answers the second temptation by Scripture also. Doct.
1. We must not esteem the less of Scripture, albeit Satan, and his instruments
do abuse it; but with the same weapons must we fight against Satan still, and
oppose a clear place of Scripture unto such places as the Tempter blows mist
upon; for, It is written again, says our Lord. 2. We should not desire God to
give any extraordinary proofs of his care toward us, when he has after an
ordinary manner provided means for our safety; neither should we limit the Lord
in any thing: for this is the meaning of Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.
3. What the Scripture speaks indifferently to all, it is to be esteemed as
spoken to every singular person, and the singular persons are to be accounted
as written in the writing of the generall^ for upon this ground, Christ says,
It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Because Deuteronomy. 6.16. it is
written, Ye shall not tempt your God. 4. Christ as our surety did subject
himself unto the law, and therefore he does apply the prcepts to himself no
less then to us; for he says of himself, Thou shall not tempt the Lord.

Ver. 8. Again, the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
shows him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.

9. And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, If thou will fall
down and worship me.

This is the third temptation whereunto Satan does make way, by showing the
glory of the Kingdoms of the World, from a high mountain, whence many Towns,
Castles, and fruitful Fields might be seen, as the compend and example of all
the kingdoms of the world, which have nothing in them, but a greater quantity
of what may be seen in one place of one Kingdom. Doct. 1. Satan will not give
over the conflict, till he have made trial of all sorts of temptations; after
the former essays, Satan will now tempt Christ with the offer of gain and
glory, All these, says he, will I give thee. 2. Satan labors to have a man in
love with the bait of Riches and Honor, ere he utter a temptation, and to have
the bait speaking ere the temptation speak: for before he speaks to Christ, He
shows him all the Kingdoms of the world. 3. Satan will make fair offers of
what he cannot perform; for the says, All these things will I give to thee. 4.
The children of God may be tempted with the vilest and most blasphemous
suggestions that Satan can devise: for this unclean Spirit dare tempt the Son
of God to the vilest idolatry, and dare say to Christ, fall down and worship
me. 5. When Satan minds to make a man a slave to sin, and to ruin him for
ever, he will crave but one act of sin as a very small thing, and that under
hope of great advantage: therefore he says, All these things will I give thee
if thou will fall down and worship me, or kneel to me.

Verse 10. Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan: for it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

The Lord abhorring the blasphemy of the proud and unclean Spirit, rebukes
him, and answers the temptation by Scripture. Doct. 1. A bold temptation
should have a peremptory answer, and that confirmed by Scripture, as here, Get
thee hence, etc. says Christ. 2. As well religious service, as religious
worship is due to God only: God will not permit either of them to be given to
Saint or Angel, or any creature; for him only shall thou serve 3. Whatsoever is
the true sense and intent of any passage of Scripture, it is to be accounted
of, as if it were expressly written; for, because Deuteronomy. 6.13. it is said, Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him: Christ says, it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and serve him only.

Ver. 11. Then the devil leaves him, and behold, angels came and ministered
unto him. Thus our Lord has overcome Satan in our name, and shown to us the
way how to fight against, and overcome the Adversary. Doct. 1. Satan being
resisted does flee; for it is written here, Then the devil leaves him. 2. The
grief and vexation which comes by temptation, shall be recompensed with
consolation, after the conflict and victory; for, Angels do come and minister
unto Christ, after his combat

Ver. 12. Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed
into Galilee. Upon the hearing of John Baptists imprisonment, Christ goes unto
Galilee. Doct. 1. Faithful Ministers must resolve for persecution; for, John
Baptist is cast in prison. 2. All Preachers of the Gospel are not imprisoned at
once; for when John is in prison, Christ is free. 3. Persecution of the
Ministers of the Gospel, is a forerunner of Christ's departing from a land; for
when word came of John's imprisonment, Christ departed from Judea, and went into
Galilee.

Ver. 13. And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon
the seacoast, in the borders of Zabulon and Naphthali:

14. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, saying,

15. The land of Zabulon, and the land of Naphthali, by the way of the sea,
beyond Jordan, Gal^lee of the Gentiles.

16. The people which sat in darkness, saw great light, and to them which sat
in the region and shadow if death, light is sprung up.

Christ being now come into Galilee, flees from Nazareth to Capernaum. Doct.
1. Christ will not be tied unto any place, though he be brought up at Nazareth,
he will leave it for his own reasons, and come, and dwell at Capernaum. 2. Our
Lord in all things had respect to Scripture, to fulfill what was foretold in
it: Even this change of place was made, that the Prophecy of Esaiah might be
fulfilled by this means: In which prophecy, to comfort the church against the
desolation to be made in the land by the enemy, Isaiah does foretell that in
that part of the country where the desolation began, that is, in the land of
Zabulon and Nephthali, there Christ should begin the consolation of the church,
in preaching of the gospel; and now our Lord performs this. 3. The people
that lie in their sins, without the saving knowledge of the gospel, are indeed
in great darkness, and under the power of death. 4. Whatsoever sin or misery
people be under, the preaching of the gospel is able to relieve them; therefore
it is called, A great light, A light sprung up to them, when Christ preaches
the gospel among them.

Verse. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. Christ had preached before in the time of John's
freedom, and made mo^ disciples then he, John 3.26. but now he begins in this
country side, and shows himself more powerful then before. Doctr. 1. When his
gospel is opposed, and his servants persecuted, he can let forth his light and
power so much the more, and can supply the inlack of instruments; therefore it
is said, From that time he began to preach. 2. Christ's doctrine, and the
doctrine of his faithful servants, is all one in substance; the sum of John
Baptists preaching and Christ's is all one, for both preached in substance,
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. 3. When the gospel comes, it
finds men under the tyranny of Satan; for the offer to bring them in into the
kingdom of God, imports this.

Verse. 18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, (for they
were fishers)

19. And he says unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.

20. And they straight way left their nets, and followed him.

21. And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of
Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending
their nets, and he called them;

22. And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him.

Christ calls Apostles, first two, then other two Brethren. Doct. 1. In the
calling of these Apostles may be seen the care which our Lord has to provide
Ministers for his church. 2. None should intrude himself into the Office, but
should expect Christ's calling, as these Disciples did. 3. Such as Christ does
call, he does furnish them with all furniture for the calling and promises
unto them good success; for, I will make you fishers of men, says he. 4. Such
as are called to the Ministry, must neither refuse pains nor peril to save
souls, but must go about their work with as great desire to convert men, and as
great prudence to bring them in, as fishers go about their work; for, I will
make you fishers of men. 5. When Christ does call his chosen instruments, he
calls them with power of persuasion, and overpowers all opposition and
impediments; for, Straightway they leave their nets, and follow him. 6. His
calling of them by Couples, and those also Brethren, gives us to understand,
that the work of the Ministry requires the concurrence of more hands, and no
less affection among them, then among Brethren. 7. His calling of so mean men
as fishers, shows the freedom of his grace in choosing of instruments;
manifests the power of his kingdom, who by such weak means can subdue the
world; and declares the depth of his wisdom, who provides so for his own
honor, that the instrument shall not carry away the glory of the work.

Verse. 23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness, and
all manner of disease among the people.

24. And his fame went thoughout all Syria: and tey brought unto him all sick
people that were taken with diverse diseases, and torments, and those which were
possessed with divets, and those which were lunatic, and those that had a
palsy, and he healed them.

25. And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from
Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Iude^, and from beyond Jordan.

Here is the diligence of our Lord in his office, with the great power of his
Godhead manifesting it self. Doct. 1. How painful should Ministers be, in
seeking out lost sheep within their bounds, when they hear that Christ went
about all Galilee* 2. The means of conversion of souls is the preaching of the
Gospel, however men esteem of it; for, He went about teaching and preaching. 3.
The special opportunity of preaching is, when people are conveened in the
ordinary place appointed for religious exercises; for, Christ preached in their
Synagogues, 4. The Gospel is a matter of highest concernment, It is the Gospel
of the kingdom, of that incomparable kingdom of heaven, which by the gospel is
revealed to men, and offered unto men, by which gospel men get right and title
unto the kingdom, yea heirs of the Kingdom, and whereby men are governed and
led on unto the full possession of the Kingdom. 5. Albeit our LORDS doctrine
needed no confirmation, because it is the Truth of the everliving GOD, yet our
weak faith needs confirmation, therefore Christ strengthens the weak faith
of such, as at first did not perceive Christ to be the Son of GOD, he was
graciously pleased to let forth the evidence of his Godhead, sovereign power
and goodness, in working miracles, and those all profitable miracles; such as
might lead men to seek the relief of the maladies of the soul, from him, who
was healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases among the
people. 6. The first report of Christ's grace is very taking: the savor of his
grace, as of precious ointment, did in the beginning of his preaching of the
gospel affect the gentiles, and drew them to seek after him; for, his fame went
through all Syria. 7. Such as find need of Christ's help, and do believe to be
relieved by him, will spare no pains, but seek him where they may find him;
for, there followed him great multitudes. 8. When it pleases our Lord to let
forth his power, he can gather multitudes after him, and make up his church out
of all sorts of people, from all places, as he pleases; for, They follow him
from Galilee, from Decapolis, etc.

CHAP. V.
Christ his Sermon on the mount is set down in this, and the two chapters
following: In this our Lord gives evident marks of the blessedness of
faithful disciples, to verse. 12. he instructs the Apostles in their duty, to
17. and exponeth the law otherwise then the Pharisees did.

Verse. 1. ANd seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountains and when he
was set, his disciples came unto him.

2. And he opened his mouth and saught them, saying.


IN these two verses is set down, how Christ fitted himself, and the auditors
for the Sermon. Doct. 1. The Lord has respect to the multitudes, and p^^ieth
their misery: This is the seeing of the multitude with the eye of compassion,
here spoken of. 2. He judges their souls to stand in more need of healing
then their bodies, Therefore he opens his mouth and teaches them. 3. There
are great ods between the fiery promulgation of the law on mount Sinai, unto
which none might approach, and Christ's preaching of the Gospel; for, Christ
went up into a mountain, in a homely manner, and sat down, and gathered his
disciples about him, and when he was set, he taught.

Ver. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
These speeches following, do not declare wherein blessedness does consist, but
do show the marks of the Man, who albeit by faith in Jesus, he indeed is
blessed, yet possibly for some mist or cloud of temptation, he cannot perceive
himself to be blessed for the present. The marks are made in number eight: The
first mark of a true Disciple of Christ, is Poverty of Spirit, whereby a poor
beggarly soul in his own estimation, sensible both of his own sinfulness, and
inlack of Knowledge, Faith, Love, and other saving Graces, does in the sense of
his wants follow after Christ to be helped. Doct. 1. Every man who in the sense
of his own wants and poverty, is made to beg at the throne of Grace, verily
is blessed, whatsoever be the sense he has of his own unworthiness and misery;
for Christ of such does pronounce, Blessed are the poor in Spirit. 2. Whosoever
are poor in spirit, seeking after Christ in the sense of their own indigence,
have right and title unto the riches of grace and glory; albeit they be poor
and beggarly in their own feeling, yet are they rich in Christ's estimatoin; for
of such Christ says, Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, unto them
belongs eternal life.

Verse 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. The next
mark of true Disciples, is godly sorrow, which makes a man in all sort of
grief to power out himself unto God in Christ, and to seek relief from him.
Doct. 1. Whosoever do follow after Christ, mourning in the sense of sin, or
fear of wrath, howsoever they may seem miserable in their own, or the worlds
eyes, yet are they verily blessed; for of such Christ says, Blessed are they
that mourn. 2. Such mourners may be destitute for a time of comfort, but at no
time can they be destitute of blessedness; for even in the time when they are
mourning, and do want comfort, it is said of them, They are blessed. 3. Albeit
their comfort be delayed for a time, yet it shall not always be with holden;
for the word of consolation is he^e spoken unto them, which they in due time
shall find applied, and verified unto them by Gods Spirit; for it is said, They
shall be comforted; and this shall be partly by being made to see satisfactory
reasons of Gods delaying to comfort them; partly by receiving now and then,
real deliveries, and sensible outgates of their mournful condition; and
partly by being supported with strength in the inner man, at all times, that
they succumb not, till at last they be fully delivered for ever; for, They
shall be comforted, says the Lord.

Verse. 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. The third
mark of true Disciples of Christ, is Meekness, which is a grace of God,
whereby Christ's followers are so nurtured, and tamed by the Spirit of God, in
the sense of their own sins, and wrongs done to God, that they do without
fretting, submit themselves to Gods corrections, whither mediately by the
wickedness of men, or immediately in his providence falling on them. Doct. 1.
Whosoever do put a right construction upon Gods dealing with them, how hard
soever their case be, certainly are blessed; for of such Christ says, Blessed
are the meek. 2. A man endued with Christian meekness is master of as much in
the world, as he stande^h in need of; that is to say, How little portion soever
he may seem to have of the earth, and so much the less possibly, because of
his meek disposition and averseness from ungodly strife; yet has he right to
all that he has need of in this earth, through Christ, yea he shall have the
use of all he has need of in this earth, so as he shall be content with his
lot, and that which he possesses shall be joined with the rich blessing of
God, poured out upon it; and last of all, he shall inherit that new Heaven, and
that new earth wherein dwells righteousness, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.2 Pet. 3.13.
For so much does the promise import, They shall inherit the Earth.

Ver. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be filled. The fourth mark of true Disciples, is hunger and thirst
for righteousness, such hungry souls are they, who in the sense of their
sinfulness, and want of all inherent righteousness, do heartily hunger to be
more and more certified of the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and do
thirst to draw sap and life from him: for the changing their sinful nature,
and making them more holy and righteous by his Spirit. Doct. 1. Such as are
heartily desirous to be justified and sanctified through Christ, they are
blessed; for of such Christ prononnceth, Blessed are they who hunger and thirst
for righteousness. 2. Kindly hunger after the righteousness of God in Christ
shall be satisfied: albeit for the present such souls as do feel this hunger,
be pained, yet they shall have all that they desire in Gods own time, the word
of the Lord shall be made milk, honey, bread and marrow unto them, a Well of
living Water shall spring up from the Holy Spirit unto them: now and then they
shall have so large a meal, and so full satisfaction, as they shall be forced
to say, Enough, O LORD: and at length shall be put in full, and sensible
possession of all; for it is written, They shall be satisfied.

Verse 7. Blessed are the mer^ifull, for they shall obtain mercy. The fifth
mark of true Disciples, is mercifulness, whereby Christians have such a holy
compassion of the miseries of other men's bodies and souls, as does make them
actually to do them good, as they are called unto their relief. Doct. 1. The
outletting of bowels of compassion to others, who are lying under the burden of
sin and misery, is the sure evidence of a blessed man; for Christ of such does
say, Blessed are the merciful. 2. The Christian his showing of mercy un^o
others, is a fo^erunner of the renewed, and fresh sense of Gods mercy to
himself, for this is imported in the proof of such men's blessedness; for, they
shall find mercy: now certain it is, that such men have already obtained mercy,
else they could not be merciful, else they could not be blessed; but it is
possible that they do not feel mercy, but rather for the present feel sad w^ath
to their estimation, yet the promise is, They shall find mercy to their own
discerning sensibly. 3. When God makes his children find the fruits of their
mercifulness, it does not puff them up, as if they merited or deserved it, for
it is not said here, they shall merit, but They shall find mercy.

Verse 8. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. The sixth mark
of true Disciples, is purity of heart, whereby Christians study not only to
eschew sin, and to have a blameless conversation before men; but also to be
holy in their mind, in their designs, and affections, before God. Doct. 1.
Albeit believers in Christ do find sensibly much pollution in themselves, yet
if their heart love it not; if when they come short in duties, their heart is
grieved for it; if the honest endeavor, and study of their heart be, that they
may be pure and holy, they are notwithstanding of this felt sinfulness, truly
blessed; for, Blessed, says our Lord, are the clean or pure in heart. 2.
Holiness and purity of heart is a preparative for sensible communion with God;
for it is promised they shall see God; that is, their eyes shall be opened to
behold by faith the invisible God; the Lord shall make them to discern the
mysteries of salvation hid from the world; he shall make them to observe the
work of his providence in justice, mercy, goodness, and power in the world
about them; and withail to perceive loving kindness toward themselves, and at
length they shall see God face to face perfectly, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ver. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of
God. The seventh mark of true Disciples, is peaceableness, whereby Christians
study not only to live peacebly with all men, but also to procure peace among
Men, where they live, so far as in them lies. Doct. 1. Whosoever do without
wronging of truth, in love to other men's welfare, study to make solid peace,
wheresoever they have power, are truly blessed; for, Blessed are the
Peacemakers. 2. They who give evidence of their christian disposition both to
maintain, and to procure true peace among those with whom they live, should be
esteemed true christians, begotten of God; for, they shall be called Gods
children; That is, by this mark they are declared of God, and should be by men
acknowledged for truly regenerate persons, in whom the image of God is to be
seen shining in their works.

Ver. 10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. The eighth mark of a true Disciple, is
suffering persecution for righteousness sake. Doct. 1. Whosoever in following
of Christ are troubled and persecuted by men, for doing that which God
allows, and do choose rather to suffer affliction, then to commit sin, are
indeed blessed: for, Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake. 2. Let persecuters do their utmost to rob the godly of all that they
have, yet they cannot rob them of Heaven, for it is said, the Kingdom of heaven
is theirs: that is, albeit they were banished out of their native country, and
utterly spoiled, yea killed, yet Heaven belongs unto them by Christ's conquest,
and by Gods promise, and it shall certainly be given to them, for making up all
their losses.

Verse 11. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. This last Doctrine
our Lord applies unto his new chosen Apostles, intimating unto them, that they
were to be hunted after, and persecuted by men, as a prey is hunted by dogs
unto death. Doct. 1. Reviling or speaking any manner of evil against Christ's
servants, is in our Lords estimation, persecution, for so does he expound it,
saying, When men revile you, and persecute you. 2. Christians must beware to
give just ground for troubling of themselves, for that is not persecution, when
ill is spoken against men truly and justly, but when ill is spoken against them
fasly, and for Christ's cause; Therefore Christ says, Blessed are ye, when they
speak ill of you falsely for my sake. 3. Notwithstanding of whatsoever
persecution, the troubled and persecuted servant of Christ does still remain
blessed; for, Blessed are ye when men persecute you.

Ver. 12. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven:
for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. This commandment is
added for a further consolation. Doct. 1. Our Lord will not be content that his
servants in persecution, do carry themselves heavily, thus and so as may be,
but will have them to bear the cross joyfully; he will not have the courage
or comfort, or countenance of his children beaten down, while they bear his
glorious cross, but he will have them cheerful; for, Rejoice and be exceeding
glad, says he. 2. Albeit this their suffering cannot merit any thing, yet
shall it be rewarded graciously; Great is your reward, says our Lord. 3.
Whatsoever consolation God does give to his suffering Servants here in this
world, which indeed is not small (for they have more peace and joy in
themselves from God, and more estimation among the Saints, then all their
trouble is worthy) yet he will not reckon this for a reward, till he have them
up in heaven; for he has said, for, Great is your reward in Heaven. 4. The
light affliction of this life cannot be compared with that which shall be given
in heaven; therefore he says, Great is your reward. 5. Whosoever indureth any
trouble, were it but so much as evil words for Christ's cause, he shall be
enrolled among the Martyrs and holy Prophets, who from the beginning of the
world have suffered for righteousness; this is our Lords reckoning, saying,
For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

Verse. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. Our Lord having armed his
Apostles against persecution, now he teaches them their duty, and that under
diverse similitudes: and first of Salt. Doct. 1. Ministers have need to have
their duties told them, no less then other people; therefore Christ speaks
to them, saying, YE, that is, Ye my Apostles and Ministers are the Salt of the
earth. 2. As Salt seasoneth, makes savoury, and does preserve from
putrefaction that which otherwise would be unsavory and ready to rot, except
it were salted; so Ministers should not only be filled with Grace and Wisdom
for their own preservation, but also labor by the word preached, by
admonition, by discipline, by a holy manner of conversing among the people, and
by all other means to season earthly men, and make them become savoury to God,
and one to another; therefore it is said, Ye are the salt of the earth. 3. If a
Minister either labor not to have graces and induements for his employment, or
having them, studieth not to be faithful in his Ministry, that he may season
his Heare^s by the power of the Gospel, or if having for a time given a show of
something, do he cease and fall from the faithful employment of his Gifts,
then is he of all men the most us^lesse and u^profitable, both to others and to
himself, of all men the most loathsome, and intolerable burden of the people of
God; most worthy to be despised of God and men, and least of all men to be
suffered to bear office and charge in the church of God: for so much impo^teth
our Lords speech, comparing him to unsavour^ salt, which has lost his savor,
and cannot recover it again, and which is good for nothing, but to be cast out,
and trodden under for of men.

Ver. 14. Ye are the light of the world, a city that is set on a hill, cannot
be hid. He shows the Ministers duty in another similitude of light. Doct. 1.
It is true the original light and fountain of all Light, who illuminateth
every one that comes into the world, is Christ our Lord himself, yet the
Ministers are called, The light of the world also, as instruments to hold out
the light, because their office is to preach Jesus Christ, who is the true
light, through whom alone delivery from the dark condition of sin and misery,
that is, true righteousness and salvation is to be gotten: and because their
manner of preaching, and holy conversation should direct men how to exercise
their faith on Jesus Christ, and how to draw virtue from him, for their
consolation, and sanctification; therefore it is said, Ye are the light of the
world. 2. Except God erect a ministry among men, and indue his servants with
gifts and graces, and make them faithful to do their duty, the world shall
lie in the darkness of ignorance and error of sin and misery, going on to
perdition; and except Ministers endeavor to have the World illuminate, by
holding forth the true knowledge of Christ, they cannot be free of the worlds
perishing, nor answerable to this their duty, for to them it is said, Ye are
the light of the world. 3. He tells them of the dignity of their calling, and
duty therein, by another similitude, teaching us, that as a city set on a hill
cannot be hid, being set there, to the intent it might be seen afar off; so
Ministers of the Gospel, for the eminency of their calling, and the necessity
of their duty cannot be, nor may be hid, but must show forth that light to the
world; and they cannot choose, but have their doctrine and diligence in their
calling, their manner of life and conversation, and whole carriage better and
worse, laid open to the view and observation of all men, for they are compared
here to a city set on a hill, which cannot be hid.

Verse. 15. Neither do men light a candle; and put it under a bushel: but on a
candlestick, and it gives light unto all that are in the house. By another
similitude he presses the Apostles, and in them all his Ministers to propagate
the Gospel. Doct. 1. As men do not light a candle, that they may make it
useless, by hiding it under a covert, but use to hold it forth, that all the
house may see it, and have the benefit of the light thereof; So God does not
give unto any man a gift to understand the mysteries of the gospel, and to
utter the same, with a calling so high and honorable, as to preach his name,
that they should keep close their gift within their breast, or within their own
doors, but that they should communicate their gifts in an orderly way to all
the church, or House of God; and therefore, as they would be answerable to Gods
design, they must study to illuminate the World, and the church, by holding
forth of the Doctrine of Christ: for, if Men do not light a candle, but that it
may give light to the whole house; far less must they think that God does
light a candle, but for the use of his House.

Verse. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. From the former Doctrine of
the duties of the Apostles, our LORD draws an exhortation to them, and all
Ministers of the Gospel (according to the rule, Mark 13.37. What I say unto
you, I say unto all, whom you represent,) teaching that what light of
Knowledge, or Faith in God, or Love to God, or to men they have, they should
bring it forth for the benefit of men, in their Doctrine and life, by the
faithful discharge of their Ministry, and holy conversation; therefore, says
he, Let your light shine, etc. 2. They should so wisely and sincerely behave
themselves in all things, that they may be approven to the consciences of all
men: for it is said, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works; that is, may perceive, may be convinced, and forced to acknowledge
that ye so teach, and so do, as the Lords faithful servants and children
should do. 3. By the holy conversation of Christians, God shall be glorified,
known, believed in, loved and praised; Therefore it is said, that men may
glorify your heavenly Father. 4. Christians by their holy life shall be
justified of men as the true children of God; for, says Christ, So do, that
men may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. 5. A good work is only that
which is done, 1. By a child of God: 2. In obedience to God his Fathers
command: 3. For the good of men; and 4. For the glory of God: For it is said,
Let your light shine, that your Father may be glorified by men, who see your
good works, or profitable and commendable works.

Verse. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Here our Lord vindicateth himself from the
calumny of Antinomianism, or opposing the Law and the Prophets. Doct. 1. No
wonder the sincere Preachers of the gospel be slandered, as if they were
adversaries to the Law, for even Christ himself was traduced in his time, as
guilty of this fault, as he shows in his Apology, saying, Think not that I
am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: The ground of the mistake was,
because our Lord set at naught the glosses which the corrupt Doctors of the
time did put upon the Scripture, and taught men the way of justification by
grace, without the works of the Law, therefore men traduced him as an enemy to
the Law, and to the Prophets: for clearing himself, he brings five reasons:
The first is, I am so far from intention to destroy the Law and Prophets, that
by the contrary, I intend to fulfill them, says he; therefore the calumny
uttered or conceived of me, as if I intended the contrary, is false. Doct. 2
Christ is a true friend to the Law; his doctrine, and the course prescribed by
him to his Church, by all means does procure the obedience of the Law, and the
fulfilling of the prophesies; for he says, I am not come to destroy them, but
to fulfill them. Now Christ is said to be come to fulfill the Law and Prophets,
because what they prophesied of him, he does accomplish; what they aimed at, he
has brought, and is in bringing to pass; what way of righteousness and
salvation they set down, he does make good; for what is in the Law and Prophets
to be fulfilled, by predictions of what Christ should do, and suffer, (set down
partly in plain, partly in figurative types and ceremonies,) or commands of
holy Duties, backed by Promises to the Obedient, and Threatenings against the
disobedient, with their examples? all these Christ came to fulfill most
exactly; first by accomplishing in his own person, all predictions of his
perfect obedience, even unto the death, whether set down in plain terms, or
foresignified of him under types and figures of the ceremonial Law; next, by
using all means that men should give obedience to the moral Law, and by
blessing effectually these means, and making men really to give obedience to
the Law: And thirdly, by making good all the promises to his subjects, and
executing all his threatenings against his enemies, and so he says justly, I
came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law and Prophets.

Ver. 18. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or
one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. The
second reason of Christ's intention not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, or
the truth of the Old Testament, is, because the truth of the Doctrine of the
Law and the Prophets is more firm and stable then the frame of Heaven and Earth
is. Doct. Heaven and Earth shall be dissolved, rather then the least point of
truth (compared here to the least letter in the Alphabet, to the smallest
point, serving to the reading of the letters) should not be fulfilled: for
Heaven and earth do continue, only till the time that all that which is
prophesied in the Scripture, to be done before the worlds ending, shall be
fulfilled; therefore says our Lord, Verily I say unto you, till Heaven pass,
one jot of the Law shall in no wise pass, etc.

Verse. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven:
But whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. A third reason proving that Christ's intention is not to
abolish the directing and commanding power of the Law, or to suffer the moral
Law to be laid aside, as not obligatory unto obedience under the gospel, is
this, because his mind is, That whosoever he be, that shall in his practice
reject the yoke of any one of these commandments of the moral Law, which men
account least of, and shall defend his practice, teaching that men may without
guiltiness break the same, shall be called and accounted of by God as the
least (that is, a man of no place or room) in the Kingdom of grace and glory;
or he shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as it is said, verse
20. And on the contrary, whosoever shall maintain in their practice and
doctrine, the authority of all the precepts of the moral Law, as the rule of
man's conversation, shall be found true members of the Kingdom of grace and
glory; and shall be had in estimation with God and his saints. Doct. 1. A fore
sentence stands against them who make transgressions to light and venial, as
not worthy to be taken notice of; or who either give dispensations or take
dispensations to transgress any moral command: and no less wrath is
denounced against them, who, because Christ has abolished the covenan^ of
works, and the condemnatory power of the Law, in favors of his justified and
sanctified ones, do teach that Christ has also abolished in favors of them,
the directive, the commanding, and obligatory power of the Law: for of such,
and all such Christ has said, Whosoever shall teach men to break the least of
these Commandments, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. 2.
These men may have great comfort, who in their doctrine and example of life do
so teach justification by grace, or by faith in Jesus, without the works of the
Law, as they do also urge all them who do believe and are justified, to make
conscience of the obedience of every precept in the moral Law, even as they
love to be saved; for of such Christ says, Whosoever shall teach, and observe
the same, shall be called greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.

Verse. 20. For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, y^^ shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. A fourth reason of Christ's purpose not to abolish the
Law, is, that he does exclude from the Kingdom of grace and glory, all those
whose righteousness shall not exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees. These Pharisees and Scribes were indeed very painful, and outwardly
made great profession of holiness of life; b^t the truth is, they made
conscience of outward obedience only, ver. 21. and of some commandments only,
Chap. 15.3. Christ and grace they cared not for, therefore their righteousness
was short. But a true christian first studieth to be clad with the
righteousness of Christ, and to have his sins pardoned in Christ, and after
that he is justified freely by his grace, without the works of the Law, he
labors to give evence of the soundness of his Faith, by making conscience
of obedience as well inwardly as outwardly, not unto any one only, or some, but
to all the commandments of the Law, studying to make progress in
sanctification all the days of his life: and so both in regard of imputed
righteousness, which is of God by faith in Jesus Christ; and likewise in regard
of inherent righteousness, manifesting itself in the sincere study of a holy
conversation before God and man; the believers righteousness does far exceed
the superficial righteousness of the Pharisees. Doct. Except a man study to
outstrip the Pharisees and Scribes, both in respect of imputed righteousness,
and inherent righteousness also, he shall not be saved; for Christ here says,
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse. 21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old times, Thou shall not
kill: and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment. A fifth
Reason of Christ's coming not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, is by his
showing the true meaning of the Law, and crying down both the false glosses put
upon the Law by men, and also all vain traditions put in place of the Law: and
this Christ does most exactly, to the intent he may show how all men by the Law
are made guilty, and are found worthy of condemnation, and had need of a
Savior to ransom them; and also by showing how men being pardoned, ought to
study unto an upright obedience of the Law in all things, and this is indeed to
fulfill the Law. To this end Christ exponeth sundry commands in the second and
first Table, and corrects five or six corrupt glosses put upon the Law, by
the Jewish Doctors: and first in these verses he exponeth the sixth command,
repeating the common-glosse of the Pharisees received by tradition, who
esteemed that the command, Thou shall not kill, was not broken, except by
actual gross slaughter, or murder: and if any man should commit
manslaughter, then they put him in one of three ranks: The first was to be
brought before the inferior Judges of capital crimes, and to be in danger of
their sentence, because the murder was not of the grosser sort. The second
rank, was to be brought before the Council, consisting of a greater number,
appointed as a superior Judicatory of capital crimes, to fit in greater
cities, and there to be in danger of their sentence; which was to denounce more
shameful and painfall death, then the inferior Judicatory did appoint, in
case the murder was more heinous. The third rank was, in case the murder
should be of the vilest, and most abominable sort; then by the great Council
which sat at Jerusalem, the guilty were to be adjudged without mercy, or more
ado, to be executed most shamefully, and burnt in the most abominable place, in
the valley of Hinnom, or Gehenns, whereby was represented Hell fire. The first
of the three ranks is mentioned, verse. 21. The rest are to be collected by
CHRIST'S alluding thereunto, verse. 22. Doct. 1. Natural men are but slight
interpreters of the Lords Law, it is not killing in their sense, if a man be
not actually slain: for, Whosoever shall kill in the grossnesse of the letter,
he only is guilty in their judgment. 2. Antiquity seems enough to carnal
men, for a reason, in defense of whatsoever error or corrupt custom for which
they can pretend antiquity; for Christ shows us, that these Jewish Doctors
did think it sufficient, that, It was said of old. 3. Truth must never be
prejudged by antiquity, nor error strengthened thereby; for unto their
pretended antiquity, It was said of old, Christ does oppose this, But I say
unto you, etc.

Verse. 22. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without
a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the council; but whosoever shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. While Christ does expone the sixth
command more exactly then the Pharisees did, and does show the meaning of it,
by allusion unto the manner of their judgment of capital crimes, our Lords
mind is not, that those Judicial courts, with their different degrees of
punishment should be the rule for censuring the breach of the sixth command;
but his mind is, that albeit, there be degrees of sin, in breaking of the sixth
command, yet the command reaches to the condemning of every degree of the sin
forbidden, so far, that even rash anger is capital, and does bring a man under
the severe sentence of Gods judgment; for, Whosoever is angry, says he,
without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; that is, he is culpable of
death; and if our neighbor be wronged by us, in a disrespectfull speech, the
sin is yet more capital, and yet more deserves the punishment of death and
condemnation; for, Whosoever, says he, shall say to his brother, Racha, or
any word of disdain, shall be in danger of the council, that is, shall be
found guilty of a capital or deadly transgression, in a higher degree; But if
anger and disdain proceed so far, as to reproach our Brother, yet more
despitefully, and to call him Fool, then we shall be in danger of hell fire,
that is, of a yet higher degree of judgment in hell. Doct. 1. The meanest and
mainest outbreakings of our corruption in any sort are forbidden in one and the
same command: for our Lords exposition of, Thou shall not kill, forbids rash
anger, and every evil motion of the heart against our neighbors person, no
less then it forbids murder. 2. The wages of the least degree of sin is
death, for not only murder, but also rash anger, and disdainful speech, are
made capital or deadly sins, (by our Lords interpretation) worthy of death and
hels fire; So that no relief is to be looked for in Gods justice from the
smalnesse of our sins, but all stands in the rich ransom of Christ's Blood,
and largeness of his Grace, unto which refuge the severe exaction of the Law,
and strict reckoning of Justice does drive us.

Ver. 23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest
that thy brother has ought against thee.

24. Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

After the exposition of this command, Christ makes application of the
doctrine unto his Disciples and all his hearers for making use thereof, wherein
he shows a necessity of making conscience to keep this command, by two
reasons: one is, that if we shall not entertain love to our neighbor, but
both do him wrong, and also not care to be reconciled with him; then God will
take no service or worship at our hand, nor will (...) from thee: for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell.

This exhortation is set down as the use of the former doctrine, wherein the
words are not to be taken captiously, as if one might hurt his own body under
pretense to preveen sin: for this is both forbidden in the sixth command, and
cannot be a solid cure or remedy of sin, though it were permitted; but the
matter is proponed in allusion to a presupposed like case of the hazard of a
man's life, by a fester or gangrene in a man's eye or hand, (wherein as it were)
better that the Chirugion should pluck out the festered eye, and cut off the
festered hand, then that the whole body should be lost: so in the case of a
darling sin or lust, whereby a man is made to stumble and fall in sin, it were
better that he should be mortified and quat, (how necessary soever, how dear
soever, though esteemed of as the right eye, or the right hand,) rather then by
sparing of that sinful lust, soul and body bothshould be cast in hell: now
there is no mortifying of the lusts of the flesh but by the Spirit of Christ,
Romans 8.13. And, as for pardon of sin we are led unto Christ in the exposition
of the sixth command, so are we here driven to Christ for the morfication of
sin, in the exposition of the seventh command; for he is the only Surgeon,
who can cut off those fretting lusts which fight against the soul.

Ver. 31. It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give
her a bill of divorcement.

32. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the
cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry
her that is divorced, commits adultery.

For clearing yet further of the seventh command, Christ corrects a third
corrupt gloss, about the abuse of marriage, in divorcements; which howsoever
the civil Law left unpunished, for civil Reasons; yet it did not exeem him
from sin, nor wrath who was the giver of the Bill of Divorcement upon a light
cause: this abuse Christ does correct, teaching that if any persons married,
should thrust away their party, except in the clear case of Adultery, found in
the party put away, they should be guilty of the breach of the seventh command,
and of all the consequents thereof; and they who approved the Divorcement
should be guilty also, each in their own degree; in so high estimation has our
Lord the band of marriage, that nothing can dissolve it, except that which
everteth the nature of the bands, and brings perjury, beside the breach of
the command, is double condemnation upon the Offender.

Verse. 33. Again, Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time,
thou shall not for swear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths.

34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods
throne.

35. Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is
the city of the great King.

36. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black.

As our Lord has cleared the exposition of some commandments in the second
Table, so for further clearing the sense of the Law, he taxes a fourth corrupt
gloss of the Pharisees, and tradition of the elders (concerning the first
table) who made no breach of the third command, except perjury, and made the
affirmative part of the command to stand only in the observation of vows;
this their clipped commentary, our Lord does correct, by teaching, 1. That by
this commandment is discharged all idle, or unnecessary swearing; for he says,
Swear not at all, to wit, when God does not call us to take an oath; for
otherwise to swear by God, when he calls us unto it in weighty matters, for
deciding controversies, and ending strife, it is a part of his worship, then
religiously to take an oath: but except in the foresaid case, Swear not at all.
2. Hereby also is discharged all swearing by the creatures; for, Swear not by
heaven, says he, or by earth, etc. or by any part of man's self, as Head or
Heart, or any other oath; the reason is, first, because these are creatures;
Heaven and Earth are not God, and ought not therefore to be sworn by; and next,
because God indirectly is imported in such oaths, by reason of the relation
which the creatures have to him, as Gods Footstool, or City, or Work; and
thirdly, because as none of the creatures are our Judge, to take order with us,
if we swear falsely; so none of all the creatures, (no not our own Head or the
least hair thereof,) are so our own, as we may engage the same by an oath, for
the least change to be made thereon, were it but of the color of our hair to
be put in pawn in case our oath be not true: and so we may not swear upon any
pretense at all, by any of them, for, Thou can not make one hair white nor
black, says he.

Ver. 37. But let your communication be, Yea, yea, Nay, nay: for whatsoever is
more then these, comes of evil.

For eschewing rash swearing, our Lord commands that our sayings be averred
by a constant, plain, and uniforme pronouncing of truth, imported in Yea, yea,
when the matter is so, and Nay, nay, when the matter is to be denied to be so:
The reason whereof is weighty, for whatsoever idle oath, or idle asseveration
is more then these, is from evil, that is, from the devil and our corruption,
and therefore to be eschewed.

Ver. 38. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth,
for a tooth.

39. But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite
thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.

He corrects a fifth corrupt gloss of the Law, wherein they abused an
appendicle of the sixth command, namely a Judicial Law given unto the Judges
for execution of Justice: and did draw the law unto the authorizing of private
revenge, as if God had put the sword in every man's hand to avenge himself; for
correcting of which error, our Lord teaches his disciples, that it were better
to suffer injuries, and to expose our selves by our patience, unto the hazard
of double wrongs, rather then to follow the corrupt doctrine of men, and by way
of private revenge, to break the commandment of God: for the consideration of
the scope of Christ's speech does make it plain, that thus the words must be
taken comparatively, with the obedience of the Pharisees false doctrine gilded
with pretense of tradition and antiquity; for our resisting of evil, or of
injuries after our own way, (as their tradition did give warrant) cannot fall
but draw on a greater evil out of Gods hand; and so it follows, that it is
better to be smitten on both cheeks, then that by a wrong way of revenging
ourselves, we should provoke God to destroy head and feet, soul and body
together.

Ver. 40. And if any man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also. The same doctrine he applies unto injuries done under
pretense of Law, that in private revenge they be not met with the like; to this
sense, if any man sue thee wrongfully at Law, and by unjust cavillation take
away thy coat; rather then thou should meet him in a wicked way, under pretense
of Law to wrong him, it were better for thee to lose thy cloak also. How harsh
does this doctrine sound in the carnal ears of natural men, who think much to
suffer any wrong done to them by men; but think nothing to do wrong both to God
and men, and to draw mischief on their own heads thereby?

Ver. 41. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
Another sort of injury comprizing wrongs done by oppression, and unjust
exaction, under pretense of authority: If under pretense of Service to be done
to the public, any man press thee to be a Post, or a guide unto a Post; do not
thou for thy part, contend for thy ease, but rather then thou should fail in
some duty by resisting, bear double burden for peace cause, lest thou be,
ensuated in a sin by contending.

Ver. 42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee,
turn not thou away. Last of al, to teach us not to be weary of weldoing, even
then when we think we have many reasons, which may hinder us to bestow upon
such as do either beg or borrow from us oftener, and more (possibly) then we can
well endure; our Lord commands to give alms, and to lend the needy, albeit
not all that is craved, yet what we may spare, and the parties present need
requires.

Ver. 43. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thine
neighbor, and state thine enemy.

44. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and
persecute you.

A sixth corrupt gloss put upon the Law by the corrupt Doctors, who taught
that the command of love to our neighbor, was to be understood only toward
Kindred, Friends and Acquaintance, and that it is lawful to hate every man
that is our enemy; our Lord does vindicate the Law from this, both clipped and
false exposition. Doct. 1. For obedience to God, and pity to perishing men, we
must keep love, even to such as be our private enemies: for Christ has so
commanded, saying, Love your enemies. 2. Love to our enemies must be approven
to God, for we are commanded to prove our love to them by dealing with God to
give them mercy, contrary to their deservings at our hands; to this end he
says, Bless them, Pray for them, and this is a task to exercise our
obedience, and to prove our sincerity therein.

Ver. 45. That ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven, for he
makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and unjust. To persuade us to obey this Command, our Lord proponeth five
motives. The first is, because so we may make it appear to others, and to our
own hearts also, that we are the Children of God, whose bounty is extended in
giving the common use of his gifts unto his evil and unjust enemies. Doct. 1.
By imitating of the bounty of God, we shall grow more and more like to him, we
shall more and more make it appear that we are renewed unto the image of God;
therefore says he, That ye may be the children of your Father. 2. We should
not lightly pass by the common favors of God bestowed upon men, as the
benefit of the Sun and Rain, but must observe the goodness of God therein toward
men, in making his Sun to rise, and his Rain to fall on the unjust.

Ver. 46. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
the Publicans the same? The second motive is, because except your love shall
extend it self unto your enemies, in the obedience of God, ye can expect no
reward from him. Doct. 1. Love refused to our enemies, proves our love
bestowed on friends to be no acceptable service to God; for, If ye love them
only which love you, what reward have ye to expect? for if we love only for
love again, we do serve our self only, and not God; and where no service is, no
reward is. A third motive is this, the vilest and most odious sinners in the
world shall equal you, if you do love only such as love you, and do not also
love your enemies; therefore love your enemies. Doct. To stand at that measure
of love, which a wicked man may attain unto, is nothing esteemed of by God;
for, If you, says he, love only your friends, do not even the Publicans the
same?

Ver. 47. And if ye salute your Brethren only, what do ye more then others? do
not even the Publicans so? A Fourth motive is, there must be more in you then
civility, cou^tesie, and humanity, moving you to give expressions of love only
to your friends; therefore love also your enemies. Doct. 1. There must be more
in a christian then can be in these that are not renewed: for, What do you more
then others, imports, that we should do more; seeing we are born of God,
better furnished with his spirit, and more engaged by special obligation to God
then others, and therefore must not carry our selves so, as it may be said unto
us, what do you more then others? 2. The most hated sinners may equal the
holiness of them who make not conscience to have this commanded love unto their
enemies in them; for, Do not the Publicans so, imports so much.

Ver. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect. A fifth motive is, Gods children must aim at the perfection of all
virtues, and therefore at the perfection of Love, extended to their enemies.
Doct. 1. Christians are called unto perfection; and albeit they cannot fully
attain unto it in this life, yet must they aim at it, to come more and more
near unto it; for it is said, Be you therefore perfect. 2. God only is the
pattern of perfection to be set before our eyes, as he holds forth himself
unto us in his word, and in his Son Jesus Christ, the express image of his
Person, to be imitate by us; therefore it is said, Be ye perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect.

CHAP. VI.
Christ's Sermon on the Mount goes on in this chapter, wherein he teaches the
right manner of alms, Ver. 5. Of prayer, Ver. 16. Of fasting Ver. 19. and
discharges covetuousnesse. In all which, he sharply taxes the faults of the
Scribes and Pharisees.

Ver. 1. TAke heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise you have no reward of your Father which is in heaven.
COncerning the right manner of giving Alms, these Truths are holden forth
unto us. Doct. 1. Alms, or showing mercy to the Poor, is a duty carefully to
be gone about: for it is said, Take heed to your alms. 2. The sin of vain
glory may easily slide in it self in any work, specially in alms giving;
therefore says he, Take heed you do not your alms to be seen of men. 3. If
alms be done, for obtaining praise of men, and not for conscience of a
commanded duty, God will not take it for service, for it is said, Otherwise you
have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven.

Ver. 2. Therefore, when thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues, and in the streets, that they may
have glory of men: Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward.

3. But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
does:

4. That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which sees in secret,
himself shall reward thee openly.

This is the remedy of this ill. Doct. 1. We must mark and beware of such
faults as we see in others; namely such ostentation as the Pharisees used, who
when they were to give alms, proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, that the poor
should conveen at such a time and place, to receive such a man's alms; therefore
Christ says, Do not sound a Trumpet, etc. that is, Beware of all vain of
oftentation. 2. When men in doing good, look more to men's praise, then how to
please God, the vain praise of men, whether they obtain it, or miss of it, is
all the fruit which they shall have of their work; for, Verily they have their
reward; they need look for no more. 3. Each other sinner do seek darkness, and
lurking holes to hide their sin; but Church, and Market, and the most open
conventions are the choice places for acting of the sin of hypocrisy, as here,
in the Synagogues and in the streets. 4. All Hypocrites are vainly glorious;
Hypocrisy and vain glory go together; for. Hypocrites, says he, Do that they
may have glory of men. 5. We should not suffer our selves to take notice what
we give in alms, nor should we esteem much of it, as if there were any worth
in our alms, let be to seek praise of men, for this is the way, Not to let the
left hand know what the right hand does; otherwise no man can be ignorant of
what he does deliberatly, no man can give alms but the poor who receive the
alms must know of it, and in public collecting of alms the world must needs
be open. 6. Alms given in a right manner, that is, in obedience to God, and in
love of the poor, is a secret work; for the main substance of it is only seen
of God; therefore it is said, That thy alms may be in secret. 7. What good
work we take least notice of, what we make least esteem of, and do carry most
quietly between God and us, of that does God take special notice; for of such a
work it is said, the Father sees in secret. 8. Whatsoever good work is done of
secret intention to obey and glorify God, shall be made open by him in due
time to our praise, and shall be rewarded in open to our profit; for beside the
sweet testimony of the conscience following it, it is promised, Thy Father
himself shall reward thee openly.

Ver. 5. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are: for
they love to pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners of the
streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their
reward. The next Doctrine concerns the right manner of prayer, Doct. 1. In
prayer, all hypocritical oftentation must be eschewed, such as the Pharisees
used, who in the congregation, and in the Street carried themselves, so as they
might be taken notice of, and accounted to be devout men: for it is reproved
here, They love to pray standing, that they may be seen of men. 2. Persons who
are vain glorious in their prayers, have no profit of their prayers, save the
wind of some witless men's approbations; for, They have their reward. 3.
Howsoever men may think it hard, that prayers for this fault should be lost,
yet so it shall be found; for Christ says, Verily I say unto you, they have
their reward.

Verse. 6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy close^; and when thou
have thus thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. Christ does not forbid public
praying before others in the Congregation, nor in a Family; for this is a part
of Gods due worship, and of our confessing of his name: neither does he
retrinch all our secret prayers to a chamber; but the meaning is, that we
should in all our prayers be far from ostentation. Doct. 1. In prayer we should
regard only Gods eye, and seek only his approbation: and beside all our
praying, with or before others, we should pray also when no man knows of it;
and whenever we pray, whether in private or public, we should be as far from
vain oftentation as if we were in a private chamber alone with doors shut; for
this is it that he says, When thou prayest, shut thy door, etc. 2. Our prayer
must be from the inward of our spirit, directed with confidence to the
invisible God; for, Pray, says he, to thy Father. 3. In prayer God does take
notice specially of the uprightness of the heart, and of that which is hid
from men, for he says, Thy Father sees in secret. 4. The sincere and secret
prayer is followed with an evident blessing in the answer; for, He shall reward
thee openly, says Christ. 5. The rewards of God must needs be full of Grace,
when he promises to reward praying and begging, both in this world and at the
day of judgment, saying of secret prayer, Thy Father shall reward thee openly.

Verse 7. But when you pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

8. Be ye not therefore like unto them: for your Father knows what thing ye
have need of, before ye ask him.

The second fault in prayer is idle multiplying of words, which is discharged
for three reasons, which are so many doctrines: 1. Idle multiplying of words,
is the sin of the heathen, who are destitute of the saving knowledge of God:
for Christ says, Use not vain repetitions as the heathen do: Idle repititions
of words presupposes and proceeds from ^ base misconception of God, as if he
could be moved by multitude of words, as men are moved; for, They think, says
he, to be heard by their much speaking, but do ye not so: The third reason is,
Because Christ's Disciples, when, in obedience of Gods command, they come to
worship God, and to edify themselves in prayer, need neither to inform God
what they would have; for, He knows, says Christ, what things you have need
of before you ask: nor need they to move or persuade God; for, He is your
Father, says he, and therefore we should not, nor need not use vain
repetitions: mean time let us remember, that when the Saints insist in prayer,
affectionately avowing the truth and mercy of God, and striving to strengthen
their own faith in prayer, that is not a vain repetition, or that much speaking
which is here forbidden.

Ver. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy name. For helping of this, and other faults about prayer, our
Lord gives us the example of a formed Prayer, which is ready and fit to be
made use of expressly as a Prayer, whenever we should join in one body with
all true Christians militant in the World, in all common and necessary desires;
which also is to be made use of, as a Pattern and Platform for imitation, when
we are to pray for any one or more things, more particularly concerning our
self, or any part of the militant Church. Now as this Prayer is a Pattern for
any desires more special then these which are here expressed, we are taught
hereby, 1. To pray only for things allowed and promised in Gods word: for such
are all things in the Pattern. 2. To pray to God only, who only hears at all
times; for, We must pray to our heavenly Father only. 3. To pray in a known
language, according as Christ did deliver this form of prayer to his Disciples.
4. To pray without vain repetition, or idle multiplying of words; for this
prayer is given for example of such a prayer, as has no vain repetition. 5. To
pray with more respect to Gods glory, then to our own particular good; for the
order of prayer teaches so much. 6. To pray with a hearty and spiritual
disposition, in fear and reverence toward God, as being above us in Heaven,
there to receive, hear, and answer our prayers from the holy sanctuary of
Christ's body, through which vail we get access unto the fullness of the
Godhead, which dwells in Christ, who is in Heaven, and without whom we
cannot find God reconciled. 7. To pray with love toward God, and confidence in
him, as in our Father in Christ: for Christ gives warrant to call God Father.
8. To pray with affection and love to all Saints militant on earth, as children
of the same heavenly Father, theirs and ours: Father to the weak, no less then
to the stronger; for Christ will have us calling him, Our Father, in behalf of
all the children on earth; for whom and with whom we do pray.

From the first Petition we are taught that every true Disciple of Christ, must
have the glorifying of God for his chiefest desire; for first and above all
must he seek that Gods Name may be hallowed. 2. That God must be hallowed as he
makes himself known by his word; for it is his Name or Himself, as he is named
and manifested by his word and ordinances, and works and providence, which is
to be hallowed. 3. That he himself must be the procurer of his own glory among
men, for therefore pray we, Hallowed be thy name.

Ver. 10. Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven. From
the second petition we are taught, that beside the general Kingdom, and
government of all things, which is always fully in vigor, there is a special
Kingdom of grace, wherein God is revealed, and acknowledged to be King and
Lord over his Saints: this Christ calls, Thy Kingdom, as a peculiar wherein he
specially delights. 2. That this Kingdom of grace is so come already, as it
shall be still coming more and more, so long as Christ's Disciples shall have
need to pray, that is, till the fullness of glory in the second coming of Christ
shall be revealed, Then shall the Kingdom prayed for, fully come. 3. That God
is he, who does promove, bring on, and perfect this kingdom: Therefore must we
say, Thy Kingdom come. 4. That od will have all his Disciples drawing at his
royal and triumphing chariot by their prayers; and saying, Thy kingdom come.
From the third Petition we learn. 1. That albeit God dwells in heaven, and
does all his intended will, yet men do not obey as they should, his commanded
will. Therefore there is need in this respect still to pray, Thy will be done.
2. That the Saints must renounce obedience to their own will, and to Satan's
will, and to the will of men, and must submit themselves absolutely to Gods
will, revealed by word or work; saying, Not mine, but thy will be done. 3. That
it must be divine power which shall change men's hearts, and frame them to the
obedience of his will, and to this end do we request him, to subdue men's wills
to his own, saying, Thy will be done. 4. That God has no work of
sanctification to work upon any man, but upon these only who are on the earth,
for they that are in heaven are perfected, and elsewhere there is none, whose
will the Lord does sanctify: Therefore do we pray only, Thy will be done, in
earth as it is in heaven. 5. Albeit we do not attain unto perfection of
Holiness in this life, yet we must aim at it, long, and pray for it: for our
Lord teaches us to pray, That the will of God may be done i^ earth, as it is
in heaven.

Ver. 11. Give us this day our daily bread. From the fourth petition we learn.
1. That whatsoever we make use of for our subsistence (comprised here under
bread) must be sanctified unto us by prayer; and God must be acknowledged in
every meanest matter, which concerns our bodily sustentation, even to the least
morsel of Daily Bread. 2. That we live not mainly by bread, but by Gods word,
and his powerful blessing, imported in Giving of bread. 3. That how lawfully
soever; and deservedly at men's hands we get our bread, yet in regard Gof od, we
deserve nothing, but must have all of free bounty, and must beg of him daily,
to give us our daily bread. 4. That we should not be anxious for to morrow, nor
for great allowance in the world: sufficient for the day is the care of it
self; and we must be content to crave and to receive This day our daily bread.
5. That as we pray not for the dead, but only with, and for such as have need
of Daily bread, and are living on earth with us; so should we be sensible of
their necessities, and pray for them as for ourselves, saying, Give us our
bread.

Verse. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. From the fifth
Petition learn, 1. That none of Christ's Disciples are so fully sanctified in
this life, but sin will be found in them; and that there is a necessity lying
on us to acknowledge our sins: 2. That every day in many things we^ offend all,
and must confess not only sin, but sins. 3. That howsoever we have right unto
remission of sins in Christ Jesus, yet we must seek to apply that our right
unto our daily faults, and beg the use of our right, for applying of
forgiveness. 4. That our sins deserve due punishment, even death, which is a
natural merit of sin, which does oblige us unto the penalty; for, therefore
sins here are called Debts. 5. That the sin being forgiven, the vindictive
punishment is forgiven also; for to the same sense are we directed to say,
Forgive us our debt, and forgive us our sins: Where-through it comes to pass,
that there is no remission of sin, and retaining of vindictive punishment, but
both the guilt, and this sort of punishment are forgiven, and taken away
together: 6. Wrongs done by others unto us, do oblige the doers of injury to
repair the wrong, and so do make them not only debtors unto God, but also unto
us; therefore does our Lord call such as have done wrong unto us, Our debtors:
7. Though public respects may move us to seek reparations of wrongs, in the
way of justice; yet not only must we renounce private revenge of wrong done
unto us, but also forgive the same, especially when the offender calls for it
at our hand; for Christ presupposes, that he who seeks forgiveness of God,
does also give forgiveness to men; 8. It is an argument to persuade us of
forgiveness from God of our wrongs, when we forgive men their wrongs done
against us; for Christ will have him who says, forgive us our trespasses, to
say also, As we forgave these that trespass against us,

Verse. 13. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; For
thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen. From the
sixth petition learn, 1. That when our sins are forgiven us, we are in peril
to be overcome of new again by the tempter Satan; of which our weakness, and
Satan's power, craft and malice, we should be so sensible, as in fear to be
ensnared, we should pray not to be led in Satan's temptations. 2. Because we
have so often yielded unto Satan's temptation, and of our self we are so prone to
be tempted, and to be overcome of our own concupiscence, that God justly may
give us over unto Satan's temptation; Therefore it is necessary that we should
request God, not To lead us in his justice into temptation. 3. If God for our
trial and further humiliation shall suffer us to be tempted, we may with
confidence pray and expect, that we shall be delivered from that ill one,
either the we fall not in his snare, or that we be not kept therein; for as
Christ does warrant us to pray, so we may expect the God will deliver us from
that evil one, and from all ill; that is, from Satan, sin, and perdition; for
we say, Thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory: that is, Unto thee our
heavenly Father belongs the Kingdom, and sovereign government of all things,
with right and strength to dispose thereof, for bringing to pass all that we
request for: and to thee does belong the glory of all things for ever: Whence
learn, 1. That none is to be prayed unto, but he only who only is able to grant
all our requests: for, To him only belongs the Kingdom and power. 2. That when
we pray for that which is agreeable to Gods will, his Fatherly affection on the
one hand, and his royal power on the other hand, may assure us, that as he is
both willing and able, so he will grant our requests. 3. That as it is his
glory to grant the petitions of his people; so unto him should we give the
glory of all things. 4. That there is no end of his Kingdom and Power and
Glory; for, They are for ever, 5. That we should settle our belief on him, and
seal up his truth resolutely, nothing doubting to be heard, for so much does
Amen import.

Ver. 14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you.

15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses.

This is a reason of the clause eked unto the fifth petition, of forgiving men
their trespasses, when we crave God to forgive us our treaspasses: not that our
forgiving wrongs done to us, is the cause of Gods forgiving wrongs done by us
to him; but because giving forgiveness to men, and receiving forgivness from
God, are graces inseparably conjoined, so that the having or wanting of the
one, may prove the having or wanting of the other. Doct. 1. Who so have gotten
grace, in the fear of God, to forgive men their trespasses, may assure
themselves of Gods gracious forgiving them their trespasses: and albeit the
remission of their sins be not intimate to them for the present, yet they shall
be sure to have it manifested: for so sa^es the text. 2. Again, such as call
God their Father, and yet will not forgive men their trespasses, may be assured
that God will not forgive them their trespasses, or that God will not speak
peace to their conscience, nor intimate remission of sins unto their souls: for
albeit Gods granting a remission of sin, in his counsel, goes before our
giving remission of men's sins, yet Gods granting unto us remission of sins in
the court of our conscience, follows after our giving remission to men of their
sin; for so long as we keep malice against our neighbor, and will not forgive
them, our conscience shall never be solidly assured of the forgivness of our
sins, for so imports the text.

Verse 16. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear to men to
fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

17. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face.

18. That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in
secret: and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

The third head of Doctrine teaching us in our religious fasting, to beware of
vain oftentation, such as the Pharisees used: It is not Christ's meaning here,
that men should refuse public Fasts, or therein carry themselves as in a day
of feasting, annoynting their head, and washing their face; for that is not
lawful: neither is it his meaning, that in secret Fasts, men must either carry
the matter so closely, that none of the Family should know it, or else not fast
at all; for that is hardly possible: But the meaning is, That when God calls
unto religious humiliation in prayer and fasting, that we should be as far
from seeking vain applause of men, as if we were not at all about such a
business. Doct. 1. Causes of fa^ing and humiliation do attend Christ's
Disciples; for this (...) Lord does insinuate, while he says, When ye fast. 2.
Such ^ in their fasting do seek men's approbation, do lose their labo^ at Gods
hand; and at the farthest, do gain no more but (...) applause of men; for of
such Christ says, Verily, they have (...) reward. 3. Hypocrites do religious
actions for worldly respects; for of Hypocrites says Christ, They do seek that
(...) may appear to men to fast. 4. That in all our religious actio^^ we should
be as far from seeking men's applause, as if we (...) not at all about any such
business; and should so study to approve the secret sincerity of our hearts
unto God, as we loo^ not toward any applause of men; for Christ commands
(...) to fast, that you appear not to men, etc. 5. The secret sincerity of Gods
service is followed with the open blessing of God; (...) he does reward such
openly.

Verse 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. The fourth head of
doctrine, is, to beware of covetousness and cares of this world, as of a
special enemy to all true Godliness; which because it is a rise evil, and
hard to be cured, he insisteth upon the beating down of it so much the more:
^sing to this purpose seven motives or reasons, which in substance are so many
doctrines. In the first part of this verse our Lord insinuates, 1. That every
man is given to have some Treasure and Store of that which he most esteems
of, loves most to have, keeps best, and is most loath to want; for this is
imported in, Lay not up treasures for your self. 2. That we are given by nature
to choose some earthly and temporal thing for our Treasure, and to have the
earth the place of it; and so have need to be warned to lay up our treasure not
upon earth. The first reason to dissuade us from covetousness of earthly
things, is, because all earthly things are perishing, and may in our time,
either rot or be taken from us! for what is on earth, moth and rust may
corrupt, or thieves (...) break in upon, and steal it.

Verse 20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, when neither moth
nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not bre^ through nor steal,

21. For where your treasure is, there will your heart ^ also.

The second reason: Heavenly things only are worthy to be our treasure, and
Heaven only is worthy to be the place thereof, therefore covet not things
earthly, but heavenly, such as are faith and love, and grace to abound in the
good fruits of faith, Lay up, says he, Treasures for your selves in heaven.
The third reason is: Things heavenly and spiritual, are to be kept and
enjoyed in heaven, where all things are incorruptible, and permanent, and such
as cannot be taken from us by fraud or violence, where neither moth nor rust
does corrupt, therefore seek not these things that are earthly, but these
things that are heavenly. The fourth reason is, a man's treasure takes his heart
after it; therefore covet not earthly things but heavenly, that your hearts
might be set on Heaven, and not on earth; for, Where your treasure is, there
will your hearts be also.

Verse. 22. The light of the body is the eye: If therefore thine eye be single,
thy whole body shall be full of light.

23. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darnesse, if
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

The fifth reason, In general terms tending to this much; If your mind intend
to treasure up heavenly things, the whole course of your life will be
lightsome, holy and heavenly: but if ye intend to treasure up earthly things,
then the whole course of your life will be earthly, dark, and unspeakably
sinful. Therefore set not your selves to treasure up earthly things, but
heavenly rather: This is imported in a similitude thus, As the eye by its
light, is the directer of the whole body, so the intention of a man's mind or
heart, by its light, is the directer of the whole course and actions of a man's
life. In the similitude are holden forth to us these truths; 1. That no less
care should be had to have our judgment and intention sanctified, then to have
the eye of our body clear; for, as the eye is the light of the body, so is the
mind, the heart and intention the light of a man's life. 2. As when the eye of
the body is clear, the whole body is illuminate, and well directed what to do;
So when the intention of the mind and heart, (which is the eye of the soul,) is
single, and set upon the heavenly treasure, then the whole body of a man's
conversation shall be well ordered, and full of light, to direct him in the way
how to get the heavenly Treasure. 3. As when the eye of the body is corrupt,
and ill disposed, the whole body walks in darkness without direction; So
when the intention of a man's heart is not singly set on the heavenly Treasure,
but is evil, and set on the things of the earth, then the whole body of a man's
course and actions is full of darkness, that is, of ignorance and miscarriage,
of sin and misery. When the intention of a man (which he sets up as a mark
to shoot at, and uses as a light to direct him what means he shall use) is
darkness, that is, erroneous and sinful; then unspeakable great is the
darkness, error and sinfulness of that man's course; for, If the light that
is in thee be darkness, says Christ, how great is that darkness? 5. This
general sentence may serve to loose a doubt, about the lawfulness of making
provision for a man's family, and laying up for his children: Thus, if a man's
intention be spiritual, and singly set on God for the obtaining of a
spiritual Treasure, then shall his course be full of light, and well directed
how to do duty to his family and children; but if under pretense of this
lawful care, he shall make an idol of riches, intending only to abound in
wealth, to seek and lay up his treasure on earth, then shall all that he does
in a lawful calling, be sinful unto him, his course shall be darkness.

Verse. 24. No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon. A sixth reason, under similitude of serving two
masters. No man can serve God and Mammon or worldly riches, more then a man can
serve two opposite masters; Therefore beware to set your selves to lay up
treasures in the earth, but rather seek God, and lay up your treasure in him.
To serve God, is to give up a man's mind, heart, and whole man, to know, and do
what God requires, without care what shall be the consequences: To serve
Mammon, is to give up a man's mind, heart, and endeavor to sinde out and
follow all the ways he can, to increase riches, whatsoever may come of it.
Hence learn, 1. That the man who takes God to be his Master, must do nothing
but as God allows him, neither in the matter of pleasure, nor of profit, nor of
preferment, nor in any other thing; for, This is to serve God as his Master. 2.
If the care or love of riches, or any other thing draw away the mind or heart
of a man from the love of God, or from his obedience, a man becomes the
servant of Mammon, or of that lust whereunto he so gives obedience. 3. Albeit
men conceive they can well serve God and their lusts also, yet it is impossible
so to do; for, No man can serve two masters opposite, such as is GOD, and
whatsoever thing does come in competition with him, for, Ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. 4. That thing is a man's Master, which, the man being put to the
trial, loves most, holds most unto, and prefers in competition: If a man
will rather offend God then lose riches, pleasures, or preferment, when he must
do the one, then is the man not the servant of God, but the servant of the
other thing beside God; for, He loves that other, and holds unto it, and
prefers it to God.

Verse 25. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on:
is not the life more then meat, and the body then raiment? A seventh reason
dissuading from coverousnesse, drawn forth by consequence from the sixth
reason: It is not lawful to be anxious about things necessary, as food or
raiment; therefore far less is it lawful to be covetous of earthly treasure,
or of needless riches. Hence learn, 1. That albeit using of lawful callings
and ordinary means for food and raiment may stand with Gods service, and his
approbation; yet taking thought for them, or being anxious about the success,
is unlawful, and here forbidden as a mark of covetousness, and too much
affecting of the creature, and of distrust in God; for, Take no thought for
your life, says he. This distrustful anxiety for food and raiment in time to
come (which is a branch of covetousness, covered with the appearance of
necessity) our Lord refutes by eight reasons: The first is, God who has given
life, which is more then food, will take care to provide food for maintenance
of life, so long as he has appointed life to continue: and God who has framed
the body, which is more worth then the raiment, will also provide for a
garment; therefore anxious care for food and raiment is unlawful: which
teaches us, That the most specious excuses which can be made for cloaking of
covetousness, are rejected by God as naughty; Is not the life more then meat,
says Christ?

Ver. 26. Behold the souls of the a^r, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feede^h them. Are ye not much
better then they? The second reason: God who provide^ food for birds and fowls,
will certainly provide for his own children; Therefore anxious and distrustful
cares for food and raiment, in Christ Disciples is unlawful; for, Behold the
fowls of the air, etc. This reason is strengthened, 1. By insinuation, that
men have the ordinary means of some lawful calling (comprehended under sowing
and reaping,) which sow^s have not; and therefore anxious and distrustful care
for food and raiment is so much more unlawful in them, as is imported in these
words, neither do they reap: again, this reason is strengthened, by comparison
of us with birds, and preferring of us in Gods estimation, are ye not much
better then they? says he.

Ver. 27. Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?
The third reason: Anxious care about the success of means connot produce any
good effect, therefore it should not be entertained; for even when a man has
eaten, he cannot make himself stronger, or more tall then it shall please God
to dispose: To what purpose then does it serve to take thought or anxiety, as
if the use of means should not yield food and raiment? for, which of you by
taking thought can eke a cubit to his stature?

Verse. 28. And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the
field how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin.

29. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory, was not
arrayed like one of these.

30. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little
faith?

31. Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we
drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed?

The fourth reason: God does care for clothing of the grass and flowers of the
field, with more curious draughts and native colors, then all the glory which
Solomon's garment had; Therefore anxiety in Gods children for food and raiment,
(as if God were not careful of them) is unlawful, Consider the lilies, says
he: this reason is strengthened, 1. By insinuating that Gods own children are
more dear to him then the grass and flowers of the field, which are made only
to endure a lit^^e time for man's use, and then to perish; for, To morrow it is
case sitio the oven^ next, by taxing taking thought and anxiety, as an evidence
of small says in God, Therefore says he, O ye of little faith.

Verse 32. (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly
Father knows that ye have need of all these things. The fifth reason: Anxious
seeking of the things of this earth, is the fault of the Gentiles, who are
destiture of the knowledge of God, and are ignorant of these heavenly things,
prepared for Gods children; Therefore Christians who are better instructed,
should eschew this godless anxiety; for, After these things, says he, the
Gentiles do seek. The sixth reason: Christians are not fatherless; nor is their
father ignorant, unable, or careless to do for them; God in Heaven is their
father, and knows all things whereof they stand in need; therefore godless
anxiety for food and raiment is utterly unlawful; for, Your Heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of these things.

Verse 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you. The seventh reason by way of precept:
You have the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, whereupon to bestow your
first and chiefest cares; which if you seek after earnestly, ye shall not need
to be anxious for food or raiment, or any other needful thing on earth; for,
All these shall be superadded unto the grant of your chief desires, and shall
be brought unto your hand; Therefore anxious caring for these meaner things, is
unlawful. Hence learn, 1. That to be partaker of the kingdom of Gods grace
here, and of his glory in heaven, is worthy of our chiefest affections, and
most intent indevours; for, Seek first the Kingdom of God, imports this. 2.
That we cannot be sure to be Subjects of Gods gracious kingdom here, nor of
his glorious Kingdom in Heaven hereafter, except we also study to be sure of
the righteousness of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ, and of holiness
and uprightness of life flowing therefrom; for, Seek the righteousness of
God, and Seek the Kingdom are joined. 3. That whosoever do earnestly seek
after the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, shall not only be sure to
have what they seek, but also to have whatsoever is necessary for them in this
life: for these things, to wit, which concern food and raiment, shall be
superadded unto you,

Ver. 34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof. He repeateth the discharge of anxious care for time to come, and
adds the eighth reason; The morrow shall bring with it troublesome cares of
its own; and the day or the time present has sufficient trouble by it self:
Therefore neither time present, nor time to come should be rendered more
miserably by anxious anticipating of troublesome cares before they come: Hence
learn, 1. That we are ready to make our present time miserable, by anxious and
distrustful care; for so imports, Take no thought for to morrow. 2. That
relying on Gods caring for us, not only saves us from sin, but also cutteth
off much misery; for so imports, Take no thought for the morrow. 3. That the
time to come has trouble proper to it self, as Gods ordinary providence does
dispose, so that we have not need by sinful anticipating of cares to make our
self more needless trouble; for, The morrow shall take thought for the things
of it self. 4. That it is wisdom not to breed our self more trouble by
sinful and distrustful cares and fears, when already trouble sufficient is
ordained by God for our exercise; for, Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.

CHAP. VII.
Five other heads of doctrine delivered in the sermon on the Mount, are set
down in this chater; to wit, rash judgment, to verse. 5. Discretion in
dispensing of holy things, v. 6. Instancy in prayer, verse. 13. Concerning false
teachers, verse. 21. And about wise practicing of the former precepts.

Ver. 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged.
THe first doctrine is a forbidding of rash judging of men's persons and
actions, or passing wrong sentence censoriously and uncharitably against
others, whether in our mind, or in our speeches; either for no fault, or for
lesser then we our selves are subject unto, for otherwise he forbids neither
private nor public righteous judgment, but only rash, uncharitable, and
unrighteous censuring of others, whereunto naturally we are inclined; for, Judge
not, says he, to wit, unrighteously: the reasons are five; The first reason
is, if ye rashly judge of others, you have to fear lest God judge you justly;
for, Judge not, that ye be not judged, says he.

Verse. 2. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. A second reason: As you are
charitable and sober in your judging of others, or uncharitable and rash in
judging of others, so may ye expect God shall in his wise providence give you a
meting; for, With what judgment (charitable or uncharitable) you judge, you
shall be judged; that is, have like measure given to you, to wit, a just meting
in mercy, or in justice.

Verse. 3. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? A third reason: It is
unreasonable, that having grosser faults your self then these which are in
others, ye should pass by your own faults, gross like beams, without
observation, and go pry in upon other men's infirmities, small like motes in
comparison: Therefore ye should not judge rashly. Hence learn, that Self-love so
blinds us, that of our own great faults we are not sensible, but the smallest
infirmities of others we narrowly pry in upon, and observe them; therefore
says he, Why beholdest thou the mote, etc.

Ver. 4. Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye: and behold, a beam is in thine own eye? A fourth reason: By rash
and uncharitable censuring thy neighbor, thou shall never be able to benefit
him, so long as this gross beam of rash judgment, or any such ill is found
in thy self, Therefore judge not rashly. Doct. He that would benefit others by
reproving their faults; must be blameless himself, or else both his counsel
and reproof shall be turned back upon him; for how and with what countenance,
or hope of profiting his brother, will he say, Let me pull out the mote out of
thy eye? etc.

Ver. 5. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then
thou shall see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. A fifth
reason: Censorious and rash judging of others, is the mark of a hypocrite,
therefore judge not; for, thou hypocrite he calls him, because the censorious
judger of other men's faults, would make himself and others believe, he were no
ways tainted with any such faults himself: Our Lord by this speech does not
hinder brotherly admonition, but rather does direct the way and order of it;
for, First cast out, etc. says he. Doct. 1. He that would inform others,
should begin in earnest to reform himself; for it is said, First cast out the
beam out of thine own eye, that is, go about the reformation of thy own sins.
2. The man who is about the removing of his own sins, shall have spiritual
light and wisdom to deal with others, in the matter of their repentance and
reformation, for It is said, Then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote.

Ver. 6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again
and rent you. The second doctrine, teaching us to use discretion i^ dispensing
holy things, specially by way of admonition (...) proof, so as profane men may
not be provoked to blaspheme ^od and abuse us. Doct. 1. The truth of the Gospel
and the holy ordinances of Religion are precious pearls, belonging only to
Christ's Disciples; therefore Christ calls them, Your pearls. 2. Some men are
so profane and sensual, as they have no reverence nor estimation of holiness,
or holy things; and therefore are justly here called Dogs and Swine. 3.
Whenever we perceive that there is no appearance of doing good, by offering
holy admonitions to men, but by the contrary, that holy things shall be abused,
and we also suffer reproach for offering the same, our Lord gives us warrant to
forbear, Lest they trample your pearls, says he, under their feet, and turn
again, and rent you: But lest under the pretense of this warrant to keep off
contempt from holy things, we be too much feared for contempt of our selves,
and for this cause may prove uncharitable censurers of others, as if they were
Dogs and Swine, who are not so to be accounted of, we must take along with us
the former doctrine of, Judge not rashly; praying the Lord withal to give us
wisdom in all things.

Ver. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you.

8. For every one that asks, receives: and he that secketh, finds: and to
him that knocks, it shall be opened.

9. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will be give him a
stone?

10. Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

11. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them
that ask him?

12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them; for this is the law and the prophets.

The third head of doctrine serves to stir us up to instancie in prayer. Doct.
1. Great is our need, who like beggars want all things, and must seek all of
God; Therefore, Ask, says he. 2. Albeit we obtain not at first what we lack,
yet must we not fall off from prayer, but continue instantly to seek and knock.
3. We shall not be refused of any needful suit that we make, nor shall we be
excluded from fellowship with God, if we knock to have entry: for, Every one
who in says do seek (what God allows to be sought) receives, etc. 4. We may
assure our selves that the return of our prayers shall not be unprofitable,
far less hurtful; for God will not deal worse with his children, then Men do
with theirs ^ for, What man, says he, will give a stone for bread, or a
serpent for fish to his child? 5. Whatsoever good could be expected by our
children from us, their natural sinful Parents, whose affections are corrupt,
that and much more, yea every thing that is good, may be expected in prayer
from God; for, If ye being evil, can give, etc. 6. Such Disciples of Christ as
depend on God by prayer, are accounted Gods Children: for instead of children,
he puts them that ask him. 7. Such as would have their prayers granted, must
not live as they list, but do to others so as in reason they would be done unto
by others; Therefore, As you would, etc. says he, day unto them. 8. The scope
of the Scriptures is first to make men disciples to Christ, and then righteous
in their conversation; for, This is the law and the prophets.

Ver. 13. Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.

14. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life,
and few there be that find it.

The fourth head of doctrine concerning the difficulty of the way to heaven.
Doct. 1. Every man is traveling in the course of his life, either unto life or
to destruction; there is not a third way beside the strait and wide gate. 2.
The gate which leads unto life is strait, and the way narrow, and full of
difficulties to our corrupt nature; but the way which leads unto destruction
is broad, and the gate wide without impediments; a way not crossing men's
corrupt lusts. 3. Because of the easiness of the way to hell many go in
thereat, nothing fearing the issue; but for the difficulty of the way to
heaven, few do find it, few do walk in it. 4. Christ's Disciples having this
straightway revealed to them in the word, should choose rather to go along to
life, then go with the multitude unto destruction; for, Enter in at the
straight gate, says our Lord, for wide is the other.

Ver. 15. Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves.

16. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles?

The fifth head concerning false Prophets, or false Teachers, which either
preach false doctrine, or true doctrine in a corrupt manner, and for wrong
ends, by whom the Lords people are in no small danger to be led away from the
power of godliness, unto the dead course of a powerless formality, 2 Timothy
3.5. Of such Christ bids us beware, saying, Beware of false Prophets: the
reasons are three, which yield so many doctrines. The 1. They will ^ain
themselves to be true Christians, that they might find room amongst the sheep
of Christ, Therefore beware of them; for, They come to you, says he, in sheeps
clothing. 2. Inwardly and in effect such Teachers are not for saving, but for
destroying of souls; for, Inwardly they are ravening wolves. 3. They cannot so
lurk, but ye may discern them by their false doctrine, or corrupt handling of
the truth, or by their graceless conversation, and their earthly ways, and
ends, Ye shall know them by their fruits, says he, Therefore beware of them.

Ver. 17. Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree
brings forth evil fruit.

18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit.

19. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into
the fire.

20. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

He clears and confirms this third reason, by a similitude from trees,
teaching us, that as men gather not good fruits from Thorn and Thistles, but
good trees bear good fruit, and cannot bear ill fruit, as their kindly and
ordinary birth; and ill trees bear ill fruit, and cannot bear good fruit as
their kindly birth: so true and false Teachers are to be known by their fruits.
Doct. 1. The Lord seals the honesty of faithful Teachers with a holy life,
and does plague false Teachers with the out-breaking of their rottenness. 2 As
destruction abides the tree that bears not good fruit, and much more that
which bears ill fruit, so destruction abides the false Teacher; for, Every
tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down.

Ver. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.
The sixth and last head of Christ's Sermon, concerning the necessity of
believing, and obeying of his doctrine, and putting it uprightly in practice,
which our Lord does press by three reasons: The first is, Not every one that
esteems himself to be Christ's servant, and does confess him to be his Lord,
shall be saved; but the man only who puts in practice Gods will: Therefore
it is necessary that faith and obedience of Christ's doctrine be carefully
practiced. Doct. 1. A man may profess himself a Christian, and seem to be
zealous in avowing Christ to be his Lord, and yet be disobedient to the
doctrine; For Christ's word does import this, that some may call him Lord, Lord,
who do not his Fathers will. 2. Professors of christianity, without the
practice of sound faith and repentance, shall be excluded out of heaven; for
the sentence is clear, Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. 3. Such as study to obey Gods will revealed in the
Gospel, that is, to believe in the Son of God, and to testify their faith by a
holy conversation shall be surely saved; for, He that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven: now the will of
God revealed in the word, is, that he whom the law condemns, should flee to
Christ Jesus by faith, and study to bring forth the fruits of newness of life.

Ver. 22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many
wonderful work?

23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that
work iniquity.

The second reason to this meaning: Many conceive now, that this plea of being
Prophets, and workers of miracles in my Name, will be sufficient for their
salvation in the day of judgment, who then at that day will find themselves
disappointed of their hopes, because they have not been workers of
righteousness; therefore real obedience of my Doctrine is necessary. Doctr.
1. There is a day of judgment appointed for all men, when Christ shall sit as
Judge; for it is said, Many shall come to me at that day; and, I shall say,
i.e. Give the Sentence. 2. Many do build hopes of heaven upon great gifts and
employments in the Ministry, given to them with some success, who shall be
rejected of Christ; for, Many will say to me, Have I not prophesied? unto whom
I will say, Depart from me. 3. All men had need to beware, lest they deceive
themselves in the matter of their own salvation, when they hear that Preachers,
and Prophets, and workers of miracles deceive themselves, and may be destitute
of saving faith and sound repentance, which they do preach to others; for it is
said, Many will say to me in that day, We have prophesied. 4. Such as Christ
shall reject at the last day, were never endued with saving grace, or accounted
by him for true B^leevers; for Christ says, I will profess to them, I never
knew you; that is, I never approved you for any of my true Disciples. 5. Such
as are destitute of true faith and repentance, how specious soever their gifts
and outward conversation seem to be to themselves or others, are in Christ's
account but workers of iniquity, and shall not dwell in his company in heaven:
for, unto them who have no more but such stuff as is here spoken of, he will
say, Depart from me, ye that work iniquity: Let an unrenewed man preach or
pray, or cast out devils, or convert souls, he is still but a Worker of
iniquity, because he is not drawn in the sense of sin to believe in Christ, and
to draw virtue out of him unto sanctification.

Verse. 24. Therefore, whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I
will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:

25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and is fell not; for it was founded upon a rock.

26. And every one that bears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall
be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:

27. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell, and great was the f^l of i^.

A th^^d reason of the necessity of our put^ing the Doctrine of Faith and
Repentance in practice, as, He that does Christ's sayings, is like a wise
builder, whose work is able to abide the trial; and he that does not practice
Christ's Doctrine, is like a foolish builder, whose work is over-turned when it
is tried; therefore the practicing of Christ's doctrine is necessary. Doct. 1.
Our Lord is an accurate observer of the inward disposition of men's hearts, and
conversation; for so his careful urging of the doing of his word does import.
2. The building of men's hope for salvation, is not alike well grounded, for
some lay their ground solidly, and in renouncing of all vain confidence, they
close by a lively Faith with Christ, as the only worker and supported of their
hopes, and grow up in him unto a holy Temple to the Lord; others lay their
ground slightly upon outward hearing and profession and suc^ like weak and
sandy foundations, and both of them seem to be alike before the trial come:
for so does this comparison import. 3. As the rain from above, the floods from
beneath, and the winds round about, beating at a house on all hands, make full
trial of the well-grounding thereof; so shall the building of men's hope for
salvation, be no less exactly tried, and he that is a Practiser of Faith and
Repent^nce, shall abide the trial, and shall not be disappointed of his hopes,
but found to be a wise man; and he that is a hearer only of Christ's doctrine,
who does not labor to practice it, in believing and obeying his word, shall
find his ground work ruined, in the day of trial, and himself declared to be
foolis^, for this is our Lords meaning. 4. There is a great need for every man
to examine himself, and to make fast work of his Faith in Christ, and study of
sanctification, because the ruin of the building of the hopes of salvation in
a counterfeit Christian is horrible; for, Great is the fall of that house,
says our Lord.

Ver. 28. And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at his doctrine.

29. For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes.

This is the effect of Christ's sermon on the Mount. Doct. 1. The power of
Christ's Word is able to convince all the hearers of it, and to force them to
admire the truth thereof; for, The people were astonished at his doctrine. 2.
Beside the authority of a faithful Minister, there was also sovereign Majesty
to be seen in Christ's teaching, proper to himself, as the Master and Lord of
all men; for, He taught them as one having authority. 3. Such as study not to
glorify God in their Ministry, do lose their own estimation also, for the
Scribes, who being ignorant of the nature of Faith and Repentance, did preach
men's traditions, studied not to practice the truth, but sought their own, and
not Gods glory, did lose their own authority, even at the peoples hand; for it
is said, Christ taught with authority, and not as the Scribes.

CHAP. VIII.
Our Lord gives evidence of his divine power, grace, sovereignty and wisdom in
miraculous healing of sundry diseases. 18. In trial of Disciples. 23. In
rebuking the tempestuous winds and seas. 27. In trial of the Gadarens.

Ver. 1. WHen he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.

2. And behold there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.


THe first evidence of Christ's divine power and grace, is, the miraculous
healing of the leper. In whose example these things are to be learned, 1. That
Christ's Godhead and divine power must be laid, as a ground by every one who
come, unto him, else nothing can be expected; according as this leper gives him
the glory of curing a miraculous disease, saying, Thou can make me clean. 2.
We must submit our selves to his will in temporal benefits, not having any
certain promise to obtain them, and still give unto him the glory of power to
grant our desires, whether he satisfy us or not; for, If thou will, says he,
thou can make me clean. 3- Nothing can keep a needy soul from Christ, when it
sees relief in him, it leapeth over all impediments, as this leper, contrary
to the prohibition of the ceremonial law, presses through a multitude, and
comes to him.

Verse. 3. And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will, be
thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. In our Lords harkening
to the Leper: Learn, 1. That Christ abhors not the vilest of those who come
unto him, how loathsome soever, and that he can touch the unclean, and not be
infected by pollution, but is able to cleanse filthiness by the touch of his
power; for, He put forth his hand, and touched him. 2. That Christ did profess
openly his own divine power; for absolutely he commanded in his own name and
authority, as God the departing of the sickness, saying, I will, be thou
clean, and this he proved in effect, immediately by cleansing the leper in a
moment; for, Immediately the leprosy was cleansed.

Ver. 4. And Jesus says unto him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, show
thy self to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a
testimony unto them. In this direction given to the leper, to show himself to
the Priest, who according to the law was judge in the case of leprosy, Learn,
1. That Christ's benefits will abide the trial, and be found to be solid, even
his soes being Judges: therefore he will have the Man healed, to go to the
Priest, who was appointed Judge of the cleansing of leprosy. 2. That Christ
will not allow any man to speak of him, but as he is directed, therefore he
would have the work found to be divine by the Priest, before it should be known
that it was his work, for his own greater glory; therefore says he, See thou
tell no man. 3. That Christ would have the ceremonial law kept, so long as the
time thereof endured, saying, Offer the gift that Moses commanded. 4. That if
our Lord suspend the manifesting of his glory, it is for manifesting of it in a
fitter time, to the convincing of his adversaries, and confirmation of the
faith of his own: Therefore he will have a Sacrifice offered unto God for the
cleansing, that the Godhead of the cleanser may be seen, and a testimony given
against them, who would not acknowledge his power to be divine.

Ver. 5. And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a
Centurion, beseeching him.

6. And saying, Lord, my servant lies at home sick of the palsy, grievously
tormented.

Another evidence of Christ's divine power, is the healing of the Centurions
seavant; Wherein learn, That Gods elections calling, and saving grace, runs to
all ranks of men, without exception; for here a man of War, a Commander, in^ued
with faith, a Centurion, and a Gentile comes to him. 2. That faith working by
love can make an earrand to Christ for others, no less then for it self; for,
My servant lies sick, says the Centurion. 3. Faith accounts misery, laid
before Christ, a motive good enough for mercy to work on: Therefore says he* My
servant is grievously tormented.

Verse 7. And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal him. In Christ's answer
learn, 1. How ready our Lord is to hear prayer, proceeding from faith and love:
for he answers quickly, I will heal him. 2. That when the party afflicted
cannot stir, Christ will be content to make the travel, as here he says, I
will come and heal him. 3. The Centurion did not expressly ask so much, as is
here granted, but half a word from says serves Christ, he will give unto it a
complete answer, My servant is sick, says the Centurion; I will come and heal
him, says Christ.

Ver. 8. The Centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be
healed.

9. For I am a man under authority, having soldiers underm^^: and I say to
this man, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes: and to my
servant, Do this, and be d^^^ it.

In the Centurions answer learn, 1. That Faith has a high esteem of Christ,
and a low esteem of it self, as is seen in the Centurions saying, I am not
worthy that thou should come under my roof. 2. That faith is content with
Christ's word, without bodily presence, and looks for no less effect from his
word then from his presence; for, Speak says he, the word only, and my
servant shall be made whole. 3. Th^^ faith acknowledges all power and
authority over all things, to be eminently in Christ; and in special, that all
sicknesses are Christ's soldiers and servants, to go or stay as he command^, in
a far more excellent way then a centurion can command his soldiers; for, says
he, I am a man under authority, etc. therefore thou who art supreme in
authority overall, may it do more then I.

Ver. 10. When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed,
Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.
Christ is said to Marvel, not that he is ignorant of the cause of this glorious
faith of the Centurion: for Christ was author of it, and did give it unto him:
but because it was to be wondered at by the Disciples, and Christ did use some
external gesture of wondering, to make the centurions faith to be so much the
more taken notice of; and therefore ^e^ is said to marvel: Hence learn, 1.
That faith, the greater it is, the more it pitcheth on Christ's Deity: the more
work it purs upon him, it is the more pleasing to him: he delights in his own
gift of grace wherever he sees it, he will marvellously entertain it, and
hold it forth as a rarity unto others: this is it, that He marvelled, and spoke
of it to his followers. 2. That the more means and the more time that a man
has had to grow strong in the faith, and yet has profited little, the more is
he to be blamed and to be reproached, in comparison of these who profit by few
means: This is it which Christ says, I have not found so great faith in
Israel, as in this Centurion, a born Ethnic.

Ver. 11. And I say unto you, that many shall come from the east, and west, and
shall sit down with Abraham, and Isa^c, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.

12. But the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness:
there shall be weeping and g^ashing of teeth.

Upon this occasion, our Lord prophesies of the calling of the Gentiles, verse
11. and rejection of the Jews, verse 12. Whence we learn, 1. That such of the
Gentiles as believe In Jesus Christ, are joined in society with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; and that out of whatsoever Nation they shall come unto Christ, they
shall be incorporate in the same fellowship of grace and glory; for, they shall
sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, etc. 2. Whatsoever was our
Lords purpose, about the choosing of the Sacramental Signs of his Supper, we
are sure that he esteemed sociall fitting of the Saints at Table, a fit sign to
represent their fellowship one with another, in grace and glory: and that he
thought it good, before the institution of the Sacrament, to acquaint his
Disciples with such a form of speech as might express so much; for in stead of
saying, Many shall be partakers with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of life, joy,
and honor, He says, Many shall SIT DOWN TO TABLE with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. 3. Whosoever are born within the compass of a National covenant with
God, are children of the Kingdom, that is, have an external title to be heirs
of the Kingdom; for therefore are the Jews who were born under the covenant,
called Children of the Kingdom. 4. If a man have no more but the external
honor of a Covenanter for the Kingdom, and do want faith in Christ, he shall
be stripped naked of that external honor also: for, here it is said of such,
The children of the Kingdom shall be cast out. 5. Such as are debarred from
heaven, are cast into utter darkness; that is, in extreme misery, confusion,
horror, and torment in hell; Where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, that
is, where shall be nothing but desperate sorrow.

Ver. 13. And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have
believed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the self same
hour. After reproving and threatening the Jews, Christ turns about, and
speaks graciously to the Centurion. Doct. 1. Christ will never be so incensed
against his foes as to forget his friends: Therefore his threatening of the
misbelief of the Jews, makes not our Lord forget his respect to this faithful
Centurion. 2. Christ will not dis-appoint the hopes of his own: but as they
believe so shall it be: they that believe in him shall not be ashamed,
therefore says he here, As thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. 3.
Christ's word and power need not his bodily presence for bringing forth the
effect promised: for the Centurions servant was healed, being absent in place,
On the self-same hour.

Ver. 14. And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he sa^ his wives mother
laid, and sick of a fever.

15. And he touched her hand, and the fever left her; and she arose and
ministered unto them.

In this healing of Peter's wifes mother, Learn, 1. That marriage is lawful,
and honorable in the Preachers of the Gospel, for Peter being called to the
Apostleship, keeps his wife, and house, and entertaineth his wifes mother. 2.
Christ will not disdain to visit the families of his own, how mean soever they
be; for, he comes to Peter's house. 3. The speciail thing our Lord takes
notice of in the house he comes unto, is, What aileth any in it, and what need
they stand in of his help; therefore it is observed of him here, that he saw
Peter's wifes mother lying sick of a fever, as if there had been nothing else
to see. 4. Christ will show his goodness and power as need is, for the comfort
of his friends as here; He touched her hand, and the fever left her. 5. Albeit
this might seem no great matter, in comparison of other miracles, yet faith will
observe Christ's divine power in a little matter, as clearly as in the greatest
work; therefore does the Evangelist mark this miracle, that She arose and
ministered unto them. 6. What benefit we receive of Christ, ought to be employed
for service to him, and his followers; for this woman being healed, Arose and
ministered, or served Christ and his Disciples, in such entertainment as Peter's
house could afford.

Ver. 16. And when the even was come, they brought unto him many that were
possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with hi^ word, and healed
all that were sick. In this multitude of miracles, learn, 1. That no time was
untimous unto Christ, when people came unto him; for, When the even was come,
when rest was due to Christ, after all the days diligence in his calling, they
brought unto him many sick. 2. Among other effects which sin ^ath brought upon
men, this is one, to be bodily possessed with devils: and it is justice that it
so should be, when possession spiritual is not regarded, as it is said, They
brought unto him many possessed with devils. 3. There is no mean to liberate
men of devils, but that they come, or be presented by others unto Christ, as
these were brought to him. 4. Christ by his word o^ command, easily can deliver
men from deepest possession; for, He cast out the spirits by his word. 5. Never
man came to him to be helped whom he cured not, therefore justly do they
^perish who come not unto him* for of those that came unto him it is said, He
healed ALL that were sick.

Ver. 17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying, himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. The Evangelist
makes observation of the intent of these works: Hence learn, 1. That all the
miraculous cures which Christ used upon men's bodies, was to make it evident,
that he was the promised Savior of souls spoken of by the Prophets; for,
These things did he, that it might be fulfilled, or be known to be fulfilled,
which was spoken by Esaias. 2. This speedy delivering of the infirm, this
universal healing of the sick; this welcoming of them, how untimous soever
they came, proves that Christ not only took on him our infirmities, common to
mankind, but also by compassion did bear our sicknesses so affectionately, that
he healed such as came unto him, so readily and shortly, as if the disease had
been in his own body.

Verse 18. Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment
to depart unto the other side. The report of his miracles being spread abroad,
multitudes of the people did flock about him, to gaze and wonder at him.
Therefore Christ no ways loving idle gazing, nor confused confluence of
curious people, does give commandment to his Disciples by ship to go over the
lake of Genesaret, unto the other side. Doct. 1. Many do flock after Christ and
his Ordinances, rather out of curiosity, and by-respects, then out of desire to
profit, as is here evident. 2. Christ is not the author, nor allower of
confusion, be it under never so specious pretenses, as here appears. 3.
Christ will rather depart then foster folly; he loves not to feed any man's
curiosity, but to be profitable; he loves not worldly pomp, but to be believed
into, and to be loved for salvation; Therefore, He gave commandment to depart
unto the other side.

Ver. 19. And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow
thee wheresoever thou go.

20. And Jesus says unto him, the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

A scribe perceiving how Christ was esteemed of, does make offer absolutely to
be his Disciple and servant; but first, with an eye to his own ease, profit and
honor, as appears by Christ's answer; then rashly, not considering his own
inability nor what hazards and difficulties he had to pass, in case of
following of Christ, and withal intruding himself in Christ's Ministry,
saying, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. Our Lord meeting the man's
mind, rather then his words, does profess himself indeed to be the promised
Messiah, now incarnate, and made the Son of man: next, that he had voluntarily
emptied himself so far of honor, riches, and ease, as he had no certain place
of residence, no not so much as a Foxes den, or birds nest, nor any household
stuff whereon to lay his head. This did our sins deserve, and this Christ was
content to suffer, for ransoming of us, and procuring right for large allowance
unto us, and to season and sanctify every mean estate and degree of life, to
such as should be called unto it; now whether this Scribe made his offer good
or not, it is not material: but howsoever, we learn, 1. That such as will
follow Christ, must make resolution to be content with such allowance, and
fare, as the Captain of our salvation was content with: for so does Christ's
answer import. 2. Whosoever do offer their service unto Christ, especially in
the Ministry, should look well what motives do induce them, and that they be
not seeking the world in his service, or else they may fall short of their
intention, and be disclaimed of Christ, as unfit to be accounted his servants,
for this is it which the answer does speak.

Ver. 21. And another of his Disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me to go and
bury my father.

22. But Jesus said unto him, follow me, and let the dead bury their dead.

Here is another man called to follow Christ, who desires a delay, and puts
off the matter with an excuse, till his old father were dead and buried: Hence
learn, 1. That such as Christ has a mind to call to the Ministry, he will find
them out: for here is a Disciple, who has no mind to follow Christ unto the
constant attendance of the Ministry, and yet Christ intends to have him. 2. A
true calling may be met possibly at first, with an unwilling mind, either
altogether refusing the Ministry, or shifting off the calling for a time, for
this man desires to be let alone till his aged father should die, that he might
discharge the last duty unto him, ere he followed Christ's call; Suffer me first
to bury my father, says he. 3. Christ will not take a refusal of the man,
whom he intends to employ; and that no pretense of doing duty to men's bodies
shall be taken for an excuse for the not taking charge of souls, when Christ
does call; for Christ urges him still, saying, Follow me. 4. Common civil
duties may be done by any men, but the work of the Ministry only by men chosen,
and called, and sent, Therefore follow thou me, says Christ, and let the dead
bury their dead: that is, men dead in their sins are sufficient for such a
work, as burying the dead, but follow thou this higher employment.

Ver. 23. And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.

24. And behold there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship
was covered with the waves; but he was asleep,

25. And his disciples came unto him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us, we
perish.

26. And he says unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he
arose and rebuked the winds, and the sea, and there was a great calm.

37. But the men marvelled, saying, what manner of man is this, that even the
wind amd the sea obey him?

In this miracle observe, 1. That our Lord of set purpose, will lead his
Disciples into dangers, for the stirring up, and trial of their faith, and for
evidencing of his own glory; for, He enters into a ship for this end, and
makes his Disciples follow him, wherein they might safely hazard indeed when
he went before and did give warrant to them to follow. 2. His presence exeemeth
not his Disciples from trouble, and danger; for, Now there arose a great
tempest in the sea. 3. Our Lord as he took on him our nature, so also he
subjected himself to our natural and sinlesse infirmities, for being weary on
the land, he falls asleep in the ship. 4. The church may be like to be drowned,
and Christ may seem to neglect the marter; for the Church now in the ship, was
covered with the waves, but he was asleep in the ship. 5. The church must
believe Christ to be God, and able to deliver them, albeit he seem as it were
sleeping among them, because he can carry himself as one a sleep, and that of
purpose in his wisdom, to the end he may be awaked by their prayers, as by the
Disciples here, They came and awoke him, and cried, Lord, save us, we perish.
6. As sense of danger and need is a choice argument, when we deal with Christ
for help (for, We perish speaks much) so is it an ordinary forerunner of
deliverance and help; for, Save us, we perish, went before the rebuking of the
wind. 7. It is a sinful misbelief to be too much feared to perish in Christ's
company and service: therefore he rebuked them, saying, why are ye fearful? 8.
He can put difference between small faith, and no faith, and as he will reprove
unbelief, so will he not despise the smallest measure of belief; therefore says
he, O ye of little faith. 9. Whether he seem to sleep, or to be awake, he is
Lord of heaven and earth, ruler and commander of wind, sea and land, whom all
the creatures must obey; for he arose and rebuked the wind and there, was a
calm. 10. The glory of the deliverance, which Christ does give to his people in
their greatest straight, is mavelous, and far above all that they can
apprehend ere it come: for when the Disciples looking as men on the Lords work,
saw the great calm, they marvelled. 11. The faith which Christ's Disciples had
in his Godhead, was little in comparison of what they had ground f^r, even
from the works of the glory thereof, demonstrate unto them; for, say they, What
manner of man is this, that even the winds and sea obey him?

Ver. 28. And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the
Gergesens, there met him two poss^ssed with devils, coming out of the tombs,
exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.

29. And behold, they cried out, saying, what have we to do with thee, Jesus
thou Son of God? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

30. And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding.

31. So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go
away into the herd of swine.

32. And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the
herd of swine: and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep
place into the sea and perished in the waters.

33. And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told
every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils.

34. And behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him,
they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.

The last part of the chapter, contains the delivery of the two men possessed
with devils: Wherein learn, 1. That Christ went no whether, but for a special
errand; pity to these two poor possessed men, moved him to cross The sea, or
the loch of Tiberius, and when he came to the other side, his errand appears,
The two possessed men are presecuted unto him. Christ can make the devils bring
men unto him, nill they, will they, for here there met him two possessed with
devils. 3. The malice of the devils is exceeding cruel, where they can get
liberty to show it against man: for they drive these men from the society of
other men, unto the saddest spectacle of tombs or sepulchers, they imbitter
them with rage and fierce anger, and move them to come against all other men,
so, that no man could pass by that way. 4. How powerful soever devils be, yet
they can neither stand out against Christ's power, nor flee from him, nor abide
his presence: Therefore, They cry out for fear of him. 5. The case of possessed
souls, in whom the spirit of disobedience does rule, is to be seen in these
whose bodies were possessed with devils, the man is their lodging house; he is
no more master of his own actions, but is Satan's slave; The man's eyes look for
Satan, his hands and feet work and walk for Satan, his throat is made Satan's
blowing-horn, his mouth speaks for Satan: and here they cry out by the Poor
man's throat, saying, What have we to do with thee? 6. Devils did know Christ to
be the Son of God, but they knew also that he came not in the world for their
good, but to be Savior of men; therefore, What have we (...) do with thee, say
they? 7. Albeit it be not in the devils power not to yield to Christ, yet they
remain their wicked averseness to obey him, being loath to leave the possession
they have gotten: they would be let alone by him, if they could, and do
wickedly plead for it, saying, What have we to do with thee? 8. They know there
is a time coming, when they shall be more tormented then they are as yet; even
the day of Judgment, and this they tremble at, saying, Art thou come to
torment us before the time? 9. They cannot hurt so much as a sow except Christ,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, do suffer them; therefore the devils besought Christ,
saying, If thou cast (...) out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.
10. The Lord suffers sometime Satan to have his will of men's bodies and goods,
for their trial; as here to go into the Gadarens swine, to try the owners mind;
therefore Christ said unto them, Go. 11. These wicked spirits love always to do
evil, and make it a sport to destroy what they are permitted: Therefore, they
drove the swine headlong into the sea, and made them perish in the water. 12.
To the end that the trial of men might be perfected, Christ will have them to
know be Spiritual benefits of the Gospel, as well as the temporal
inconveniences following it. This it the reason that Christ will have the
Gadarens to know as well of the delivery of men possessed with devils, as of
the drowning of the swine; for, The swincherds tell them of all, that so they
might be inexcusable. 13. Men left to their own selves, will choose any thing
rather then Christ, and will do no better then these Gadarens did. 14.
Temporal loss of swine is so great in the worldly men's estimation, that
spiritual advantage is nothing esteemed of: for the Gadarens are not so moved
with the delivery of the souls and bodies of the possessed men, as they are
with the loss of their swine. 15. If men see nothing of Christ's sweet mercies,
but only take up his power, they will be loath to have him in their company;
therefore these Gadarens do Beseech him to dapart from them. Such worldly men
will rather quit the Gospel, then hazard their worldly goods. 16. This is the
greatest token of Christ's leaving a place, or not coming into a place, when the
whole incorporation, city, or place does consist only of Gadarens, and all do
consent that he should depart: for there apparently, he has no errand to stay
him; and wheresoever Christ has no employment, thence will he remove.

CHAP. IX
Here are more evidences of Christ's divine power, authority, and love to his
people, in healing the palsy, and pardoning of sin, verse. 8. Calling of
Matthew, and defending of his Disciples, verse. 17. Removing of sickness. verse.
22. Raising the dead. verse. 31. Dispossessing devils. verse. 35. And care to
have ministers provided for the conversion of souls.

Ver. 1. ANd he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own
city.
HE comes to Cpernaum, which is called his own city, not only because he dwelt
in it, but because he had a number of his own in it, as may be gathered from
the history: Hence learn, 1. That the more godly persons be in a city, the more
the Lord will own it: and albeit a city for the most part be unthankful (as
Capernaum was) yet will no^ the ungratitude of the multitude hinder him to be
good to his own in it; for Christ here returns to Capernaum, and makes it be
styled His own city.

Ver. 2. And behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a
bed: and Jesus seeing their faith, said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. In the healing of the soul and body of
the man sick of the palsy, learn, 1. That such as are seeking benefit of
Christ, will watch for opportunity to find him. When Christ comes to
Capernaum, certain men do bring out One sick of the palsy to him. 2. It is an
act of lively faith as to come to Christ, so also to help others to come unto
Christ: for of those that bring the palsy sick to Christ, as well as of the
palsy sick himself, it is said, Jesus saw their faith. 3. Our Lord loves to
entertain faith with evidences of respect unto the believers; for, Jesus seeing
their faith, speaks comfortably unto the palsy sick. 4. When Christ will
heal sickness and miseries at the root, he takes away sin, and forgiveth it:
therefore says he to the palsy sick, Thy sins are forgiven thee. 5. When he
remitteth sin, he advances a man to Sonship, and does regenerate him;
Therefore Christ does here call him, Son, while he pronounces him forgiven. 6.
The man whose sins are forgiven, is blessed, albeit his outward condition do
seem miserable: Therefore Jesus bids the sick of the palsy be of good
cheer, because his sins were forgiven.

Ver. 3. And behold, certain of the Scribes said within themselves, This man
blasphemeth. The adversaries of Christ conceive ill thoughts of this his mercy
to the palsy sick: Hence learn, 1. That it is no wonder to see Christ's
followers misconstrued, for the Scribes think of Christ himself, that he
blasphemeth. 2. Even these who are of the learned sort, who should know him
best, may be mistaken about him; for, Certain of the Scribes misconsture him.
3. Any vail is sufficient to blindfold the wicked, for these men will not see
Christ to be God, notwithstanding he does demonstrate his deity daily, because
they see him to be a man; This man, say they, blasphemeth. 4. Christ's forgiving
sins by his own authority, was a plain avowing himself to be very God, for who
can forgive sins so but God? And this is the ground whereupon the Scribes do
think Christ guilty of blasphemy, that being, as they thought a man, and no
more, he did forgive sins by his own authority, which is the property of God.

Ver. 4. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think ye evil in
your hearts? Christ will prove himself to be God, by discovering their inward
thoughts: Hence learn, 1. That the more the Godhead of our Lord be opposed,
the more will he show himself to be God, in the face of his adversaries: And
here he turns out the inside of the Scribes mind, showing himself the
searcher. of hearts; for it is said, Jesus knowing their thoughts. 2. Thoughts
go not free before God, Men shall give account of them; for, here the Scribes
are challenged of thoughts, Wherefore think ye evil? 3. It is a sin, and a
fearful one, to think in our heart, that Christ is not very God, for which no
man shall be able to answer, when he shall be challenged, more then these men
were able, to whom Christ says, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?

Ver. 5. For whether is it easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, Or to say,
arise and walk?

6. But that ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive
sins, (then says he to the sick of the Palsy) Arise, take up thy bed, and go
unto thine house.

7. And he arose, and departed to his house.

He demonstrateth himself yet more to be true God, even his enemies being
judges, by discovering so much power in his works, as they acknowledged him to
be divine: Hence learn, 1. That our Lord his works are able to convince the
adversaries of his Godhead, themselves being Judges; for, Whether, says he,
is it easier? etc. 2. Christ's forgiving sins in his own name and authority, and
his setting a man sick of a palsy, whole and strong upon his feet, in a
moment, are both convincing evidences of Christ's Godhead; The argument may be
framed thus, He who heals the palsy sick in a moment by his own power,
gives a convincing evidence of his Godhead, (even the Scribes, Christ's
adversaries being Judges:) But Christ does heal the sick in a moment by his
own power, (as he proves sensibly in his healing the Palsy before their
eyes:) Therefore Christ gives a convincing evidence of his Godhead, the
Scribes and adversaries being judges. Another convincing argument may be thus,
He who has power of himself to heal the palsy, does without blasphemy give
out himself to be God, in forgiving sins by his own authority (even in the
judgment of his adversaries, who esteemed the healing of the palsy in his own
name, to be less easy then to pronounce forgiveness of sins in his own name:)
But Christ has power of himself to heal the palsy, and sensibly ^^weth the
same in healing thereof, to the intent his adversaries may know that he in the
time of his humiliation in the flesh had power on earth to forgive sins;
Therefore Christ without blasphemy gives out himself to be God, in forgiving
sins by his own authority; and so the adversaries of his Godhead, the Scribes
were confounded.

Verse 8. But when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God,
which had given such power and men. The Pharisees are put to shame, and yet do
not glorify God; but the multitude do acknowledge divine power manifested in
this work, Doct. 1. When the learned refuse to give to Christ glory, God can
make others to glorify him; as the multitude here do glorify God for what
they see in Christ, when the scribes are dumb. 2. The light of a miracle may
convince a man, and lift him up to see divine properties in Christ, and yet not
be sufficient to settle him in the faith, that Christ is God and Man in one
person: for here the multitude do come short of a full testimony that Christ is
God: they glorify God who had given such power to Men, not having yet the
knowledge, that The Man was God incarnate.

Verse 9. etc. to 14. And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man named
Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he says unto him, Follow me. And
be arose and followed him. In Matthew his conversion and calling to the
Apostleship, Learn, 1. That it is our duty, when we may edify others, to
declare what proof we have of Gods mercy toward our selves, albeit the
glorifying of God by this mean be joined with abasing of our own estimation;
for Matthew here gives us an example so to do, in relating how himself, when
Christ called him, was found in a base and odious office among the Jews, to
wit, a Customer, who had sold his own credit, and all men's kindness for love of
gain. 2. The grace of effectual calling is not prevented by any goodness in
man; for, Matthew is sitting at the receipt of custom, without taking notice of
Christ, all the time he had been in Capernaum, before this time: yet Christ
with a special eye of compassion and love does now look on him, convert and
call him to be an Apostle. 3. The operation of grace is invincible; for Matthew
here without more ado, breaks through all Impediments, arises, leaves the
Custom-house, and follows Christ.

Ver. 10. And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meal in the hous^^ behold,
many Publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his Disciples. After
this, Matthew does entertain Christ in his house: upon which occasion other
Publicans also do come in unto Christ: Hence learn, 1. That a soul which has
rasted the grace and love of Christ, cannot choose but fall in love with him,
and his followers; for Matthew now cannon satisfy himself, till he get Christ
and his Disciples to eat with him at his house. 2. Christ will not refuse to
take, and give signs of friendship and love, where he knows he is loved; for
here he comes and his Disciples with him, to eat at the Publicans house. 3.
The observation of Christ's kind respect to any one sinner, may give
encouragement to the rest, to draw nee^ unto him also: for, because Christ will
come to a Publicans house to eat with him, many Publicans and sinners came and
sat down also with him and his Disciples.

Ver. 11. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto (...) Disciples, Why
eats your Master with Publicans and sinners? The Pharisees cannot endure this
his familiar conversing with sinners. Doct. 1. Such as are not humbled in the
sense of there own sins, will take occasion of car^ing against God, if he deal
otherwise with his own children then they can allow; if he show signs of
favor to others, whom they judge more sinful then themselves: This is the
ground of the Pharisees accusing Christ, because, He eats with sinners. 2.
They who are least sensible of their own sins, will be greatest enemies to
such, as in the sense of sin are seeking communion with Christ: and no greater
temptations have young Christians to waken them, then from old hypocrites: The
converted Publicans are disdained, Christ and his Disciples are quarrelled for
their kind carriage toward young converts, only by the Pharisees: Why eats
your Master with sinners, sa^ they?

Verse 12. But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, they that he whole
need not a Physician, but they than are sick. Christ takes the defense of his
Disciples, and clears himself and them also. Doct. 1. Whosoever suffer or
are quarrelled for Christ's cause, he will take the plea upon himself: the
Disciples here are questioned, and Christ makes answer to the Pharisees;
Christ justifies his own deed by three reasons: The first, The Physician may
converse with the sick: Therefore I may converse with such publicans and
sinners as find themselves sick of sin; albeit ye who count your selves whole
and sound, find no need of such a Physician as I am: Hence learn, 1. That sin
is like a sore sickness which needs the true Physician, who is Jesus Christ
alone: for so imports the comparison. 2. All such as are dead in their sins
and trespasses, and namely such as are puffed up with conceit of their own
righteousness, are whole and found in their own estimation, and do misregard,
the Physician Christ, as if they stood in no need of him; such were the
Pharisees hereby taxed. 3. Such as are sick and sensibly troubled with sin,
Christ will converse, with them, as with persons standing in need of him; for,
They that are sick need the Physician, says he.

Ver. 13. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
The second reason: God never commanded a ceremony of the Leviticall law, to
hinder a necessary duty of mercy, or of the Moral law, as Hosea 6.6, teaches;
Therefore no ceremony Leviticall must hinder me to show mercy on these
publicans and sinners: Hence learn, 1. That proud men who are puffed up with
the conceit of their own righteousness, and do disdain humbled sinners, are
ignorant of the word of God, whatsoever they seem to be in profession of
knowledge; Therefore says Christ to these proud Pharisees, Go ye and learn
what it means, etc. 2. God delights to show mercy to sinners, and will not
suffer any man to deny mercy to his neighbor, under pretense of observation of
some act of outward ceremony: Commands about outward ceremonies were not
appointed to hinder, but to further the work of mercy; for it is said, I will
have mercy and not sacrifice. The third reason: My errand unto the world is not
to call unto repentance such as are righteous in their own eyes, as you are;
But to call such as these Publicans, who are sinners in their own eyes;
therefore it is lawful for me to converse with them, rather then with you:
Hence learn, 1. So many of the hearers of the Gospel, as are righteous in their
own eyes, do want a warrant to come unto the comfort of Christ's mercy and
mediation, so, long as they remain proud and puffed up with opinion of their
own righteousness; for he says, I am not come to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. All his doctrine unto the conceited: righteous, is, to
show them their unrighteousness, and deserved condemnation, and Gods imminent
wrath, and to exclude them from the benefit of his Gospel, till they be
humbled. 2. such as are sensible of their sins and unrighteousness, who see
themselves to have sin, and to want repentance, are the very souls whom Christ
is seeking, and whom he came to call, that coming unto him, he might give them
repentance* for, he says, I am come to call sinners to repentance. 3. The
grace of Christ's Gospel does not give liberty to loosnesse, and sinful living,
but calls men to the course of repentance, that walking on in the way of
mortifying sin, Christ may lead them unto salvation; for I came to call sinners
to repentance, says he.

Verse 14. Then came to him the Disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees fast often, but thy Disciples fast not? Thus the Pharisees are refuted:
now John's Disciples do come and quarrel for Christ's Disciples nonconformity
with them in fasting. Doct. 1. It is no wonder to see questions arise in the
Kirk for nonconformity in ceremonies; for John's disciples do quarrel with
Christ, that his Diiciples were not conformable to them in the custom of
frequent fasting. 2. Men are much in love with their own customs, and look more
to ceremonies then to substance, and would have their own practice to be the
sole rule which others should follow; for, Why, say they, do WE fast, but THY
Disciples fast not? 3. Such as are given to urge needless conformity, give
advantage to the enemy, and will readily join with Christ's adversaries in the
controversy to strengthen themselves, and to make their party good; for, Why
do we and the Pharisees fast? say John's disciples. They side with the
Pharisees, and justify their course, that they may burden Christ and his
disciples, as the fewer number, with a prejudice.

Ver. 15. And Jesus said unto them, can the children of the bridechamber
mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days will come when
the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. Christ
justifies his Disciples by two reasons, in which he deals with John's
Disciples as with friends, more mildly then with the Pharisees. The first
reason is, so long as I am in my Disciples company, it is the time of joy unto
them; Therefore to enjoin them fasting, were untimeous: Hence learn, 1. That our
Lord Jesus is Bridegroom, and the church is his Bride, which he espouseth to
himself to be partaker of all the riches of his grace; and Christ's Ministers
are the Bridegrooms men, for this the comparison does import. 2. The Disciples
of Christ so long as Christ was bodily present among them, had days of great
joy, as children of the Bride-chamber, daily beholding his glory and grace, in
which condition they were not called unto fasting: Therefore says he, The
children of the Bridechamber cannot mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with
them. 3. When the Lord does withdraw his wonted presence, and usual comforts
from us, we are called to fasting and mourning; for The days shall come,
wherein the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast, says
he.

Ver. 16. No man puts a piece of new cloth unto an old garment: for that
which is put in to fill it up, takes from the garment, and the rent is made
worse.

17. Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the bottles break, and
the wine runs out, and the bottles perish; but they put new wine into new
bottles, and both are preserved.

The second reason clothed with two similitudes, is this, The strong exercise
of extraordinary fasting is no more fit for the tender and weak condition of my
Disciples, then to put a piece of now stiff cloth upon a tender old coat,
which is not able to bear the seam, or then it is fit to put new wine into old
and weak bottles (for this exercise of extraordinary and frequent fasting is
fit for strong and exercised Disciples only) Therefore my Disciples are not
charged to fast in this their tender condition: Hence learn, 1. That the work
of Gods grace in young converts is very tender, and easily hurt, and must be
discreetly entertained, so does the scope of the similitudes import. 2. When
christians are grown up so some strength, and have their senses exercised, they
must be put to answerable pains and exercise in Religion; for this is To put
new wine in new bottles, that both might be preserved. 3. If discretion be not
used in proportioning the burden of outward exercises of religion, unto the
capacity and strength of the Disciples, both the exercise is lost, and the
Disciples are hurt: for this is the meaning of, the hole of the garment is made
more, the new wine and the old bottle both are lost.

Ver. 18. While the spoke these things unto them, behold, there came a certain
ruler and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead: but come and
lay thine hand upon her and she shall live.

19. And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so did his disciples.

The dispute is broken off by the coming of a ruler, praying that his daughter
might be raised from death. In the coming of this ruler unto Christ, We learn,
1. That Christ can find out means in his providence to honor himself in the
midst of all controversies and disputations; for, A certain Ruler, a man of
place comes and worshippeth him, while he is speaking, and so breaks off the
dispute. 2. Christ can find an errand for the man whom he will draw unto him,
as here, by a daughters death: so by some like trouble on a man or on his
family, he can draw the Parents unto himself. 3. All that come to Christ, are
not alike strong in faith. This ruler of the Synagogue requires both Christ's
Presence, and the touch of his hand, that his daughter may be raised from dead:
Come, says he, and lay thy hand on her. 4. Our gentle Lord refuses no man,
puts no man away that come unto him, He arose and followed him.

Ver. 20. (And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touched the b^mme of his garment.

21. For she, said within her self, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be
whole.

While Christ is on his way, a sick woman through faith is healed. Doct. 1.
Poor and rich are alike welcome to Christ, for here while he is going with the
Ruler, he neglects not this poor sick man. 2. That which does separate us
from the society of the Holy, must not separate us from Christ, but rather
drive us unto him; for this woman legally polluted, and so separate from the
Temple, and all clean Persons, draws near Christ to touch him. 3. Though all
remedies do fail, and our evil be of long endurance, yet Christ must be run
unto, for this woman is diseased twelve years, yet comes with hope of help in
Christ. 4. Albeit Christ seem to take no notice of us, but to be about the
helping of others only, yet must we take notice of him, and draw in to him upon
all occasions offered. As this woman comes to Christ in his way to the Rulers
house; while grace is in dealing, we must have our share of it. 5. None can
come to Christ rightly, but such as believe to be the better of him: and such
as come may be persuaded of help by him, as this woman assured her self of
health, If she might but touch his garment.

Verse 22. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter,
be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. And the woman was made
whole from that hour) Christ will not have this work to be hid, but brought to
light for good use. Doct. 1. Though modest souls resolve quietly to creep to
heaven, unknown of others; yet God will have his work in them brought to light,
for his own glory; Therefore Jesus turns about, and draws her forth before
the multitude. 2. Faith in Christ gets a sweeter welcome then it can expect^^
it may come trembling, but shall find joy ere it go: as this woman is made
whole, and is declared to be a Daughter, begotten by the word of the Gospel,
and adopted among Christ's children, and is comforted and commended for her
faith in the midst of her fears. 3. Our Lord will not suffer any mean of our
devising to take the room from the mean appointed by himself; Therefore Christ
does not say, thy Touching my garment; but, Thy faith has made thee whole.

Ver. 23. And when Jesus came unto the rulers house, and saw the minstrels and
the people making a noise,

24. He said unto them, Give place, for the maid is not dead, but sleeps. And
they laughed him to scorn.

Christ goes on to the Rulers house, and does not forget his errand. Doct. 1.
Christ may give grace to another before thee; but if thou be seeking him, the
helping of another shall not hinder thee, but help thee rather, as the woman's
healing helped the Rulers faith; and so Christ goes on where he is invited to
come. 2. Christ will have nothing counted desperate which he takes in hand;
yea, he will have death it self esteemed but as a sleep, in comparison of his
divine power: nothing is too hard for him; in which sense he says here, The
Maid is not dead, but sleeps. 3. To speak of Christ's power to a misbeleever,
is but a jest: Therefore these misbeleevers laughed him to scorn.

Ver. 25. But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the
hand, and the maid arose.

Verse 26. And the fame thereof went abroad into all lands.

In the raising of the Damosel, and consequent of it, Learn, 1. That Christ is
the life and resurrection, and that his power can easily raise the dead^ for
here he took the dead Maid by the hand, and she arose. 2. The offer of Christ's
mercy to one, should make his name famous among all, as here his fame for this
One work went abroad in all that land.

Ver. 27. And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying,
and saying, Thou son of David, have mercy on us. In the healing of these two
blind men, Learn, 1. That our Lord wearies not to do good; the more he is
employed, the more good he works. When Christ departed from the rulers house,
Two blind men follow him. 2. When others get alms and mercy from Christ, it
should allure more to come to his deal, as these blind men hearing of many
helped by Christ, do come and cry, Have mercy on us. 3. Such as seek good of
Christ, must look on him as he is described in Scripture, as he is the promised
Messiah, the native King of Israel; Son of David, say they, have mercy on us.
4. Such as believe to get good of Christ, will find a way to follow him, and
come at him, albeit they were blind; for these blind men follow and cry. 5.
More persons in the sense of one need, may join in one fute unto Christ; for
these two blind men do join in one cry, saying, Have mercy on us. 6. The
incarnation of the Son of God is a noble Prop to Faith, Thou son of David, say
they, have mercy. 7. Mercy is our only plea with God, and Christ; Therefore,
say they, Have mercy on us.

Ver. 28. And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him, and
Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? they said unto
him, Yea, Lord. Christ suffers them to cry on, till he lead them unto his
lodging. Doct. 1. The Lord will seem not to regard the prayer which he minds
to grant, and so will train on the Supplicant patiently to pursue his request:
for no answer is given, till the blind men come to his lodging, and do follow
him within doors. 2. Whosoever love to have any thing from Christ, had need to have
a right estimation of his power, and to have their faith fixed; therefore,
Believe ye, says Christ, that I am able to do this? 3. In things belonging to
this life, it is sufficient to believe his Power, leaving the matter of his Will
to himself. Therefore here it is asked only, Believe ye that I am able? And they
answer, Yea Lord, and no more.

Ver. 29. Then touched he their eyes, saying, according to your faith, be it
unto you.

30. And their eyes were opened, and Jesus straightly charged them, saying, See
that no man know it.

Our Lord touches their eyes, and opens them. Dct. 1. Where any faith is,
the Lord will strengthen it as need is; therefore albeit no touching was
needful, yet to strengthen their faith, He touches their eyes. 2. Faith shall
not be frustrate; Therefore says Christ, According to your faith be it unto
you, and their eyes were opened. 3. Our Lord loved no rash applause, but that
his miracles should be kept in silence a while, that men might take heed to
his doctrine the more resolutely, and praise his work the more solidly:
Therefore charged he them, saying, See that no man know it, to wit, till I give
you warrant.

Ver. 31. But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that
country. They not taking heed to the command, but consulting their own wit, do
contrary to the commandment, therefore is their disobedience marked; But they
spread abroad his fame: Whence we learn, That the most specious pretenses that
can be made, are not able to save a man from guiltiness, if he disobey a
command.

Ver. 32. And as they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man
possessed with a devil.

33. And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spoke: and the multitude
marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.

In the healing of the dumb, Learn, 1. Where Satan gets possession, he does mar
the right use of what a man has of God in one thing or other, in so far as he
is not restrained; From some he takes the wit away, as from the lunatic: from
some he takes their strength, and boweth down their back; From some he takes
their hearing, and from this man he takes his speech; He is a dumb man
possessed with a devil. 2. The only remedy of all sort of possession is, To
bring the person infested by Satan unto Christ, as this man is brought unto
him. 3. When Satan is cast out, the man is set free, and where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty; for, When the devil is cast out, the dumb
spoke. 4. Where Gods work is rightly seen, the glory of divine and super
excellent power is perceived: Therefore is it that the multitudes marvelled,
saying, It was never so seen in Israel; meaning, that never any such work was
done.

Ver. 34. But the Pharisees said, He casts out the devils through the prince
of the devils. Satan moves these dogs to blaspheme Christ. Doct. 1. It is a
dangerous thing to oppose Christ, for such will at length readily blaspheme
him, and will give the glory of his working rather unto the devil, then unto
him; as here the Pharisees said, He casts out devils by the Prince of devils.

Ver. 35. And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness, and every disease among the people. In Christ's care of the salvation
of the multitude, Learn, 1. That diligence in teaching and preaching the
Gospel, is the proper way to convert and save souls, which Christ himself has
appointed and practiced in his own person: He went about all cities and
villages, teaching and preaching. 2. Justly is the Gospel called the Gospel of
the Kingdom, both of Grace and Glory, seeing it is the light which shows the
Kingdom, the furnisher of weapons to fight for it; It is the Scepter whereby
the Subject^ of the Kingdom are guided; It is the rule and law for the
Subjects life, and it contains the evidences of the Subjects right unto the
Kingdom; and being received in a man's h^^^t, it b^ing^th with ^^a begun
kingdom of righteousness, peace and joy. 3. The best opportunities of peoples
conveening, must be taken for teaching the Gospel, and no pains should be
spared for that purpose; as men have their particular calling: for Christ the
Prince of Pastors went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues. 4. Christ's mira^l^s were all of th^^ profitable to men, He healed
si^knesses and diseases. 5. There is no evil or malady of soul or body among
people, which our Lord is not able and willing to heal in all those that employ
him: for, He healed every malady, and every disease, in those which came unto
him.

Ver. 36. But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them;
because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.
Our Lord compassionatly looks upon the condition of the people, under their
ordinary teachers the Pharisees. Doct. 1. Misery of Gods people, is a reason to
show pity when he pleases, and specially when they are conveened in a
multitude; for it is said, When he saw the multitudes, he was moved with
compassion because they fainted. 2. They are all as wandering sheep, who are not
gathered in unto the saving faith of Jesus Christ; Therefore these multitudes
not yet converted are compared to scattered sheep. 3. These men are no Pastors
in Christ's estimation, who do not teach people righteousness and salvation in
Christ, who are idle and unfruitful shepherds; Such as were the priests and
Levites at that time: Therefore the multitude here are counted as Sheep having
no shepherd, because their teachers did not their duty unto them in any
profitable way.

Ver. 37. Then says he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous,
but the laborers are few.

38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he will send forth laborers
into his harvest.

This his commiseration he lays forth before his Apostles, that they might be
affected therewith also. Doct. 1. People made willing to hear the Gospel, are
like a field ready to be cut down; so the comparison imports. 2. Sometime the
people are more in number, and more willing to hear, then there are able and
willing Ministers to teach: and Then is the harvest plenteous, and the
laborers few. 3. The true Disciples of Christ should carefully observe this,
and lay it to heart; therefore is it that Christ lays this case before his
Disciples. 4. True Laborers and faithful Preachers are Gods special gift to a
land, worthy to be sought from God by prayer; therefore says he, Pray the Lord
to send laborers. 5. God himself must fit men for the work of the Ministry,
and must thrust them forth, and give them their commission, for no man can
further the harvest who is not sent; the fore says he, Pray that he would send
forth, etc.

CHAP. X
In this Chapter is contained the first commission given by Christ to the
Apostles to go preach, wherein he does guard them against all difficulties in
their Ministry; and in special, against poverty and persecution.

Ver. 1. ANd when he had called unto him his twelve Disciples, he gave them
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
sickness, and all manner of disease.
HEre Christ calls and furnished his Apostles. Doct. 1. Christ does not admit
every man unto the work of the Ministry, but chooses out, and calls whom he
will; as here he calls unto him twelve, and no other. 2. Christ will have
such as shall preach the Gospel, to be Disciples ere they be Ministers; trained
and prepared a while in his company, ere they be put in public charge; for
here, He called unto him his twelve Disciples. 3. He fits whom he sends with
all gifts and abilities, necessary for the discharge of their Office, as here
he gave them power against unclean spirits, etc. 4. Our Lord Jesus is very God,
having divine power in himself, which he will put forth by what instruments he
pleases, as here, He gives power to his Apostles to work miracles in his name
and authority.

Ver. 2. Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these, The first, Simon, who
is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother.

3. Phillip, and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the Publican, James the son of
Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus.

4. Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot who also betrayed him.

In the names of the Apostles we learn, 1. That there must be an order among
the Ministers of the Gospel, albeit without stately subjection of all to any
one, there may be a priority of order, which nature requires, without supremacy
of Jurisdiction: yea, there may be priority of order, without a superiority of
degree in Office; let be, without superiority of jurisdiction; for, here there
is a first, without naming a second: The first, Simon who is called Peter; who
in the meetings of the Apostles might for orders cause, speak in the name of
the rest, as elder then the rest, or as Moderator; but had no Lordship nor
superiority of office over the rest; for this he disclaims 1 Peter 5.4. Next we
observe, That albeit for a man's own salvation, his conversion and
sanctification be necessary, yet want of true grace and sanctification does not
disan^^^ the office of a man outwardly called, nor hinder the lawsuinesse of
his Ministry; for Judas Iscariot is here called, and authorized to preach the
Gospel, as Peter was, and is sent out in a common commission with the rest; for
it is said, He calls the twelve, and gives them power, or whom Judas is
named for one.

Ver. 5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into
the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not.

6. But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

7. And as ye go, Preach, saying, The Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

In the direction learn, 1. That it was necessary, that the Jews should have
the first offer of the Gospel, being the visible Kirk for the time, the people
first and before all other in covenant with God; therefore in this first
commission, the Apostles are commanded to keep within the Jews bounds, and not
go to the Gentiles as yet, nor unto the Samaritans, which were composed of the
offspring of the mixed multitude of Pagans, who after the cativity of the ten
tribes, were planted in their room; for, Go not in the way of the Gentiles, but
rather to the lost sheep of Israel, says Christ. 2. The office of Ministers,
is, to bring home unto the true shepherd Christ Jesus lost sheep, going astray
from Christ: Therefore says he, Go to the lost sheep. 3. The consideration of
the danger of peoples souls ready to perish, must stir up the Ministers to
faithfulness in their charge; Therefore he calls his people Lost sheep. 4.
The mean appointed by Christ for salvation of souls is preaching, how foolish
soever it may seem to the world; for Go, says Christ, and preach. 5. The sum
of John Baptists preaching, Mat. 3.2. and of Christ's, Mat. 4.17. and here of
the Apostles, is all one; to wit, The Kingdom of heaven is at hand. 6. By the
preaching of Christ his Ministers, the kingdom of heaven is brought near hand
to men: for righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost is offered
unto every soul, who in the sense of need shall embrace Christ, Preach, says
he, the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Ver. 8. Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils;
freely ye have received, freely give. It is worthy observation, that the Lord
for confirmation of men's faith has given power to the first Preachers of his
Doctrine, to deliver men from miseries, both of soul and body, from sickness
and devils; that in all time coming the power of his Gospel might be believed:
for, Heal the sick, says he, Cleanse the Lepers, Cast out devils. 2. To show
the freedom and rich grace of the Gospel, (whereby, whatsoever belongs to
righteousness and salvation, is bestowed upon the unworthy, without money, and
without price) he gave the first Preachers of his grace a command to take no
reward for their miraculous cures, saying, Freely have you received, freely
give.

Verse. 9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses.

10. Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, nor yet shoes, nor yet
staves: (for the workman is worthy of his meat)

In this temporary commandment to the Apostles in their first commission, our
Lord teaches, 1. That such as have a calling to preach, need not be solicitous
for their living: and that they should not aim at the conquest of money, or
means, unto themselves, but to bring in souls to God. Therefore says he,
Provide neither gold, nor silver, etc. 2. Christ esteems and declares the
Preachers of the Gospel worthy of their sustenance, and their Hearers to be
obliged in equity to sustain them, saying, The work man is worthy of his meat.
3. When the Preachers are sustained by the Hearers, Christ esteems their
sustenance to be no reward, neither to be any thing considerable, to hinder
their bestowing of the benefit of the Gospel, to be esteemed A free gift; for
after he says, Freely give; he subjoyneth, The work man is worthy of his meat.
4. As Christ assures painful Preachers that they shall not want, so he gives
no order for sustenance of idle men; for there is no servant of his spoken of
here, but the workmen only, The workman is worthy of his meat.

Verse. 11. And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it
is worthy, and there abide till ye go thence. Christ gives direction about
their lodging and company, Doct. 1. Such as are known lovers of Religion, and
to be ready to entertain, according to their power, the preachers of his word,
are the only persons worthy of the company and guestning of Christ's servants;
the only persons in whose houses Ministers should choose to; lodge; for, Enquire,
says he, he who in the city is worthy. 2. Christ will have his servants
maintained in a seemly way, and not as beggars, basely going from house to
house; therefore says he, Abide in the house which is worthy, till ye go out of
that place.

Ver. 12. And when ye come into an house, salute it.

Verse 13. And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it
be not worthy, let your peace return to you.

Our Lord shows them to make trial of the house fit for their lodging. Doct.
1. Beside the good report that men have of their respect to Religion, Christ
will have his servants trying them, ere they trust them much; and the mean
whereby he will have them tried, is by their respect to the Gospel, and offer of
Peace through Christ's Grace: for every seeming holy Person, is not a friend to
the doctrine of Grace; therefore says he, When ye come to a house, salute it;
that is, Offer Peace by the Gospel unto it. 2. No house is worthy in Christ's
reckoning, but that which receives the offer of Gods Peace by the Gospel of
Grace through Christ, and unto such only Christ allows Peace; for he says,
If the house be worthy, let your Peace, according to your doctrine, come upon
it. 3. If any receive not the offer of Peace by the Gospel of grace in Christ,
they are debarred as unworthy, or unfit to have the fellowship of Christ's
servants, or any benefit of the Gospel; therefore says he, Let your Peace
return unto you. 4. Albeit the offer of Christ's Peace do unto the refusers
thereof no good, yet shall it testifle of the fidelity of the servants of
Christ, in offering Peace for their part, and so do good to the Preacher;
therefore, Let your peace, says he, return to you.

Ver. 14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor bear your words, when ye
depart out of that house, or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

15. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom
and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, then for that city.

From this to the end of the chapter, Christ incourageth the Apostles, and all
his Disciples to follow the Profession of the Truth of the Gospel, without
fear, by sixteen reasons: The first reason or motive, Such as receive you not,
shall be severely punished; for the shaking off the dust of the feet, served to
show that the Apostles were free of their blood, and that God did despise the
refusers of the Gospel, as a man does the dust of his feet, and that in the
last day, the dust of the ground where despisers of the Gospel did dwell, should
bear witness against them, albeit there were no other witness to be found.
Hence learn, That such as despise the Gospel, God shall despise them, and cut
them off from the society of himself, and all his servants. 2. There is an
appointed day, when Justice shall be execute to the full upon all the wicked;
and namely, on the despisers of the Gospel; and this is, At the day of
judgment, says Christ. 3. There shall be degrees of torment in hell, as there
are degrees of offenders; for, The case of Sodom shall be more tolerable then
of some other. 4. The sin of a city refusing the Gospel, is greater then the
sin of Sodom: for so does the comparison of the refusers to hear Christ's
messengers, and of Sodom import. The reason whereof is, because Sodom had not
the Gospel, and offer of Gods grace made unto them, did not sin against such a
convincing light, did not despise in so high a degree the remedy of sin, as
despisers of the Gospel do.

Verse. 16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. The second Reason: Though
your danger be great, yet remember ye are in my service; I send you out,
therefore care for no more, but prudently and holily to carry your selves in my
service. Doct. 1. Preachers must prepare themselves not only not to be received
by all to whom they do offer the Gospel, but also to be persecuted, and put in
hazard of their life: for Christ says, I send you forth as sheep among wolves.
2. Resolution must be made for the worst entertainment that can befall
Preachers, (that so the lesser crosses may be the better endured) even for what
sheep may suffer of wolves; to wit, Beastly cruelty without pity, because that
many Preachers suffer of people; Behold, says he, I send you forth as sheep
among wolves. 3. Christ's commission to his servants may encourage them, and
comfort them against whatsoever cross may befall them, Behold I send you
forth. 4. Except the great Shepherd of souls defend his own servants, they
have no more strength to resist their enemies, then sheep, in comparison of
Wolves. 5. Preachers must be wary and circumspect, to keep themselves from harm
of their wicked adversaries, that neither their body, nor soul be hurt by them;
Therefore it is said, be wise as serpents. 6. They must also take heed, that
they harm not the flock of their adversaries by any passage of unfaithfulness
in their calling; for it is said, Be harmless as doves.

Verse 17. But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the councels, and
they will scourge you in their synagogues.

18. And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony against them and the Gentiles.

The third reason: Ye are forewarned of witty and powerful enemies in Church
and State against you; but remember it is for my sake, and for a testimony
against them, and therefore Fear not: Hence we learn. 1. That there is no less
danger to Christ's servants, from unrenewed men, who seem to be civil, and
courteous, and observant of the laws, then there is danger from the most
beastly and cruel adversaries; Therefore says he, Beware of men. 2. There is
great danger for Christ's servants in civil courts and judgment seats under
pretense of law; yea civil judicatories and Ecclesiastical both, may turn
adversaries to Christ's servants, and conspire to persecute them; for it is
said, They will deliver you up to councels, and scourge you in the synagogues.
3. When inferior judicatories are found unjust against the servants of Christ,
remeed in law by superiors is hardly to be expected; at least, small confidence
is to be put in appellations to supreme Judges, but Christ's servants must
prepare themselves for the enmity of chief governors, and Kings also; for it
is foretold, That they shall be brought before governors and kings. 4.
Whatsoever be the pretense of People against the Preachers of the Gospel, the
maine quarrel is for Christ's sake; for it is said, Ye shall be brought before
Governors and Kings for my sake. 5. A testimony given to the truth of Christ's
Gospel before persecuters, which may stand against them at the last day, in
case it prevail not with them unto conversion, is worthy all the sufferings of
these that be persecuted; for you shall be brought for a testimony against
them. 6. There are a number to whom the word of the Gospel does come, only for
their conviction, who receive no benefit thereby; for so imports this
Testimony against them.

Ver. 29. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. The
fourth reason: Ye shall be furnished by my Spirit, as you have need, in your
sufferings and speeches for the defense of the Gospel: Therefore fear not.
Doct. 1. It is good to be resolved and prepared for the cross ere it come:
Therefore our Lord brings it, as it were, to the time of compearance, saying,
When they deliver you up. 2. The main matter which a true Disciple should
consider, and will take notice of, is not what he may suffer, or what he shall
say; but what way he may glorify Christ, and maintain the truth best;
Therefore it is said, Take no thought how, or what ye shall speak. 3. Christ's
servants must not be perplexed what to do or say in his cause, for Christ does
forbid us to be anxious, (ordinary means or preparation are not forbidden, but
anxiety only) saying; Take no thought what or how ye shall speak. 4. The Lord
will not forsake in the day of trial such servants, as are more feared to
offend, then to suffer, but surely will be present with them, to make them give
a fair testimony: for he promises to such, It shall be given you in that same
hour. 5. It is not necessary, that God should give beforehand what is needful
for the hour of trial: it is sufficient that assistance be given when the time
of need comes; for he says, It shall be given you in that same hour, what you
shall speak.

Ver. 20. For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which
speaks in you. For confirmation of our faith, he assures such servants, of
the communion of his Spirit. Doct. 1. A testimony or suffering for Christ,
concerns the Father and the Spirit, no less then it does concern Christ: for
in this case the spirit of the Father does own Christ's cause; for, It is the
spirit which speaks. Christ's cause is not upholden by learning, or humane
wisdom, but by the holy spirit; for, It is the spirit of your Father which
speaks. 3. The servants of Christ are but instruments whose mouth the Lord
borrows in his own cause; for Christ says, It is the spirit which speaks
in you.

Verse. 21. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the
Father the Child: and the Children shall rise up against their Parents, and
cause them to be put to death.

22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake: but be that endures
to the end, shall be saved.

The fifth reason: You must resolve to be hated for my sake of all men; but if
you go on to the end, ye shall be saved: Therefore Fear not. Doct. 1. The
worlds hatred against Christ and his Gospel, and grace in his servants, is
stronger then natural love, and is able to dissolve all bonds of blood or
friendship between the ungodly and Christ's Disciples; for, The brother shall
deliver up the brother to death, etc. 2. Christ's servants are obnoxious, not
only to be destitute of all men's comfort, but also to be hated of all sorts of
men for Christ's cause; for it is said, Ye shall be hated OF ALL MEN for my
names sake. 3. There shall be an end of the troubles of all Christ's true
Disciples, for so imports, He that indureth to the end. 4. There is a certain
salvation after the troubles are past; for, He that endures shall be saved. 5.
There is need of patience and enduring of the trouble unto the end, lest if a
man faint and give over, he lose his reward; for none, But he that endures to
the end shall be saved

Verse. 23. But when they persecute you in this City, flee ye into another: for
verily I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel, till
the Son of man be come. The sixth reason: Sometime I will reserve you for
further service, and will open a door for your escaping of persecution, and you
shall not want some place to welcome you: Therefore Fear not. Doct. 1. The Lord
allows Ministers in case of persecution to flee at sometimes; namely when
their life shall serve more for Gods glory, and the Kirks good, then their
death can; in such a case, he says, When they persecute you in one City, flee,
etc. 2. Preachers must still follow their calling, and seek occasion of
preaching in another place; Therefore says he, Flee to another City. 3. When
one place refuses to hear Christ's servants, God will provide another place,
where they may preach; Therefore says he, Flee into another City. 4. He
answers a doubt, what if thy servants be persecuted in each city, and having
gone through all, shall find no city kindly to them, whether they may retire?
He answers, that till the second coming of the Son of Man (which second
coming now only rested, he being come the first time already) there should not
be wanting some city of Israel, some kindly place to receive his servants:
which speech is not fitted for the Apostles in their first out sending, wherein
there was no persecution; nor yet only for the Apostles in their second
commission to all the world; but for all preachers of the Gospel unto the
worlds end, who in the Apostles persons are spoken unto. Under the name of the
Cities of Israel, is understood places where his servants will be welcome to
preach the Gospel, if other places cast them out. Whence this doctrine is
afforded, that However some Ministers may be so persecuted that they cannot
flee; or fleeing, shall not escape the sword of the persecuter, but must
glorify God in their martyrdom; yet there shall be other Ministers one after
another, till the second coming of Christ, preaching the Gospel from place to
place, in despite of all the persecuters in the world; for of this our Lord
gives assurance, saying, Verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the
cities of Israel till the Son of Man be come.

Ver. 24. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord.

25. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as
his Lord: if they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of his household.

The seventh reason: It may content you, that you shall not be worse used then
I your Lord and Master am, and shall be used: Therefore Fear not. Doct. 1. There
are very near and sweet bands between Christ and us; for he is our
Schoolmaster, and we his Disciples; he is our Lord, and we are his servants:
he is the Good man of the house, his church, and we his Domestics and
houshhold men, so imports his words, saying, The Disciple is not above his
Master, etc 2. Christ is a pattern of sufferings, from the cradle to the
cross, from his birth to his burial; for here he sets forth his own
suffering, to encourage us to suffer by like example. 3. To seek or look after
freedom from persecution, is to seek that we who are Christ's Disciples should
be better dealt with then our Master was, which is unreasonable; for, The
Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. 4. Conformity
with Christ in suffering, may sufficiently comfort any man who suffers for
Christ; for, It is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master. 5. The
comparison of Christ's excellency, and our base condition, should make us
willing to undergo any sort of humiliation; therefore says he, It is enough
that the servant be as his Lord. 6. Beelzebub was the idol of Ekron, and one
of the chiefest devils names: There is no blasphemy so great against Christ,
but Satan will find mouths to vent it; for it is written, They called the
Master of the house Beelzebub. 7. No wonder that Christ's servants be called
devils, when Christ was called a devil; so reasons Christ, saying, How much
more shall they call them of the household Beelzebub.

Verse. 26. Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered that shall not
be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known. The eight reason: The truth of
my doctrine, and your innocence, must both be brought to light upon all
hazards; Therefore, Fear not, but avow my Gospel boldly. Doct. 1. Christ's
servants are in danger to minish their testimony concerning Christ's truth, for
fear of men; Therefore are they warned not to fear them. 2. Albeit the
holiness and innocence of Christ's servants be overclouded, and born down for a
time, by scandalous speeches of persecuters; and they esteemed no better then
Beelzebub, yet shall it be brought forth to light in Gods time: for our Lord
has said, That there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor secret
which shall not be known; Thus may this general sentence serve the purpose in
this place. 3. Because at last the light of the Gospel shall break forth and
overcome all obstacles, Therefore Ministers should boldly preach Christ's truth:
and thus also does this general sentence serve Christ's intent, as the next
verse makes it plain.

Verse. 27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye
hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the house tops. Christ commands his
Apostles to publish, as openly as they could, whatsoever he should reveal unto
them, in any manner of way: putting the house top, for the most patent places,
where a man might be best seen, and heard; for the houses of Judea were covered
platform. Doct. 1. The matter of Preachers sermons should be nothing but truth
revealed by Christ; therefore says he, What I tell you, that speak. 2. Christ
does not reveal any thing to his servants, whether ordinarily by ordinary
means, as by reading or meditation; or extraordinarily by his Spirit, but it
is able to abide the light, and the trial of all who shall hear of it; and is
worthy to be avowed openly; for he says, What I tell you in darkness, that
speak you in light, and what you hear in the care, that preach on the house
tops.

Ver. 28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
The ninth reason: You must fear me, who am able to kill both soul and body;
therefore, Fear not man, who cannot harm you so much. Doct. 1. Plain and
faithful preaching of Christ's truth, may readily be met with persecution, and
hazard of life: and a man must be master of death, and delivered of the fear,
not only of smaller losses, but even of the loss of life also, if he would
preach all Christ's truth as he should; Therefore says Christ, Fear not them
which kill the body. 2. All that men can do against a faithful witness of
Christ's truth, is to take the life of the body; they cannot reach to the soul
to destroy it, or to take away from it righteousness or peace, or joy in the
holy Ghost; for, They are not able to kill the soul, says he. 3. The true
remedy of all base fear of the creature, and of death, is the true fear of God;
Therefore says he, Fear him rather which is able to destroy soul and body in
hell. 4. If a man suppress the testimony which he should give to Christ, for
fear of being killed by men, he falls in the danger of being cast in hell,
and losing soul and body. This is imported in the saying, Fear him which is
able to destroy soul and body in hell.

Verse. 29. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not
fall on the ground without your Father.

30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value then many Sparrows.

The tenth reason: Gods providence which reaches unto Sparrowes, and to the
hairs of your head, to preserve the least of them, may encourage you
sufficiently against fear of men; therefore, Fear not to preach my truth. Doct.
1. Gods providence is very particular toward all the creatures, so that the
least of them is not taken or slain, without Gods dispensation; for, One
Sparrow, says he, shall not fall to the ground without your Father. 2. The
Lords care of his servants does reach to the preservation not only of their
life, but also of the smallest thing that concerns them; for, The very hairs
of your head are numbered, says he. 3. God esteems much more of his servants
then of other creatures: for his children are bought with his Sons blood;
Therefore says he, Ye are of more value then many Sparrowes. 4. The
consideration of Gods estimation of his servants, and of his particular
providence about them, may give them assurance, that tyrants and persecuters
shall do them no further hurt then God pleases, and so may deliver them from
all fear in the discharge of their message; this Christ infers, saying
expressly, Fear ye not therefore.

Verse. 32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in heaven.

33. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father which is in heaven.

The eleventh reason: If ye confess me confidently before men, I will confess
you before God, but if for fear of men, ye deny me, I will deny you; Therefore,
fear not to avow the truth of my Gospel. Doct. 1. Christ will not only have
Preachers, but also all christians, to avow his name and his truth before all
men, and that for Gods glory and men's edification: This is it he says in the
general, Whosoever shall confess me before men. 2. Men by confessing Christ's
truth, cannot honor him so much as he shall honor them who boldly do avow
him; for, Him will I confess before my Father, says he. 3. If men refuse to
stand for Christ, or for his truth, or cause, or for his servants troubled for
his service, they deny Christ, and in substance do say, They know him not, and
that they will not be for him in danger; for not to confess Christ, is here to
deny him; for, Whosoever shall deny me, says he, instead of saying, whosoever
shall Not confess me. 2. Such as refuse to avow Christ and his cause before
men, he will disclaim them before God, as men that belong not unto him; for he
says; Him will I also deny before my Father: This threatening strikes not
against such, as do slide at a time, and do afterward repent; and are ready to
confess Christ in no less hazard, as Peter did: for such men do not refuse to
avow Christ, but resolve to confess him, and do keep their resolution, albeit in
some surprizall they slide.

Ver. 34. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth ^ came not to send
peace, but a sword. The twelfth reason: Ye must resolve for trouble, even from
your nearest friends, and not look for worldly peace, if ye follow me;
Therefore, Fear not. Doct. 1. We are ready to promse to our selves worldly
ease, and wealth, and honor, and friendship, by professing of the Gospel,
albeit we have no warrant for ^o: therefore will our Lord have us purged of such
conceits, saying, Think not that I am come to send peace, etc. 2. Christ's
errand is indeed to bring peace, heavenly peace between God and man, but not to
bring earthly peace between the Godly and wicked; therefore says he, Think no^
that I am come to send peace on the earth. 3. Albeit it be true, that the
Gospel of Christ is not the cause of pe^secution, con^ention, and war^ but the
cause is in the wickedness of (...) and malice of Satan, who cannot endure the
Gospel; (...) she setting up of Christ's throne in any place, is so frequently
the occasion of contention, and trouble, and wars, that Christ is esteemed by
men to be a raiser of trouble in the world while as his part is only this, he
chooses that contention, trouble, persecution, and wars should come, rather
then his kingdom should not be erected and promoved, in and among men; Therefore
is it that he says, I came not to send peace, but the sword. 4. Albeit the
Gospel be not the cause of war, but by accident of man's wickedness, yet Christ
will take it on him, that in some sense he came to send the sword ^^^ because
he (...) appointed troubles, persecution, wars and (...) that may be
comprehended under the sword to come, that he may make use thereof, as of a fan
in his hand, for the trying and purging of his followers; and therefore
howsoever he be not accessory to the sin or persecuters, yet i^ he the author
of the purging of his own Church, and the appointer of all the means tending
thereunto; in which sense he says, He came not to send peace, but the sword.

Ver. 35. For I am come to set a man at variance against his Father and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.

36. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

This is explained in these verses, wherein the most bitter sort of contention
for the Gospel is foretold. Doct. 1. The natural hatred which men have against
the Gospel will make then: break all the bands of alliance and nature, and
persecute their dearest friends, for hatred of Christ's Gospel; and this trouble
we must resolve to endure; for it is told us, There shall be variance Between
Children and Parents, Father and Son, Mother and Daughter. 2. As this variance
is a part of the trial and exercise of his own people, Christ will avow
himself to be the cause of it, saying, I came to set a man at variance. 3. In
the case of persecution for the Gospel, at no unrenewed men's hands is
friendship, or favor, or help to be expected, but rather the contrary may be
looked for, that the more obligation of friendship be betwixt them and us, we
shall have the more opposition by them; for, A man's foes shall be they of his
own household, says Christ. 4. The Gospel does not work on all alike, but may
take effect in one, and pass by the rest; for, A man's foes shall be they of
his own household, does import so much.

Ver. 37. He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me:
and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. The
thirteenth reason: Whosoever shall choose to please kindred, friends, or
alliance, rather then me, I will disclaim them; Therefore stand not to avow the
word of my Gospel, albeit nearest and dearest friends should storm at it. Doct.
1. in the case of persecution for Christ's cause, He who to please friends,
stands not to disavow Christ's cause, and does choose to offend Christ, rather
then his friends, is unworthy of the name of a Christian; for he is unworthy of
me, says Christ. 2. Love to Christ hinders not love to friends, but only
seasoneth it and keeps it in the own place; for Christ only says, he that
loves them more then me.

Ver. 38. And he that takes not his cross and follows after me, is not
worthy of me. The fourteenth reason: if any man refuse trouble for me, I will
disclaim him; therefore, Fear not to profess me. Doct. 1. Whosoever is not
content to submit himself to whatsoever trouble can be imagined may befall
him, for following of Christ and his cause, is unworthy of the name of a
Christian; for so much does the text import. 2. Such damage, pain and ignominy,
as Christ endured must every christian resolve to endure for Christ's cause;
therefore i^ trouble for Christ called by the name of the cross, while he
says, He that takes not up his cross. 3. The weight of the cross cannot be
born, except Christ be looked unto, be followed, and adhered unto; therefore he
commands every Believer, both to take up his cross, and to follow him. 4. If
this condition please not a man, to have Christ and a cross both, Christ will
reject him, for ^f such he says, He is not worthy of me; that is, He is not
fit for me, I will not own him.

Ver. 39. He that finds his life shall lose it: and he that loses his life
for my sake, shall find it. The fifteenth reason: If any shall seek to save his
life, with disadvantage of my Gospel, he shall lose his life; and if any shall
not regard his life to do me service, he shall save his life: Therefore, fear
not to avow the truth of my Gospel. Doct. 1. Christ's truth should be dearer to
us then our life, for so does Christ's words import. 2. Whosoever do find out,
or follow a way to save his goods or his life, with the disadvantage and loss
of Christ's cause, he brings eternal perdition on himself; for Christ says
here, He that finds his life, shall lose it. 3. Whosoever shall hazard, or in
the hazard, lose his life temporal for Christ, he shall know by experience,
that he has made a good bargain, and preserved his life for ever; for it is
said, He that loses his life for my sake shall find it.

Ver. 40. He that receives you receives me, and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me.

41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward. And he that receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.

42. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of
cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no
wise lose his reward.

The sixteenth reason: Whatsoever respect or kindness is done to any of my
Disciples, for my cause, I will take it as done to me, and will reward it;
Therefore, Fear not to profess the truth of my Gospel, upon all hazards. Doct.
1. Receiving the message of salvation from Christ's servants, or kindness shown
unto Christ's servants, is reckoned by Christ as done to himself, and done to
the Father, in whose name the preacher does come, for he says, He that
receives me, receives (...) tha^ sent me, etc. 2. The cause for which a man
does any respect to Christ's servants, is mainly looked unto by God, whether it
be done to a preacher, because he is a Preacher; to a righteous man, because he
is such; to a Believer in Christ or Disciple, (how little or despiseable soever
he seem) because he is a Disciple; therefore says he, In the name of a
Prophet* in the name of a Disciple: for what good is done to any of Christ's
followers for other respects, as for friendship, hope of receiving gain by it,
or such like, does not come in (...) 3. The smalness or meanness of the
benefit, whereby any of Christ's followers are helped or refreshed, shall not
diminish Christ's estimation of the man's good affection; for, Even a cup of cold
water shall not want a reward.) 4. This doctrine how hardly soever it be
believed, is worthy to be received; for Christ confirms it by a verily, and
that to purchase unto this saying, the more credit.

CHAP. XI.
After closing up of the Apostles commission, we have John Baptists message to
Christ, with Christ's answer and testimony of John, to verse. 15. Then Christ
upbraideth these cities which did not receive, or make use of the Gospel, to
verse. 25. And inviteth needy sinners to come unto him.

Ver. 1. ANd it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his
twelve Disciples, be departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
IN closing the commission of the Apostles, Learn, 1. That the Apostles had no
unlimitted commissions, but were a^^ic^e^ to commandments, for the former
directions given to them are here called Commanding of them. 2. Acts of base
fear, or witless impudency, done in a perilous time, to the dishonor of the
Gospel, or disadvantage of any point of the truth belonging to the Gospel, are
breaches of Christ's command: for here all Christ's exhortations to his servants
wisely and stoutly to bear out the profession of his truth in all points, are
likewise called Commanding of them. 3. Christ so employeth his, servants in
teaching and preaching, that he will also go about the work himself; for
having commanded his Disciples to preach, He departed to preach and to teach in
their cities.

Verse. 2. Now when John had heard an the pr^son the works of Christ, he sent
two of his Disciples,

3. And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?

John being in prison, sets himself to confirm his Disciples in the faith
of Christ; and to this end he sends them to Christ with a question, wherein
he knew Christ would give them solid satisfaction. Doct. 1. The world will
readily reward the labors of the most excellent Saints of God, with injuries;
for, John Baptist here is in prison for his pains. 2. The news of the
prospering of the Gospel, Christ can cause to be carried to the prisons where
his servants do^ly, thereby to refresh them; Therefore John must hear of
Christ's works, I^ the prison. 3. A faithful servant of Christ should st^^y to,
make Christ's name known by whatsoever means he can, and to have all those who
belong unto him acquainted with Christ, for John even in prison takes course
to have his disciples to know Christ, better then they did. 4. Beside what we
can do in solving the doubts of others, we shall do well to send the weak in
faith, to propone their doubts to Christ himself. Therefore John commands his
two disciples to propone their questions to Christ, saying, Art thou he? etc.
knowing that he was most able to satisfy them.

Ver. 4. Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and show John again those things
which ye do hear and see.

5. The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed,
and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel
preached to them.

From the answer learn, 1. That Christ despises not the weakness of the says
of his own; for here he answers John^ doubting disciples, both with words, and
deeds, saying, Go show what you hear and see. 2. Our Lord deals prudently with
weak ones; for as John covers the Disciples doubting with a question, proponed
as it were in his own name; So Christ covers their doubting also, by giving the
answer, as it were unto John, rather then to them; Go show John again, says
he, albeit it is sure John had no doubt about Christ, for at Christ's Baptism,
he was confirmed abundantly that Christ was the very Messiah. 3. That which
disciples may hear, and see, and observe, in the real and experimental
putting forth of Christ's power among men, is sufficient to prove that he is
the true Messiah: Therefore says he, Tell John again these things which ye do
hear and see; Like as even the ordinary and daily working of Christ still unto
this day, upon such as are converted from time to time, may prove that he is
the true Messiah. 4. He in whom all these things which are prophesied to be
done by the Messiah are accomplished, is the only true Messiah: But Christ
Jesus is he in whom all prophesies are accomplished; for, He makes the blind
to see, the lame to walk, and the poor to take the Gospel: Therefore Christ is
the only true Messiah; for this is the proof whereby Christ does confirm John's
Disciples, that there was no other Messiah to be looked for. 5. The remedy of
all sin and misery is to be found in Christ, both for body and soul; for it is
he by whom the blind receive their sight, and the poor receive the Gospel,
etc. 6. The poor and needy soul, sensible of its own sin and misery, is the
proper object of the Gospel; The righteous and the rich in their own opinion,
do not smell any worth in Christ's Word; for, It is the poor who receive the
Gospel. 7. The Gospel does affect the poor and needy soul, so as it does put as
it were a stamp of the good news of Gods grace upon it: for so imports the
passive word in the Original, which says, that the poor are Evangelized, or
stamped with the preaching of the Gospel.

Verse 6. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me. Our Lord
obviats any temptation which might arise from his outward humiliation. Doct. 1.
Many stumbling blocks are to be met within a man's way toward Jesus Christ, such
as were taking on the shape of a servant, and his outward humbling of himself
unto the cross: This is imported In his mentioning of men's being offended, or
stumbling at him. 2. Such as do not stumble at Christ, nor start back from
believing and professing of him, for whatsoever cross or impediment laid in
their way, shall surely be saved; for, Blessed is he whosoever shall not be
offended in me, says he.

Ver. 7. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes
concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken
with the wind? Now follows Christ's testimony of John Baptist, wherein John is
commended for eight respects. The first is, his constancy: Hence learn, 1.
That Christ gives his servants a good meeting, he bears witness of their
faithfulness, as well as they do bear witness that he is the true Messiah; as
here for instance, when John's Disciples are departed, Christ speaks to John's
praise before the multitude. 2. The reasons which moves us to go hear the
Sermons of any preacher should be well examined; for we must answer unto
Christ's question, What went ye out to see? 3. It is the commendation of a
Preacher of the truth that he be constant in the truth, and not wavering hither
and thither; for this is the ground of John's commendation, That he was not a
reed shaken with the wind, as the interrogation having the force of a
negation, does import.

Verse 8. But what went ye out for to see? a man clothed in soft raiment?
behold, they that wear soft clothing, are in kings houses. The second point of
the commendation of John, is, for his Holiness and high Measure of
Mortification: Hence learn, 1. That it is the commendation of a Preacher, to be
mortified to the glory, ease, pleasure, and riches of this world; for on this
ground Christ commends John, by way of interrogation, denying him to be A man
given to soft raimens. 2. A true Preacher must be so mortified to this World,
as all the Allurements of court be not able to corrupt him; for such as love to
wear soft raiment, will affect to be in respect at court, for that very end;
therefore says he, They that wear soft raiment, are in kings houses.

Ver. 9. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and
more then a prophet. The third point of John's commendation is the clear
revealing of Christ, and of the shortest course to come unto Him, wherein John
was above any Prophet. Hence learn, 1. That the right reason of going to hear
Sermons, is, because the man that speaks, has warrant to speak, and to
reveal Gods will: this is it which he says, Went ye out to see a Prophet? 2.
John is called more then a Prophet, specially because he did point out Christ
more clearly and fully, then any before him, as Christ does show hereafter;
teaching us, that these are the greatest men in the Ministry, who do most point
out Christ to the world, and do most sincerely lead men unto him.

Verse 10. For this is be of whom it is written, behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. The fourth point of
John's commendation, is from his special employment to be Christ's Harbinger, to
make way for Christ; for albeit every Minister of the Gospel be Christ's
messengers, to carry amba^^age to the world, yet John Baptist was such in a
special manner: for of him it was prophesied by Malachi, Behold, I send my
messenger. 2. Albeit it be the office of every Minister, by the preaching of
Christ's doctrine, to make way for Christ's entry into the soul, to dwell in it
by his Spirit, yet John Baptist was Harbinger in an odd way, assisted by the
doctrine of repentance, in humbling proud sinners, and fitting them for mercy
in Christ: And, 3. He was in a special manner employed for pointing out of
Christ to be the Lamb of God, not only in doctrine, but also with the finger of
ocular demonstration.

Ver. 11. Verily I say unto you, among them that are bor^ of women, there has
not risen a greater then John the Baptist: notwithstanding, he that is least in
the kingdom of heaven is greater then be. The fifth point of John's
commendation, is, in comparing him with, and prefering him above all the
Prophets which came before him: because, 1. Singular predictions were of him,
more then ever of any of the Prophets. 2. His bringing into the world had more
extraordinary passages of providene then any of the Prophets. 3. His authority
and office to bring in a new Sacrament, was singular. 4. Beside the baptizing
of our Lord, and converting of such multitudes, his Ministry was countenanced
with the clearest vision, and revelation of the mystery of the Trinity, that
ever was. 5. The sanctification of his Person from the womb to his Martyrdom,
was singular. 6. The clearness of his knowledge of the way of righteousness by
Christ^ and of the application of types of the Messiah unto Christ, as that
true Lamb of God, was singular. These and such like other excellencies are
reasons why our Lord said, there has not risen a greater then John the
Baptist, among them that are born of women. Mean time lest John should be too
much esteemed of, Christ having thus preferred him unto all that were born of
women, does except Himself, and justly prefers Himself unto John, saying, He
that is least, or, no man in the kingdom of God, is greater then he; So does
Christ describe himself, as he was esteemed of by the rulers of the Church;
for who could be less in the Kingdom of God, in their estimation, then he
whom they did excommunicate? Now the rulers did excommunicate Christ, and for
his cause also, did cast out of the synagogue all that confessed him. He was
the Stone which the builders refused; whom the chief Priests and Elders did not
esteem worthy to be a member of the Church, or to have any place in the
building of Gods Temple: So Christ was in their estimation, The least; that is,
no man, in the Kingdom of Heaven, as this phrase is taken, Mat. 5.19, 20. And
who except Christ can be greater then John, who is called greater then any of
all the Prophets, yea of all which were born of women? It is true, that
Christians who lived since Christ ascended, have the history of many
particulars concerning Christ, which John did not live to see: But who shall
persuade us, that the least member of the Christian Church, or the least
Preacher of the Gospel, do see more of Christ in the Word of history, then any
of the Prophets; or John, who is greater then any of the prophets, did see in
the spirit and word of prophecy? And put the case that in regard of historical
knowledge, they did know many particulars which John did not know; yet this
sort or measure of knowledge, does not make them simply greater then John. Now
the comparison here, of John with the least of the Kingdom of Heaven, is not
simply in respect of knowledge, but in respect of greatness, which greatness
comprehends all the forenamed six points of excellency, and also whatsoever
other respect may contribute to excellency: and thus if we take greatness, none
can be called greater then John, except Christ, who in the estimation of the
rulers of the Jewish church at that time, was the least, that is, no man in the
Kingdom of God, and the stone of offense, which the builders did reject: Hence
learn, 1. That whenever any greatness or excellency of man is spoken of, the
excellency of our Lord Jesus must not be obscured, but rather lifted up
thereby: for where he is, a greater then Solomon is; a greater then John
Baptist is. 12, Whosoever shall dishonor Christ, he will not deny himself: He
will take unto him his own glory, for he declares himself here greater then
John, though the rulers of the church and others esteemed him to be the least,
or no man in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ver. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. The sixth point of
John's commendation is, the fruitfulness of his doctrine, that by the clearness
of John's preaching, the gates of Heaven, and the way of the Church were made so
patent, that men did not stand upon the bar and partition of ceremonies, or
upon any orderly way of the proselites coming into the church; But multitudes
did leap over all the Leviticall ceremonies: so that publicans, sinners,
heathen, legally unclean, and the naturally lothed lepers did thrust themselves
all in upon the company of converts, and upon the grace manifested by John's
doctrine: and indeed obtained grace to enter in the Kingdom of Christ, by this
their ingyring themselves upon him: Hence learn, 1. That the legal ceremonies
were never appointed to hinder people from Christ, but to lead them to him; and
therefore when the observation of these ceremonies might be a hinderance of
people coming to Christ, (As for example, so many days behoved to pass ere a
leper were legally purified, that he might come in the company where the Word
of God was preached) in such a case, God was not displeased that men overpast
and violently ran over these impediments to come to Gods Grace manifested in
Christ: for says he, The violent take it by force. 2. Yea the doctrine of
Grace being clearly revealed, no impediment of bygone sins, or sense of
unworthiness present should hinder a humbled soul from entry in the Kingdom of
Grace, for this Kingdom is taken by force. If we cannot remove impediments, let
us set our foot on them, and make stepping stones of them, thrusting our selves
so much more on Christ's grace, as we find our selves unworthy: laying hold so
much more on his offered salvation, as we find our selves otherwise to be lost.

Ver. 13. For all the prophets, and the law prophesied until John. The seventh
point of commendation, is, that John pointed at Christ now already come, at
Grace already laid open: whereas the Law and the Prophets only did prophecy
and foretell that it was to come; and this is a reason of the fruitfulness of
John's Ministry; Hence learn, 1. That the pointing forth of the fulfilling of
the promises, and prophesies in Christ, is a mean to bring men in multitudes
unto the Kingdom of Heaven; and this is imported in the particle ^or, wherein
a reason is rendered of what is said in the former verse; for, says he, all
the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John, but John shows the
accomplishment: And therefore multitudes did thrust themselves into the
Kingdom of Heaven. 2. The Church of the Old Testament, had a dark time, in
comparison of what we have now; for their light was prophesies of things to
come, but ours is preaching of what is already come; for, The Law and the
Prophets prophesied until John.

Ver. 14. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come. The
eighth and last point of John's commendation, is, that John was that Elias
prophesied of, to come before Christ: Malachi 4. John is called by the name of
Elias, because of like zeal for God, and successful employment in the
reformation of Religion; for as Elias in his days, so John in his days did in
the power of the same Spirit, stir up men to seek the true God in Christ. Doct.
1. When truth is told to people never so clearly, yet will they hardly believe
it, no not though Christ himself should speak it; Therefore says Christ, If you
will receive it. 2. Whether men believe or not, Truth must be told them, to
make them inexcusable; This is Elias, says Christ, If ye will receive it.

Ver. 15. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. If Christ's testimony of John
had been believed, then John's testimony of Christ had been believed also; for
John testified that Christ was the promised Messiah: therefore Christ did so
much the longer insist in this commendation of John; and having said
sufficiently, he closes with this speech, He that has ears, etc. Teaching
thereby, first, That every man has not a hearing ear, but some are deaf
misbeleevers of Gods Word, imported in these words, He that has ears. 2. Even
these who are elect, of them it is said, Let them hear. 3. If the Elect shall
hear unto believing, it suffices Gods intention, although the rest remain
ignorant misbeleevers; for, He that has ears, let him hear, is as much as, Let
the rest go their way, come of them what may.

Verse 16. But whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto
children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows,

17. And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.

Our Lord perceiving the unbelief of the multitude; does regrate their
obstinacy, who neither by John's austere Ministry, nor by his own sweet
dealing, could he moved to repent or believe; and this he does, by comparing
their disposition toward the Gospel, with the disposition of the rude people
toward music: for as they cared for no melody, and could not be moved either
with piping or lighter springs; nor with mourning and sader songs, as the
Minstrel boys use to sing; So the Jews could neither be moved to sorrow, unto
repentance, by John's austere preaching of repentance and judgment; nor to
rejoice at Christ's sweet offers of Grace and Salvation, made to them in a more
gentle and loving way. Hence learn, 1. That the obstinacy and rebellion of the
hard hearts of Christ's hearers, affected and moved his tender heart with grief;
for, Whereunto shall I liken them, does import so much. 2. The more are found
in the guiltiness of despising the Gospel, the more does our Lord resent the
wrong, and regrate sinners misery: Therefore says he, This generation. 3.
Hardly can any comparison express the sin of despising of the Gospel; for,
Whereunto shall I liken them, imports this. 4. The most obvious byword shall
be made use of to condemn the wickedness and folly of them who despise the
Gospel, in the conceit of their own wisdom; for it is like little children
says he, who when they find no respect had of their music, do put up their
pipes with this regrate,

Ver. 18. For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has a
devil.

19. The son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold, a man
gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners: "But wisdom
is justified of her children.

It is said here, That John neither did eat, nor drink, that is, not after the
ordinary diet of other men, as appears, if we compare this with Mat. 3.4.
Whence we learn, 1. That Gods Word is not to be pressed captiously, but the
true intent of it is to be looked unto, one place being compared with another.
2. God uses to send out his Ministers with diverse dispositions: some are more
austete in life, and more thunding in their Doctrine; others more sociall in
their carriage, and more gently inducing people to repentan^^: Of the forner
sort was John Baptist; Of the Latter, Christ. 3. People have ever some fault to
alledg in the Preacher, why they will not receive his message; for here the
people say, The devil it in John, because he chused to live more auster^ly
than other men, and when they see Christ converse sociably with sinners, To eat
and drink with them, and to take the fare as they found it, they say of him,
that he was a Glut^a^^, a drunkard, and a companion to wicked and vile men. 4.
All hearers are not alike ill disposed; though many do misbeleeve, yet some are
begotten to God by wisdom, or by the doctrine of Gods grace; for; Wisdom has
her own children. 5. Such as are made wise to salvation, will bear witness by
their faith, by their profession and Godly life, unto the doctrine of God, and
will glorify the wisdom of God preached unto them: for, Wisdom is justified of
her own children. 6. How many soever they be, who despise the Gospel, it does
not work a reasonable prejudice to wisdom* God will content him with the
testimony of elect and true Believers: for to God it is sufficient, that Wisdom
be justified of her own children.

Verse 20. Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works
were done, because they repented not. Seeing the main scope of the following
speech is expressly set down to the upbraiding of these cities, and the ag^eging
of their sin, it is without ground ^o argue hence, the ability of man to repent
and believe, without the special operation of Gods grace, and, it is an idle
and profane deed, to move question, why God did not grant such means to Tyrus
and ^idon, upon such and such supposition: for it is sufficient unto Christ's
purpose, that Aborazin and Bethsaida, had so abused the means of grace, as
they had hardened themselves in the sinfulness of nature, above Tyrus and
Sidon: so that more might have been expected in the matter of repentance from
Tyrus and Sidon, and from Sodom and Gomorrah, even according to the principles
of (...), then was found in these cities; for is so much pains had been taken
on them, as was taken on Capernaum, etc. in much appearance of reason it might
have been expected, that they should have repented in some sort, and have given
such signs of repentance, at least, as with Ahab, and Niniveh, they might have
escaped temporal Judgments. This being the scope, we should not stretch the
words beyond, and contrary to it: Hence learn, 1. That the miracles of Christ
were done by his own power* for here they are called His mighty works, in a
proper sense, and so they do prove him to be true God. 2. The use which should
be made of the miracles of Christ, and mighty works done by him, is repentance;
for that which is found fault with here, is, they repented not. 3. Whosoever
will not repent, when God calls for repentance, and will not give glory to God
when he calls for it, he will pour shame on them; for here he upbraids these
cities, which did not honor him.

Ver. 21. We unto thee Chorazin, we unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty
works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.

22. But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the
day of judgment, then for you.

Here is the doom given forth against these cities. Doct. 1. Over and above the
wrath due unto sinners, for transgression of the Law, a higher degree attends
the abusing the means of grace, and so much the greater, as the means have been
the more largely granted; for, Woe unto thee Chorazin. 1. It is free for God to
send the offer of the Gospel where he pleases; He had his own reason, why he
did not send the Gospel to Tyrus and Sidon, and yet would offer it Chorazin,
and Bethsaida. 3. Such as do hear the Gospel daily, may readily be found more
hard hearted, then they who never heard it; Chorazin more impenitently disposed
then Tyrus. 4. There shall be proportion of judgment at the last day, as there
has been of sin in this life; and the torment of such as perish without the
means of the Gospel, shall belesse then of such who under the means are found
impenitent, for, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, then for
Chorazin and Bethsaida.

Ver. 23. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted ^^ne^ heaven, shall be brought
down to h^ll, for if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been
done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.

Verse 24. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom, in the day of Judgment, then for thee.

The like judgment is threatened against Capernaum. Doct. 1. The honor of a
town is the Gospel, and where it is most clearly preached, that place is
exalted most and made nearest heaven; Therefore, Is Capernaum said to be exalted
to heaven. 2. Abused means of grace, if they prevail not unto true conversion,
do bring a man deeper in the state of condemnation; Therefore says he, Thou
Capernaum shall be brought down to hell. 3. Abuse and contempt of the Gospel,
impernitent unbelief, and misregarding the offers of Gods grace, do weigh
heavier in Gods balance, then the grossest sins against the Law; and are
attended with heavier wrath, for this the comparison of Capernaum^ sin and
judgment, with Sodoms sin and judgment, makes evident.

Verse. 25. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.

26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

Sometimes one is said to answer, when he opens his mouth and speaks to
them, who were expecting some speech from him, albeit none have spoken before,
as here in this speech: Christ glorifieth his Father, for the wise and free
dispensation of saving Grace, manifested in the good success which his
Disciples had, (whom as it is, Luke 10.17.21.) he sent forth to preach, and
work miracles, verse 25, 26. He declares his own power to give light and life
to as many as came unto him, verse. 27. And last of all exhorts the needy to
come unto him, with sundry motives to induce them, ver. 28, 29, 30. For the
first: Learn, 1. That the mystery of salvation is at Gods disposing, to hold it
from, or show it unto whom he pleases; for says he, Thou have hid it from the
wise, etc. Thou have revealed it unto babes, etc. 2. The worldly wise, and
prudent men in this world, are not these for the most part to whom the Gospel
is revealed; for thou have hid it, says he, from the wise and prudent. 3. The
people of weaker understanding, and babes in comparison of others are found to
be the Lords choice in election, and the persons who get the saving light of
the gospel for the greatest part; for he says, Thou revealest them to babes.
4. Christ will not want followers, despise him who will, for whose conversion,
how base soever they seem, God is to be praised; Therefore Christ for those
little ones says, I thank thee, O Father, and does rejoice in them, how
contemptible soever they seem to be, no less then if they had all the
excellencies of the world in them. 5. Gods supremacy over Heaven and earth,
makes him free, to choose or refuse whom he pleases; I thank thee, says he,
Lord of Heaven and Earth. 6. The cause of election of some, and reprobation of
other some, of this or that man, rather then of others, is to be found only in
Gods good pleasure; Therefore says Christ, O Father, for it seemed good in thy
eyes. 7. Christ heartily consents unto, and approves the Fathers decree of
election and reprobation, as it stands; Therefore says he, Evenso Father, and
I thank thee; for God and Christ are glorified in both.

Verse. 27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knows
the Son but the Father: neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and
he so whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Here Christ proclaims his riches
and authority, that he may make way for the offer following. Doct. 1. Beside
the right and power which Christ as God has unto, and over all things, he has
received of the Father as God-man, or God incarnate, right unto and oyer all
things, in, and for the church, nothing being excepted, except him who has
delivered all things unto him; for, All things are delivered to me of my
Father; and Christ has taken the gift of all things, for our behove, as power
to gather his Church, appoint Ministers, bestow the spirit as he will, open and
close Heaven and hell, as he pleases, and to dispose of all his enemies, and
of all creatures as they may best serve for the well of his people. 2. The
excellency of the Son of God is a mystery, which neither man nor Angel can know
comprehensively, as he is indeed, but the Father only; for, No man knows the
Son, but the Father; and so, except a man he taught of the Father, and learn of
the Father, he can never attain the right knowledge of the Son. 3. The
distinction of the Father from the Son, and the glory of the Fathers person is
a mystery which neither man nor Angel can know perfectly; No man knows the
Father, but only the Son. 4. Any measure of right knowledge of the Father which
we can attain unto, must come by revelation from the Son, who is the engraven
character of his person, who by his word and spirit does the Father known unto
so many as he pleases; Therefore says he, No man knows the Father, but he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him.

Ver. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will ^^ve
you rest. From the former doctrine Christ draws forth two exhortations: the
first unto faith in himself; the next, unto new obedience. Doct. 1. The right
use of the doctrine of election, and reprobation, verse 28. and of the riches
which is in Christ, and of the mystery of the Father, and of the Son, is this,
to draw near to Christ, and to seek communion with him: for having spoken of
those, he calls upon us, saying, Come unto me. 2. All things being delivered
unto Christ, he cannot be quiet till he have needy souls made partakers of the
riches which is in him; Therefore does he call unto us, saying, Come unto me. 3.
Such as have wearied themselves in seeking in themselves, or in any of the
creatures, something to quiet their souls, and cannot find rest, have warrant
to come to him; for he says, Come unto me ye that labor. 4. Albeit a soul
find nothing whereby to commend it self to Christ, but a fruitless life, and
loathfom burden of sin, nothing but that which yields restless
unquietness; yet without exception of any person, all such may come unto him
for relief; none of those who acknowledge their inability to help themselves,
are secluded. There is no Bar to put back a soul from Christ, which desires to
come unto him, which desires to believe in him, and to have communion with him;
for he says, Come unto me all ye. 5. Albeit there be no bar put to hinder any
man from coming to Christ, yet none will come until they be sensible of a burden
whereof they cannot be freed by any other means: Therefore he speaks expressly
to such, saying, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, not
excluding lukewarm Laodiceans, or any other, who desire to be made sensible of
sin, who desire to repent, who desire to believe in God, and to fear God. 6.
Seeing all things are delivered unto Christ, and all that have need are
commanded to come to him, it is a miserable and damnable folly, to seek any
thing belonging to righteousness, and eternal life, except in Christ Jesus
only; for he tells us, All things are delivered unto me; and says, Come unto
me. 7. God can sanctify the love of our selves, so far as to make it a motive
and allurement, to draw us unto him; for such as are unquiet about the
condition of their soul, or are burdened with any trouble which they are not
able to bear, have a promise of relief, if they shall come unto him, who can
show them the true cause of their trouble, and the right outgate also; for; I
will give you rest, says he. Now rest is opposed to labor and burdens, and
so imports full relief from all the sin and misery which can trouble any man.

Ver. 29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. The next exhortation teaches
us, 1. To stay with Christ under his discipline, after we are come unto him;
and so to join the study of obedience with faith: the duties of faith and
obedience must not be severed: for he joyneth, Come to me, and take on my yoke.
2. Albeit Christ's commands be our true liberty, yet in respect of the
untowardnesse of our nature, the tie of doing all holy duties belonging to
sanctification, of bearing the Lords chastisements, and suffering persecution,
is a yoke wherein we have need to be bound: Therefore says he, Take on my yoke.
3. It is necessary that we willingly submit our selves to this yoke, and
burden, how contrary soever it seem to our nature; for, Take ye up my yoke,
does the word in the Original bear; or, Lift it as it were upon your
shoulders. 4. When we have consented to submit to Christ's yoke, we have need as
Disciples daily to learn how to bear it; Therefore he commands, saying, Learn
of me. 5. As unto the right bearing of the yoke of Christ, the virtues of
humility and meekness are necessary; so are they to be learned, and had only
from Christ, blessing unto us not only his Doctrine, but also his example; for
it is said, Learn of me, that I am meek and lowly: now no command given unto
him of the Father was grievous, no suffering made him grudg, no pains made him
shrink from his duty or to faint: his plaints of his enemies, and his answers
unto them, were full of meekness: he stood not to abase himself for the
Fathers glory, and men's good; and it is he who must give us grace to do so
also. 6. True rest unto the conscience is to be found in Christ's satisfaction
given to justice for us, true peace in his service; for he says, Come to me,
and ye shall find rest. 7. It is sufficient in this life, that we find rest to
our souls, albeit our bodies be troubled. Therefore it is said, Ye shall find
rest to your souls. No more is promised.

Ver. 30. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Another motive to take
on his yoke, is, My yoke is easy, Hence learn, 1. That albeit Christ's
Discipline and manner of exercising of his followers, be a yoke and burden to
our corrupt nature, yet it is an easy yoke and a light burden to a soul,
seeking liberation from sin, and seeking salvation through Christ; Therefore
says he, My yoke is easy. etc. Now it is called an easy yoke, in comparison
of the covenant of works, wherein men want the help of a Mediator, and are
bound to do all in their own natural strength; but we have Christ to help us,
who works all our works in us, and for us. 2. It is an easy yoke in
comparison of sin, which makes a man draw and bear his own ditty unto
condemnation. 3. Christ's yoke is easy, because albeit the ten commands
renewed, and repeated in the Gospel, do require no less perfection to be aimed
at in sincerity of obedience, then under the covenant of works: yet the cords
to bind on the yoke are not terror, but love; and that little which is done in
faith, and upright obedience, is well accepted: and much joy and peace, much
courage and comfort is bestowed on such as uprightly aim, and endeavor to
obey the commands of God in Christ, thus says he, My yoke is easy, and my
burden is light.

CHAP. XII
There are three controversies between CHRIST and the Pharisees: The first is,
about his Disciples their plucking of ears of corn, to ver. 10. The next, about
the healing of the withered arm of a lame man, to ver. 22. The third about the
casting out of a devil, to ver. 46. After which we have his estimation of his
carnal and spiritual kindred.

Ver. 1. AT that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day, through the corn, and his
Disciples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.
IN the first controversy learn first, That our Lord took much pains in going
from place to place, about what the Father had given him to do; for even on the
Sabbath he went from place to place, Through the corn field. 2. The work of the
Ministry, and attending on the Lord, sometimes may be so urgent, as his servants
will forget to provide their meat; for here, His Disciples were an hungered. 3.
God may put his chosen children to straits in this world, and suffer them now
and then to taste of want; for his Disciples must for hunger, at a time, Pluck
the ears of corn, and eat them for bread.

Ver. 2. But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, behold, thy
Disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the Sabbath Day. The Pharisees
fish a fault where there was none, and quarrel with Christ for his Disciples.
Doct. 1. It is no new thing to see men, who are otherwise learned, and are in
account for their holiness in the church, to be adversaries unto Christ, and
his Disciples; for the Pharisees here do quarrel with Christ for his Disciples
cause. 2. Christ's Disciples readily shall be mistaken and misconstrued, do what
they please: for their plucking of ears of rough corn, to satisfy their
hunger does not escape censure. 3. Hypocrites do urge ceremonies, and external
observations, more then the greater things of the Law: for here the Pharisees
quarrel the Disciples, for plucking of the corn, and purging of it from the
aunds, and eating of it on the sabbath, in the case of necessity, as a breach
of the sabbath: misregarding charity to the hungry and fainting Disciples,
saying, Why do they that which is not lawful on the sabbath day.

Ver. 3. But he said unto them, have ye not read what David did when he was an
hungered, and they that were with him.

4. How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was
unlawful for him to eat, neither for them that were with him, but only for
the priests?

Our Lord defends his disciples by four reasons: The first is this, It was no
sin for David and his men, in a case of necessity, to eat the shewbread, which
by the letter of the Law was appointed for no man's use ordinarily, save the
priests: therefore without sin likewise may my disciples pluck the ears of corn
and eat thereof on the Sabbath: for notwithstanding the letter of the Law
forbideth all manner of work opon the Sabbath, yet the intent of the Law and
meaning thereof was neither to forbid the Shewbread to be made use of in such
an extraordinary case of necessity, nor to forbid meat to be made ready on the
Sabbath to suffice a man's hunger. Doct. 1. When the mind of the Lawgiver, and
the intent, and the end of the command is not contraveened, the precept is not
broken; for this is the ground of Christ's defense. 2. Not reading nor
considering the Scripture, whereby the meaning of the Law may be understood, is
the cause of error and mistaking of duties; This is it he says, Have ye not
read?

Ver. 5. Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the Sabbath-dayes the
Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and are blameless?

6. But I say unto you, that in this place there is one greater then the temple.

The second reason, is, The priests for promoving of the service of the Temple,
do bodily work on the sabbath, which in your language is to profane the
sabbath, and yet are blameless: Therefore albeit my disciples, for promoving
my service (who am greater then the Temple) do pluck ears of corn, and eat
thereof on the Sabbath, and so seem to you to profane the Sabbath, yet they are
also blameless; Hence learn, 1. Whatsoever bodily work is necessary for the
promoving of the service and worship of God upon the Sabbath, is not a breaking
of the Sabbath; for the Priests Did bodily work in the Temple on the
Sabbath Day, and are blameless. 2. As the body is above the figure, or shadow,
so is Christ greater then the Temple, which is a figure of him: Therefore says
he, In this place is one greater then the temple.

Ver. 7. But if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless. The third reason, is
this, The Lord never appointed the outward ceremonies of his service in the
first table, to hinder works of mercy prescribed in the second table: but on
the contrary, when at one time both cannot be done, he will have the work of
mercy done, and the ceremony of a sacrifice left undone, for that time.
Therefore it is agreeable to Gods will, that my Disciples should rather pluck
corn, and eat it on the Sabbath, by way of mercy to their own body; then harm
their health under pretext of keeping the Sabbath, which if ye had understood
and considered, ye would not have condemned my Disciples without cause. Hence
learn, 1. The true meaning of Gods word being known, it is able to prevent rash
judgment: Therefore it is said, If ye had known. 2. Condemning of the guiltless
does draw the judge, being rash, under guilt: Therefore says he, Ye would not
have condemned the guiltless. 3. It is not every man, no not every learned
man, who is acquainted with the true meaning of the Scriptures: for in saying,
If ye had known, he taxes both the Pharisees and Scribes of ignorance.

Verse 18. For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day. The fourth
reason, I whom ye see to be a man, am also God, and Lord of the Sabbath, having
authority to prescribe or allow for my service on that day, what I please: to
judge, and to punish, or pardon the breach, as I please; Therefore, If I judge
this work of my Disciples to be no fault, neither should ye. Hence learn, 1.
That the incarnation of the Word, or second person of the Godhead, made the
Son of God to be the Son of Man: but it did not diminish his Divine Authority,
as he is the Son of God: for he says, That the Son of man is Lord even of the
Sabbath day. 2. Christ can maintain the authority of the fourth command, and
appoint any one of the seven days as he pleases, for the observation of the
command: for, He is Lord even of the Sabbath,

Ver. 8. And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue.

10. And behold, there was a man which had his hand withered: and they asked
him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might accuse
him.

11. And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that shall have
one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold
on it, and lift it out?

12. How much then is a man better then a sheep? wherefore it is lawful to do
well on the sabbath days.

Here is another dispute about the sabbath in the synagogue, whether it was a
breach of the sabbath, to heal a man of a withered hand miraculously: Hence
learn, 1. That Christ went on to follow his calling, notwithstanding of enemies
and opposition: for after his disputation in the field with the Pharisees, he
goes into the synagogue, where he might do good to the People. 2. Christ's
enemies, when they have no just quarteil against Christ or his followers, they
invent one: as when they could find no sin at all in him; they sought to accuse
him for miraculous healing of men on the sabbath, for want of better ground of
accusation; for, They asked that they might accuse him. 3. Malice makes men
blind, reasonlesse and absurd: for, They ask if it be lawful to heal a man
miraculously on the sabbath day, wherein there can be no apparent ground of
doubting. 4. The more impudent Christ's enemies be against him, the more shame
and confusion the Lord will bring on them; for our Lord refuteth his
adversaries by their own confessions, that it was lawful to do more on the
sabbath to a beast, then they did question him for doing unto a man; ver. 11,
12.

Ver. 13. Then said he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand: and he stretched
it forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other. The Lord goes on to
heal the impotent man. Doct. 1. Whatsoever impediment be put in Christ's way to
hinder him to do good, he will go on to do what he intends; for, He says to
the man, stretch out thy hand. 2. There is no need to presuppose power to obey,
in those to whom God gives commands; for he can call things that are not, and
make them to be: he says here to the man whose hand was withered, who was
unable to stretch forth his hand, Stretch forth thy hand. 3. Albeit we know we
have no power to obey what is commanded, yet at Gods command it is good to
essay, and set to, as if we had power; for the man at command, stretched forth
his hand. 4. While men are in the way of obedience of a command, how difficult
soever it be, God can bless the beginning of obedience, with ability to
perform what is commanded; for, His hand was restored whole as the other: He
preased to stretch forth a withered arm, and it became whole in the stretching
forth.

Ver. 14. Then the Pharisees went out and held a council against him, how they
might destroy him. Now the Pharisees being confounded in dispute by Scripture
and experience, they resolve to kill Christ: Hence learn, 1. That Christ's
enemies, when arguments do fail them, do fall to violence; for, The Pharisees
seek now how to destroy Christ. 2. Christ's adversaries take help one of
another, and combine against him with joint wit and power, as here, They took
counsel to destroy him.

Ver. 15 But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence: and great
multitudes followed him, and he healed them all. Christ withdraws himself
from these murderers; Hence learn, 1. It is lawful for Christ's Ministers to go
out of the way of furious persecuters for a time, when the adversaries plot to
kill them; for even Christ, who was able to resist, Withdrew himself from that
place where they consulted to destroy him. When a Minister perceives that his
life may do unto God, and his Church, more service, then to be killed at such a
time, and in such a way, it is no wisdom for him to be stouter then his
Master. 2. It is better that such as love the Gospel, should follow the
persecuted Preachers thereof, then that they should want the benefit of the
Gospel; as here multitudes follow persecuted Christ. 3. None follow Christ in
earnest, and for the right end, but they shall obtain their desire; for, He
healed them all, that followed him for obtaining health.

Verse 16. And charged them that they should not make him known. Albeit it was
Christ's mind, that his miracles should not be buried, yet (having his own
means, and men, and time how, and by whom, and when he will be made known) he
loves not, that himself, or his great works, should be the subject of common
news, rashly and idly to be divulged, and talked of by every man; Therefore, He
charge them that they should not make him known.

Ver. 17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying,

18 Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is well
pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles.

The Evangelist observes a design of God, by this means to fulfill, or rather
make manifest the fulfilling of a Prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 42.1. wherein it
is foretold, that Christ should work great and glorious works descreetly and
with little din. Hence learn, 1. That Christ's coming into the world, was not
with worldly pomps, and much noise, as worldly princes do carry themselves with
much show; for so was it foretold of him by the Prophet. 2. As for the words of
the Prophet, they are worthy that notice should be taken of them, and that men
should attend unto them; Therefore is Behold prefixed. 3. Christ is the fathers
servant, in regard of his humane nature; and in regard of his office of a
Redeemer, and Mediator, being employed in the noblest service that ever was,
that is, to bring home the Elect; for God says, Behold my Servant. 4. He is a
person singled out for the purpose: in Heaven or Earth there is none like to
him, for this is He whom I have chosen, says the Father. 5. The Father loves
Christ as himself, for his own worth ^t the Son of his love, as the engraven
form of his own person; and in this sense he calls him, My Beloved. 6. In
Christ God is well contented and satisfied every way, and namely as he is Surety
and Under-taker for us; The Father craveth no more, no other thing for our full
ransom then what Christ has laid down, and no more in us then he has
promised to work in us: for of him says he, In him I am well pleased. 7. He is
so thoroughly well pleased in him for us, and in our name, that he wished no
more, My soul is well pleased. 8. Christ as man is furnished fully unto all the
employment of a Mediator for ever; and the Spirit of God is bestowed on him as
he is Man, without measure; for, I will put my spirit upon him, says he. 9 Not
only the Elect of the Jews, but also the Gentiles were designed to be Christ's
flock, that he should labor among us, and teach us how to behave our selves
toward God and man, how God will save us, and how he will be served of us; how
he governs the world now, and what he has decreed to do hereafter; for it is
said, He shall show judgment to the Gentiles. Now judgment is whatsoever God
would have us believe, or do.

Ver. 19. He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear bk voice in
the streets. From these words, Learn, 1. That the manner of Christ's first
coming was not to subdue by strong hand, as an earthly Conqueror, as many
supposed he should have come; for it was prophesied of him, He shall not,
strive, that is, by external force he shall not set up his throne. 2. Though
in zeal and affection to his Fathers glory, and men's salvation; he uttered his
voice and cried, yet not the voice of contention, the voice of oftentative
ambition, and imperious proclamations; for in this respect he uttered it not,
He shall not cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.

Ver. 20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. Another point of Christ's
commendation teaching us, 1. That there may be much weakness and tenderness
in the beginning of Gods work of grace, in a converted soul, comparable to a
smoking flax, or bruised reed. 2. Christ will not despise these weak
beginnings, nor reject such weaklings; for, He will not quench the smoking
flax. etc. But will tenderly entertain the spunk of begun light, and affection,
and will bind him, and strengthen a bruised reed. 3. Whither the weak work of
his grace be in a particular person, or in a society, he will fight for the
maintenance of it, till he have the victory; for, Judgment shall at last be
brought forth unto victory; that is to say, Truth shall have sentence
pronounced by him in favors thereof at last, and shall have the victory
against all opposition; for, He shall bring forth judgment unto victory.

Ver. 21. And in his name shall the Gentiles trust. The last point of the
commendation of Christ, is, that he shall not only perfect his commission among
the Jews, but also shall prevail among the Gentiles. Doct. 1. The power of the
Gospel is able to persuade the greatest strangers and aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel to come to him: for it is said, In his name shall the
Gentiles trust. 2. It is as sufficient for faith to have Christ's Name preached,
as to see his person; for, The Gentiles shall trust in his Name, that is, in
him as he is set forth to the audience of all, in the preaching of his truth.

Ver. 22. Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb,
and he healed him, in so much that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw.
Follows a notable miracle in dispossessing Satan of a blind and dumb
cative, with the diverse censours of Christ's works by the People and Pharisees,
whose wickedness Christ rebukes: Wherein observe, 1. That the fearful
condition of men spiritually possessed by Satan, (as are all unrenewed, in whom
the spirit of disobedience does reign) may be seen in bodily possessions; and
among the rest, in this man, on whom Satan shuts all doors, that he can
neither let in comfort nor let forth the sense of his misery; for, He makes
him' blind and dumb, which dumbness is ordinarily accompanied with deafness
also. 2. Such as Christ will deliver from Satan, albeit they cannot come of
themselves to him, yet he can furnish means to bring them to him; for, This
blind and dumb man was brought unto Christ. 3. Christ is the powerful
Physician of evils inflicted by the Devil, as here he gives evidence, in
healing this man perfectly; for he came to lose the hands of Satan.

Ver. 23. And all the people were amazed, and said, Is this the son of David?
The People are moved at the sight of this work, and do see a glimpse of his
Godhead, and of Divine glory in him. Doct. The miracles of our Lord were so
demonstrative of his Divine power, that the beholders were overcome, and forced
to acknowledge his works to be worthy of the promised Messiah: Is this (say
they) the son of David?

Verse. 24. But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow does not
cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. The Pharisees
perceiving the people to be affected with the miracle, grow mad, and do
blaspheme. Doct. 1. Satan, the more he is like to lose his prey, the more does
he rage; for the Pharisees do baspheme Christ so much the more, that they
perceive the people to acknowledge him to be the true Messiah: 2. What Satan
loses one way, he labors to recover and make up another way, in opposing
Christ and misconstruing his work, so much the more violently and wickedly, as
he sees himself like to be overcome: as is here to be seen in the Pharisees.
3. Such as fall in opposing Christ, readily grow worse and worse, till they
come to a height, as may be perceived in these proud men. 4. How impudent and
malicious is the Devil, and how desperate are his slaves, who dare call Christ
by the name of Beelzebub!

Verse 25. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom
divided against it self, is brought to desolation; and every city or house
divided against it self, shall not stand.

36. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself, how shall then
his kingdom stand?

Christ clears himself, and convinces his adversaries by five reasons: The
first reason, Seeing every Kingdom, city and family set against it self, is
ruined, and so also is the Kingdom of Satan; if he should assist me to cast
himself out, it is no more reasonable to say, that I cast out devils by Satan's
help and assistance, then to imagine and say: that Satan will consent that his
kingdom should fall; therefore I cannot with any color of reason be thus
blasphemed: From the description of the sin of these Pharsees, learn, 1. That
in pondering men's sins, the Lord looks much to the inward disposition, mind and
affection of sinners, whether they sin of infirmity, or of presumption; of
ignorance, or against their light; Therefore it is said, Jesus knew their
thoughts. 2. The way to preserve all Societies, is Union; and the way to ruin
them, is dissension; for, For every Kingdom, City, house divided, shall not
stand. 3. Satan has a kingdom among men, which by all means he goes about to
maintain, and will be loath, really and in effect, wholly to dispossess
himself, both of the soul and body of any in whom he has power and place; for,
If Satan cast out Satan, how shall his Kingdom stand?

Ver. 17. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast
them out? Therefore they shall be your judges. The second reason, for clearing
of Christ and convincing his adversaries, is this. You grant that your children
and carnal friends, when they cast out devils by the gift of miracles, do it
by the power of God; Therefore that shall condemn you of malicious partiality,
for your saying, That I cast out devils not by the power of God, but by
Beelzebub: Hence learn, 1. That malice moves men to misconstrue the best
actions of the most innocent: for the Pharisees out of malice ascribe Christ's
works to the Devil, which they knew were of God. 2. The process of justice
against the wicked must be short, when their conscience and common reason in
their dearest carnal friends, is sufficient to bear witness against their
wickedness, and to condemn them for it: upon this ground Christ says, By whom
do your children cast out Satan? therefore they shall be your judges.

Ver. 28. But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom of
God is come unto you. A third reason to convince these men of blasphemy, is,
Seeing you know that I do cast out devils by divine power of Gods Spirit, you
cannot be ignorant that I am the Messiah, and that the kingdom of grace
promised in the Messiah is come: and therefore you are malicious opposers of
the kingdom of God in my person: Hence learn, 1. Christ's manner of casting out
devils was with such heavenly majesty and authority, as that his enemies knew
it was by the Spirit of God: for here our Lord takes that for granted, saying,
If I cast out devils by the spirit of God, etc. 2. Seeing Satan's kingdom is
cast down by the doctrine of the Gospel, and souls are converted through the
divine power of God; It is certain that the promised Kingdom of Gods grace in
Christ is already come; For, If I, says Christ, cast out devils by the spirit
of God, then is the kingdom of God come unto you

Ver. 29. Or else, how can one enter into a strong m^ns house, and spoil his
goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil his house. A
fourth reason: If I by the supreme power of Gods spirit, did not cast out
Satan, it were as impossible to thrust him out, as to spoil a strongs man's
house without overcoming him first; Therefore you are wilful blasphemers, who
ascribe this work to the Devil: Hence learn, 1. That Satan is powerful to
take, and keep possession of men, when God permits him so to do: and may be
compared to a strong man, who brings his conquest within doors, and maintains
the house against all that might spoil him: so does the comparison import. 2.
Christ is powerful to overcome Satan, and to spoil him of his possession, and
may be compared to a stronger Man. 3. Satan will not shed with the possession
of a sinner, except by strong hand he be over-mastred; for, he must be bound,
before he be spoiled.

Ver. 30. He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with
me, scatters abroad. A fifth reason: Wheresoever I come to set up my Kingdom,
all these who do not help forward my work, are really my enemies; Therefore you
who do oppose me, are much more my enemies; and so your speeches against me,
are to be esteemed malicious blasphemies: Hence learn, 1. Wheresoever Christ
sends his Gospel, all that hear it, are either for him, or against him, none
are neutrals; for so he says, He that is not with me, is against me. 2. None
are for Christ, but such as do their best to gather in others unto him, ( as
corn to his barn) according to their calling; and whosoever do not promove
Christ's Kingdom, are culpable of hindering of it; for he says, Who so
gathers not with me, scatters abroad.

Ver. 31. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men.

32. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: but whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Thus are these men convicted: now the Lord shows, how near they were to
perdition: and this he does by laying before them the desperate condition of
such, as sin against the holy Ghost; for each other sort of sin is pardonable,
and in some person, one or other, is actually pardoned; even sins committed
against the Mediator, are pardoned; but the sin against the holy Ghost, is
never pardoned, neither in this world, by the ministerial application of the
Gospel; nor in the world to come, by the authoritative absolution of the Judge,
at the last day. The Scripture in Mark 3.29. Luke 12.10. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and
10.26. gives us to understand, that not every sin against conscience or
against the Gospel is this sin: but that this sin is an open, wilful,
deliberate and malicious rejecting and opposing of Jesus Christ totally, and of
the way of Salvation by him; and that after the holy Ghost, has by a
supernatural operation convicted the Person of the Salvation offered to the
World through Christ: And therefore it is called, A blasphemy against the holy
Ghost: Because this sin divelishly opposes the supernatural work of the holy
Ghost, convincing the mind, that, Jesus is the Son of God, the only Savior of
the World; for otherwise in a common manner, every sin against God, is a sin
against all the Persons. Now this sin is called Unpardonable, not because it
cannot be forgiven, but because it never is forgiven: The man that falls in
this sin, never repents, nor gets grace to desire to repent, but does as a
Devil desperately go on to oppose Jesus Christ: Therefore, whatsoever sin it
be, for which the man is sorrowful and penitent, and does flee unto Christ, to
be relieved of it, it is not this sin, which the Scripture does call The
Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, how heinous soever it be. Hence learn, 1.
That there is ^o sort of sin, except this one, which may not, yea has not been
forgiven in one man's person or other; for it is said, All manner of sin shall
be forgiven unto men. 2. The sin against the holy Ghost, as it is formerly
described, cannot fall out in the person of a penitent believer in Jesus
Christ, to whom pardon is promised; for, This sin shall not be forgiven. 3. The
son of God is also the son of Man, verily par^aker of our flesh and blood, in
whose person the nature of God and man is united, for a ground of confidence
unto sinful men that they may come unto God through him: for here he is
called, The Son of Man. 4. It is possible, that some of the Elect appointed for
Life, may fall in the sin of blasphemy against the Son of God, out of
ignorance, or fear, or some sort of deception, and thereafter may repent, and
find mercy: for it is said, Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man,
it shall be forgiven him; to wit, Upon the conditions, and in the manner set
down in Scripture, to wit, if he repent, and flee to Christ. 5. It is a
dangerous matter to oppose Christ and his Gospel, in any part of his Truth, or
Kingdom, or to blaspheme, and speak ill of the work of grace in his Children;
especial out of hatred of the truth, and good way of God: for this draws
near to the unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost.

Ver. 33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree
corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit. There were
two things which might weaken the power of his threatening: 1. The conceit of
the holiness of these Pharisees. 2. That their blasphemy was but a matter of
words; Therefore for the peoples edification, Christ breaks down these
sconces, showing these men to be most wicked to ver. 36. and Gods judgment to
be strict, even in the matter of words, to verse 38. As for the first he
proves these men not, to be holy, but wicked, by four reasons: The first is,
because their Fruits were evil, set down in the comparison of trees which
being good, do bring forth goods fruits: and being evil, do bring forth evil
fruits; Hence learn, 1. As a tree is known to be good, or evil, by the fruits;
so is a man known by the course of his deeds; for this is the intent of the
similitude. 2. As a man carries himself for Christ, or against him, so is he
good or evil; and though he were as blameless otherwise, as these Pharisees,
yet he is a wicked man if he be against Christ; for The tree is known by his
fruit.

Ver. 34. O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things?
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, A second reason,
because the whole ^ect of the Pharisees were a wicked Pack, seeming to be
friends to the Law, but adversaries to Christ, the true intent thereof,
adversaries to the grace of God, and to righteousness by faith; and so not
only by nature, but also by succession to their Predecessors, in holding their
poisonable doctrine, they were a generation of vipers, the worst sort of
adders, who being evil, could not speak good; and having their heart full of
poison, could not but speak as their heart dyted unto them; Hence learn, 1. It
is impossible for unrenewed men to speak good, far more impossible to do good;
for, How can you that are evil, speak good? says he. 2. Men who glory in their
forebears, as these men did in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and do not follow
their footsteps, are in Gods account to be fathered on Satan, and are the
viperous brood of his children; Therefore justly does our Lord call these men,
Generation of vipers. A third reason, Because the overflowing of their hearts
in blasphemous words, did prove them to be wicked blasphemers. Doct. 1. The
heart is the fountain of a man's words and works; as it is set, so is the
current of a man's words and works, good or evil; for, Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks. 2. Whenever evil does break forth in a man's
words, for that time at least evil abounds in the heart; for, Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

Ver. 35. A good man out of the treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things. A
fourth reason proving them to be wicked, is, because they did delight to lay up
wickedness in their heart, and to bring forth ill out of their heart. Doct.
Whether a man be renewed and a good man, or unrenewed and an evil man, it may
be known by the stuff, which delibrately he lays up in his heart, and
deliberately brings forth out of his heart; for, If it be a good treasure, he
is a good man; if it be an evil treasure, he is an evil man: for here such as
the man is, such is his treasure; for, A good man out of the good treasure, and
an evil man of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth, etc.

Ver. 36. But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. Thus Christ has removed the
pretext, and conceit of the Pharisees holiness: now he removes the conceit of
the smalnesse of their sin, in respect it was a matter of words, for two
reasons; The first is, Idle words should be punished, much more blasphemous
words: Hence learn, 1. How little soever men do esteem of words, yet in Gods
balance they weigh not light: for, not only wicked words, but also idle words,
such as serve for no good purpose, or for no lawful end, shall come in
reckoning as so many sins; Therefore says he, Every idle word they shall give
account thereof 2. There shall be a day of judgment, wherein all sins, even
words shall come to be judged: for here a day of judgment is set, and this
judgment shall pass upon particulars, even upon words, whereof men have not
before given account, and received pardon.

Ver. 37. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall
be condemned. Another reason; showing that words will be respected by God,
whatsoever men think of them; because the course of a man's words being naughty,
shall be sufficient to be a ditty to prove a man unrighteous; and being well
seasoned, shall be a sufficient evidence to prove a man righteous; therefore
words are not to be slighted: Hence learn, That as a well governed tongue, and
the course of wisely ordered speeches, is, and shall be in Gods judgment a
sufficient evidence of a man renewed and justified; so also a loose tongue is
and shall be an evidence of the contrary.

Ver. 38. Then certain of the Scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying,
Master, we would see a sign from thee. Another dispute about signs, which the
Pharisees craved of Christ; wherein learn, 1. That Christ was exercised with
diverse sorts of temptations by his adversaries; some openly blaspheming, some
subtly insinuating, as if they would deal reasonably with him, Master, say
these men, we would see a sight as if they never had seen any of his miracles
before; or, as if upon the doing of some miracle, they minded to believe in
him. 2. Christ's miracles were sufficient to clear that he was the Messiah; for
even his enemies can crave no more, but to have a sign; for, say they, We would
see a sign from thee. 3. Obstinat unbeleevers will not be satisfied with any of
Gods words or works; but still will crave new ones, as these men, after numbers
of signs, crave yet a sign. 4. Mis-beleevers are also limitators of the Holy
One of Israel, nothing will satisfy these men but a sign at their direction:
We desire to see a sign, say they.

Ver. 39. But he answered and said to them, an evil and adulterous generation
seeks after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of
the Prophet Jonas.

40 For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly: so shall
the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

Our Lord refuses to give them any sign, save this, That after they had
killed him, he should rise from the dead, as Jonas came out of the Whales
belly, and so they would not prevail over him, for all their malice. In this
answer, learn, 1. That a people that does not embrace the Lord, as he is
pleased to offer himself, is a people alienate from God, and is a follower of
another God of their own devising; for therefore he calls them, Adulterous
generation. 2. As when Jonas his doctrine was rejected by the Jews, God made
him be accepted in Niniveh: So shall it be with such, as will not receive
Christ offering himself unto them, he shall find others to take the offer: If
the Jews refuse, the Gentiles shall receive him: this is one way of having the
sign of Jonas. 3. Again the enemies of Christ who will not cease to pe^secute
him, shall know by Christ's victory over them, that he is the Messiah; for as
Jonas was proved to be the Lords Peophet by his miraculous delivery from death;
so shall Christ be found to be the true Messiah, by the resurrection from the
dead, and by his victory over the persecutions of his adversaries; and this is
another way of having the sign of the Prophet Jonah: signs of both these
sorts are proper to mis-beleevers.

Verse 41. The men of Niniveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and
shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and behold,
a greater then Jonas is bear. Christ after refusing to gi^e them a sign, or to
work any miracle at their pleasure, certifieth them that they shall be
condemned for their mis-belief, by two witnesses. The first witness is, The
men of Niniveh, who repented at the preaching of Jonas: whether this repentance
was better then the repentance of Achab, it skilleth not to dispute: because,
presuppose it was no more then was in a natural man, upon the historical
believing of temporal judgment coming upon them, like unto Achabs repentance,
yet it was more then these hard-hearted people did, who were obstinate
unbelievers, and were neither moved with the preaching of mercy nor judgment.
Doct. 1. Any sort of repentance, presuppose it be only temporary, is better
then obstinate unbelief, and no sort of repentance: for Ninivehs humiliation is
better then the Jews hard-hearted carriage. 2. There is more fruit of one
Sermon to be expected from Pagans, then of many Sermons from the abusers of
Ordinances of Religion, for Niniveh repents at one Sermon, Judea repents
not after hearing many. 3. The sin of the Mis-beleever, and his judgment is the
greater, by so much as the means of believing have been more frequently
applied, and Christ has shown himself more in the use of means: for,
therefore was the condemnation of the Jews unbelief the greater, because
Christ, who was greater then Jonas, was not believed, after long preaching and
miracles wrought.

Verse 42. The Queen of the South shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost parts of the
earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, a greater then Solomon is
here. Another witness is the Queen of the South. Doct. The Example of such as
have taken pains to get knowledge, or obtain any virtue, whose names are
recorded in Scripture, must either be made use of, unto imitation of their
faith and diligence, or else their example will serve to agredge sins unto
deeper judgment: for the Queen of the South shall rise in judgment against
those that regard not the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Verse 43. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, be walks through dry
places, seeking rest, and finds none.

44. Then he says, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and
when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and garnished.

45. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other spirits more wicked
then himself, and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state of that man
is worse then the first. Even so shall it be also unto this generation.

The last answer serves to show them their own miserable condition, and that
by a parable of a supposed case of Satan's being cast out of a man, in respect
of one sort of possession, and coming back unto a worse and more dangerous sort
of possession: The scope of the parable^s, to show, that this people by the^r
refusing to receive the grace of God, and to believe in Christ, were in a
sevenfold worse condition, then if the Gospel had never been preached unto
them: for Christ by his doctrine had made them see the only true way of
right^ousnesse and eternal life, and so in regard of the refutation of their
former error, and removing the ignorance wherein they did formerly lie, Satan
was in some sort cast out: but in respect of their not receiving Jesus Christ,
and his grace, to dwell in their hearts by faith, the devil had gotten a
sevenfold stronger possession of them now then before. From this parable we
may learn, 1. That Satan is an unclean spirit, for so here is he called. 2. He
may be cast out of a man in some sort, and yet the man be not renewed; As for
example, He may be cast out of a bodily possession, and the man remain
unrenewed: He may be cast out in regard of a man's outward polluted life, as he
was cast out of these, who after abjuration of their ungodly life at their
baptism, did return again to their former filthiness, 2 Pet. 2.. He may be
cast out of a man's mind by refutation of his former errors, and illumination
of him by sound doctrine: and yet the man may remain unrenewed: such as was the
casting of Satan out of this evil and adulterous generation. 3. In case a man
be not taken up by the spirit of grace, in whatsoever other respect Satan is
cast out of him, he shall be more deeply possessed by him, then before.

Verse 46. While be yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.

47. Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desiring to speak with thee.

Concerning the coming of Christ's friends and kins folks unto him, whatsoever
was their errand, their pretense is to speak with him: but untimously do they
call for conference, while he is about another work: Hence learn, that Christ
is indeed very man, having kindly consanguinity with other men, and natural
relations unto them, grounded upon the verity of his humane nature: for he
has, Mother and brethren, or Cousin germans, Persons near in blood unto him,
who are called in Scripture, Brethren. 2. The Virgin Mother was not so free of
sin, but she might and did fall in escapes, as here in joining with the
friends, at least, in an untimous troubling of Christ's Sermon (to say no more)
and preferring her own conference with him, unto his fathers service: which
conference might have been delayed, until his teaching of the people had been
ended, and a more eminent work, which was now in hand, perfected.

Ver. 48. But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my Mother?
and who are my brethren?

49. And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold, my
mother, and my brethren.

50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same
is my brother, and sister, and mother.

From Christ's answer, learn, 1. That respect unto kindred and friends, must not
be prejudicial to any higher service of God; for when Christ's mother and
friends called to speak with him, while he is teaching; he asked, Who is my
mother? 2. Whosoever believes in Christ, and endeavors to do Gods will,
gives real demonstration of saving faith, and may be assured of Christ's love
and estimation, no less, then if all the relations of Brother, and Mother, and
Sister, in one^vere put upon him; for, Whosoever shall do the will of my
Father, the same, says Christ, is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother.

CHAP. XIII.
The constitution of the visible Church, and the dispensation of Gods grace in
it, unto the end of the world, and how the separation shall be at the day of
judgment, is set down in diverse parables, to verse. 53. and what small respect
our Lords contrymen carried toward him.

Ver. 1. THe same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the seaside.
THe time is marked of this following sermon, and the place also, to teach us,
that nothing could hinder Christ from spreading the doctrine of salvation, no
opposition of foes, no misconstructions of friends were able to discourage him
from his calling; for, That same day wherein he had a bitter conflict with the
Pharisees, and interruption from his friends, That same day without wearying or
fainting in labor, he goes to the sea side to teach.

Ver. 2. And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went
into a ship, and sat, and the whole multitude stood on the shore. The gathering
of great multitudes to hear Christ teach is marked, to show us, That when
Christ's enemies do set themselves most to disgrace him, then can he, and does
he glorify himself most: for when the Pharisees had set themselves, by bitter
blasphemies, to scare the people from following Christ, so great a confluence
of people is gathered unto him, that he must (for eschewing the crowd, and
prease of the people) Go into a ship.

Ver. 3. And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying Behold, a lower
went forth to sow.

4. And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the ways side, and the fowls came and
devoured them up.

5. Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth and forthwith
they sprung up, because they had no deepnesse of earth:

6. And when the sun was up, they were scorched, and because they had not root,
they withered away.

7. And some fell among thorns: and the thorns sprung up and thoaked them.

8. But others fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundred
fold, some sixty fold, some thirty fold.

The scope of this parable, is to show That not all hearers of the word do
profit thereby, but some only: and this is set down under comparison of sowing
seed in diverse grounds, to verse 9. Then is it enquired after, while may he the
meaning of it, and exponed, to verse ^4. From this phrabolick similitude,
learn, 1. That Christ in his care which he has of the Church, is like a
diligent husbandman laboring; The people are like to the field or ground; and
the word preached is like to seed sown. 2. Albeit the word as seed be one, yet
the ground is of sundry sorts, the hearers (...) of diverse kinds; some
comparable to stony ground; some to thorny ground; some to highway ground;
some to good ground. 3. The Lord makes trial of all, and does not spare to
cast seed on all sort of ground. 4. In most hearers, through their own default,
the seed of Gods word brings not forth fruit.

Ver. 9. Who has ears to hear, let him hear. The parable being proponed, our
Lord cares for no more but that so many only as should have grace to
understand it, shall make use of it. Doct. 1. Of outward hearers of the Lords
Word, some are destitute of the inward ear of understanding, destitute of
belief; other some have an open ear to understand and believe; for this is
imported, by, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear. 2. It is Christ's
intention, that his own to whom he gives understanding and faith, should
profit by hearing; and when these do believe, he rests satisfied: therefore
says he, let him that has an ear, hear; whatsoever may become of the rest. 3.
This Doctrine being proponed to a people in common, without application to any
particular person, serves much to waken and stir up the hearers to study, and
to understand, and to make use of what is spoken; as appears in the Disciples
question, which follows: for this saying, Let him that has an ear, hear,
imports as much, as, God will not regard the loss of such, as do not regard
to understand his word, and to make use of what they hear,

Ver. 10. And the Disciples came and said unto him, Why speak thou unto them
in Parables? The Disciples ask the meaning of the parables, and a reason of
this manner of Christ's teaching. Doct. 1. It is a duty of love to be soliciters
for the common multitude: therefore the disciples do regrate their case, saying,
Why speak thou unto them in parables? that is, in a way which they will not
understand. 2. Our questions about the manner of the Lords dealing with people,
and manner of speaking unto them, should be proponed unto the Lord himself, and
satisfaction sought from him; for, Why speak thou to them in parables? say
they: the question otherwise proponed by way of quarrelling, is dangerous.

Ver. 11. He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given. Our Lord
does answer them in a very satisfactory way: teaching that the matters of the
Kingdom of Heaven are mysteries, which none can understand till it be given
them from God, and that there are some to whom God minds not to give
understanding of his mysteries, they being reprobate; therefore, To them it is
not given, says he. 2. There are others, to wit, his elect ones, to whom he
will give the unde^standing of the mysteries of Heaven; for he says, To you it
is given. 3. The cause of putting difference betwixt one and another, in the
matters of the Kingdom of Heaven, it is in the will of God the giver; for so
does Christ reckon, saying, To them it is not given, to you it is given.

Ver. 12. For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance; but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away, even that he
has. Our Lord does clear, and confirm his Answer, by showing the course kept
by God in the dispensation of grace, wherein having and not having, is to be
understood of saving grace. Doct. 1. Such as find grace in God's eyes through
Christ, have indeed a gift or possession worthy to be called a gift; for so he
describes the Elect, Whosoever has. 2. Such as are Reprobates, or are not
elected, and do not find grace in the Lord's eyes, whatsoever they have of
others gifts, it is nothing in effect, but a seeming to have; for such are
described, Whosoever has not. 3. Whosoever has gotten the Fountain-gift of
saving grace, or of God's love in Christ, he shall have all other gifts, which
tend to perfect salvation; for it is said, Whosoever has, to him shall be
given, and that in abundance. 4. Whosoever has not this gift of grace, and
favor in God's eyes, shall want and be deprived also of all other gifts
tending to salvation, or at least, of the right use of them; for even that
which they seemed to have of common gifts and means of salvation, shall be
taken from them, so as they shall not reap eternal life thereby.

Ver. 13. Therefore speak I to them in Parables: because they seeing, see not,
and hearing, they hear not, neither do they understand. From this ground, that
this multitude was reprobate, our Lord gives a reason of his speaking to them
in parables. Doct. 1. Some do see with their natural eyes Gods Works and
wonders, and do hear his Word also outwardly, who do not by the spiritual eye
of Faith perceive or take up the Lord's glory shining therein; for, Some in
seeing, see not, in hearing, hear not. 2. Concerning such as God has
reprobate, he will dispose so of the means of salvation toward them, as they
shall profit nothing by them unto salvation; therefore says he, I speak to
them in parables.

Ver. 14. And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which says, By
hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing, ye shall see, and
shall not perceive. Left they should have thought this an hard saying, Christ
shows, that Isaias threatened the like against the wicked in his time, and did
prophecy of the righteous judgment of God, in this sort to come upon the
reprobate in Christ's time: Hence learn, 1. That the prime reason of the
withholding of saving grace, from such as do perish, is in Gods decree of
reprobation; for of the reprobate it may be said, Though the Lords works be
outwardly, and in a common manner seen by them; and his Word do sound among
them, and be outwardly, or in a common manner heard by them, yet this shall be
without profit to them, or use making of by them; for, Such hearing, they hear
and perceive not. 2. When Gods judgment pronounced in Scripture, has taken
hold of one fleece of wicked persons in one age, it goes on to be executed
upon others after them, of that same sort; for the words of Isaiah spoken to
the people in his own time, are to be fulfilled even upon the wicked in Christ's
time, some hundred years after Isaiah's prophecy, and the same words are
fulfilled in our time, and shall take hold of the wicked in time to come.

Ver. 15. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them. The Lord shows the
righteousness of God, in execution of this decree of reprobation, by this, that
there is in them a voluntary induration of heart, going before the juridial
induration inflicted upon them: Hence learn, 1. That beside the natural
seneslesnesse of things spiritual, and the natural ignorance, and unbelief of
the Gospel, there is an affected and voluntary blindness of mind, and hardness
of heart, which men draw on by custom of sinning; this is it he says, Their
eyes have they closed. 2. Where unto natural blindness and hardness of heart,
men superadde a wilful blindness and hardness of heart, it is justice with
God to give them over to a judicial blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart, as the comparison of this place, with that of Isaiah, cha. 6. gives
ground; for here their voluntary blindness is set down, They have closed their
eyes; and there the judicial blindness and hardness is set down, Shut their
eyes, make their heart fat. 3. This plague is proper to the reprobat, who God
will not save, to whom God has resolved to give no saving grace, Lest he should
heal them. 4. whosoever get grace to turn fro their sins, to repent and to
believe in Jesus Christ, are not given over to a reprobate sense, shall surely
be saved; For while he says, He will not grant them grace to hear and
understand; that is, to believe and repent, least they should be healed, he
imports, that if they did believe and repent, they behoved undoubtedly to be
healed; the exercise of Faith and Repentance being infallibly marks of saving
grace.

Ver. 16. B^^ blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they
hear.

17 For verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous men have
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

By showing the reprobation of this People, Christ commends the estate of his
Disciples. Doct. 1. Such as have received grace to perceive salvation offered
in Jesus Christ, and to lay hold thereon, are truly blessed; for, Blessed are
your eyes, says Christ, for they see. 2. The miserable condition of the
reprobate, and such as are given over to misbelief, does commend the blessed
estate and condition of such as get grace to believe, being compared therewith;
this is imported in, But blessed are your eyes. 3. The estate of the church
after the manifestation of the Messiah in the flesh, is more blessed than the
condition of the church before Christ, in respect of the grace of the Gospel,
now more clearly proponed without shadows and figures; and in this happiness,
the Apostles who conversed with Christ bodily, justly have the first place:
Many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see what you see, and have not
seen them. 4. Such as get a saving sight of Christ, do earnestly desire to see
more of him; for Prophets and righteous men who believed in Christ to come,
ardently desired to see him in the flesh.

Ver. 18. Hear ye therefore the Parable of the Sower. In the exposition of the
Parable, learn, The Lord will teach his own the meaning of his Word, so as they
may be edified thereby; and what they do not understand at one time, he will
cause them to understand at another: for, Hear ye, says he to his disciples,
the parable of the sower.

Ver. 19. When any one hears the word of the Kingdom, and understands it
not, then comes the wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in his
heart: this is be which received seed by the way side. From the exposition of
the seed sown by the way side, learn, 1. That the Gospel is the word of the
kingdom of Heaven, and other words in comparison are to small effect; but this
word shows the way, and gives right unto the Kingdom, gives earnest, and a
beginning of the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore it is called, The word of the
kingdom. 2. Satan is busy waiting on where the word is preached, to mar the
hearing, or understanding, and believing of it; for, When one hears, that
wicked one comes. 3. Where men understand not the Gospel preached, and are not
made sensible by the preaching of it, of their own sinfulness, and danger on
the one hand: and of the grace of God offered in Christ to relieve them, on the
other hand, the word is lost unto them; for, The wicked one catches away that
which was sown.

Ver. 20. But he that receives the seed into stony places, the same is he that
hears the word, and anon with joy receives it.

21. Yet has he no root in himself, but dureth for a while; for when
tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is
offended.

From the exposition of the seed sown in stony ground, learn, 1. That some hear
the word, and receive it with joy readily, upon temporal grounds, and natural
motives: for excellent truths, and offers of remission of sins, and eternal
life, may affect a natural man in a natural way, Such is he that receives the
^^rd in stony places. 2. Where sound faith is not mixed with the word received,
there the word is not ingrast; for, He has no root in himself. 3. Where the
word is not received, so as the root of true faith and Gods grace is in the
man, his seeming faith will not endure, whatsoever luster it may have; for, He
endures but a while. 4. When a man receives the Gospel for some motive of a
temporary good, the fear of some temporary evil (such as is threatened in
persecution) will be able to drive him from his professed Faith; for, When
persecution comes, by and by he is offended, and so a ffliction is a
touchstone whereby to try the sincerity of professors.

Verse. 22. He also that receives seed among the thorns, is he that hears
the word: and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke
the word, and he becomes unfruitful. From the exposition of the seed sown in
thorny ground, learn, 1. That however the word seem to be received, if it do
not bring forth fruits of amendment of life, if it beget not Faith working by
Love, it is like seed choked with thorns, and the word is lost in such an
heart. 2. Whatsoever things pertaining to this life, do go so near a man's
heart, as they take up the room, time, travel, and affection, which heavenly
things should have, they are but thorns which choke the seed of God's Word. 3.
When the care of getting, or keeping, or governing of riches, under fair
pretenses of a lawful calling, of caring for our family, and not neglecting
the benefits of God, do steal away the heart, and do waste a man's time and
strength, which should be bestowed upon heavenly things, then all these
pretenses are but the deceitfulness of riches. 4. If a man's works do not
proceed from the virtue of God's word, whatsoever be his works from other
principles, they are nothing in God's account; for, If the Word be choked, the
man becomes unfruitful.

Ver. 23. But he that received seed into the good ground, is he that hears
the Word, and understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth
some an hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty. From the exposition of the good
ground, learn, 1. That only such are worthy receivers of the Word, who believe
and obey it in their conversation; for, These only are like good ground,
receiving the good seed, and rendering the fruits of good seed. 2. Every true
believer is fruitful, albeit every one does not bring forth fruit in a like
measure, but some more, some less; Some an hundred, some sixty, and some
thirty fold.

Ver. 24. Another Parable put he forth unto them, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field.

25 But while men slept, his enemy came, and sowed ^ares among the wheat, and
went his way.

26 But when the blade was sprung up, and brough^ forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also.

27 So the servants of the Householder came and said unto him, Sir, did not
thou sow good seed in thy field? From whence then has it tares?

28 He said unto them, An enemy has done this. The Servant said unto him,
Will thou then that we go and gather them up.

29 But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the
wheat with them.

30 Let both grow together until the Harvest: and in the time of Harvest I will
say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in
bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barns.

Another Parable serving to teach, That the visible church full not want a
mixture of wicked persons, joined with the Godly, unto the worlds end: and that
we must not dream of a possibility, to make a perfect separation of good and
bad, in the church. The chief doctrines to be observed herein are, 1, That the
external visible church is worthy to be called, and counted the Kingdom of
Heaven, even in regard of the external constitution of it in this world,
notwithstanding of the mixture of wicked hypocrites in it; because therein
Christ rules as King, and has his Subjects, all professing him to be King of
Saints, but especially in respect of his own elect therein, who honor him in
Spirit, in whom he does begin eternal life, and draws it on unto perfection.

2. The visible church is like a corn field, wherein are sown good seeds and
noisome weeds, sound converts, begotten of God, and wicked hypocrites, who are
the children of Satan; for the enemy sowes tares among the wheat.

3. There is no more possibility for men to eschew the incoming of Hypocrites
into the church, than for any husband-man's servant to hinder an enemy to cast
in the seed of weeds in their Master's field, in the night when men do sleep.

4. It is a matter of grief and offense, to see in the church of God so many
unprofitable and noysom weeds, so many wicked hypocrites and naughty persons;
this the servants coming to regrate the matter, does import.

5. The rash zeal of servants, before they consult the Lord their Master, is
ready with the hazard of the church, and true members thereof, to have such a
constitution of the visible church, as they should suffer none to be a member,
who are not inwardly regenerate, but have all others of whose inward
Regeneration they are not assured, plucked from among professors: this is
imported in, Will thou that we go and gather them up?

6. The Lord, albeit he has given order to censure the scandalous Offenders,
yet he discharges his servants to prosse toward such a separation, as to have
all the weeds and wicked in heart to be cast out, least while they gather out
the graceless tares, they should root out also the gracious wheat with them,
for it is not possible for any man to discern the renewed from the unrenewed so
clearly, but he may be mistaken; this Christ means by, he said, Nay, lest ye
root up the wheat with them.

7. The Lord accounts it less hazard to suffer many hypocrites to be in the
visible Church, then to hold out, or cast out of it any one of the weakest of
the Elect and converted children; for so he reckons here, that it is much
safer to suffer many weeds to grow in Gods field, then to hazard one grain of
good wheat, by seeking to root out the weed; Nay, says he, gather not out the
tares, lest ye root up the wheat with them.

8. This mixture in the visible Church, Christ the Lord is minded to permit,
and commands to be permitted, till the day of judgment; and then, but not till
then, shall a full separation of the Godly and the wicked, of the elect, and
the reprobate he made; In the time of harvest, I will say, Gather the wheat, etc.

9. At last, the separation shall be such; as all the wicked shall be cast into
hell fire, and the Godly placed in heaven: The tares shall be burnt, and the
wheat gathered into the barn.

Ver. 31. Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven
is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man ^ook and sowed in his field.

32. Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree: so that the birds of the air come
and lodge in the branches thereof.

Another parable, The scope whereof is to show, that the visible Church, in
regard of the power of the Gospel in it, and of the true grate of God, in the
true members thereof, how small soever it may seem in the beginning, yet shall
grow up wonderfully, this is set forth under the similitude of mustard seed,
which for examples cause, in the parable, after the nature of a parable, is
presupposed to be the least of all seeds; and again, is presupposed to grow up
to such height, that it should become the tallest of all trees: which
parabolicall supposition being made, then shall it be fit to resemble the work
of God, by the grace of the Gospel, which how small soever the beginnings of it
be, yet shall it be the most glorious of all Gods works, ere all be done. Hence
learn, That the work of the Gospel, and planting of Gods Church, how small
beginning: soever it seem to have, yet shall by the blessing of God have
wonderful increase. The day of small things is not to be despised* by this, as
the disciples were encouraged to spread the Gospel, so should all the Lords
servant^ be encouraged to be diligent to sow the seed of grace, by holding
forth the doctrine of the Gospel, according to their calling.

Verse 33. Another parable spoke he unto them, The Kingdom of Heaven is like
unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the
whole was leavened. Another parable tending to this same purpose, namely, to
show that the work of Gods grace by the Gospel in the visible Church, how small
appearance soever it has, will notwithstanding spread and prevail, according to
the measure appointed of God. The doctrine is this, As good leaven, after a
competent time, will leaven all the lump, to the leavening whereof it is
appointed; so will the work of Gods grace in his Church by the Gospel
powerfully affect, and prevail unto the conversion of all these for whom God
shall send it, and therefore we should not judge of Gods works in his Church by
outward appearance; this serves then, and should serve now, to make men
faithful in teaching the truth, and to wait for a while till God shall work,
and give his blessing to the hearers in his own time.

Verse. 34. All these things spoke Jesus unto the multitude in parables, and
without a parable spoke he not unto them.

35. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Pra^bet, saying, I will
open my mouth in parables, I will utter things which have been kept secret from
the foundation of the world.

Here is rendered another reason, why Christ did speak to the people in
parables, to wit, that he might fulfill what the Prophet as the type foretold,
that Christ should do, and how Christ should by speaking in parables stir up
his hearers to search what was meaned by this sort of speaking, as the Psalmist
stirred up his Hearers to attend the more, to what he was to deliver in
parables, Psalm 78 2.. To the intent that such as would understand, might
learn; and others who would not search for light, might be justly left in
blindness. Doct. 1. Both the matter and manner of Christ's doctrine is worthy to
be maintained and vindicated from all misconstructions, for Heat we have the
evangelist for a precedent. 2. Preachers should teach nothing for matter nor
manner, but what they have a precedent, for in the Scripture, for even Christ
did so.

Ver. 36. Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his
disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of
the field.

37. He answered and said unto them, He that sows the good seed, is the Son
of man.

38. The field is the world: the good seed are the children of the Kingdom:
but the tares are the children of the wicked one.

39. The enemy that sowed them is the Devil: the harvest is the end of the
world: and the reapers are the Angels.

40. As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire; so shall it be
in the end of this world.

41. The son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of
his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.

42. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

43. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom of their
Father. Who has ears to hear, let him hear.

Here the speaking in parables takes good effect in his own Disciples; they
are made sensible of their own dullness in understanding, and are moved to ask
light of the Lord, and so they receive satisfaction; for the Lord declares
what the parts of the parable were in their intent and signification. Hence
learn, 1. That the visible Church, as it is not without reason called, The
Kingdom of Heaven, as is shown before; so also, not without reason, is it
called here, the world; in regard it contains all sorts of people in The
world, and is spread throughout the world, and not limited to any one place:
The field (to wit, the universal visible Church) where the seed is daily sown,
is called The world. 2. The Elect, and true Believers begotten by the Gospel,
and true Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and heirs of Heaven, are the only proper
children of the Kingdom, for, The good seed are the children of the Kingdom.

3. Such as have nothing in them, save outward profession, and do remain wicked
and unrenewed men, are nothing else for their inward estate but children of
Satan; for, The tares are the children of the wicked one.

4. Satan, as an enemy to the glory of God in his Church, does what he can to
have hypocrites, and wicked men mixed among the godly, as members of that same
church, ver. 39. for, The enemy that sowed them, is the devil.

5. This mixture of good and bad, is to endure to the end of the world, that
is, until the day of judgment, wherein the Angels shall have work to separate
the wicked from the godly; for, The harvest is the end of the world, and the
reapers are the Angels.

6. In the end of the world, every man shall have the fruit of his labor, as
his seed, that is, as his good or evil works have been; for, This is the full
harvest, verse. 39.

7. Openly profane persons, and secret Hypocrites, workers of iniquity, shall
have no place among Gods people any more after the day of judgment, but their
place shall be hell, the place of unexpressible torment; for, The tares shall
be gathered and burnt in the fire.

8. Such as are justified by faith in Christ, and do study by his grace to live
righteously, how base soever they may appear in this world, shall in the world
to come be wonderful glorious; for, They shall shine as the Sun in the
kingdom of their Father.

9. It is sufficient for the main end of Christ's doctrine, if such as have
grace to understand, and believe, shall make use thereof, for the rest he
regards not; for he says, They that have ears to hear, let them hear.

Ver. 44. Again, the Kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure bid in a field:
the which when a man has found he hides, and for joy thereof, goes and
sells all that he has, and buyeth that field. Another parable, teaching us,
that the church, in regard of the precious doctrine of grace and salvation to
be had by Christ in it, is a rich treasure, able to relieve and supply all
wants and necessities, therefore called an hid Treasure, which the
misbeleevers, how wise soever in the world, cannot perceive.

2. The believer who finds it, will make no reckoning of the worth of any
ear^hly thing, in comparison of it, but will part with what soever is pleasant
or profitable unto him in this life, rather then be deprived of this grace;
for, He sells all to buy it.

3. As he labors to have this treasure, so he has a care to keep it, that
neither by violence nor deceit it be taken from him; for, He hides it, and
sells all to have the means of enjoying of it, and to have right to the field
of the visible Church, where this treasure is to be found.

Ver 45. Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a Merchant man seeking goodly
pearls:

46. Who when he had found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that
he had, and bought it.

Another parable teaching us, 1. That the Church in respect of the true
subjects thereof, that is, in respect of the Elect, and true Believers, is like
Merchantmen occupied about the purchase of these things, which may truly
enrich them, and make them happy. 2. That among all things which can be
conceived to be fit to bring men unto happiness, there is only one means able
to make blessed, one pearl of price, to wit, Christ Jesus; in whom are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and grace, and that the wise man will content himself
with Christ, and what is to be found in him, and will renounce all other things,
which come in comparison with him.

Verse 47. Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a net that was cast into
the sea, and gathered of every kind.

48. Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered
the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.

49.So shall it be at the end of the world: the Angels shall come forth, and
sever the wicked from among the just.

50. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

Another parable teaching us, 1. That the visible Church, in the way of
gathering members, and manner of constitution thereof, is like a draught-net,
taking in all who profess subjection to Christ in his ordinances; good and
bad, true and false professors; for it gathers of every kind, to wit,
whosoever profess faith in, and promise subjection to Christ.

2. That not before the day of judgment, but then precisely, separation shall
be made of the just and wicked, and then shall the wicked be punished for ever,
in whatsoever place or estimation they have been in this world. This parable
and that of the tares, tend to one end, to strengthen us so much the more
against the stumbling block of the unavoydable mixture of wicked hypocrites in
the Church visible, that the godly shall not fare the worse, for the wickeds
being among them in one field, in one draught-net; nor the wicked fare the
better at the latter end, for their society with the godly, in the visible
Church.

Ver. 51. Jesus says unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say
unto him: Yea, Lord. Christ takes account of his Disciples whether they
understood his speech. Doct. 1. Hearers of the Gospel should labor to
understand what they hear; for, Have ye understood? says Christ. 2. The
Ministers by catechizing should take account of their hearers; for so does
Christ, saying, Have ye understood? 3. People of what quality soever, should be
willing to give account to their Teachers of their profiting in knowledge; for
the Disciples do answer, Yea, Lord.

Ver. 52. Then said he unto them, Therefore every Scribe which is instructed
unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man that is an householder, which
brings forth out of his treasure things new and old. Christ teaches them
still to be gathering more knowledge, and to make use of their hearing. Doct.
1. Every Minister should be furnished for his employment; for, He is A Scribe
unto the kingdom of heaven. 2. Ministers should be faithful st^wards,
distributing unto the necessity of the people, out of the abundance of their
furniture; for, They are Householders, who should be provided with store, as it
were of the last years growth, and of this years gathering also.

Ver. 53. And it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence.

54. And when he was come into his own Country: he taught them in their
Synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence has this man
this Wis^dome, and these mighty Works?

55. Is not this the Carpenters Son? Is not his Mother called Mary? and his
Brethren James and Ioses, and Simon, and Judas?

56. And his Sisters are they not all with us? whence then has this Man all
these things?

Christ departs from that place, and goes into Ga^ilee, where he is not well
received. Hence learn, 1. That when Christ has perfected his Work, and not
till then, will he remove from a place; for it is said, When he had finished,
then he departed. 2. He neglected no bands of common duty, he visits Nazareth
and Galilee, where he was brought up, and gives them an offer of his grace;
teaching us by his example, that the greatest evidence of kindness to our
Friends or Acquaintence which can be given, is, according to our calling, to
draw them unto God; for, He came unto his country, and taught them in their
synagogues. 3. By the preaching of the Gospel (how clearly and convincingly
soever it be preached) the reprobate and obstinate unbeliever will not profit,
but at most will only admire it, and let it go^ he may be convinced by it, but
will not be converted. When he can object nothing against the doctrine, he will
without all reason except against the person of the Preacher, or his kindred,
and his parentage, or his outward condition, or some such one thing or other to
debar himself from believing and obeying the doctrine, even as these men did.
They were astonished, and said, Whence has this man this wisdom? etc.

Ver. 57. And they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, A Prophet is
not without honor, save in his own country, and in his own house. Christ his
extraordinary wisdom should have made them take up his excellency, but it
turns contrary. Doct. 1. These very things which are inducements unto belief,
will prove stumbling blocks unto the wicked, to hinder them from belief, as
here is seen. 2. Ministers despised by their carnal friends, must comfort
themselves with the ordinary lot of Godly teachers, who of all sorts of men are
lest esteemed amongst their own friends and acquaintance; graceless nature
having more enmity against Preachers and instruments of grace, then against any
other sort of men; for so did Christ comfort himself: saying, A Prophet is not
without honor, save in his own Country.

Ver. 58. And he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.
The despising of Christ turns to the disadvantage of the despiser. Doct. 1.
Despising of the Ministers prejugeth men of the blessing of the Ministry, and
misbelief is punished by the Lords hiding his power from the misbeliever;
fortherfore Christ did not many mighty works among them, because of unbelief:
for as unto the Believer God manifests himself, so from the misbeliever God
does hide himself.

CHAP. XIV.
After the history of John's beheading, to ver. 13. The miracle of the loaves,
and Christ's walking on the sea, to ver. 34. And the healing of the sick in the
bounds of Genezareth is set down.

Ver. 1. AT that time Herod the Tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus.

2. And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the
dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.


Herod hears of Christ, and takes him to be John Baptist risen from the
dead. Doct. 1. Whatsoever opposition Christ does meet with, he sees ever to
the spreading of the glory of his own name: for here, His fame comes to Herod,
after John is beheaded. 2. God can clear the cause of his Martyrs in the
conscience of their persecuters, as Herod here counts John Baptist a man
righteous, whom God would honor, by making him an instrument of mighty works.

Ver. 3. For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him in prison
for Herodias sake, his brother Philips wife.

4. For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to have her:

5. And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because
they counted him as a Prophet.

By this occasion, John's death which was bypast, is here recorded, in which
history, learn, 1. Faithful Ministers will not spare to tell, even Kings their
sins, as John does here reprove Herod for his incest and adultery. 2. It is no
new thing that Kings and great men take it evil, to be reproved of their sins,
and are ready to persecute faithful Preachers; for, Herod here imprisons John
for his free speeches. 3. The Lord can make any means serve to keep his
servants life so long as he pleases, as here he makes the fear of the people
a mean of John's safety for a time. 4. Wicked men do not abstain from any sin,
but for worldly reasons, they do nothing for regard to God, nothing else did
Herod look to; but, He feared the multitude.

Verse 6. But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced
before them, and pleased Herod.

7. Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her whatsoever she would ask.

8. And she, being before instructed of her mother, says, Give me here John
Baptists head in a charger.

9. And the king was sorry: never theless, for the oaths sake, and them which
sat with him as meat, he commanded it to be given her.

10. And he sent and beheahed John in the prison.

11. And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel: and she
brought it to her mother.

At last the Lords appointed time comes, and John is beheaded: in which
history, learn, 1. When a man has a mind to an evil work, a time shall be
found fit for the doing of it, as here a time is offered unto Herod. 2. A time
of carnal feasting, is a time fit for plotting and practicing against Gods
Servants, as here Herod's birthday is fit for John Baptists beheading. 3. A
foolish and graceless heart is easily taken with a small delight, as Herod is
marvellously pleased with a Damsels dancing. 4. A foolish delight is able to
ensnare a man for practicing a wicked work, as Herod's vain delight ingageth him
in a rash general promise and oath, and so he is engaged in the murder of the
Lords Servant. 5. Such as the Parents are, such is the education of their
children readily, Such mother here, such daughter. 6. The malice of the wicked
against reprovers of their sin is deadly; for, John Baptists head must pass
for his reproof of incest. 7. Malicious persons will prefer the satisfaction of
their malice to any thing else; for, Herodias had rather have John's head, then
half a Kingdom. 8. A graceless soul may have a wrestling with his lusts, ere
he commit a sin, and may be sorrowful for carnal reasons to do some wicked
deed, as Herod here is loath to kill John: Natural conscience may tell a man
of sin, and vex him also, and yet for no right reasons; as, The King is sorry,
to behead John. 9. A natural conscience is not able to resist a temptation,
though it may restrain a man for a time; for, Herod, though he be sorry, yet he
yields. 10. A sinner ensnared is holden by bands which he might lawfully
break, as Herod here by a rash oath; Nevertheless for the oaths sake, he
yields. 11. That which indeed is a man's shame, will appear unto a foolish
sinner to be his credit; and when credit appears, it will more prevail with the
wicked, then either conscience and carnal fe^; Herod here for Their sakes that
sat with him at meat, does yield that John shall lose his head. 12. Gods
dearest servants may be taken away by a light occasion, after that ^he Lord
has ended his work by them; as here, John dies at the desire of a wanton
Less. 13. The bodies of the Saints may be abused after death, at the pleasure
of the persecuters, as John's head here is made a spectacle to his foes.

Ver. 12. And his disciples came, and took up his body and buried it, and went
and told Jesus. From the history of John's burial, Learn, 1. That the faithful
must not be ashamed at the suffering of the Saints, but testify their respect
to the living and to the dead; for; John's disciples came and buried John's body.
2. When Pastors are cut off, men must resort to the chief shepherd so much the
more, at the Disciples of John came to Christ, and told him of John's death.

Verse 13. When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship into a desert
place apart: and when the people had heard thereof, they followed him one foot
out of the Cities.

14. And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with
compassion toward them, and he healed their (...).

From the history of Christ's departure, Learn, 1. That Jesus has reason to
depart from the place where any of his servants are slain, and others of them
are in danger; for, When he heard this he departed. 2. Such as have need of
Christ will find him out, and follow after him, refusing no travel nor pains to
seek him; for, The people follow him to a desert place. 3. Christ is
compassionate toward such as seek him; and of such as seek he will put none
away; the needy and sick find health from him, for here it is said, He was
moved with compassion, and healed the sick which followed him.

Ver. 15. And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a
desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may
go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals.

16. But Jesus said unto them, They need not depart, give them to eat.

17. And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two fishes.

18. He said, Bring them hither to me.

19. And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and took the
five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and
brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.

20. And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the fragments
that remained, twelve baskets full.

21. And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside women and
children.

Here is the miracle of the loaves, occasioned by the Disciples care to have
the multitude dismissed timously. Doct. 1. It is wisdom to have regard unto
peoples infirmity, and what they may endure in attendance of divine worship;
as, The Disciples here have a care of the peoples want of food. 2. If God call
for extraordinary attendance, he will furnish ability, and provide for the
bodies of such as prefer the feeding of their souls to the refreshing of their
bodies, providing they tempt not God herein, by neglecting wilfully ordinary
means; Therefore Jesus says, They need not depart, give ye them to eat. 3.
Where God gives a call to his servants to feed people, they must look to
himself for ability, and not be discouraged, for the little furniture which
they conceive they have; for here the Disciples have no more but five loaves,
and two fishes, and Christ contenteth himself with them, Bring them to me,
says he. 4. It is good in an ordinary call unto any work to look to ordinary
means, as the disciples here not apprehending as yet any more then the
ordinary, do make objection, that they have but five loaves and two fishes. 5.
The Lord will have our weakness for his work to beseen: to the end his power
may the more appear; as here, the paucity of loaves and fishes must first be
seen, ere he work the work. 6. In working of miracles, our Lord did so dispose
of all circumstances, as might most profit the people, and glorify the Father;
in whose name and power, as being one with the Father he did the work; as here,
He orders the people in their places, looks to Heaven, and powerfully
blesses their provision, that there might be bread and fish enough by his
divine operation. 7. Christ's Ministers shall lose nothing in distributing their
gifts unto the feeding of his people; for the Disciples, after more then five
thousand have eaten of their few loaves, do take up twelve baskets full, a
great deal more then they had laid down.

Ver. 22. And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship,
and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.

23. And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart
to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there alone.

24. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the
wind was contrary.

Another miracle tending to show, that as Christ is Lord of the earth, and
lives of the creatures therein, so he is Lord also of the sea and winds,
wherein he exercises his Disciples with a plece of trouble, to make them
profit in the knowledge of his spiritual Kingdom. The reasons of this short
dispatch, and constraining of the disciples to go to sea without his bodily
presence, may be seen in Ioh. 6. and Mark. 6. Here it is sufficient to learn,
1. That we should be sure of an urgent calling, before we undertake a hazardous
voyage; for, Jesus constrained his disciples to go into a ship. 2. Christ will
not have men diverted from their places and callings, under pretense of waiting
on him; nor to expect to live by miraculous means, but to attend upon the
ordinary blessing of each man's vocation: and therefore, he sends the multitude
away. 3. Christ, albeit the Son of God, yet because he had taken on our nature,
and the office of Mediator therein, upon all occasions of retyring, he prays
and intercedeth with God for his people, He went and prayed apart. 4. When the
Godly are in trouble, and under trials, the Mediator is praying for their
upholding: when the disciples go to sea, Christ goes to the Mount to pray. 5.
Christ's Disciples must be in trouble and hazards, when others are at ease, as
here it fares with these Disciples. 6. Albeit men have Christ's warrant for
their voyage, yet are they not exempted from trouble and danger therein, for
here is an instance. 7. Men may have fair wheather in the beginning of a work,
and danger and trouble may be kept back till they be so far engaged, as it is
more safe for them to go forward then to return; so fares it here with the
Disciples; for, The storm arises, when they are in the midst of the sea.

Ver. 25. And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them walking on
the sea.

26. And when the Disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying, it is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.

27. But straightway Jesus spoke unto them, saying, Be of good cheer, it is I,
be not afraid.

Christ does not stay all night from them, but comes to them in due time.
Doct. 1. God keeps back comfort and delivery, till it be time, as Christ
suffers the disciples to be exercised long, and comes not to them till the
fourth watch of the night: but then he comes in due season. 2. Christ is Lord
of Sea and Land, and can make way unto his people^ relief, through the most
stormy Sea, no impediment can under him, nor hold him from his disciples
society: for, Christ here comes walking on the Sea. 3. The Lords coming to his
own sometimes is fearful, and sometimes destruction is apprehended, when
delivery is most near, as here They cry out for fear. 4. Apparitions of spirits
in bodily shape^ is possible, and the truth of it in all ages has been
received, as here, They say, It is a spirit. 5. When the Lords disciples are in
greatest extremity, then uses he to comfort them speedily, and to reveal
himself unto them most kindly, as here straightway he cries, It is I, be of
good cheer. 6. Wheresoever Christ shows himself present, there is no reason
to be afraid of any trouble or danger, for he is able to deliver his own in
whatsoever strait; therefore says he, It is I, be not afraid. 7. When he
speaks, he makes his word to be discerned by his people, and so satisfies
them; for he makes his own know his presence, Be of good cheer, it is I,
says he.

Ver. 28. And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, ^id me come
unto thee on the water.

29. And he said, Come, and when Peter was come down out of the ship, ^e
walked on the water, to go to Jesus.

Zealous Peter cannot stay, till Christ enter the ship, and so comes to be
exercised a little. Doct. 1. Fervent love hastes to be at Christ, it looks
to no danger, but will hazard through fire and water to be at him; as here:
Peter's heart fli^^ers to be a^ the Lord, when he sees him. 2. When men mistake
the measure of their own strength and gifts, they are ready to seek a calling
ere it be given them, and to enterprise things too hard for them: as here Peter
says, Lord bid me come unto thee on the water. 3. If God give a calling,
however it seem to be procured, a man may rely on it, and have reason to
believe for assistance in following of it; for, Peter hears Christ say, Come;
and presently he casts himself on the sea, and his faith for a time upheld
him, so long as he kept the gripes.

Verse. 30. But when he saw the wind boisterous: he was afraid: and beginning to
sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me. The storm continues, and Peter
begins to fear, and doubt, and sink. Doct. 1. It is not Christ's presence,
but his will and command, which makes a storm calm: Christ and trouble may be
both present together; for notwithstanding Christ is come, the wind is
boisterous still. 2. The continuance of the trial of faith, brings to light
the weakness of faith; for a man may hold out a while, who at length may faint
as Peter here does. 3. When men look more to the dangers then to God calling
them to it, no wonder that their faith be^brangled: for Peter sees the wind
too much, and Christ presence too little. 4. It is safest to ponder all that
faith is to meet with, if we can overtake it, before we enter in the conflict
with difficulties; for Peter should have prepared against the wind, as well as
against the sea, and waters. 5. Sometimes peril presses a man more when he is
in the dangers, then before; and a man may seem stout before the experience of
the danger, who shall prove feeble in it: men know not readily their own
weakness, till they be put to a proof; Peter doubted nothing to walk on the
Sea, till now. 6. As faith grows feeble, courage and strength, and all begin
to fail; as soon as Peter doubts, he begins to sink. 7. When our faith
grows weak, our prayer should be strong; for doubting Peter cried in prayer.
8. Whatsoever be our danger, let Christ's power be exalted, as sufficient to
help us, as Peter does, saying, Lord, save me. 9. Seen danger, and felt
weakness, does cut off presumption, and put faith to rely upon God altogether;
for now Peter cries, Lord, save me.

Ver. 31. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and
said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Christ
draws near quickly, and helps him. Doct. 1. Albeit our Lord be displeased
with our sins, yet will he not delay to help, when need calls for present
relief; as here suddenly, He stretched forth his hand. 2. To doubt where we
have warrant to believe, is worthy of a reproof; therefore says Christ, Why
did thou doubt?; Christ will neithe^ deny that to be faith which is mixed with
doubting, nor refuse to help the weakness thereof, by gryping by his powerful
grace, such as do but faintly gripe him by their faith, as here he caught
Peter, and said unto him, O thou of little faith.

Ver. 32. And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.

33. Then they that were in the ship, came and worshipped him, saying, of a
truth thou art the Son of God.

Now the exercise is ended, the disciples weakness and Christ's strength is
manifested. Doct. 1. When the trial is at an end, the trouble is at an end,
Christ and Peter come up into the ship, and the wind ceased. 2. It is a blessed
trouble which ends in glorifying of Christ, and in the increase of knowledge;
for, Now the Disciples come, and worship Christ. 3. New experience does furnish
deep impressions of Christ's divine power and Godhead; for now, say they, Thou
art the Son of God. 3. Delivery out of imminent death, speaks more of Gods
power to the humble person, then the greatest works does speak unto the secure,
as the delivery of the Disciples from the raging sea, makes them more sensible
of Christ's Godhead, then the miraculous feeding of five thousand with so few
loaves in the wilderness; for now it is, and not till now, that they say, Of a
truth thou art the Son of God.

Ver. 34. And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Genesaret.

35. And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all
that country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased.

36. And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment, and as
many as touched, were made perfectly whole.

Now the Lord landeth, and goes to Gen^saret, and heals the sick. Doct. 1.
Our Lord goes ever where he has an errand, and delighting to do good where
ever he goes, and as the common Savior of all sorts of persons, in all
places, does heal all, who in the sense of their need do seek the benefit of
him; as here, all the sick in Genesaret that come to him, Are made whole. 2.
Then have people right knowledge of Christ, when they know his power, and grace,
and do give him employment, as this people do. 3. Such as know Christ aright,
will not only make use of him themselves, but also bring in unto him, all whom
they can move, each man according to his calling, as this people do. 4 The
greater measure of says be, the l^ss will be the prescribing of signs unto God;
for, The hem of the garment suffices these believing people. 5. Where God
sees need of signs to help the exercise of the faith of miracles, he gives
unto the persons the instinct also of the sign, which may suffice to confirm
them; for, As many as touched, were made whole perfectly.

CHAP XV.
Christ defends his disciples against the challenge of the Pharisees for not
observing ceremonies of Religion devised by men, to ver. 21. Heals the woman
of Canaans daughter, to ver. 29. Heals many, and feeds miraculously a
multitude by the sea of Galilee.

Ver. 1. THen came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem.

2. Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders? for they wash
not their hands when they eat bread.


IN this contest betwixt Christ and the Pharisees about traditions, learn. 1.
That it is no new thing that Christ has adversaries; and these chiefly,
corrupt Churchmen, even such as bear office in places most famous for Religion;
for here Are Scribes and Pharisees which were of Jerusalem, going about to
divert disciples from following of Christ, and to put a disgrace (if they
could) on our Lord, for his Disciples cause. 2. It is no wonder to see Christ
and his Church molested with the controversy of nonconformity in humane
inventions of Religion, Why do thy disciples transgress the traditions? say
they. 3. Antiquity and Fathers without Scripture, is the old charter of
superstitious Formalists; for, Why (say they) do thy disciples transgress the
traditions of the Elders? 4. That which otherwise is lawful in it self, while
it abides within the limits of civil fashions, may be left undone, and be
discountenanced, when it is set up in state, within the limits of Religion;
therefore the Disciples did not wash their hands before meat, in the company of
Pharisees, who made washing at that time, to be a holy and religious act.

Ver. 3. But he answered unto them, Why do you also transgress the Commandment
of God by your tradition? Christ puts the Pharisees to defend their
traditions, and refuteth them: Hence learn, 1. That God in wisdom brings men's
ceremonies to a dispute, and so to be refuted and contemned, then especially
when men do press them most; for now Christ takes on the plan, and answers
for his Disciples, and confuteth the Formalists by four reasons. The first
reason; By the authority of your traditions ye transgress the command of God:
Therefore such authority is not to be regarded by my Disciples: Hence learn, 1.
That traditions may be fathered or mothered on those that maintain them, no
less then upon those who invented them; for Christ says, Why do you by your
traditions transgress? 2: Such as are most ^ealous for humane traditions shall
readily be found transgressors and contemners of divine commands, and Gods
traditions given by Scripture; for, Why do you transgress the command of God?
says he. 3. When the authority of humane traditions does loose, or weaken the
obligatory power of moral command in any thing, it may and should be despised
altogether, and rejected as unworthy to be a rule for a man's carriage in any
thing; for, Why do you also by your traditions transgress the command of God*

Ver. 4. For God commanded saying, Honor thy father and mother: and be that
curses father or mother, let him die the death.

5. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or his mother, It is a gift
by whatsoever thou might be profited by me,

6. And honor not his father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye
made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.

Christ proves the challenge, because their traditions did warrant the
children to dedicate unto the churchmen, for a religious offering or gift, all
that they might spare above their own maintenance; and so for their own filthy
lucre, they deprived Parents of all maintenance from their children, contrary
to the fifth command; for when the Parents, or the poor should seek support of
them, their traditions bade them answer thus, That which thou seek, and
every other thing whereby thou might be helped, or profited by me, or any
thing of mine, it is a gift already dedicate to the Church; And therefore hold
me excused: Hence learn, 1. The duty of children unto parents is straightly
urged by Gods command: and the wicked transgression of it is made capital; for
the Law says, He that curses, let him die the death. 2. It is a part of the
honor due to parents, that children sustain them in their need, as they are
able: for not helping is here as much, As not honoring of their Father or
Mother. 3. Such traditions as directly, or by consequence do prejudge the true
intent of any of Gods Laws (whatsoever pretense of Religion be made) are
wicked; for he says, You by your traditions have made the command of God of
none effect. 4. No gift nor voluntary offering presented unto God does please
him, when the duty of love adebted to others is neglected, or contraveened
thereby; for Christ calls such a gift, a breach of the fifth command. 5.
Dispensation with Gods Law by humane authority, and urging of men's traditions
more then of Gods commands, is in effect the abolishing of Gods Law; for so
says Christ, By your tradition, you have made the command of God of no effect.

Verse 7. Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying,

8. This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with
their lips: but their heart is far from me.

The second reason, from Isa. 29.13. By way of retorting; the challeng is, this
urging of your traditions is but the bewraying of your hypocrisy, and
counterfeit drawing near to God in external rites, when your affections are no
ways toward God; Therefore my disciples should not receive them: Hence learn,
1. Zeal for humane ceremonies, especially joined with the neglect of Gods
precepts, does prove gross hypocrisy; for so says Christ, Ye hypocrites draw
near to me. 2. The Lord esteems nothing even of the outward exercises of
religious ordinances, appointed by himself, when men do not labor to perform
the same with affection; it is the heart which he looks unto in worship:
Therefore says he, Their heart is far from me.

Ver. 9. Bu^ in vain they d^ worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men. A third reason, from the Scripture also, Isai. 29.13.
When men's inventions and precepts, are made the rule of Gods worship, God does
reject such service, and therefore your challenge of my disciples is unjust.
Hence learn, That it is the Lords prerogative to prescribe all the parts of his
own worship; and if a man presume to prescribe what shall be worship to him,
which he has not prescribed, it is a sufficient cause to reject man's
ordinance; for, In vain do they worship me, etc.

Ver. 10. And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear, and understand.

11. Not that which goes into the mouth defiles a man: but that which comes
out of the mouth, this defiles a man.

A fourth reason delivered unto the multitude, by way of apology for his
Disciples, This sort of pollution which comes to the mouth by unwashen hands,
is not a sin which defiles the conscience, but the wickedness of the heart,
vented by the mouth; such as is these wicked men's quarrelling of my Disciples,
that indeed does pollute the man: Therefore these Pharisees, rather then my
Disciples, are polluted. Hence learn, 1. That contesting against Christ's
Disciples, slandering and reproaching of such as do not observe humane
traditions, is a pollution of the slanderer, and more dangerous then the
omission of humane ceremonies, which may be omitted without pollution of sin;
for, That which comes out of the mouth, polluteth. 2. Albeit unto mocking
adversaries, we need not always give reasons of what we do or omit, yet unto
different spectators it is good to give a reason, for their edification, and
our own clearing, as here Christ gives satisfaction to the common people; for,
He called the multitude, and said. 3. The fountain of the pollution of a man's
actions, is his heart, conscience and affections not being rightly disposed;
for, Out of the heart comes such and such evils.

Ver. 12. Then came his disciples and said unto him, Know thou that the
Pharisees were offended after they heard this saying? The Disciples do wonder
that Christ did regard so little to displease the Pharisees: Hence learn, 1.
Truth must be taught, whosoever may be displeased; for so did Christ preach,
albeit the Pharisees were offended. 2. Nothing will vex false teachers more,
then the discovery of their false doctrine before the multitude, as the
Pharisees for this Cause were offended. 3. Men are ready to stumble and offend
at the teaching of Truth, where no stumbling block is laid before them, as at
Christ's doctrine, The Pharisees were offended after they heard this saying.

Ver. 13. But he answered and said, Every plant which my heavenly Father has
not planted, shall be rooted up. Our Lords answer serves for a reason, 1. Why
he spoke against the Pharisees false doctrine: and 2ly against their
traditions; and 3ly why he misregarded in this case their offence-taking,
because both their ceremonies, their false doctrine, and they themselves also,
being altogether reprobate stuff, were plants which God had not planted in his
field, but Satan; and therefore they were all to be rooted out, for the good of
the vineyard, and field of the Lords church. Hence learn, 1. That in the
visible church, and Garden of the Lord, there may be some plants not of Gods
plantation, but of Satan's; such as false doctrine, corrupt inventions of men,
thrust into Gods worship, and wicked men defenders of both; for this is
imported in, Every plant which my Father has not planted. 2. God, the good
Husbandman, will have these evil weeds discovered, and cast out, as God
gives a calling and occasion; therefore says he, They shall be rooted out.

Verse. 14. Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. Christ does cut off any more
speaking of these wicked men. Doct. 1. Obstinate maintainers of false doctrine,
and of corrupt traditions, enemies to Christ and his disciples, are given over
of God, and are worthy also to be given over, and let alone by men, that is,
fellowship is not to be kept with them; Therefore he says, Let them alone. 2.
Where the teachers and people follow men's traditions in Religion, and not the
rule of Gods word, the leaders and they that are led, are both blind; This is
it he says, They be blind leaders of the blind. 3. The following of false
teachers and blind guides, will not be an excuse before God for people to plead
immunity: But seeing none should follow any man, but as that man does follow
the Lord, the blind guide and the blind follower shall both perish, if they
hold on in their wrong way; for, Both shall fall into the ditch.

Ver. 15. Then answered Peter and said unto him, Declare unto ^^ this parable.

16. And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding?

17. Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever enters in at the mouth, goes
into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?

18. But those things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from the
heart, and they defile the man.

19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies.

20. These are the things which defile a man: but to eat with unwashen hands
defiles not a man.

Peter does not understand the parable of not being polluted by meat, and so
moves this question. Doct. 1. It is good to be asking of Christ, whatsoever we
understand not, whatsoever reproof may follow for our dullness; therefore
says Peter, declare unto us this parable. From Christ's answer: learn, 1. That
when disciples do not take up the plain speeches of Christ, they are
reproof-worthy; Therefore says Christ, Are ye also without understanding? 2.
Albeit Christ reprove our faults, and be angry at them, yet he will go about to
relieve us of them, for he is about to teach after reproof, saying, do not ye
understand? 3. Every action or word does testify what is in the heart, and
does add a degree of further pollution and guiltiness, unto that which the man
had before he brake out externally; for, Evil words coming forth from the
heart, do pollute the man yet more. 4. When a needless ceremony, and a
superstitious invention of man is neglected, or forborne, it is not a sin,
notwithstanding of whatsoever humane authority, or tradition of the Elders
commanding it; for Christ here does pronounce the disciples eating with
unwashen hands, though contrary to the tradition of the Jewish doctors, Not to
defile the man.

Ver. 21. Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and
Sidon.

22. And behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts and cried unto
him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is
grievously vexed with a devil.

Christ having ended his dispute, goes to seek a wandering Sheep: from this
his journey-taking for the woman of Canaans cause; Learn, 1. That where Christ
has a lost sheep, or a work of mercy to work, he spares no pains to compass
his purpose; for here, He departed to the coasts of Sidon. 2. The persons to
whom Christ has a mind, providence will draw them after him, Behold, a woman
of Canaan came. 3. Faith finds the smell of Christ where ever he be, and
draws in unto him; for, She comes and calls on him. 4. Faith pressed with
need is earnest in prayer; for, She cried unto him. 5. Faith does fix on Christ
as the true promised Messiah; for she calls him, Son of David: Faith looks
on Christ as compassionate and merciful, it pleads for mercy and pretends
no merit, for thus says she, Have mercy on me. 6. Love owneth them whom it
loves, whatsoever be their condition; for here the trouble that her child is
troubled with, she counts it as her own, saying, Have mercy on me, for my
daughter is troubled. 7. Faith gives Christ the glory of ability to do all
that it desires; so she ascribes unto him power to cast out the devil,
saying, My daughter is vexed of a devil.

Verse. 23. But he answered her not a word: And his disciples came and besought
him, saying, Send her away, for she cries after us. There are 4 means used for
the trial of her faith. The first is, Christ's keeping silence when she
prays: Hence learn, That God, albeit he love the Suppliant, and do accept his
petition, yet possibly he will keep silence, and not seem to take notice for a
time; for, He answered her not a word. The next means of her trial is the
small assistance she has of the disciples prayers: wherein learn, That says
loves the help of the prayers of the Faithful militant, as a means prescribed
of God for mutual comfort; for, She cried after the disciples. 2. When God
thinks it fit to try our faith, by delaying to hear us, he will for our
trial make other means which we use, to fail us also; as here the disciples
would be rid of her importunity, and have her dispatched, that she should not
trouble them; Therefore say they, Send her away, She cries after us.

Ver. 24. But he answered and said, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of
the house of Israel. The third means of the trial of her faith, is, By our
Lords telling her, that his commission reached only unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, which was indeed true, in regard of his particular and
personal Ministry in the days of his humiliation, wherein he was to make offer
of his grace, first and chiefly unto the Jews: and this is true again, If we
take Israel for the Elect of God, both Jews and Gentiles: He came for these
Elect ones only: But unto this woman who understood not so high a matter, it
could not seem but that his commission was to the Jews only, and not to the
Gentiles, of which sort was she: Hence learn, 1. That among other trialls of
the faith of the Lords people, this is one, To suffer them to be questioned,
whether they be of the number of the Elect; for thus much imports, I am not
sent but to the lost sheep of Israel. 2. Christ has an errand to such as find
themselves in peril to perish; for, He is sent to the lost sheep.

Verse. 25. Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me. She cannot
answer this doubt, and therefore passes it over; and insists in prayer; what
Christ's commission is, she will not dispute, but sure she is, she must be
helped: Hence learn, That when any doubt does tend toward excluding us from the
number of such to whom the Gospel is sent, we shall do well to pass by such
doubts, without disputation, and to insist in prayer, grounded upon Gods
goodness and power to help, for so did this woman, Then came she and
worshipped. 2. The more the Lord seem to refuse us, we should so much the more
humble our selves before him, and continue in prayer; for it is marked, That
then she worshipped, and said, Lord help me.

Ver. 26. But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread,
and cast it to dogs. The fourth means of her trial, is, By seeming to exclude
her (as a heathen, or unclean dog, without the covenant) from all the benefits
of the Messiah, belonging to Israel, (who are the children of God by covenant)
as their proper food; and here the former doubt is augmented, and put more
nearly home unto her: Hence learn, 1. That the Lord when he will try, does try
unto the quick, and humbles unto the dust the soul under trial, and for this
end makes the last difficulty more then any of the former; for now he says,
It is not meet to give to dogs, etc. 2. Such as are within the external
covenant of Grace, are in some respect holy, as consecrate to God and
appropriate unto him by covenant, and such as have the privileges of Gods
people belonging unto them, as unto children, while others who are without the
covenant are counted dogs; This he imports, saying, It is not meet to cast
the childrens bread to dogs. 3. The representation of our unworthiness before
our eyes is a main point of trial of our faith: Therefore, for her last trial,
he compares her to a dog.

Ver. 27. And she said, Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall
from their masters table. The Lords Spirit loses the doubt unto her: Hence
learn, 1. That Christ's commission, albeit it was chiefly unto the Jews to set
much on their table, yet it was not so limited, but that crumbs of their food;
especially being neglected by them, might be bestowed upon the Gentiles: this
is it she sees, Crumbs fall from the table. 2. The Lord in trial of faith,
makes the Believer of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, to mark all
advantages whereby it may strengthen it self; Therefore says she, Truth, Lord,
yet the dogs eat the crumbs. 3. The Believer is content to be humbled, as deeply
as the Lord pleases; and to acknowledge his own unworthiness to the uttermost:
only he cannot be content to be excluded from God, and the benefits of his
grace; for this woman can be called a dog, but cannot want some crumbs of
Christ's kindness. 4. It is a special wisdom to turn motives unto
discouragement, into motives to believing, and drawing so much the more near to
Christ, as the motives unto dscouragement do drive us away from him; for so
this woman does, The more her natural uncleanness and unworthiness, and her
alienation from the commonwealth of Israel, is represented unto her, she
bears her self the more in upon Christ: when she seems to be boasted away
from him as a dog, she creeps in under the childrens table, to catch crumbs
falling from it.

Ver. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith:
be it unto thee even as thou will. And her daughter was made whole from that
very hour. From Christ's answer, learn, 1. That faith does please Christ
exceedingly; therefore says he, O woman. 2. This is a true and kindly faith,
not to take a refuse of Christ, answer as he pleases; but to pursue constantly
our petition for his grace, and by no means to part with him: for this cause
Christ says to her, Great is thy faith. 3. Whatsoever hard expressions be due
to a sinner, in regard of his natural condition, yet the believer is greatly
loved and esteemed of by Christ, as here; It is now no more A dog, but O woman.
4. Howsoever Christ seem to wrestle with a believer, yet he is purposed to give
faith the victory, and to yield himself in this conflict to the believer, as
here, Be it unto thee, says he, as thou will: The believer shall have at last
all that he wishes; and Satan shall he tread under foot. 5. The prayer of his
faith is available for others; for this woman's daughter was made whole from
that very hour.

Ver. 29. And Jesus departed from thence and came ^igh unto the sea of Galilee,
and went up into a mountain, and sat down there.

30. And great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that were lame,
blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus feet, and he
healed them.

Another proof of Christ's Godhead, and of his grace toward the miserable; He
heals all the miserable who came unto him. Doct. 1. When Christ has done his
work in one place, he follows his work in another place, he comes now to the
sea of Galilee. 2. Many may come to Christ at once, without impeding one
another: it is not so among men, where one must wait till another be
dispatched; Here multitudes come unto him. 3. Christ stands not how many, and
how desperate the cures be that are presented unto him; for here, He healed
them all, blind, dumb, lame, etc. 4. It is sufficient to lay our miseries
before Christ, our miseries will speak for us, and he will answer us with helping
of us; for here, They did but cast down the miserable at his feet, and he
healed them.

Ver. 31. Insomuch that the multitude wondered when they saw the dumb to speak,
the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see; and they
glorified the God of Israel. Here is the effect of these miracles, They
wondered and glorified God. Doct. 1. The miraculous works of Christ were such
as forced the beholders to acknowledge divine Power in him; for here, the
beholders wondered, and glorified God. 2. Very nature will be moved, and forced
to glorify God, when it sees Gods Power in a supernatural way manifested;
Therefore it is said, The multitude wondered; etc.

Ver. 32. Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said, I have compassion
on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have
nothing to eat: and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint by the
way. Unto all the former bounty bestowed on the people, is added this miracle,
of feeding such a multitude, by so mean provision. Hence learn, 1. That the
care of men's welfare lies more near unto Christ's heart, then unto the heart
of any of his Disciples; for it is Christ here who first takes notice of the
peoples necessity. 2. Love and compassion is the fountain of Christ's bounty to
his people; for, I have compassion, says he. 3. He feeds his compassion upon
the sight of our necessities and miseries incumbent and imminent; and he not
only relieveth present necessities, but does provide also for time to come; as
here he says, I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way.

Verse. 33. And his disciples say unto him, Whence should we have so much bread
in the wilderness as to fill so great a multitude? The Disciples think it
impossible, because they did not see means how it should be. Doct. 1. Seen
difficulties, and apparent impossibilities do serve as lighted torches to make
the Lords way toward us, and his work about us to be better seen, as the
disciples objections here do contribute to illustrate the miracle; for, Whence
should we have so much bread? say they. 2. Christ's Ministers being to be
employed in a piece of service, do readily look more what furniture they have,
then what power Christ has, who is about to employ them; Whence should we
have, say they, so much bread in the wilderness, to fill so many? 3. Such is
our natural misbelief, that if we see no means, we cannot believe that which
God says shall be; no not, albeit we have had experience before in the like
case; Whence shall we have, say they, so much bread? They forgot the former
miracles. 4. Misbelief is ready to strengthen it self by all appearances of
reason; as here the Disciples do, saying, Whence shall we have bread in the
wilderness?

Ver. 34. And Jesus says unto them, How many loaves have ye? and they said,
Seven, and a few little fishes.

35. And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground;

36. And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake
them, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.

37. And they did all eat, and were filled, and they took up of the broken meat
that was left, seven baskets full.

38. And they that did eat, were four thousand men, beside women and children.

39. And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came unto the coasts of
Magdala.

Follows the miracle and the orderly disposing of it, as the Lords power may
be best seen: Hence learn, 1. Ere the Lord work, he will have it seen how
little ground he has to work upon; therefore by asking his Disciples, he
draws forth how few loaves and fishes for such a work were to be had. 2. He
will not despise his own appointed ordinary means, for so far as they can
reach: nor will he do any thing extraordinary, further then is necessary; for,
He could have fed them without these seven loaves, but he will take them and
make use of them seeing they may be had. 3. Christ uses to shame the misbelief
of his servants by making them actors in the work, which they could not believe
to see; for, He gave to the Disciples, and they to the multitude. 4. There is
no scant when the Lord gives the banquet, for all are filled when he inviteth
his guests, as here. 5. His manifold wisdom will glorify himself as he
pleases, but ever in a way sufficient to manifest his divine power; for there
are here more loaves and fewer people, and fewer fragments, then when by five
loaves five thousand were fed, but one basket proves the miracles as well as a
hundredth, and the fewer the ordinary means be, he will show his power the more.

CHAP. XVI.
The Pharisees with the Sadduces do tempt Christ, to ver. 6. Our Lord warns
his disciples to beware of their doctrine, to ver. 13 And having settled them in
the belief of his Godhead and office, to ver. 21. He guardeth them against his
own suffering, and theirs also, lest they should afterward stumble at the
cross.

Ver. 1. THe Pharisees also with the Sadduces, came, and tempting, desired him
that he would show them a sign from heaven.
IN these wicked men's tempting of Christ: learn, 1. That our Lord did suffer
much contradiction and temptation by wicked Sectaries; here diverse, and mo at
one time, come against him. 2. Satan's children, how opposite soever one to
another, can agree to oppose Christ; for, the Pharisees and Sadduces here do
join against Christ, though they were otherwise adversaries one to another;
The Pharisees maintaining the resurrection of the body, and the immortality of
the soul; the Sadduces denying both. 3. Such as would make show that they would
believe, if such and such signs, or not promised conditions were granted unto
them, are both lying hypocrites and tempters of God also, in prescribing new
means of believing, when God has given sufficient already; Therefore it is
said, They came tempting him, in desiring a sign.

Ver. 2.He answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, It will he
fair weather: for the sky is red.

3. And in the morning, It will be foul weather to day: for the sky is red and
lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not
discern the signs of the times?

4. A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no
sign be given them but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And be left them, and
departed.

Because Christ's doctrine and miracles did prove that the Messiah was come, and
the time of the Kingdom of grace; Therefore he reproves them, for not
discerning the times. Doct. 1. The Lord has made the offer of the means of
grace, a sign of the time of grace, as well as he has made signs in the sky
of foul or fair weather approaching; therefore are they worthy to be blamed, who
do not observe the time; for, Can y^ not discern the signs of the times? says
Christ. 2. Hypocrites and men in nature, are able to discern of natural
things, but not of spiritual: Thus Christ taxes the Pharisees, saying, Ye can
discern the signs of the sky, but not the time of grace. 3. Such as set not
their heart on God revealed in Christ, are not of the true church, nor Spouse
of Christ, but are adulterers; Therefore Christ calls these Pharisees and
Sadduces, Adulterous generation. 4. Christ's enemies shall get no satisfaction
in signs; such as they prescribe to help them to discern Christ by in his
Doctrine and Operations, shall be suffered to go on in opposition, till they
have vented their malice to the full; and then shall they know by Christ's
victory over them, and over death it self, and over all his enemies, that
Christ is indeed the true Messiah; for says Christ, No sign shall be given
them, but the sign of the prophet Jonas, who after three days arose, as it
were, out of the grave. 5. Hypocrites and such as tempt God, shall be left unto
themselves; as here, Christ left them, and departed.

Ver. 5. And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten
to take bread. This forgetting to take bread, is told us; partly, That we may
know how our Lords train was maintained; to wit, As soldiers they carried
their bread with them, and to show us, that our Lord had a care that his
followers should not be burdensome to any; But in special it is spoken of, to
clear the occasion of the disciples mistaking of the speech of Christ, herafter
set down in his warning of his disciples, to beware of corrupt doctrine under
comparison of leaven.

Ver. 6. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the Sadduces. Under the similitude of leaven, Christ bids his
disciples beware to be infected by the corrupt doctrine of these sectaries.
Doct. 1. False doctrine is like leaven, for it infects the lump secretly and
totally; therefore Beware of leaven, says he. 2. The doctrine of justification
by works professed by the Pharisees, and the doctrine of the Sadduces denying
the resurrection of the body, and the immortality of the soul, are both
poisonable leaven; therefore, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadduces, says he; putting both the sects in a like condition of infection.

Ver. 7. And they reasoned among themselves saying, It is because we have taken
no bread. The disciples imagine that Christ was speaking of bodily leaven.
Doct. Readily are our Lords words mistaken, even by disciples, and upon a
mistake wrong conclusions are drawn, and so the intent of Christ's words are
lost; for, Because we have no bread, is this admonition given, say the
disciples.

Ver. 8. Which when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little faith,
why reason ye among your selves, because ye have brought no bread?

9. Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five
thousand, and how many basket ye took up?

10. Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye
took up?

11. How is it that you do not understand, that I spoke it not to you
concerning bread, that you should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of
the Sadduces?

12. Then understood they how that he had them not beware of the leaven of
bread: but of the doctrine of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces.

Christ is offended that they should be so careful of bread, and imagine that
himself was anxious about bread also, seeing they had experience lately of his
power to provide bread at his pleasure. Doct. 1. Our Lord will not change his
speech for our mis-taking, but rather reprove our dullness, and then help to a
right understanding, as here he does, saying, Why do ye reason thus? 2. Christ
will make it a matter of reproof, if he see his disciples anxious about any
thing in this world, as here for this, Because they had brought no bread. 3.
Not to profit in faith, is the matter of greatest controversy between Christ
and his followers; as here, O ye of little faith. 4. The right use of Christ's
works, in special of his miraculous feeding many with a little food, is to
assure us of Christ's power to provide bread for his servants, and that they
need not to be anxious about that matter; Therefore says he, Remember the
miracle of the loaves. 5. The Lords reproof, is a mean of rectifying our
understanding; for after the reproof, then they understood that he meaned by
leaven, The corrupt doctrine of the Pharisees.

Verse. 13. When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his
disciples saying, Whom do men say that I, the Son of man, am?

14. And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and
others Ieremias, or one of the prophets.

15. He says unto them, But whom say ye that I am?

Christ is about to clear and confirm his disciples in the knowledge of
himself, and makes way for this, by questions: Hence learn, 1. That it is
expedient for Pastors to examine the knowledge of their flock as Christ here
asked his disciples. 2. It is no new thing to see diversity of judgment
concerning Christ, and the matters of his Kingdom; for there were in Christ's
days diverse opinions of men about him, even among them, who were not his
opposite enemies; for, Some said he was John Baptist, etc. 3. Of such as have
most means of the knowledge of Christ, most is to be expected, and if Christ's
Disciples have a right estimation of him, the less matter what others have; but
chiefly it is necessary that such as are to preach Christ, know him rightly;
Therefore says Christ, But whom say ye that I am?

Ver. 16. And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God. From Peter's answer: Learn, 1. That the Apostles knew Christ to be
very God and very man in one person; for Peter says, Thou art that Christ, i.
e. The promised Christ. 2. The vail of his humane nature and infirmities, did
not keep the eye of their faith from se^ing him to be one in substance with he
living God; for, Thou art Christ, the son of the living God, say they.

Verse. 17. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-jona: for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in heaven.

18. And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my Church: and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Christ commends this confession of Peter, as a saving truth revealed from
Heaven, whereupon in despite of Satan, he would settle his church, and rule the
same by the Ministry of his servants, and would ratify in heaven their service
done upon earth. Doct. 1. It is very acceptable and pleasant unto Christ that
his disciples do profit in knowledge and grace; Therefore says he, Blessed art
thou. 2. None get saving knowledge of Christ's person and offices but by special
revelation from God, for, Flesh and blood has not revealed it, says he. 3.
Such as know Christ rightly are truly blessed; for this cause he says, Blessed
art thou. 4. Such as bear testimony unto Christ, he will bear testimony for
them, and will give them a new name, as here he pronounces Peter, A lively
stone, builded on a sure rock, and that by way of confirmation of the name,
which he had given unto him at his first calling, saying, Thou art Peter, or a
stone. 5. The truth that Jesus Christ is the promised Messiah, very God, and
very man in one person, the anointed Savior of the world, is, The main
ground-stone whereupon the faith of all believers is founded, as upon a rock;
for, Upon this rock I will build, says he. 6. All the power and policy of the
devil, and his instruments shall not be able to overturn this truth, nor the
Lords building of his church upon it, nor the work of Gods grace in any member
of the church, which is builded on this truth; for so he promises in a speech
borrowed from the manner of these times when the Judges sat at the Port and
gave judgment; And so what wisdom or power was in the town, was in the gates
thereof, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it, says he. 7. The
church properly belongs to Christ as his own peculiar; neither Pope, nor
King, nor Parliament, nor any one or more in heaven or earth, may subject the
Church unto themselves, as it is the church; for Christ has reserved the
church for himself, and has appropriate this incorporation, as such, unto
himself alone, and called the church his own proper; saying, I will build my
Church. 8. Howsoever there be many particular churches distinguished one from
another, yet must they all endeavor for an unity among themselves, that they
may be one church with, and to Christ, and among themselves, keeping the unity
of faith in Christ, and unity of subjection to all his ordinances in the bond
of peace among themselves; for Christ has called them one, and appointed them
to be one, saying, I will build my Church, in the singular number. 9.
Whatsoever external defense, comfort, cherishing, and assistance unto the
church be required of the Magistrate, for the service of Christ, yet all the
means of edification of the church, and all the administration of the means of
the internal building of the church, Christ reserveth unto himself, to be done
by his own means, and his own chosen instruments; for this work he takes unto
himself, saying, I will build my Church.

Ver. 19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. In this promise made to
Peter, in name of the Apostles and their Successors in the Pastoral charge,
in whose name he did speak: learn, 1. Christ's church visible is his Kingdom,
even on this earth, not an earthly Kingdom, but a spiritual and heavenly
Kingdom, wherein he as King of heaven, in heavenly things, does reign; therefore
he calls the church visible, The Kingdom of Heaven. 2. This Kingdom or church
has keys to let in and keep in subjects; to cast out, and hold out rebels, by
doctrine and Discipline, and is not left without Ordinances and Order, for the
preservation and enlargement of it self; for, I will give Keys, says he. 3.
The Ministriall power of their keys is promised to the Ministers of this
Kingdom, that is, the Apostles, and their Successors in the Pastoral charge,
in whose name Peter did speak unto Christ, and in whose name he is spoken unto
by Christ; for he says, I will give to thee. 4. Such as have the office of
administration of the keys, have their authority in that office only from
Christ, in whose Name the keys are to be used, for He only is the Giver of the
keys; for it is said, I will give thee the keys. 5. What the Lords Ministers
do by virtue of their office, in admitting unto the fellowship of God and his
Saints, or excluding from the same; binding unto judgment, and loosing from
judgment in Christ's Name, according to their commission, it is ratified by God
in Heaven, as done by his warrant; for it is promised, Whatsoever ye shall
bind on earth, or loose, shall be so in Heaven.

Ver. 20. Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he
was Jesus the Christ. This mystery he commands them to keep to themselves
till he should give further order. Hence learn, Christ has his own fit times
when he will reveal his own mysteries; therefore be charged them that they
should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ; for if they had known, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory: He will not have his death hindered
by the untimous proclamation of his Truth.

Verse. 21. From that time forth began Jesus to show to his disciples how that
he must go into Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and ^hief
priests, and Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. The
disciples being now instructed about the person and office of Christ, he
foretells his suffering, death and resurrection, to acquaint them with the
cross, and so to prevent their stumbling at his sufferings. Hence learn, 1.
Our Lord was not ignorant what he was to suffer ere it came, nor ignorant of
the out-gate appointed for him, how he should be killed and raised again. 2.
Whosoever would look rightly on Christ's sufferings, must also look unto his
out-gate and victory over the same; he must look on his raising, as well as his
killing; for he tells them, He must be killed, and raised the third day.

Verse 22. Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far
from thee, Lord; this shall not be unto thee. Peter out of his carnal wisdom
rashly forbids Christ to suffer himself to be so used. H^nce learn, 1. That
if the cross be looked unto, without looking to the Appointer of it, the use,
end, and outgate of it, men will never consent, that either they, or such as
they love should bear it; therefore says Peter; Far it be from thee, Lord. 2.
Natural wit is very confident and presumptuous to judge of Gods matters; for
Peter leaning unto it, dare take upon him to rebuke Christ. 3. Yea, if a man
lean unto, and follow his own natural wit and affection, he may be led to
oppose God, and the work of his own Salvation; for, This shall not be unto
thee, Lord, says Peter.

Ver. 23. But he turned and said unto Peter, Get thee behind ^e Satan, thou art
an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of man. In Christ's reproof given to Peter, learn, 1. Our Lord so loved
to work out our redemption, that he could not endure to be any way hindered;
therefore says he, Get thee behind me. 2. What Satan cannot do immediately, he
will assay to do it by instruments, Christ finds him out here, saying, Get
thee behind me Satan. 3. Naturally a man savoureth not things spiritual,
neither knows them, nor loves them, if they be told him; Therefore says he,
Thou savourest not the things of Go^. 4. We should in temptations beware of
Satan, as our pany, whoever be the instrument, and the more impudently we be
tempted unto sin, woe should the more stoutly, and peremptorily resist it, as
Christ did; saying, Get thee behind me Satan. 5. After a man has been much
lifted up in consolation, be may readily miscarry and fall in some offense, as
Peter's case is here, compared with ver. 16.6 A man may be a stumbling block
unto others, albeit he do not intend it; for to Peter it is said, Thou art an
offense. 7. Apparent good counsel from a carnal friend, may readily carry
some temptation in the bosom of it, as Peter's counsel here does; and sin will
serve Satan's tur^^, where ever he find it, whether in the godly or wicked, for
Peter's corruption here is Satan's instrument fit enough for the time.

Ver. 24. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. Hereupon our Lord
takes occasion to teach all his followers a necessity of bearing the cross:
Hence learn, 1. That Christ ^o^^ that he was to be crucified, and resolved to
suffer the shame full death of the cross, before it came; Therefore calls he
his servants suffering fo him, by the name of the Cross, that he mig^^ teach
them not to be ashamed of his manner of death, when i^ should come. 2. Christ's
followers must resolve to be disclaimed of him, as one of his followers, except
they will resolve to be^^ his cross; Therefore says he, If any man will
follow me, L^^ him take up his Cross. 3. Love to a man^ own life, estimation
of his wit, and worth; in a word, a man's own self is a bundle of all sort of
idols, which we must either renounce, and be content to have them mortified, or
else we cannot follow Christ: therefore says he, Let him deny himself. This
self-denial the Lord has appointed to be helped forward by a cross, which
God will not leave to our choice, but will fit it for every man, and lay it
before him, or upon him, and will have every man humbly to stoop, and submit,
and take it on, and bear it out constantly, so long as the Lord thinks fit to
let ^^ly; for, Let him, says he, deny himself, and take up his cross. 5. This
cross must not make a man forsake to follow Christ; but rather the man under
the cross, must draw the more ne^r unto Christ, and follow him, that he may be
helped to bear his cross, and so attain to self-denial more and more;
therefore he says, Take up, and follow me. 6. As the cross does force a man
to deny himself, for it fails not to take from him, and to lay upon him what
he would not, so self-denial boweth the back to take up and bear the cross
kindly; therefore said he, Let him deny himself, and take up his cross.

Ver. 25. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it, and whosoever will
lose his life for my sake, shall find it. The reasons to move us so to do, are
seven. The first reason is, the eschewing of the cross to save your life, is
the very way to lose your life, therefore resolve to bear the cross; for,
Whosoever will save his life, says he, shall lose it. A second reason; to
resolve to lose thy life for my sake, is the way to keep it: therefore resolve
to bear the cross. Hence learn, 1. That the love of this temporal life makes
men deny Christ: therefore is it, that Christ will have a man resolving about
this life. 2. Whosoever will save his life by denying Christ, is a great fool;
for he loses that eternally which he seeks, by eschewing of Christ's cross,
to save for a time; for, Whosoever will save his life, says he, shall lose it.
3. To lay our reckoning to lose life and al, rather then deny Christ, or any
point of his truth, is our greatest wisdom: He who makes least account of his
life, and of all things belonging thereto, in comparison of serving and
confessing Christ, is a wise man; for he gains for ever in effect that which
he hazards temporally for Christ; for, Whosoever, says he, will lose his life
for my sake, shall find it.

Ver. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? A third
reason is, He that refuses to bear my cross in hope to gain thereby, shall be
disappointed; for he shall lose his own soul, and so can gain nothing, though
he seem to gain a world; therefore resolve to bear my cross. Doct. 1. When the
cause of Christ cannot be maintained without the cross be born, and hope is
offered of worldly gain also, if a man shall fall off from Christ's cause, it is
a sore temptation, as Christ's question in answering of it does import, What is
a man profited in this case? says he. 2. He that in fear to lose, or in hope
to gain some earthly thing, refuses to maintain Christ's cause, shall lose more
then he can gain, were it a Kingdom; for, he loses his soul, and what profit
has he, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? A fourth reason;
Nothing in the earth can redeem a man's soul, when he has shed from me for fear
of the cross, or hope of gain; therefore resolve to bear my cross rather then
to deny me. Doct. 1. There is no ransom of a man's soul beside Christ, if any
man deny him; for, What shall a man give in exchange for his soul? 2. It is a
special means to strengthen us against the fear of the cross for Christ's
cause, to foresee our irreparable loss if we deny him, and to say with our
selves, What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Verse. 27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels, and then he shall reward every man according to his works. A fifth
reason; Though I may seem mean and abased, in that my followers are put to bear
my cross, yet I will be found the glorious Son of God, worthy to be suffered
for; Therefore let no man think shame, of my cross, The Son of man, says he,
shall come in the glory of the Father. The sixth reason; The fruit of bearing
my cross, or refusing of it, shall be seen at the day of judgment, when I
shall be Judge, and shall reward the backslider with deserved judgment, and shall
crown the grace of suffering for me with the reward of life; He shall reward
every man, says he, according to his works: Hence learn, 1. That Christ's
incarnation neither should, nor shall derogate any thing from the glory of his
Godhead; for, The Son of man shall come in the glory of the Father. 2. The Son
of man and the Son of God is only one person; for it is said, The Son of man
shall come in his Fathers glory. 3. The fruit of every man's works, whether good
or ill, shall be found at the second coming of our Lord; for, Then he shall
reward every man according to his works.

Verse 28. Verily I say unto you, There be some standing h^re, which shall not
taste of death, til they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom. The seventh
and last motive, is, I do promise a glance of the glory of my kingdom, unto
some of you my hearers, before I die, as much as may encourage you, and all
others my followers to endure any cross for me: Therefore resolve to bear the
cross. Now some little glance of his glory he gave shortly after this, in the
transfiguration; but this was not the main matter: his coming in the power of
his kingdom, was then made more evident, when after his resurrection he
declared himself Lord and King, in erecting his church with all her officers
where he pleased, in subduing Jews and Gentiles unto himself, by the power of
his Word and Spirit, in separating his church and his people from the world,
without the church. This Kingly power was seen most evidently by such of the
Apostles as lived longest; and this his coming in the power of the gospel, is a
pawn and evidence of his future coming to judgment, in the glory of his Father.
Hence learn, 1. Whosoever get a right sight of the glory of Christ's power, in
converting souls, in erecting his church with all his ordinances therein, and
governing of it, will not refuse to bear his cross; for, To encourage the
disciples to bear the cross, this promise here is made. 2. Christ's power and
grace manifested by conversion of souls, and erecting of the church in the
Apostles days, is a demonstration of Christ's Kingly Power, and an evidence of
his coming unto judgment; for, Some (says he) here standing, shall not taste
of death till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom.

CHAP. XVII.
After Christ's transfiguration, to verse. 14. He heals the lunatic, to verse.
22. Fore-telleth his own passion, and pays tribute.

Ver. 1. ANd after six days, Jesus takes Peter, James and John his brother,
and brings them up into an high mountain apart.
HOwsoever the last verse of the former chapter is not altogether fulfilled in
this transfiguration of Christ, yet is it some earnest of performance of the
promise there made; for by this glance of Christ's glory, they had evidence how
glorious he should be, in the morefull manifestation of his Kingly power and
Majesty; He chooses witnesses, not all, but some, and these in a sufficient
number, three; the same whom he was to make witnesses of his agony in the
garden thereafter, Peter James, and John: and these he takes apart into an high
mountain: that being separate and set above distractions, they might attend the
vision without interruption. Doct. 1. Our Lord will not use all his servants
alike familiarly; but some, such as he pleases, he will make in some cases
more intimate, for here he chooses only three to see his glorious
transfiguration. 2. Such as he minds to acquaint most with his sufferings, he
will readily acquaint most with his glory, for their encouragement and
preparation; for these three are they who are made witnesses hereafter of his
agony in the Garden; Peter, James and John.

Ver. 2. And was transfigured before them, and his face did shine as the sun,
and his raiment was white as the light. In the transfiguration, the Lords glory
appears in three things. The first is, the alteration of the natural
obscurity of his flesh, into a glorious shining brightness, flowing from the
in-dwelling of the Godhead in him; in so far, that the darkness of his
^aiment is swallowed up in this light, springing through the same, so as it
made his raiment appear white as light. Hence learn, 1. Where the Lord
pleases to let forth his glory, it is able to beautify our earthly and
obscure bodies, as this transfiguration, far transcending Moses his face
shining, gives evidence. 2. Glorification takes not away the substance, nor
natural properties of the body; for here is a glorious transfiguration, but no
abolition of the substance of Christ's body.

Ver. 3. And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.
The second point of Christ's glory, is the apparition of Moses and Elias,
whether in their own proper bodies, resumed for a time, or in bodies formed
for the present purpose, to be laid down again as garments, it is not material
to inquire; for either this or that was alike easy to the Lord: and presuppose
their bodies had been raised, and laid down again in dust, yet wherein soever
Moses and Elias could be serviceable to their Redeemers glory, it was not their
trouble or loss, but their advantage; The main matter which we have to learn,
is, 1. That Moses and Elias, and so all the prophets are Christ's servants and
witnesses unto him, all of them agreeing in one with him. 2. That the dead in
the Lord are not perished, but live with God in heaven; for, Moses and Elias
are seen here, kept therefore.

Verse. 4. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to
be here: if thou will, let us make here three Tabernacles; one for thee, and
one for Moses, and one for Elias. The effect of this glorious vision ravisheth
so the hearts of the three apostles, that they could have taken this estate for
heaven: Hence learn, 1. How joyful the sight of glorified persons shall be. 2.
The sight of the least part of the glory in heaven, so ravisheth the soul, that
it forgets all that is on the earth, and is so satisfactory, that a soul
could rest on the least degree thereof, as in a heaven; for, It is good to be
here, says Peter. 3. It is our nature, if it be well with our selves, not to
care for others, little mind had the Apostles what need others had of their
service, when they could have stayed still on the mount.

Verse 5. While he yet spoke, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them, and
behold, a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased, hear ye him. The third point of Christ's glorification, is, the
testimony of the Father concerning his Son Jesus, which Peter could never
forget again, 2 Peter 1.17. First, they see a bright cloud, then they hear a
voice out of the cloud (for we are not able to behold him as he is, and must
not pry into his glory, which is unsearchable, but must take heed unto what he
revealed by the ear: a Voice, of his Word must reveal God unto us) and that
which is here revealed concerning Christ, is, 1. That the Man Christ is true
God; the Son of God, one in substance with the Father; for, This is my Son,
says the Father. 2. That as he is incarnate, going about the work of
Redemption, and presenting himself Mediator for us, to satisfy God in all
things about us, he is Beloved, accepted, approved as satisfactory and rested
upon for our behove, In whom I am well pleased, says the Father. 3. That we
are to take him for our Teacher and Commander, to believe and obey Him; for the
Father has said to us all, Hear him.

Ver. 6. And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were
sore afraid. This voice was so full of Majesty, proceeding from the excellent
glory, that the disciples fell down. Doct. 1. When the Godhead of the Father,
or of Christ is manifested, who can stand before his Majesty? No wonder they
fell on their face, the presence of the Lord in this life, even in mercy
reveiled, is very fearful; for it is said, They were sore afraid, such is his
glory, and our weakness.

Ver. 7. And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.
Thus lay the Apostles as dead men till Christ came, and put strength and
comfort in them. Doct. It is Christ by whom we are lift up when we fall, and
confirmed against our fears; for the disciples did not stir, till he touched
them, and said, Be not afraid.

Ver. 8. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus
only. That we may know that the voice was spoke of Jesus, and concerned him
alone, he alone is left with the disciples, and now the vision is removed, when
the intent of it is obtained. Doct. The Lord measures the means of manifesting
himself, as he seem fit for our good; for, When they lifted up their eyes, they
saw none but Jesus only.

Ver. 9. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying,
Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.
The discharging of the disciples to show the vision until the resurrection,
teaches us, that the Lord has his own set-time, when he will make use of what
he reveals to his servants, and will bring forth every truth in his own time,
when it may be most useful; Therefore says he, Tell no man, till the Son of man
be risen from the dead.

Ver. 10. And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the Scribes that
Elias must first come? Upon the departure of Elias, and the discharge of
revealing the vision, the three Disciples do move a question, about the
Prophecy of the coming of Elias, which the Disciples do think to be now
accomplished; and that by his staying still, it might have appeared to the
world to be accomplished: But Christ shows that that prophecy was
accomplished another way, in John Baptist. Doct. 1. What doubts do arise unto
us about Scripture, among other means, let us by prayer crave solution of them
through Christ, as the Disciples here asked him about Elias. 2 The adversaries
of Christ are ready to blindfold themselves, and others also, by mistaking
Scriptures, like these Scribes, who will not acknowledge Christ to be come, Til
Elias come, to wit, in their way.

Ver. 11. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come,
and restore all things:

12. But I say unto you, that Elias is already come, and they knew him not, but
have done unto him whatsoever they lifted: likewise shall also the Son of man
suffer of them.

Our Lord did answer, that indeed the Scripture must be accomplished, and not a
letter fail; for, Elias, says he, truly shall first come, and that when John
Baptist came, this Scripture concerning the coming of Elias was fulfilled,
because when John Baptist came in the spirit and power of Elias, Elias in a
manner was revived; for as Elias set himself to the reformation of Religion,
when all was wrong in his time; so John Baptist, when the whole frame of
Religion was marred, by the corruption of the Jewish Doctors, did renew the
doctrine and worship again: Doct. 1. The fulfilling of the Scriptures may
readily be mistaken of men; for, when that which is foretold is done before
their eyes, they will not see it; for, Now Elias is come, and they knew him not.
2. The world instead of receiving Gods Messengers, as becomes, are ready to
abuse them, as they please; Therefore says he, They have done to him what they
listed. 3. As men do deal with Christ's Servants, so would they deal with
Christ's self, if they were able, and could get occasion; for, Likewise shall
also the Son of man suffer of them, says Christ.

Ver. 13. Then the Disciples understood that he spoke unto them of John the
Baptist. By this speech the Apostles take satisfaction, and stumble no more at
this doubt. Doct. Albeit our Lord do not answer men's doubts and questions in so
many letters and syllables, yet he will make his own disciples understand the
solution of their questions, and what is his meaning; His inquisitive Scholars
shall be taught what is needful for them to know, as here Christ's speech does
satisfy his Disciples; for it is said, Then they understood, etc.

Ver. 15. And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a
certain man, kneeling down to him and saying,

15. Lord have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic, and sore vexed: for often
times he falls into the fire, and often in the water.

16. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

Concerning the healing of the lunatic: Learn, 1. It is a fit time for the
Lord to show his power most, when he may have mainest witnesses, and most glory
in his working; as here, he trusseth the healing of the lunatic, with his
coming to the multitude. 2. The soul which believes in Christ, as it finds
its need pressing, so will it go speedily to Christ, so will it humbly and
earnestly seek help of him, as the Lunaticks father does: 3. The misery of a
soul left unto Satan, is great, who out of malice, if he can, will vex the man
who is in his power; as, the poor child was vexed in fire and water. 4. Christ
does reserve some benefits to be conferred immediately by himself, and in this
case second Means and instruments (although they be employed) do fail; as here
it falls out, I brought him to thy disciples, but they could not heal him,
says the child's Father.

Ver. 17. Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? Bring him hither to
me. This sharp rebuking both of the mis-beleeving Jews, and also of the
Apostles, for depriving themselves of the use of the gift of miracles by their
unbelief, teaches, 1. That nothing grieveth our Lord more then peoples
mis-belief, for this obstructeth all the blessings which are appointed to come
by faith; Therefore he upbraideth the multitude, and his Disciples among the
rest, with this sharp rebuke, O faithless generation. 2. The longer that Christ
has offered himself to a people or person, and the more patience he has shown
toward them; the more he is provoked by their mis-belief to reject them, and
depart from them; therefore says he, How long shall I be with you? How long
shall I suffer you? 3. He is not so angry, as any passion can move him to
forget to be merciful to the miserable; for incontinent he says of the poor
Boy, Bring him hither to me.

Verse 18. And Jesus rebuked the devil, and he departed out of him: and the
child was cured from that very hour. At a word our Lord delivers this
distressed soul. Doct. 1. How strong soever, and how long soever Satan's
possession be in a soul, Christ can cast him out quickly; as here, Jesus
rebuked the devil. 2. Christ is a perfect Physician, he can so cast out Satan,
and remove a plague, that the party afflicted shall be no more molested, as
here, The devil departed out of him, and the child was cured from that very
hour.

Ver. 19. Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we
cast him out? The disciples are ashamed, and privily do ask the cause of their
ill success. Doct. 1. It is reasonable that we be ashamed of our mis-beliefe,
as the Disciples were when they came to Christ, in the house privately, and
apart. 2. Chastisements are then best made use of when they send men to search
the sins which have drawn them on; as here, Why could not we cast him out? say
they.

Ver. 20. And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say
unto you, if ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this
mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall
be unpossible unto you. From Christ's answer learn, 1. That Unbelief may be
lurking, till it be brought forth in trial, and not being observed timou^ly by
ourselves, nor repented of in secret, may be brought forth before others, to
our shame openly, and so we chastised for it, as the disciples were, to whom
Christ answers, Because of your unbelief. 2. Unbelief, and other unrepented
sins, may mar the exercise of most excellent gifts; for the Apostles could not
cure this child, Because of their unbelief. 3. The least measure of the faith
of miracles being put to work, upon the warrant of Gods word, if it be purged
from unbelief, and from secure and carnal confidence, and be put forth in the
own vigor, (as the least grain of Mustard Seed does put forth the sharpness,
taste, and smell of its own kind) it is able to effectuate the greatest works,
and to overcome the greatest difficulties; put the case they seemed as
impossible as the removing of mountains; Therefore says he, If ye have faith,
etc. 4. The same may be said of saving faith also, it being put to work upon
the warrant of Gods word, to mortify some lust, or to grow in some virtue, it
shall be able to overcome all difficulties: The reason is, Because nothing is
impossible to God, who when he passes his word unto the Believer, will not
fail to perform what he has promised, whether it be in an extraordinary, or
an ordinary way; for it is said, nothing shall be impossible to you.

Ver. 21. Howbeit this kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting. Christ
gives another reason of their not being able to cure the child. Doct. 1. There
is a difference of the power of devils, and there are differences of exercises
of poor souls by them; for here is a kind most violent. 2. When we find Satan
strong and violent, and not yielding ground to us, when he is opposed* or set
upon by us, then must we set an edge upon our faith by prayer, and an edge upon
our prayer, by fasting and separation of our selves unto the exercise of
prayer; for, this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting, says he.

Ver. 22. And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of man
shall be betrayed into the hands of men.

23. And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise again* and they were
exceeding sorry.

There is another warning of the Disciples, concerning the cross and sufferings
of our Lord, and of his resurrection. Hence learn, 1. That there is need to
guard well against the scandal of the cross of Christ, before the cross come,
lest we stumble when unexpected troubles shall follow Christ's cause; therefore
said he, The Son of man must be betrayed. 2. The best guard against troubles,
is, to look to Gods appointment, and foretelling of the cross, and to look to
the resurrection, and out-gate promised; therefore Christ says, The third day
he shall rise again. 3. We are inclined to be more moved with the grief of the
cross, then to be comforted and encouraged by the glorious out-gate of it; for,
Now They were exceeding sorry.

Ver. 24. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute
money, came to Peter and said, Does not your Master pay tribute?

25. He says, Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him,
saying, What think thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take
custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?

26. Peter says unto him, Of strangers. Jesus says unto him, the^ are the
children free.

27. Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast
an hook, and take up the fish that first comes up: and when thou have opened
his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money, that take, and give unto them for
me and thee.

In this history of Christ's paying tribute: Learn, 1. That tribute is due to
Magistrates for their public service, this is imported in, Does your Master pay
tribute? 2. Christ is no unfriend unto Magistrates and Rulers, nor any ways a
hinderer of paying any thing due unto them: for Peter affirms that Christ
paid ordinarily. 3. He will not exempt his Ministers or Followers from the
common civil duties whereunto other subjects are liable; Therefore he says to
Peter, What think thou? etc. 4. Christ by no ordinary course of Law was
subject unto any power under heaven: for as Kings sons are naturally free from
tribute, so is the Son of God naturally free also, for he is the Heir and Owner
of all things; for as every King and his native children are naturally free
from the burdens proper unto the subject, so is God the Father, and his native
Son Christ, coeternall with the Father, naturally also free from all things
which the creatures can impose upon him. What King is he, who will subject Gods
Son unto him? Therefore Christ said, That Kings children are free, of all whom
he was the chief. 5. Howsoever Christ was the rich Heir of Heaven and Earth, as
of his own workmanship, yet for our cause he voluntarily subjected himself, and
became poor, that he might make us rich; for he had no money to pay his tribute.
6. As in matters of civil loss, Christ did dispense with his own right civil,
and subjected himself to pay tribute, which he was not bound to do, so must his
servants do: and not only must they pay tribute, which is their due by civil
obligation, but rather then they mar the Gospel, and breed scandal, they must
bear burdens, which civilly they are not bound to bear. 7. Christ was never so
far abased at any time, but the glory of his Godhead might have been seen
breaking forth in the mean time, or shortly after, lest his humiliation should
at any time prejudice his glory at our hands; as here at the time when he does
subject himself to pay tribute, at the same time he shows himself Lord of all
the creatures, who can make the most wild of them to come to his angle, and
bring money with them in their mouth unto him; as here he gives evidence, in
this fish which Peter catches.

CHAP. XVIII.
Our Lord discharges prelacy among his Disciples, to ver. 7. Commands to
eschew offenses, to ver. 15. And to remove them (when they should fall out) by
discipline and forgiveness mutual.

Ver. 1. AT the same time came the Disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
THe Disciples dreaming of a worldly kingdom of Christ, do strive for state
among themselves; Hence learn, 1. The seed of ambition and prelacie is old in
Ministers, and ground was found to foster it in the unmortified corruptions of
the Apostles; for here they are disputing, Who is the greatest in the kingdom?
2. Neither Peter nor any other of the Apostles had supremacy or majority of
power over the rest; for here they ask Christ, Who is the greatest? They did
not acknowledge any one greater then another, but referred the determination of
this unto Christ, who simply disallowed the question, as sinful.

Ver. 2. And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of
them.

3. And said, Verily I say unto you, Except you be converted, and become as
little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

This pestilent and pernicious evil Christ discharges and disswadeth them from
by six reasons; The first reason, which comprehends a doctrine in it, except
you study to be as far as this little child is, from seeking of pre-eminence
one over another, in the church or kingdom of heaven here beneath, you shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven, which is above. 2. Learn, that the mortifying
of ambition and renunciation of prelacy, and following of humility, is so hard a
lesson to be learned, that there is need of teaching of it in an odd way by the
eye, as well as by the ear, therefore, Is a young child set, as a copy of the
lesson, before the Disciples eyes. 3. Howsoever Christ has ordained sundry
degrees of office-bearers in his house, yet he will have no majority of power
of any one over the rest of that office, but will have men so far from
affecting of it, as a young child is, who knows not what striving for state
does mean; therefore says he, Except ye become as children. 4. If this wicked
root set up the self in a man, he must repent him of any motion toward it, and
be converted; and if being convinced of the sin, he shall not be converted, and
repent of it, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven which is above; for
so much says our Lord here to the Apostles, Except ye be converted, and become
as little children, ye shall not enter into heaven.

Verse 4. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the
same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. A second reason, The man
furthest from affectation of pre-eminence, is the man worthy of most estimation
before men; therefore beware of looking toward prelaticall pre-eminence of one
over another. Doct. True greatness of Ministers stands not in being one over
another in majority of power, but in humility and farnesse from seeking a
prelacy or pre-eminence over their brethren; for, Whosoever shall humble
himself as this little child, says he, is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven.

Ver. 5. And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me.

6. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the sea.

The third reason; I give authority unto every messenger of the Gospel, even to
the meanest and most averse from this sort of pre-eminence, that, Whosoever
receives him, receives me, etc. Therefore be content with this common honor,
and seek not greatness of one over another. The fourth reason, the
ministerial authority is not augmented by prelatical power erected among you,
nor diminished for want of it, therefore beware of prelacy; for I do give the
authority of Ambassadors to the meanest whom I send, even to the most humble,
so as, Whosoever receives such an one in my name, receives me. This may content a
moderate man. A fifth reason; affectation of Majority over the brethren, is a
stumbling block to little ones who believe in me, Therefore beware of it; for,
Whosoever shall offend any of these little ones, etc. The sixth reason is from the
danger, if they do otherwise, that it were better for a man to die a violent
and ignominious death, then by affectation of prelacy, and despisisng the
simplicity of a sent Minister, to hinder the work of the gospel in his hand, or
the salvation of any believer, how mean soever he be, Better, says he, that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, etc.

Ver. 7. Woe unto the world because of offenses: for it must needs be that
offenses come: but woe to that man by whom the offense comes. Here in general
he discharges laying of any stumbling block before others, whether by word or
deed, or any other way, which may induce any man to sin, or may hinder him in
the course of obedience of God: the reasons of the discharge are seven, which
are so many doctrines. The 1. reason, Much woe, much sin and misery is to come
upon the world by stumbling blocks cast before them: Therefore beware of
offenses; for, Woe unto the world because of offenses. The 2. reason, Greatest
woe abides the man by whom offense is given; But woe to such a man by whom
offenses come; Therefore beware of offenses. Doct. 1. There is a necessity of
offenses coming, or that stumbling blocks or inducements to sin, and means to
turn men away from the right paths of the Lord, shall be laid in men's way; a
necessity is in regard of the inclination that men's corrupt natures have to be
drawn, and to draw others unto sin: a necessity is, in regard of God^ decree,
to permit such stumbling blocks for the trial of some, and punishment of
others; for, Offenses must come. 2. Whatsoever mischief shall come, or may come
by a stumbling block, shall be imputed unto him who gives offense, or lays a
stumbling block in others way; for, Woe to the man by whom the offense comes.
3. Neither the necessity of the coming of offenses in Gods providence, nor the
imputation of the mischief done unto the man who gives offense, shall excuse
the party that takes offense, or save him from wrath; for still this stands,
Woe to the world, because of offenses.

Ver. 8. Wherefore if thine hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast
them from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather
then having two hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire.

9. And if thy eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee ^ it is
better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather then having two eyes to
be cast into hell fire.

A third reason; Whatsoever thing it be which is the cause of a sinful fall to
your self, or to your neighbor, were it as profitable or necessary as your
eye, or your foot, in your estimation, it is better to be deprived of it, then
to sin, and so be cast in hell with it; therefore beware of giving offense.
Hence learn, 1. That the cause of stumbling our selves, and moving others to
stumble, is in our selves, to wit, some beloved lust, precious and profitable
perhaps in our estimation, as our eye, or our hand, or our foot; therefore says
he, If thy hand, eye, or foot offend thee.2. Such beloved lusts must either be
mortified and cut off, or else we cannot but perish: and therefore better these
lusts be abandoned and cut off, then they and we should both perish; Cut them
off, says he; better for thee, etc.

Ver. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say
unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven. A fourth reason; Despising any of these little ones must be
eschewed: therefore the laying of stumbling blocks must be eschewed; for not
caring to offend them, is to despise them: Therefore says he, Take heed ye
despise not one of these little ones. The fifth reason; God esteems of the
meanest of these little ones so much, that the good Angels, who daily enjoy
Gods glorious presence, are ministering spirits appointed to attend them:
Therefore do not despise them, by not caring to stumble or offend them. Doct. If
we consider what price God and his holy Angels set upon the meanest christian,
we would be loath to despise or offend them; for, Their angels behold Gods face.

Verse. 11. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost. The sixth
reason; I came to redeem the meanest of Believers, even such as count
themselves lost; Therefore ye should not despise them, by not caring to offend
them. Doct. The estimation and love that Christ has of and toward the meanest
christian, should move us to beware to offend or despise them; for, The Son of
man is come to save that which was lost.

Ver. 12. How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
astray, does he not leave the ninety and nine, and goes into the mountains,
and seeks that which is gone astray?

13. And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoices more of
that sheep than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.

14. Even so, it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of
these little ones should perish.

The 7th reason; It is not the will of the Father that any the least christian
should perish, and therefore ye should not despise them, or misregard their
offense or stumbling, where-through they may perish: This is set down in the
parable of a good Shepherd; the scope whereof is to show, that as a good
shepherd regards every one of his sheep, and if they wander, will carefully
seek to reclaim them and save them; so does God regard the meanest of his
elect, the meanest of christians, so as he will reclaim them from their sins,
and danger of perishing, as the Text shows: How think ye, if a man have so
many sheep? etc. Doct. 1. He that scandalizeth his neighbor does what he can
to make him perish, as the opposing of the will of the Father to preserve him,
unto the power of a stumbling block, does import. 2. Do the devil or his
instruments what they can to hinder the salvation of Believers, God will
preserve them; for, It is the Fathers will that one of these little ones should
not perish. 3. Albeit he that lays a stumbling block before his brother,
shall not be able to destroy him, yet he may put him out of the way a little,
and hinder him in his course to heaven, as the parable of the shepherds
reducing of the wandering sheep does show.

Verse. 15. Moreover, if thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between him and thee alone: if he shall bear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. After dissuading us from stumbling of others, he teaches us how to
remedy scandals given unto us by others, that the offender may be reclaimed,
and the church receive least damage thereby: and 1. He gives direction about
private scandals, saying, Moreover, etc. Doct. 1. When scandal is given, we
must not only beware our selves to stumble, (though we cannot eschew but be
grieved) but also must study to reclaim the offender; for this direction is
given to us, to remedy scandals given. 2. The scandalous sin of a brother, or
professed believer especially, must be cared for, and cured by believers; If
thy brother offend thee. 3. Private admonition especially, in case the offense
be private, is a mean of reclaiming our brethren from their sinful courses, Go
tell him his fault alone. 4. It is not necessary to divulge every fault which
we alone know, or to let others know of it; for it is said, Tell him between
him and thee alone. 5. The most disc^eet, easy, and gentle ways are first to
be assayed in the case of private offenses; Therefore says he, Tell thou him
alone. 6. It is the gaining or saving of a brother, to reclaim him from his
sin: and an obligation put upon the reclaimed sinner, toward the Brother who
admonished him; for says he, Thou have gained thy brother. 7. We are bound to
hear and obey private admonition, even as we would be saved; for, if he bear
thee, says he, thou have gained thy brother.

Ver. 16. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. Now
he teaches how to proceed, if private admonition prevail not. Doct. 1. If
private admonition profit not, and the party admonished will not amend, we must
not give over the cure of his scandalous course, but must use further means,
and take the assistance of some others to help to reclaim him; Therefore says
he, Take with thee one or two more. 2. The admonition of two or three, serves
to convince the Offender of his fault the more clearly, or to bear witness
against him in case of his disobedience; for, In the mouth of two or three
witnesses every truth shall be established.

Ver. 17. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if
he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a^ heathen man and a
publican. The former failing, he teaches what further must be done, Doct. 1.
When more private means avail not to remedy a scandal, Christ has appointed
more and more public Censure and Discipline in his Church; for he says, Go
tell the Church. 2. Christ has appointed a church of Governors, or rulers
over congregations, and over all particular persons within the same, which must
attend the complaints of the Offended, and remove scandals, and who have power
to call before them, and to examine and censure the Offender for that end; for
so imports Christ's saying, Tell it unto the Church. 3. The Church has means
and power to remove public scandal, which being employed by the church, and
obeyed by the Offender, Excommunication is not to be used; for Neglecting to
hear the Church, presupposes the church Direction and Order to be given forth
for amendment of the Offender, and removing of the scandal. 4. When the church
has given sentence upon the Offender, and has appointed the way to remove the
scandal, then the Offender should obey in the Lord; for Christ declares it a
sensurable fault, to Neglect to bear the Church. 5. If the Offender disobey the
churches direction, for removing of the scandal, then the church may and should
excommunicate the obstinate; that is, declare him to be deprived of the honor
of a Christian, till he repent, and to be holden in such dis-respect, as the
heathen and publicans were by the Jewish Church in those days; for, Let him be
to thee such, presupposes, he is found and declared by the church to be holden
for such. 6. When the church declares an offender contumacious, or
excommunicateth him as unworthy of the fellowship of the Saints, for his
present abominable condition; then every believer must carry himself toward the
excommunicate, as toward a man disgraced, and cast out of church-honour; for
Christ has said, Let him be unto thee as an heathen man, that is, as one
without the church; and a publican, that is, a despised sinner; for so were
Publican^ esteemed of among the Jews, to the intent the Offender may be ashamed
of his sin, and repent.

Ver. 18. Verily I say unto you, whosoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven: and whosoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. Here our Lord confirms the Authority given unto the church, or
Assembly of Church Governors. Doct. 1. The church, or Assembly of
Church Governors has authority from Christ, in Christ's name to pronounce
guilty, and liable to judgment, and to pronounce absolution and remission of
sin, as they find cause; for says he, Whosoever ye bind, or ye loose. 2.
Christ will ratify in heaven, what the church assembled do in his Name, in the
exercise of the keys of Doctrine and Discipline, whether to the condemning of
the guilty, or absolving of the penitent; for he says, It shall be bound in
heaven, loosed in heaven.

Ver. 19. Again, I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven.

20. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them.

To give assurance that the execution of his ordinances by the church, shall be
ratified in heaven, he shows them, that the consent of never so few of his
Saints, agreeing together upon a petition unto God, shall have a blessed effect
in heaven; how much more shall the consent of the church-Rulers in execution of
public ordinances be ratified and have effect: and this he further confirms,
by certifying us of his gracious presence, where never so few, two or three,
suppose there be no more Rulers in some small congregations, are met in his
name: much more when a greater number do assemble and meet for his public
service: Hence learn, 1. That for mutual edification one christian may take
the help of another, for prosecuting jointly some particular petition before
God; for it is said, If two of you shall agree upon a petition, etc. 2. God
does so love the communion of Saints, that the consent of more of his children
in one suplication, has the encouragement of this particular promise; for,
What they ask shall be done. 3. If the consent of some shall be blessed when
they jointly prosecute one petition, much more may the church be confident,
that their public consenting unto the execution of Christ's ordinances shall be
blessed; for this the scope of the speech imports. 4. No meeting or gathering
together of the Saints can have expectation of a blessing, except it be in
Christ's name, that is, in so holy a manner, and upon such warrantable grounds,
as his glory, and the welfare of his church be promoved thereby, and not
hindered; for he promises his presence only to such as are gathered in his Name.

Verse. 21. Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

22. Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but till
seventy times seven.

For clearing of the matter of private admonition, and public censures, a
question is moved by Peter, how often we should forgive offenses unto our
brethren, professing repentance; which Christ answers: Hence learn; That it
seems to our corrupt nature that we should not forgive faults to the same
person, many times falling therein; for, How often, and till seven times, which
seems abundance, imports so much. From Christ's answer learn, 1. That we
should set no number to the times of forgiving the penitent, were it until
seventy times seven times, that is, how often soever. 2. The Lord delights in
large mercy, and stands not how often soever to give mercy, providing the party
be truly penitent; for otherwise we must not deceive our selves, God will not
be mocked t^ fo^^e that commands man to show mercy so often, will no^ refuse to
give mercy himself.

Ver. 23. Therefore is the Kingdom of heaven lik^^d unto a certain King which
would take account of his servants.

24. And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him which ought him
ten thousand talents.

25. But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and
his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.

26. The servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

27. Then the Lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him,
and forgave him the debt.

28. But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellow servants, which
ought him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him by the
throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe.

29. And his fellow servants fell down at his feet, and besought him saying,
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

30. And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, til he should pay the
debt.

31. So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and
came and told unto their lord all that was done.

32. Then his lord after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked
servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me.

33. Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as
I had pity on thee.

34. And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors til he should
pay all that was due unto him.

35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your
hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

This doctrine is cleared and confirmed by a parable, the scope whereof is to
show, that except we be willing to forgive, and do forgive particular injuries
done to us, how often soever our brother shall desire pardon, we cut our selves
off from being pardoned of God, against whom we do sin oftener then any man can
do against us. According then to the scope of the parable, we are taught, 1.
That our sins against God are more, and more heavy, then any which our brethren
do comitt against us; for men's injuries against usare but pennies in
comparison, but our faults against God are thousands of talents. 2. God is
readier to forgive us our greater sins, then we are ready to forgive our
brethren their petty offenses against us. 3. The consequence of Gods mercy
toward us, should move us to be merciful one toward another. 4. He who will
not forgive his brother his trespasses, and that from the heart sincerely, the
Lord will not forgive that man his sins, but will cast him in hell, til he pay
for his sins, and that shall never be. To dispute here of the recalling of
remission of sins, is without ground, and not to the purpose, for the scope is
fulfilled in this, that as the wicked servant who did not forgive his
fellow servants, got not forgiveness, but was cast in Jail, and into the
tormentors hands, so neither should any get forgiveness from God, who did not
forgive men their trespasses.

CHAP. XIX.
Christ comes from Galilee to Judea, and heals the sick, to verse. 3.
Clears the cases of divorcement and of single life, to verse. 13. Blesses
young children, to verse. 15. Shows the impossibility of justification by
works, to verse. 26. And the disciples blessedness to the end.

Ver. 1. ANd it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he
departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea, beyond Jordan.

2. And great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there.


CHrist returns to Judea in his own time, to help such as he had a mind unto.
Doct. The sick and diseased, and such as find need of Christ, will seek after
him; Such are his train who follow him, and who will find relief in him; for, He
healed them all who came.

Ver. 3. The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him,
Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

4. And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made
them at the beginning made them both male and female?

5. And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh.

6. Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God has
joined together, let no man put asunder.

Christ's enemies move the question about divorcement, to make him odious either
to men or women, howsoever he should answer. Hence learn, 1. Whithersoever
Christ went, as he had disciples, so he had adversaries, who did ever seek to
make him odious to the people, that his doctrine should be the less fruitful:
here are cavillers, asking, Is it lawful, etc. 2. Ignorance of Scripture is
the cause of error, and of idle questions; for, Have ye not read? says Christ.
3. To come to the institution of any Ordinance of God, is the way to correct
the abuses of it, as here in the matter of marriage, Christ goes to the first
institution of marriage, saying, He which made them. 4. Marriage of one man
with one woman and no more at once, is Gods ordinance, founded upon the creation
of the first couple, for he made them only One male, and one female. To the end
that this Matrimonial love might be incommunicable to any other, and
indissolvable one from another; for, They two shall be one flesh. 5. The band
of Man and Wife for mutual society, is more entire then of Parents and
children; Yea, it is a sort of unity, so that man and wife become As one flesh;
for in regard of mutual affection and agreement, for the mutual welfare one of
another, They are no more two, but one flesh. 6. Where God does not give
warrant to loose marriage, neither consent of parties, nor any humane authority
can lawfully loose; for, What God has joined, let no man put asunder.

Ver. 7. They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away?

8. He says unto them, Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts,
suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not s^*

9. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery: and who so marries
her which is put away, does commit adultery.

The Pharisees do object the bill of divorcement, and Christ shows that this
does not free any man from sin, who (except in the case of adultery (shall put
away his wife. Hence learn, 1. That Patrons of error will wrest Scripture, and
set it in opposition to truth; for, Why did Moses? etc. say the Pharisees. 2.
Moses Ordinance about the bill of divorcement, was no allowance of the
divorcement, but a judicial or civil law, providing for the credit and safety
of the honest woman: for the sum of it was, I find no fault with this woman,
only I cannot love her, so she was clear, and this civil permission did
deliver the man from civil punishment only, but not from sin: therefore says
he, Moses suffered you. 2. The civil punishment was spared, and the bill of
divorcement permitted for the hardness of the man's heart, who if he should not
have been suffered to put away his wife, would have some way taken away her
life; for, Moses suffered you for the hardness of your heart. 4. This
permission was but temporary, and for a time; but the first and ancient
institution of marriage behoved to be the rule whereby to correct abuses crept
in; therefore says he, From the beginning it was not so. 5. Marriage is loosed
by adultery, and the innocent party is free; for he does make exception of
fornication, as a cause making the party injured to be free to put away the
Adultresse. 6. And in case the unlawfully divorced party be married to another,
it is Adultery; for so does Christ pronounce.

Ver. 10. His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his
wife, it is not good to marry. The disciples think this doctrine hard, for in
case divorcement were not lawful, they say it were better not to marry, then to
be so straightly bound in marriage: in whom we see, 1. How impatient our nature
is of all restraint, and how much we love to be at liberty, even from the bands
of God; for, If so it be, it is not good to marry, say they. 2. Sudden
resolutions and sentences are readily full of folly: for here the disciples
neither do look unto their own strength, or rather inability to live in a
single life, nor do they consider the incommodities of an unmarried life, nor
the commodities of marriage, where God gives a blessing.

Ver. 11. But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they
to whom it is given.

12. For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mothers womb:
and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be some
eunuchs which made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of heavens sake. He that
is able to receive it, let him receive it.

Our Lords answer is to this meaning: Every man is not able to receive this
saying of yours, that is, To live without marriage lawfully, except either he
be an Eunuch by nature, born impotent, unfit for marriage; or an Eunuch by Art
of man, gelded; or an Eunuch by grace, to whom God has given power over all
his natural affections, and the gift of continency to live unmarried, for this
end, that he may be so helped more constantly and without diversion, to go on
toward the Kingdom of Heaven. Hence learn, that no man ought to despise or
rashly reject marriage, it being Gods Ordinance, and a mean to keep from
fornication; for all men cannot receive this saying of, Better not marry, etc.
2. If any man be freed of the necessity of marriage, he ought to employ himself
so much the more for the kingdom of God; else the gift is to small use, for he
that is able to live unmarried, and to receive the disciples saying, he to whom
this gift is given, must be as an Eunuch unto the Kingdom of God.

Ver. 13. Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put
his hands on them, and pray; and the disciples rebuked them. Some desired
Christ to bless their young children, and to this end do present them unto him.
Doct. 1. Albeit little children understand not the mysteries of Christ, yet it
is lawful and commendable to believing parents to consecrate their children to
Christ, and to seek his blessing, with the external signs and seals of the
blessing of them; for here, They brought unto him little children, that he
should lay his hands on them, and pray. 2. Carnal wisdom is not fit to judge of
the extent of Christ his grace, not what persons are privileged to come unto
him: for here in the disciples, it is carnal wisdom, to thrust away children
offered unto Christ.

Ver. 14. But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come
unto me for of such is the Kingdom of heaven.

15. And he laid his hands on them, and departed (...).

Christ admits the children, and reproves the Disciples for debarring them.
Hence learn, 1. That Christ will not exclude the young children of Believers,
being offered unto him; for Christ said, Suffer little children to come unto
me. 2. Albeit little children know not what to ask; or what is done unto them,
yet can Christ give both his blessing, and the signs thereof to them; the
ignorance of little children did not exclude them from the Sacrament of
Circumcision, nor these children from imposition of Christ's hands, in sign of a
special blessing. Neither must this exception of childrens ignorance exclude
our children from Baptism; for this holds still, Suffer them to come unto me.
3. Seeing little children of Believers are neither excluded from the Kingdom
of Heaven in this earth, that is, from being members of the visible church; nor
are they secluded from the Kingdom of Heaven which is above; therefore are they
not excluded from receiving the signs and seals of the Right and Entry to such
grace, namely the seal of the covenant, Baptism; for it is said, Of such is the
kingdom of heaven. 4. If Christ did esteem it a sufficient reason, why not only
these little children, but also why in general, little Children should be
admitted to the signs of his blessing, because, Of such is the kingdom of
heaven; then, who is he who after he has heard the Disciples reproved for
debarring of such; dare debar any such from the first sign of entry into
Christ's Kingdom? for Christ has said, by way of reason-giving for their
admission, Of such is the Kingdom of heaven, and He laid his hands on these,
for example.

Verse 16. And behold one came, and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing
shall I do, that I may have eternal life? Here comes a young man, very holy
in his own estimation, and hops to be approved of Christ. In the example of
this Youth, observe, 1. That a natural man may perceive that true happiness
is not in riches, but in eternal life; for this rich Youth having riches for
this life, seeks Life eternal. and* A natural man may have a desire of
Heaven, for so has this Youth, That he may have life. 3. The natural man is
utterly ignorant of justification by faith in Christ, and inclined to seek
justification by works; for he says, What good thing shall I do, that I may
have eternal life? 4. The natural man presumes on his own strength, as able
to do whatsoever good work can be prescribed unto him; for, What shall I do?
says he. 5. A natural man may seem to have a good estimation of Christ, and
call him Good Master, and make fair offers to serve God, and follow the
commands of Christ, and yet he found void of all real truth herein, which to
himself and others he seems to have, as in this man is found.

Ver. 17. And he said unto him, Why calle^^ thou me good? there is none good
but one, that is God; but if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.

18. He says unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall
not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness.

19. Honor thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self.

In Christ's answer learn, 1. That Christ loves no complements of fair words
which proceed not from sound faith, and love to him; therefore says he, Why
call thou me good? 2. Christ will be known to be God by them who come unto
him, or else they cannot worship him aright; for the reproof being fitted to
allay the young man's high estimation of himself, (who could not speak a right
word) does import this much: Give me not divine attributes, seeing thou take
me not to be God; or give me not fairer words then thy judgment and affection
do allow. 3. In proper speech, only God is good, by whom alone a man must be
made good, made to do good, and made to receive good; for there is One good,
even God. 4. Such as seek justification and eternal life by works, must be
taught, that to keep the whole Law in all points without the least sin, is the
only way to heaven by works, (which way to every man now polluted with sin, is
impossible): There is no better way to humble a proud Pharisee, then to teach
him soundly the mind of the law; Therefore says Christ, If thou would enter
into life, keep the Commands. 5. The precepts of the second Table, wherein
Pharisees conceive themselves most perfect, are a sufficient touchstone,
whereby to try their unfruitfulnesse, and imperfection; therefore Christ names
only the Commands of the second Table.

Ver. 20. The young man says unto him, All these things have I kept from my
youth up: what lack I yet? From this impudently false answer, learn, 1. That
the natural man knows not the Laws meaning rightly, but conceives of it as if
it did command some external duties only, and did forbid only some of the
grossest sins, and did not reach unto the utmost branch of every duty, and sin
in the inner man, no lesss then in the outward Acts: Therefore says this
ignorant, All these have I kept. 2. A short exposition of the Law, makes a
large opinion of righteousness and keeping of the Law; Therefore says he, All
these have I kept from my youth up. 3. All the righteousness that a natural
man can conceive himself to have attained unto, will not give true quietness
to his conscience, for this youth for all this is asking, What lack I yet?

Ver. 21. Jesus said unto him, if thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou
have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: and come
and follow me. In Christ's answer, observe, 1. That Christ will put the men, who
have a high estimation of themselves, unto special trials, that their
inabilities may be openly known; as here, If thou will be perfect, go sell all.
2. Every man is bound to bestow, as God directs, all which God has given
unto him: goods, lands and life, when he is called by God unto it: And therefore
Christ gives not here a simple counsel to this man, but a special command to
renounce the love of riches, which was his idol, and to bestow his goods as he
was commanded, and that upon promise of more durable riches in Heaven, that so
he may make the man who would appear perfect, to be seen a gross worshipper of
Mammon; for, Sell, and give to the poor, is a particular and express command
given to this man. 3. Presuppose a man upon a special command sold all, and
distributed all to the poor, as was commanded to this man, yet unto the
perfecting of him there will be required more, to wit, that he should be a
follower of Christ, enter himself Christ's Disciple, deny himself, take up his
cross, and follow Christ, that so he might have righteousness and life
eternal by him alone; for it is here written, If thou will be perfect, not
only sell all, etc. but also, and come and follow me.

Ver. 22. But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful, for
he had great possessions. The young man had no will of this blessed bargain,
but goes away sorrowful. In the example learn, 1. How trialls do bring men
forth to the light, and make them manifest what they are, as here this youth,
He went away now. 2. A man wedded to the love of this world, will renounce
Christ and his Commands rather then the world, when it comes to a proof,
especially if he be a great man in the world; therefore it is marked, That he
had great possessions. 3. A natural man may be sorrowful when he cannot with
Heaven in his own way; when he cannot get Heaven, and his own will in this world
also; for it is said, He went away sorrowful.

Ver. 23. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, that a
rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:

24. And again I say unto you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

25. When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who can
then be saved?

26. But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, with men this is impossible,
but with God all things are possible.

Upon this man's departure, Christ teaches his disciples wholesome lessons;
wherein learn, 1. That Christ edifieth his church upon all occasions, whether
men join themselves to him or separate from him, as here. 2. It is as
impossible to have riches and not to trust in them, not to be ensnared and
hindered from heaven by them, as for a camel or cables sow, to go through a
needles eye, by reason of the natural corruption which i^ in man, ready to
entangle and drown the man's mind, and his time, and affections in the world,
and cares and pleasures of it; Therefore says Christ, A rich man shall hardly
enter in the Kingdom of heaven. 3. Whatsoever difficulties be told us of in
the way to heaven, they serve only to make us despair of our own strength and
abilities, and to flee in unto God, to whom nothing is impossible, for he can
^o loose the heart of a man from the world, as riches shall be no impediment to
hinder him from Heaven, and whatsoever else^^ impossible to us, he can make it
possible and bring it to pass; for, To God all things ^^ possible.

Ver. 27. Then answered Peter, and sa^d unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all
and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?

28. And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, th^^ ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.

29. And every one that has forsaken houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my name sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Here upon occasion Christ shows the felicity of his faitfull disciples. In
Peter's question, Learn, 1. Albeit it be little that we suffer for Christ, yet
we think much of it, for Peter's worldly case in following Christ was little
worse ^hen when he traded only in the fishing, notwithstanding he thus
speaks, saying, We have for saken al, as if it had been some great matter. 2.
Howsoever it be not worthy to speak of, what we do or suffer for Christ, yet
the least thing done in sincerity, is not despised by Christ, but highly
esteemed, and richly rewarded ^ for Christ promises a reward. 3. Christ does
not narrowly mark the infirmities of his own, but does cherish the smallest
beginnings, and formenteth the smoking flax, as here may be seen in his answer
to Peter; albeit Peter's speech smell of pride, yet he paseth it over, saying,
Verily I say unto you, etc. 4. Although Christ does not always answer his
peoples expectation, by giving them the very thing which they look for, yet he
will not fail to give them a better thing; as here the Apostles dreamed of an
earthly Kingdom, and of earthly honors to be given unto Christ and themselves;
this he will not give them, but he leads them higher, showing them, that what
they loved to have in this life, should be given them in substance, and in a
more eminent way in the life to come; to wit, a Kingdom to each of them, which
should be satisfactory unto them; and that, in stead of the Kingdom which they
did affect over the twelve Tribes of Israel, in their earthly conceit of his
Kingdom, saying, Ye shall sit upon Thrones. 5. The day of judgment shall be a
sort of regeneration, wherein our bodies and souls shall be renewed perfectly
for glory, and immortality ^ Therefore Christ calls tha^ (...), in the
regeneration. 6. At that day Christ, even in his humane nature, shall be seen
to reign in glory suitable to his divine Majesty ^ for He shall sit on the
Throne of his glory.

7. Such as follow Christ, must resolve for Christ's sake to be deprived of what
is dear unto them in this life, if he shall be pleased to put them to trial,
that is imported in, Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren. 8. What
men do lose for Christ, shall breed them gain, a hundred fold even in this
life: because the comforts and privileges of Christ's Kingdom are a hundred
fold better then any thing they can be deprived of for the Gospels cause; for
says he, They shall receive an hundred fold. 9. Beside what spiritual gain is
gotten in this life to such as suffer for the Gospel, life eternal is also
given for an inheritance in the world to come, which is able to make up all
losses sustained for Christ; for it is said, And they shall inherit eternal
life.

Ver. 30. But many that he first, shall be last; and the last shall be first.
Howsoever Christ esteem much of what his servants do suffer for him, yet he
gives advertisement to Peter and the rest, and in them to al men, that they
should not conceit of any merit in their sufferings, or worth in any other
specious excellency, but to study rather to be humble and sincere; because at
the time of Gods reckoning, many who in their own eyes, and before men were
first, should be found to be last; that is, of no esteem with God: and such as
in their own eyes, and in the eyes of the world seemed nothing, should be with
God in prime estimation: many who in the conceit of their own merit were first,
in the reward should be last, and of no account; and many who in the opinion of
the merit were last, and worthy of nothing, should be first in the reward; this
is imported in saying, But many that are first shall be last, etc.

CHAP. XX.
Christ shows in a parable how many that are last shall be first, to ver. 16.
Forewarneth his disciples of his sufferings, to ver. 20. Discharges prelacie
among them, ver. 29. And heals two blind men.

Ver. 1. FOr the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder,
which went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard.

2. And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them
into his vineyard.

3. And he went about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the
marketplace,

4. And said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right,
I will give you. And they went their way.

5. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.

6. And about the Eleventh hour, he went out and found others standing idle,
and says unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?

7. They say unto him, Because no man has hired us. He says unto them, Go ye
also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive.

8. So when even was come, the Lord of the vineyard says unto his steward,
Call the laborers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last to the
first.

9. And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received
every man a penny.

10. But when she first came, they supposed that they should have received
more, and they likewise received every man a penny.

11. And when they had received it, they murmured against the good man of the
house,

12. Saying, these last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them
equal unto us, which have born the burden and heat of the day.

13. But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: did
not thou agree with me for a penny.

14. Take that thine is, and go thy way, I will give unto this last, even as
unto thee.

15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? i^ thine eye evil
because I am good?

16. So the last shall be first, and the first shall be last: for many be called,
but few chosen.


THe scope of the parable is, to show, that such as conceit of the merit of
their works, are of no estimation with G^d, who gives eternal life of Free
grace, and not of merit. The parable is propounded, to ver. 16. And applied to
the purpose or scope, ver. 16. To this intent, as in the vineyard all these
laborers who esteemed much of their own labor, notwithstanding they had
wrought longer then others, yet were last taken notice of, least esteemed of,
and disappointed of their expectation, and rebuked as adversaries to Free
grace: but such as had no confidence in their own working, were first rewarded,
and liberally dealt with. So is it in the visible church, (which is the
vineyard of the Lord) such as esteem most of their own works, merits and
sufferings, shall be least esteemed of by God: but such as have no confidence
in their own works, shall be first taken notice of, and most liberally dealt
with; Thus the last shall be first, and the first shall be last. A reason
whereof is given from the paucity of the Elect, in comparison of the greater
number of these who are externally called, but not elect; Herein giving us to
understand, that it is grace to be employed in any service or suffering for
Christ with any sincerity; and it is grace to have a low estimation of our
selves, and of whatsoever we do or suffer for the Gospel; as also to have our
persons and works acceptable to God, and graciously rewarded with eternal life;
it does flow altogether from Gods grace, and free love, electing such a one
unto holiness and blessedness, and not from any good thing in the person; And
here let us remember, that neither similitude nor parable are to be followed
further then the scope and intention of the speaker: true it is, that many
witty similitudes may be made here, to represent Gods care of his church, men ^
duty in serving God in their callings, Gods encouraging men to work, by setting
before them a reward, Gods calling of some men in their youth, some in their
old days, the distributing to every man the reward of his work after this life
is ended, and such like; but these doctrines are not soundly grounded on this,
place, wherein the scope only is to be the rule of the exposition^ wherefore if
a man once depart, he may easilyfal, not only in impertinent questions, but
also in perilous conceptions, and such as are contrary to the scope: for if
the^ Penny be the reward; and the reward be eternal life; if the penny be made
Hire, or due by debt, and all the workers do get the Penny, then by this
parable all shall be saved, and all shall be saved by merit of their work; then
all shall be equal in the gift of eternal life, which they make the Penny of
reward, and so none shall be first or last; and none shall be workers in the
vineyard or visible Church but Elect only: and so the parable shall be close
everted, and turned to be contrary to the scope, expressly declared in the text.
Thus much may suffice for advertisement to be sober in the exposition not only
of this, but of al other parables, that nothing be a ground to build upon, save
what the Lord the Speaker intends as his scope.

Ver. 17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart in
the way, and said unto them,

18. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto
the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death.

19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock and to scourge, and to
crucify him, and third the day he shall rise again.

In Christ his forewarning the Disciples of his sufferings, and that in the way
that he went the last time to Jerusalem: Learn, 1. How necessary it is that the
doctrine of the cross be often inculcated, that being provided for before, it
may trouble us less when it shall come; for this is it which in sundry times
before Christ had told them. 2. The often foretelling of our Lords passion,
does serve to confirm us of the resolute willingness of the Redeemer to
suffer for us; for he knew all that he was to suffer, and was never dashed. 3.
It is necessary that we never separate the consideration of the cross from the
issue, nor Christ's death from his resurrection, which followed, lest we be
overcome and stumble at the cross; for Christ does always join the mentioning
of both together.

Ver. 20. Then came to him the mother of Zebedees children, with her sons,
worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him.

21. And he said unto her, What will thou? She says unto him, Grant that these
my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left in
thy Kingdom.

Concerning the requ^st made to Christ for preferment of the two Apostles,
James, and John: Learn, 1. How hard a thing it is to be rid of the love of this
world, and of pleasant dreams about it; for still the Apostles and their
friends did dream of an earthly Kingdom of Christ, and of worldly honor unto
his servants, notwithstanding Christ did so often tell them the contrary, ^and
did study to prepare them for the cross rather, in this world. 2. How
necessary it is for all men to watch over their hearts, that the love of the
honor of this world creep not in upon them, when occasion of a Bait does
offer; for in hope of prevailing by their mothers money, these two chief
Apostles are thus tickled and entangled with a vain and corrupt lust. 3. What
means and money men will employ, to gain any earthly thing which they love; the
mother for her natural bands with Christ, must be set on to make suit; a
preface must be made in general in her speech to oblige Christ for fear of
refuse, if the particular should first have been propounded; I desire a certain
thing of thee, says she, Grant that these my sons, etc.

Ver. 22. But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to
drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be bapptized with the baptism
that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are able. From Christ's answer,
learn, 1. That when the Ministers of the Gospel hunt for high places in the
world, they wo^ not what they are doing, nor how foolish they are in so doing;
as Christ says here, Ye know not what ye ask. 2. The Prefer^ ferment and
Kingdom which we should affect, is in an other world, and we must prepare us
for the cross with Christ, ere we come to the Kngdome with him: Are ye able to
drink of the cup that I shall drink off? 3. From the two disciples
undertaking, learn, that men least acquainted with the cross, are most
confident undertakers; for they say, We are able.

Verse 23. And he says unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand
and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it
is prepared of my Father. Christ puts them in mind of suffering, rather then
reigning, and of suffering in this world, ere they could reign in the world to
come. Hence learn, 1. Such as suffer for Christ, suffer no other thing but such
as Christ did suffer also; for, Ye shall drink, says he, of my cup. 2. A
certain measure of affliction was fitted and measured out for Christ and his
followers, which Christ esteemed to be but light, and of most short indurance;
to wit, A cup soon drunk out, a douk, a dipping, or a sprinkling with
affliction, A Baptism, as the original does import. 3. To appoint what degrees
every Believer shall have in Glory, in comparison one of another, or who shall
have less, who more, is no part of the commission given to Christ, when he was
sent into the world; it appertains not unto Christ. Again, It is not his
without the Father, as the petitioner conceived: It is not mine to give: As
likewise speaking as a man, more sib to one than to another, as here, he was
looked on, or as if at his own pleasure, for gratifying of friends, he might
distribute degrees of Glory in Heaven; in this sense also he says, It is not
mine to give, save to these, etc. 4. There shall be degrees of Glory in Heaven,
comparable to sitting on the right hand to some, and on the left hand to
others; for our Lord denies not this, but insinuates it in manner of his
answer. 5. These degrees of Glory shall not be distributed with respect unto
men's works or deservings; or unto any thing in the persons to be glorified, but
merely according to the good pleasure of God, and his decree, preparing and
predetermining what shall be every mans' measure; for, It shall be given to them
for whom it is prepared, says he: and in this sort of distribution, Christ^
denies not, but it belonged unto him, as one in substance, and Government with
the Father, to give decrees of Glory; for the Original is, It is not mine to
give, save to them for whom it is prepared of my Father.

Ver. 24. And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against
the two brethren. The rest of the Apostles were no less ambitious then these
were in this particular, yet are they angry at these two. Doct. Men will be
angry at others for a fault whereof they themselves are guilty, and nothing
grieved for it in their own person; as the ten were moved with indignation,
when they heard this, and yet were neither free of the same fault themselves,
nor grieved for it; so diversely is sin shaped in our own person, and in others.

Verse 25. But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the princes
of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them.

26. But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your Minister.

27. And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant.

Our Lord takes occasion from this, to beat down, and root out this wicked
weed of prelacy: This strife for State and Majority of Power was reproved
before, and yet it is not amended. Doct. 1 Hard is it to root out the seed of a
beloved sin, especially the root of prelaticall ambition; it cannot be drawn
out, till it be repented, for it is hard to put it out of the Apostles hearts.
2. Our Lord did esteem it a fit means to cut off strife, to take away all
domination in the church, and all Majority of Power among the men of one office
in his house: for where there is no higher place, where there is no great powto
one then to another, there all strife for the place of more power does cease;
It shall not be so among you, says Christ. 3. The Lord allows domination,
and Principality, and Greanesse, and exercising of authority in the civil
State, but will not allow it among the Ministers of the Gospel; for having
granted domination to civil Governors, he excludes churchmen from it,
saying, But it shall not be so among you. 4. It is not the abuse of Majority of
Power, which our Lord forbids his Ministers, but simply and absolutely he
discharges All Majority of power, all Greatness of Jurisdiction of one over
the rest, and does curb the very wishes and will of being great among their
Fellow-Ministers, speaking to every one of his Ministers, saying, Whosoever
will be great among you. 5. So far must the Apostles and Ministers of the
Gospel be from affecting State, and Majority of Power over the rest, that as
they would please our Lord, they must set themselves to serve the rest of their
Brethren, and to promove the work of Christ each in others hands, by
maintaining the credit each of others Ministry; for he says, Let him be your
Minister, or Servant. 6. Not only does our Lord discharge all majority of Power
among the Apostles, and in their persons among the Preachers of the Gospel, but
also all stately Primacy, or Dignitary Priority: All Chiefness, albeit without
jurisdiction, such as is constant and unchangeable Precedence in Assemblies;
and therefore he prescribed the curbing of this inclination, by injoyning the
study of submission mutual, and each man serving of the rest, for the
furtherance of the common work; for, Let him be your servant, imports this.
3. If this command do not prevail with the ambitious party, but he must needs
bring forth his ambitious desires, then the rest of the Ministers are warranted
to diminish of that man's estimation, and to account the less of him, by so
much as he is ambitiously inclined to a principality, and majority over the
rest; for so does the words bear, Let him be your Servant, that is, Let him be
so esteemed of, and no more.

Verse 28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. Our Lord does clear his
Doctrine by his own example, showing them how he humbled himself for the
public good. Doct. 1. The example of our Lords humiliation of himself serves
to curb all ambition in his Ministers, and if it prevail not, shall bear
witness against them; for, Even the Son of Man, says he, came not to be
ministered unto. 2. Christ in his first coming, came not to take up an earthly
dominion, or a stately pre-eminence, as his Disciples imagined, but came in the
shape and state of a servant, and behaved himself so, as he was ready for the
good of his Disciples to wash their feet; for he came not to reign in a worldly
manner, but to serve in the external Ministry of the Gospel; He came, says
he, to minister. 3. Ministers should not only quit prelacy for the good of the
Church, but their life also, if need bet, for Christ out of the Love to men's
Salvation, not only emptied himself of Stately Dominion, but also emptied
himself of Liberty and Life, And gave himself a ransom for many.

Ver. 29. And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.

30. And behold two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that
Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David.

Among these that countenance Christ, and follow him from Jericho, two are
marked. Doct. 1. Of all the multitude of Christ's followers these are the most
remarkable persons, who give unto Christ most employment, and draw most virtue
by faith out of him: therefore above all, These two blind men are specially
here noted. 2. It is wisdom to seek of God the greatest things, whatsoever else
we need; for these men are not so curious for Alms of Money, albeit they were
Beggars, as to have the benefit of the Mediators mercy, Have mercy on us, say
they. 3. Whosoever crave any benefit by Christ, must be clear in this point,
that Christ is the promised Messiah? for, Son of David is their great argument.
4. We must believe his power and love as God incarnate, able and willing to
save us; for so do they, saying, O Lord, thou Son of David.

Ver. 31. And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace:
but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.
From the discouragement off^red unto them: Learn, 1. It is no new thing that
such as in appearance are following Christ, do hinder these who are following
him in ea^^est; for, The multitude rebuked these poor men, and will have them
to hold their peace. 2. But it is wisdom for such as believe in Christ, the
more they are opposed, the more to seek him, and to take no answer from any,
but from himself: for so does these blind men, who do not forsake their
petition, till it be granted.

Ver. 32. And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I
shall do unto you?

33. They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.

34. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes, and immediately
their eyes received sight: and they followed him.

Christ hears them, and falls in conference with them. Doct. 1. Christ
takes notice of such suppliants as the multitude does despise. He stands
still to hear these blind men's suit. 2. Where there is Faith and Sincerity, the
Lord will draw it forth to open view for his own glory, and the good of the
Believer, therefore, He asks what they would have; that it might be known that
they did not seek money, but the fruit of his divine power. 3. When misery is
laid forth in faith before Christ, he meets it with compassion, as here in
these blind men, for he is a compassionate high priest. 4. It is easy for
Christ to do every greatest work, as here to open the eyes of the blind, and to
give sight to them; for, He touched their eyes, and they immediately received
sight. 5. It is reason that what gift we get of Christ, we employ it for his
honor; for, Their eyes received sight, and they followed him.

CHAP. XXI.
Christ rides to Jerusalem, to verse. 12. Casts out the buyers and sellers
out of the temple, to ve. 18. Curses the fig tree. verse. 22. Defends his own
authority against the Pharisees challenge. ver. 28. And in two parables sets
down their sin, and Gods judgment in rejecting of them.

Ver. 1. ANd when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethpage,
unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples,

2. Saying unto them, Go into the villages over against you, and straightway ye
shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them and bring them unto me.

3. And if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord has need of
them; and straightway he will send them.


IN this Christ's last voyage to Jerusalem, Observe, 1. That Christ being
resolved to lay down his life, the more near he draws to his suffering, the
more does he reveal himself to be the promised Messiah, in whom the promises
were accomplished; Therefore he will now go riding into Jerusalem. 2. Again lest
the nature of his kingdom should be mistaken, he will give evidence in his
poverty, that his kingdom is not of this world; Therefore he will borrow an
ass to ride on. 3. He has right to whatsoever he likes to make use of, as he
shows in commanding the disciples, To loose the ass and her colt, and to
bring them to him. 4. His knowledge does reach to the observation of the
meanest things, and does take notice of Asses and their colts, and their
bindings and loosings. 5. Whatsoever impediment can occur to any of his
servants in their course of obedience unto him, he does foresee it, and does
provide for the removing thereof; as here, If any say ought unto you, etc. 6. He
knows the master of the Ass will be within, and what he will say, and
foretells how he shall dispose of his will, and move him without any more to
let them go; for the hearts of kings and countrymen are in his hand: and thus
he lets his disciples see a glimpse of his God* head, saying, Straightway he
send them. 7. Albeit he be Lord of all, yet will he make use of what his
friends have with their own consent, so that they may be reasonable servants,
with good will bestowing what he calls for; Therefore says he, Straightway he
will send them. 8. He is not ashamed to profess himself Lord and Master, and
yet to be so far emptied, as to have need of the service of an Ass; Say, says
he, the Lord has need of them.

Ver. 4. All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, saying,

5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy king comes unto thee, meek, and
sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.

6. And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them.

The Evangelist makes this observation on this passage: Whence learn, 1. Our
Lord will see to the performance of all things written of him. He is the
promise maker, and the performer also: Therefore it is said, This was done that
it might be fulfilled, etc. 2. It is not our deserving, but Gods purpose and
promise, which is the cause of our Lords gracious carriage toward the world;
for now he is to be killed in Jerusalem, yet will he ride in as king, to
accomplish promises made to the Kirk, by the Prophet Zachary. It is sufficient
to observe the sense of a Scripture quoted, for the Scripture stands not in
letters or in syllables, but in sense of words compare this with Zach. 9.9.4.
It is the matter of the Kirks joy and gladness, to know of Christ, and of his
coming to his people; whatsoever be their grief, this is sufficient to be
their comfort: Therefore said the Spirit for comfort, Tell the daughter of Zion.
5. It matters not how the world fare, it is the daughter of Zion, the company
of the Blessed and Believers in Jesus whose comfort God does respect; Therefore it
is said, Tell the daughter of Zion. 6. Not only the dull multitude, but even
the Daughter of Zion is asleep unto the gracious tidings of the Gospel, and
has need to be stirred up, by, a Behold, to observe the Messiah come,
Therefore says he, Behold thy king. 7. Our Lord is a King, how lowly soever he
look, yea, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: for he says, Thy King comes. 8.
The church has a special interest in Christ, as King, and he has interest in
his church, as his own peculiar Subjects, for whose good he governs all the
matters of the world; for it is said, Thy King comes unto thee. 9. This is the
glory of his crown, that he is so gentle and merciful to us, as he will not
forsake the work of our Redemption, neither for our mis-deservings and
provocations, nor for the injuries done to him by his adversaries for our
cause; for, He is meek. 10. The manner of his Kingdom is spiritual, not after
the pomp of this world, sitting upon no stately hotse, but on an ass colt, so
as the poorest of his subjects should not be deterred or debarred from access
to him.

Ver. 7. And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and
they set him thereon. The disciples obedience and success is observed: Hence
learn, 1. When we have a clear call, ready obedience is our part, without
troubling our selves what may be the success; for, The disciples went and did
as he commanded them. 2. It is our part to honor Christ, so far as we can,
and to lay aside our ornaments to glorify him; for, They put their clothes on
the ass and the colt. 3. Christ contenteth himself for any state which is to
keep in his Kingdom here on earth, with what his disciples can furnish him, as
here; for, They set him thereon, and so he rode.

Ver. 8. And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way, others
cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way. The people are
moved, and do honor unto Christ. Do^^^ How base soever our Lords kingdom may
seem unto spectators, yet he can bring to himself Subjects how many he pleaeth,
and so purchase himself glory, not only before a spiritual eye, but also in the
sight of the world; for here, great multitudes spread their garments in the
way. 2. It is every man's part to honor our Lord, and set forward his kingdom
as they are enabled, some one way, some another; for here, Some spread their
garments, others cut down branches of trees, and strawed them in the way.

Verse. 9. And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried saying,
Hosanna to the son of David: blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
Hosanna in the highest. They take in their mouths words of the Psalm. 118. where
it is prophesied of the coming of Christ, to show himself king. Doct. 1. The
Lord can open the eyes of whomsoever he will, to see his glory, and to give him
honor, as the true King of Israel, and to perceive the predictions of
prophecies to be accomplished in him; for here, The people cried, Hosanna. 2.
The meaner sort of people, are usually they whom the Lord chooses to set forth
his glory, and to be Trumpeters of his praise: as here, The multitudes go
before, and follow after. 3. When such as should know Christ, and honor him,
do it not, God can raise up others to glorify him: The churchmen here
mis-regard Christ, and God stirs up the multitudes to confess him. 4. When
it pleases Christ to show his kingly power, he can make the meanest of his
subjects to avow him, and set forth his glory, even in the faces of his raging
enemies: for here (without fear of the corrupt church-mens excommunication) the
people make joyful acclamation to his honor, they pray for the prospering of
his Kingdom, and profess, that salvation is the fruit thereof, for Hosanna in
the Hebrew signifies, Give now Salvation, we pray: They do acknowledge Christ
to be the promised Messiah, The son of David, to be sent of God, and in his
name into the world, to be the Blessed, and the Fountain of Blessing to his
subjects, saying, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Ver. 10. And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying,
Who is this? Thus he enters openly, in State, into Jerusalem: Hence learn, 1.
When it pleases Christ to take unto him his kingdom, he will avow himself
king in the midst of his enemies; as now he rides in this glory into
Jerusalem. 2. Where greatest show of Religion is, it is no new thing to see
Christ to be least known; for, Who is this? say they. 3. Where he has a mind
to honor himself in suffering, he will show himself so evidently, as he may
be taken notice of by his enemies, as here, All the city is moved, saying, Who
is this?

Ver. 11. And the multitude said, This is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth of
Galilee. The multitude describes Christ rudely, as he was commonly talked of.
Doct. As men do know Christ, so do they speak of him, and according to the
measure of their knowledge should they bear witness of him; for this was the
clearest description of him which the multitude could give, This is Jesus, the
Prophet of Nazareth, say they.

Ver. 12. And Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that
sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers,
and the seats of them that sold doves. Christ shows himself King in purging
of his Temple, Doct. 1. It is the work of King Jesus to take notice of
Religion, and ^o purge it where he minds to reign: Therefore, He went into
the Temple of God, to purge it. 2. Horrible abuses may creep in into the place
of Gods Service, while men under pretense of furthering Religion, do follow
courses for their own gain; as here, Market and Money-changing are set up in
the place where Religion only was to be exercised. 3. In this extraordinary
way of reformation of his Temple, he shows himself to be God, able to
compass the most difficile works, by what means he pleases, and to terrify
his adversaries. 4. Outward abuses, albeit not so great as inward, yet may they
be begun at in reformation, as here Christ does.

Verse. 13. And said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the
house of prayer, but ye have made a den of thieves. He gives a reason of his
doing, from Scripture. Doct. 1, Reformation of Religion is to be done according
to Scripture, by reducing abused ordinances unto their first institution; for,
It is written, says he. 2. All the Ceremonial Service appointed at the Temple
was subservient to the Moral and Spiritual Duties; for it is said, My House
shall be called a House of Prayer. 3. All the worship of God may be comprised
in Prayer, as it comprehends praises and thanksgiving, because the end of
Ordinances is to make men know how to carry themselves toward God in praises
and prayer; Therefore, says he, My House shall be called the House of Prayer.
4. Vilest sins seek shelter under the pretext of Religion, and there think to
lurk; Therefore, this is the Challenge, Ye have made my House, a den of
thieves.

Ver. 14. And the blind and the lame came to him in the Temple, and he healed
them. When wicked men are scourged forth, blind and lame come and are healed.
Doct. How harshly soever our Lord carry himself toward hypocrites, and
abusers of Religion, yet will he deal graciously with the poor and needy, who
call for his help; for here, The blind and lame come and are healed in the
Temple; when Buyers and Sellers are scourged out of that place.

Ver. 15. And when the chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things
that he did, and the children crying in the Temple, and saying, Hosanna to the
Son of David; they were sore displeased,

Verse. 16. And said unto him, Hear thou what these say? And Jesus says unto
them, Yea, have ye never ready Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou
have perfected praise?

This Glory of Christ grieveth his enemies. Doct. 1. Christ's enemies are never
more incensed, and malicious against him, then when he is most honored, and
does show his Divine Power most; therefore now The Scribes and Pharisees are
displeased. 2. Wicked hypocrites are so blind, that they do see nothing of the
beauty of God, but only seek, and find out matter to carp at: Therefore, They
are displeased, and say, Hear thou, etc. 3. It is good for the children to
hear their Parents, and the elder sort sing Hosanna unto Christ, that they may
learn to do the same; for here as the elder, so also The Children cried. 4.
Christ is not ashamed of childrens way of praising of him as they are able, and
fitted for it: therefore, Christ answered them, Yea. 5. If God can glorify
himself in the mouths of babes and sucklings, which cannot speak, making them
from their womb to crave and receive by their mouth their nourishment, without
reaching; shall he not be glorified in training them up to speak, and to speak
words of his own praise, in the measure of understanding suitable to their
age? for, Out of the mouths of Babes he perfecteth praise. 6. Diverse doctrines
may pertinently be drawn from the same text, upon diverse occasions and the same
text may be well applied to diverse purposes, without wresting of it, as will
appear by comparing this place with Psalm. 8. ver. 2.

Ver. 17. And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany, and he
lodged there. He had his own intended work in Bethany: yet by his leaving of
his adversaries, he teaches us to cease from contention before it grow hot,
and to cut short with our enemies, using as few speeches as may be; therefore
it is said, He left them. 2. In that by his going off the town, occasion of
tumult^ and uproars were eschewed, we learn to eschew needless dangers, and to
reserve our selves unto the time wherein God calls us to glorify him by
suffering; for, He went out of the city to Bethany.

Ver. 18. Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered.

19. And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing
thereon but leaves only, and said unto it. Let no fruit grow on thee hence
forward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away.

20. And when the Disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the
fig tree withered away?

21. Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith
and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree; but
also if ye shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into
the sea, it shall be done.

22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive.

Christ turns to the city, and curses a fig tree by the way. Doct. 1. Where
Christ has his own chosen to teach, and his glory to advance, there will he
becoming and going; though the place be wicked, and his resort thither be
dangerous; therefore, In the morning he returned to the city. 2. How diligent
was our Lord in his calling, when to do his Fathers work, he came from the
country into the city, even in the morning, ere he tasted mea^; for it is said,
Ho hungered. 3. How often did our Lord give evidence of the truth and kindlinesse
of his Manhood; for, He is here hungry, and desirous to ^at; yet more desirous
to teach his disciple^ somewhat for their edification, upon occasion of his
being hungry, then to eat the sweetest figs, and therefore he makes the barren
fig tree to become the table whereupon he should feed on, and whereupon he
should set shortly after ready food for his Disciples,* To move questions here
whether Christ was ignorant that there was no figs on this tree, and why he
cursed it* seeing it was not yet the time of figs, as idle. No doubt he knew
what fruit to draw from it, and missed not what he expected; but did obtain all
that which he intended, to wit, That the Disciples by this miracle, might be
taught to make use of the gift of miracles given unto them, and certainly a
tree was well bestowed, (how birthy soever it might have been) upon so noble a
lesson unto the Church. It is also without warrant to ground allegories here,
as if Christ had intended to show that he desired fruits of the Church of the
Jews, and of all professors of Religion, and that if they do not render
fruits, when he does call for them, then that he would curse them, and make
them unable to bear fruit afterward: such like flowers may seem pleasant, but
have no solidity, as from the intention of this miracle. I grant that allusions
may be made unto this tree, and similitudes may be drawn from it, no less then
from any other thing: but the scope which our Lord declares afterward, is that
only whereupon we must with warrant build; namely, He will show his Almighty
Power in blasting of so strong a tree with a word of his mouth, so that the
Disciples do wonder to see the miracle, verse. 20. Whereupon our Lord does teach
them, that whenever they should have this word for their warrant, whether
extraordinarily inspired for the doing of any miraculous work in his name, or
ordinarily propounded in the common doctrine of the Church, for a warrant to
pray for, and expect anything, if they should act their faith, and not give
wayto doubting, then they should be able to do greater miracles then the
blasting of the fig tree was, even the greatest which they could imagine: so
that if the Spirit of the Lord gave a word for removing of a mountain, (for
examples cause) how impossible soever it might seem, yet should it come to
pass, if they did put forth their Faith to act about it; and so also,
whatsoever the Word of the Lord did warrant them to pray for, and to expect of
him, they should obtain it, if they did pray in faith for it; and was not this
lesson worth all the figs, which either this fig tree or any other tree could
bear? Doct. 1. Our Lord was never so hungry for meat and drink, but he could
forbear it til a fit time, and make it his meat and drink to be doing good, and
fulfilling the Fathers will: for he loves to edify, and feed his Disciples
here, more then to feed his natural hunger. 2. Albeit our Lord did never harm
to any man by any of his miracles, yet had he power to curse, and miraculously
to destroy, as well as to save, if he had pleased to put forth his power in
justice; for the fig tree was not able to stand, when he did curse it. 3. He
trained his Disciples by his own example unto all duties which he put them
unto, and here he traineth them unto the exercise of the gift of miracles. 4.
The gift of miracles was never to be exercised in particular, but upon a good
ground of Faith, that is upon a warrant given from Christ's Spirit, for doing
that work in particular; and it was necessary for him who had the gift and the
warrant for doing of a miracle, to strengthen his Faith on the warrant, or else
to miss of his intent, as in Peter's sinking did appear. Therefore, says he, If
ye have faith and doubt not. 5. The Lord requires Faith in prayer for
obtaining promised mercies, or else if we come short, to blame our misbelief;
Therefore says he, Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive it.

Ver. 23. And when he was come into the Temple, the chief Priests and Elders
of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority
do thou these things? and who gave thee this authority? Here is another
conflict: Teaching us, 1. That when Christ's adversaries can say nothing
against his doctrine, and are convinced by his miracles, of his Commission from
God, yea, of his Godhead, yet do they quarrel with him about his calling,
saying, By what authority do thou, etc. It is no strange thing if his
adversaries deal so with his servants. 2. This holds sure in the general,
That no man should take this honor unto him to be a Preacher of Gods truth
without warrant and authority; for so imports the question, By what authority
do thou these things?

Ver. 24. And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also ask you one thing,
which if ye tell me, I in likewise will tell you by what authority I do these
things.

25. The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? and they
reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven, he will say
unto us, Why did ye not believe him?

26. But if we shall say, Of men, we fear the people, for all hold John as a
Prophet.

Christ propounds another question to his adversaries, Doct. 1. When
cavillers come to tempt us to take advantage of our speeches, we ought to be
circumspect, that neither the truth be damnified by us, nor our adversaries get
advantage against us. Therefore here Christ asks a question in stead of
giving an answer. 2. The Lord ^^n catch the crafty in their craftiness, and
can decipher (...) ^olly of them who seek to cloak wickedness under colors,
for this question both answered the former, and convinced the adversaries of
wilful wickedness; For they knew John's calling and doctrine to be divine,
and that John bare witness unto Christ, and so they behoved to know Christ to
be the Messiah; therefore pertinently does he ask, John's baptism, whence was
it? 3. Callings unto the holy Ministry must either be from God, and so they
are lawful, or from men only, and so they are unlawful; They must either be
from heaven, or of men. 4 The Sacraments and all religious Service and Worship,
must have the same authority with the doctrine, to wit, Divine; for the
question is moved about John's Baptism in stead of John's Doctrine, or John's
Commission or Calling. 5. Men of corrupt minds do seek not the verity, but the
victory in dispute; they do not look what is true or false, right or wrong, but
what is most for their own corrupt ends and purpose, as the reasoning of these
men does show: for the verity which they knew of John, they will not confess
for shame, nor dare they flatly deny it, for fear the people should fall on
them. 6. Whosoever confess a doctrine to be from Heaven, and yet do not
believe it, are inexcusable, and condemned by their own conscience; for say
they, If we say from Heaven, he will say, Why did ye not believe him?

Ver. 27. And they answered Jesus and said, We cannot tell. And he said unto
them, Neither tell I you, by what authority I do these things. Christ has the
victory here; Doct. 1. The Lords enemies at last are confounded and put to
silence; for, We cannot tell, say they. 2. One sin insnareth and draws a man
into another sin, for they refuse to tell the truth, and in refusing, they fall
in a lie, saying, We cannot tell. 3. Such as captivate the knowledge they have,
and make no use of it, are justly deprived of what further kowledge they
pretend to seek? for, Neither will I tell you, is Christ's last answer to such.

Ver. 28. But what think you? A certain man had two sons, and he came to the
first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard.

29. He answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went.

30. And he came to the second, and said likewise, And he answered him and
said, I go sir, and went not.

31. Whether of them twain did (...) Will of his father? They say unto him, The
first. Jesus says unto them, Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and the
harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you.

Thus they have done with Christ, their plot is disappointed, but Christ does
pursue them, convincing them of disobedience, and denouncing deserved judgment
upon them, in two parables: The scope of the first is, to show, that sundry of
Publicans and open sinners, of whom they esteemed least, were more righteous
and blessed then they were, because the Publicans, like the penitent son,
repented their backwardness unto Gods commandments, and were fled in by faith
to the Messiah, and were made Subjects of the Kingdom of Grace, and so Heirs of
the Kingdom of glory; But they notwithstanding of a fair profession of
obedience to God, were like the other disobedient and counterfeit son, abiding
still in their impenitency and unbelief, and in the way to be debarred from the
Kingdom of grace and glory: Hence learn, 1. That men will more readily
acknowledge their fault in another man's person, then in their own; therefore does
Christ draw forth these men's judgment by a parable. 2. He will have the
conscience of the wicked, subscribing to the righteousness of Gods judgment
against themselves, as will appear by, What think ye? compared with their
answer. 3. The most odious and despised sinners, repenting and believing in
Jesus, do find Grace and Place both in the church, and in heaven above; but
such as confide in their own righteousness, are debarred, for, Harlots, says
Christ, go into the kingdom of heaven before you.

Ver. 32. For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed
him not; but the Publicans and the harlots beleevd him. And ye, when ye had
seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. Christ gives
reason of the condemning these wicked men. Doct. 1. The more blameless and
holy the Preacher of repentance and righteousness by Christ be found, the
greater is the sin of those who do not receive the message: for so Christ
aggravateth these men's sin, saying, John came in the way of righteousness and ye
believed him not. 2. Albeit self-conceited righteous people do not believe the
doctrine of righteousness by Christ, yet God will manifest the power of his
truth, in the conversion of despised sinners; for, The harlots believed John,
albeit the Pharisees did not. 3. The sight and example of other folks
believing, and repenting in Christ, if it do not move us to acknowledging of
our sins also, and flying unto Christ, it shall stand as a witness against us,
to aggravate our sin and condemnation; Therefore says he, And ye, when ye had
seen it, ye repented not. 4. Remorse for not believing Gods word in his
servants mouth, in time bygone, is a special spur and preparative to believe
it the more solidly for time to come; Therefore says he, Ye repented not, that
ye might believe him; that is, When you saw that the Publicans had out stripped
you in the way of righteousness, by believing John's testimony of me, ye did
not lament your unbelief, that you might give him so much the more credit for
time to come, and so recover your loss by faith in me.

Ver. 33. Hear another parable, There was a certain householder which planted a
vineyard, and hedged it round about, and dug a wine press in it, and built
a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country.

34. And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the
husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.

35. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beatone, and killed another, and
stoned another.

36. And he sent other servants more then the rest, and they did unto them
likewise.

37 But last of all, he sent unto them his Son, saying, They will reverence my
Son.

38. But when the husbandmen saw the Son, They said among themselves, This is
the Heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.

39 And they caught him, and cast him out of the Vineyard, and s^^w him.

40. When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes, what will he do unto those
Husbandmen?

41. They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let
out his Vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in
their seasons.

Another parable convincing them of their wickedness against God and his Son
Christ, and denouncing judgment against them, and that whole ungrate nation,
under the similitude of a Householder and his Tenants, the substance whereof is
this; As the Tenants of the householder dealt with their Master and his
servants, and his son, the heir of the vineyard, so the Scribes and Elders of
the Jews, with the rest of that unthankful nation, dealt with God, and his
servants the Prophets, and with his son Jesus Christ: and as the householder
punished these wicked tenants of the vineyard, so should God punish that wicked
nation, by taking the Gospel and face of a visible Kirk from them, and giving
their room unto the Gentiles, who should bring forth better fruits than they
had done. From this parable, learn, 1. That the Lords care of his visible
church, is comparable to the care which the most painful husbandman has of
his vineyard; he leaves nothing undone which may make it fruitful: he gives
wholesome ordinances of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, erecteth governors,
civil and Ecclesiastic, appoints them (as his tenants) to press the fruits
of a holy conversation from his people; and when they are remiss, he stirs
up some special instruments, faithful Prophets and Preachers, to stir up all,
and to exact of all the fruit of his labor upon his people, as may be seen in
his dealing with the Jewish church. 2. Ordinarily the Lord gets a bad meeting
of his people, and specially of the rulers of the church, who look more each
man unto his own case, honor, and gain, than to the holy conversation of
people, and glory of God; as the example of the Jewish doctors here, and Rulers
of the Lord's people shows. 3. When the body of church-rulers are corrupt, if
any of their fellows shall plead the Lords cause against them, these faithful
servants shall readily be persecuted, evil entreated, and killed for their
pains, as in the example of the Jewish church is to be seen. 4. As men deal
with God's servants, so would they do with God himself, if he should come as a
man to them, and put himself in their power, to try their affections unto him,
as is evident in the Jewish rulers, who flew Christ the Son of God, God
manifested in the flesh. 5. When a people not only do bring forth no fruits of
the Gospel, but also do persecute such as do stir them up unto their duties, it
is righteousness with God to pour out his plagues upon them, and go away from
them to some other people, as he dealt with the Jews after many provocations.

Verse. 42. Jesus says unto them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner?
this is the Lords doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes. From 118. Psalm
our Lord shows, That it was foretold how the Rulers of the Church should
deal with himself, the Messiah, and with what success. Doct. 1. The not
considering and believing of the Scriptures, is the cause why many do fulfill
things foretold in the Scripture to their own ruin and condemnation; therefore
says he, Did ye never read? 2. The gathering of the Church is compared to the
building of a Temple, wherein the Ministers and Rulers are Builders. 3. It was
prophesied that Christ should be esteemed by the Churchmen in his time, a
Stone not worthy to have any room in the building, and therefore should be
rejected, and excommunicated by them; for it is written of Christ, The stone
which the Builders refused. 4. How basely soever he was esteemed of by them,
yet he was indeed the Ground-stone, the Strength and Glory of the Church; so
should he be seen, and acknowledged to be, contrary to all opposition; for,
This Stone is become the Head of the corner. 5. The Divine Power of God
appears most evidently in the exaltation of Christ in his Church, beyond the
expectation, and contrary to the hearts of all his enemies; therefore says he,
This is the Lords doing. 6. The work of God about his Church in setting up the
Throne of Christ, is a most wonderful matter in the eyes of all who have
understanding; for, It is mavelous in our eyes, says the Prophet.

Verse. 43. Therefore say I unto you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. Here Christ
applies the last Parable, and the Psalm last cited to the Scribes and Rulers,
and to the rest of the rotten members of that Church. Doct. 1. The Gospel or
the means of Grace in a visible face of a Church, is Gods Kingdom on earth, and
the greatest benefit that can be bestowed on a Land; for so it is called here.
2. The Nation which does not bring forth the fruits of the Gospel, may justly
be deprived of that privilege, as here is threatened, The Kingdom of God shall
be taken from you. 3. The Church may be flitted from one Nation to another, but
shall not cease to be among some people; for, It shall be given to another,
says Christ; Thus he foretells them of the rejection of the Jews, and the
in-bringing of the Gentiles.

Ver. 44. And whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. Having threatened the
whole Nation of the Jews, now he threatens all his enemies of every sort more
specially, teaching us, 1. That some will stumble at him, as at a stone of
offense, and will oppose him out of ignorance, and inadvertance, as men do fall
on a stone in their way: and some will oppose him out of malice, and will set
themselves as adversaries to him, as the distinction of falling on and being
fallen upon, imports. 2. The first sort shall not only not prevail against
him, but as here is said, shall be broken also, either to their repentance, as
Paul was; or to their perdition, as ignorant and misbeleeving adversaries are.
3. Such as are adversaries out of malice he will set himself against these, as
here he says, He will fall upon them with his weight and by his mighty power
grind them to powder, that is, destroy them utterly by the highest degrees of
punishment, and thus he tells the chief Priests and Pharisees their own
particular doom.

Ver. 45. And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they
perceived that he spoke of them.

46 But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude,
because they took him for a Prophet.

These men take up Christ's meaning, but do make no good use of the warning.
Doct. 1. Threatenings profit not, but rather do irritate desperately wicked men,
as here they desired to lay hands on him. 2. Christ's most malicious adversaries
(though they be set for blood) yet can do no more than God will suffer them to
do, as here is to be seen. 3. As long as the body of the people do favor
Christ's cause, persecutors will not vent all their designs against Christ and
his followers; as here, They sought to lay hands on Christ, but they feared the
multitude. 4. The least good opinion of Christ will serve for some use; albeit
not to the parties salvation, yet to the advantage of Christ's cause, as here it
served for some use, That they took him for a Prophet.

CHAP. XXII.
The Parable of the marriage of the Kings son, to ver. 15. The Pharisees tempt
Christ about tribute to Caesar, ver. 23. and the Sadduces tempt him about
marriage in the resurrection, ver. 34. The Pharisees again tempt him about the
greatest commandment in the law, and our Lord tries their skill in scripture,
by a question about the Messiah.

Ver. 1. ANd Jesus answered, and spoke again unto them by parables, and said,

2. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage
for his son,

3. And sent for his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding, and
they would not come.

4. Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden,
Behold, I have pr^pared my dinner: my oxen, and my fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready: come unto the marriage.

5. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another
to his merchandise:

6. And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and flew
them.

7. But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his
armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city.


THe scope of this parable is to set forth the manner of acceptance of the
Gospel preached: some reject the offer altogether, some not only reject the
offer, but do abuse, and persecute the church, and Preachers of the Gospel:
some do join themselves in Truth into the fellowship of the Grace of God in
Christ; and some do join themselves unto the church in hypocrisy, being only
called externally, but not elected; all this is represented in a similitude of
the marriage of the Kings son. In which parable or presupposed history, we are
given to understand, 1. That communion and fellowship with Christ in all
graces, in his church visible, daily preached to the world, is like a feast, a
marriage feast of the King's son, abounding in all means of life, and joy, and
honor, ready prepared, and offered unto men liberally and freely to be
bestowed on such as will receive the offer, as is described, verse. 1, 2, 3,
4.2. The acceptance, which the offer of the grace of Christ in the Gospel
receives at the hands of many men, is like the meeting which was given to the
invitation to the Kings feast; for many made sight account of the offered
favor; every man preferring his own naughty matters unto the Kings grace
tendered unto them, verse. 5. and some not only reject the offer, but also
persecute and kill the preachers, as ver. 6.3. The rejecters of the Gospel of
Gods grace in Christ, offered unto them in the gospel, and much more the
persecutors of the Lords servants who make the offer, shall be served as these
wicked and rebellious murderers were, that is, They shall be destroyed and
perish in the just indignation of God, ver. 7.

Ver. 8. Then says he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which
were bidden were not worthy.

9. Go ye therefore into the high ways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the
marriage.

10. So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all,
as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with
guests.

From this part of the Parable, Learn, 1. Refuse the gospel who will, and
oppose it who will, God shall not want a church; but shall have as many as he
pleases, for the countenancing of his rich and free grace, and glorifying of
Jesus Christ, some coming in to the gospel in truth, good guests; some coming
in to the church in hypocrisy, bad guests, and all by the Ministry of Christ's
servants, represented by the furnishing of guests to the Kings marriage feast.

Ver. 11. And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which
had not on a wedding garment.

12. And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a
wedding garment? And he was speechless.

13. Then said the king to his servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

From this part, Learn, 1. That such as join themselves to the church in
hypocrisy, and have no care to honor God by a holy life, flowing from faith
and love toward Jesus Christ, shall be remarked and observed so particularly,
that if there were but one, he shall not escape, but shall be condemned, and
cast in hell, there to be tormented for ever, represented by the punishment of
the man who came in to the feast, as a friend; but without a wedding garment,
that is, without purpose or care to honor the marriage, or the Bridegroom, by
a holy life proceeding from faith and love toward Christ.

Ver. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen. The reason of this different
manner of receiving the offer of the gospel is marked. Doct. The cause why some
receive the grace of Christ offered in the Gospel, in a better manner then the
multitude of others do, and do adorn the gospel by a holy conversation,
flowing from faith and love to Jesus Christ, as the multitude of others do not,
is not in the men themselves, but in the free grace and love of God electing
some unto grace and glory, and leaving others to answer for their meeting given
to this call; for, Many are called, says he, but few are chosen.

Ver. 15. Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle
him in his talk.

16. And they sent out unto him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying,
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the ways of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men.

This is Christ's ran counter with the disciples of the Pharisees and Herodians;
they go about either to make him odious to the people, if he should allow
tribute, or make him seem an enemy to Caesar, if he should disallow it: Hence
learn, 1. The enemies of Christ will not rest till they perish, but will assay
one mean after another to draw inconveniences upon him, and his followers: for
here again, They take counsel how to entangle him in his talk, that they may
have advantage of his words. 2. How close soever Christ's enemies shall carry
their plot, he will bring it forth to light; these men will not appear
themselves, but send out and suborn others less suspected; for, They sent out
their Disciples with the Herodians, men of the Court-religion, following Herod's
way, who was half an Idumean, and half a Jew, men subtle and politic, and fit
to take advantage of words, if any thing should have escaped Christ to the
seeming prejudice of Caesar, or his deputies. 3. It is admirable how fair a show
bloody adversaries of Christ may make of their great respect to Religion, of
their estimation of upright Teachers, of their desire to grow in knowledge,
from the love of truth, and such like, and yet intend nothing but to entangle,
ensnare, betray, and destroy Christ and his servants; for who can speak or
pretend fairer then these men, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, etc.
4. How benumbed and feared with an hot iron is the conscience of hypocrites,
who being convinced of the truth of a man's doctrine, and of his honesty and
fidelity, yet will not only not believe him, but also seek to destroy him, as
these men give evidence. 5. The properties of a faithful preacher are, first,
He is a true and upright man, whose heart, and words, and ways do agree; he
teaches not men's precepts and devises, nor his own dreams, but the ways of
God; secondly, He teaches truth, in truth truly, for the right end, in
sincerity, aiming to inform, and persuade men to embrace truth; thirdly, His
affections do not make him wrest his commission, for fear or favor; fourthly,
He cares not for the fear or favor of any man, so as to wrest the truth for
any man's cause, but without partiality, or personal respects he delivers the
same truth equally unto all, not regarding the person of man.

Ver. 17 Tell us therefore, What think thou? is it lawful to give tribute
unto Caesar, or not? After their flattering insinuation they present the snare;
wherein we learn, That it is an old cra^t of the devil, to labor to draw the
Preachers of the Gospel in dislike either with the people, or with the
magistrate, the one snare failing, then by the other; for thus they say, Is it
lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? thinking, if he said Yea, the people
should have him as an adversary to the liberties of his native Kingdom: if he
said, Not, he might be held guilty of treason and sedition.

Ver. 18 But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites? From C^^ists answ^r, learn, 1. That it is impossible to deceive the
Lord, he knows the hypocrite, whatsoever vision he puts on; for Jesus
perceived their wickedness. 2. He will let the hypocrite know sometime, that
he will not be mocked: therefore says he, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?

Ver. 19. Show me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny.

20. And he says unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?

21. They say unto him, Cesars. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto
Caesar, the things which are Cesars: and unto God, the things which are Gods.

By calling for the stamp of the tribute money, and finding by the Im age and
superscription of the money, that they had by agreement subjected themselves
unto Caesar, and taken him for their King, and stricken coin for his use, he
concludes the question as solved, and bids them, Give unto Caesar that which
is Cesars, and unto God that which is Gods: Hence learn, 1. Where a Kingdom
has subjected themselves unto a King, and become his Subjects and tributaries,
it is lawful to pay tribute unto him; Give unto Caesar that which is his. 2.
Christ is no enemy to Magistrayey, nor to civil rulers, but teaches men to
give therein their due; for, Give unto Caesar that which is Cesars, says he: and
therefore it is reason that magistrates be as careful, that God have what is
due to him, in Religion and obedience of his commands, as he is careful that
their due be given to them. 3. Men should so regard Kings and Rulers, as they
do not mistake God, but respect, honor, and obey him above all; Therefore says
he, Give unto God, that which is Gods.

Ver. 22. When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and
went their way. They find themselves disappointed, and with a fruitless
admiration of Christ's wisdom, do depart. Doct. Christ's adversaries in the end
will find themselves mistaken in their vain hopes, which they have had to
ensnare him, or his: and all that open the mouth against him shall be ashamed,
as, These men marvelled, and went away.

Ver. 23. The same day came unto him the Sadduces, which say that there is no
resurrection, and asked him,

24. Saying, Master, Moses said, if a man dye having no children, his brother
shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.

In Christ's ran counter with the Sadduces, learn, 1. Christ will yoke, with all
his adversaries, and will dispute with all Sectaries, and confound them; new
exercises, new disputes, new contradictions, new temptations abide our Lord and
his Church; for after the Pharisees and Herodians are gone, the Sadduces come.
2. It is a speciell policy of Satan to multiply his temptations one after
another, so near in time as he can; for, The Sadduces came that day. 3.
Multitudes of sects and schisms, is not new nor strange, but the just
punishment of a corrupt Church; not only Pharisees and Herodians, but Sadduces
also, set on by turn upon our Lord. 4. No error so monstrous, but it will
find Patrons and Followers among them who do not follow Christ; for the
beastly error of the mortality of the Soul, and denying the Resurrection of
the body, finds here Sadduces to profess it.

Ver. 25. Now there were with us seven brethren, and the first when he had
married a wife, deceased, and having no issue, left his wife unto his brother.

26. Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh.

27. And last of all the woman died also.

28. Therefore in the resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven, for
they all had her.

Because that in the resurrection the Sadduces conceived that every man is to
return to his wordly estate and condition, as wife, children, and goods, and
thus do see many absurdities follow, (as they apprehend) upon their own
suspicion, therefore they reject this article of faith, and propound their
conceit as an unanswerable doubt unto Christ. Hence learn, 1. The conceiving of
spiritual things in a fleshly manner, is the ground of mistaking the truth,
and setting up of errors and heresies, as appears in these Sadduces; they
apprehend the doctrine of eternal life to be this, That the course of this
temporary life shall be renewed and made perpetual. 2. No man seems wiser in
his own eyes then the blindest heretics do; they conceive that Christ himself
cannot answer their objections against the truth, and this imboldneth these
Sadduces to dispute.

Ver. 29. Jesus answered, and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God.

30. For in the resurrection, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage;
but are as the angels of God in heaven.

Christ confuteth them by Scripture. Doct. 1. If the Scriptures be not
understood and believed, it cannot miss but errors will arise: for nothing
else but this light can prevent or remove errors; for, They erred, not knowing
the Scriptures. 2. It is necessary for quieting our minds in the truth of Gods
Word, that we look only to the promise of God, and to his ability, to perform
all what he has promised; Therefore says he, Ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God. 3. After the resurrection, we shall be set
free from the infirmities whereunto now we are subject; and shall neither need
meat, nor drink, nor marriage, but shall be upholden immediately of God,
without means, as Angels are, and shall be employed only in the immediate
service of God, as the Angels of Heaven are.

Verse. 31. But as touching the Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read, that
which was spoken unto you by God, saying,

32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God
is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

Having reproved their error, he confirms the true Doctrine by Scripture:
Hence learn, 1. That no sufficient silencing of error can be, till the
contrary truth be made clear by Scripture; Therefore says he, Have ye not
read? 2. Whatsoever is said in the Scripture, should be taken as spoken unto
us, and that by God; for, Have ye not read that which is spoken unto you by
God? says he. 3. Whatsoever the Scripture does import, by good consequence is
to be accounted for God^ speech, and that which in reading should be so
understood, as if it were expressed, as here Christ reckons, Concerning the
Resurrection, have ye not read? says he; for the Scripture does not stand in
letters or syllables, but in the sense of words, and in the truly inferred
consequences from thence. 4. Whosoever are within the Covenant of Grace, whose
God the Lord is by Covenant, they are sure to live in Heaven with God, after
this life, and to have their bodies raised at last unto immortal life: because
God is the Savior and Redeemer, not of the soul of his Elect only, but also of
the body; therefore there must be a resurrection of the body; for, God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living: that is, His Covenant to be a man's God,
will not suffer the man to perish in soul or body, but though temporal death
overtake the body, yet the soul must live, and not die, but be for ever in a
blessed condition with God, and the body must not always remain under the
power of death, but must be raised at last to an immortal condition, that it
may also live for eever by his Power, who has proclaimed himself the Go^ of
his own people, and has taken this style, and will keep it for ever.

Ver. 33. And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his
doctrine. This is the issue of the Controversy, Doct. The end of disputation
against the truth, is a further clearing of it, and glorifying of Christ; as
here, The multitude were astonished at his Doctrine.

Ver. 34. But when the Phrisees had heard that he had put the Sadduces to
silence, they were gathered together.

35. Then one of them which was a Lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him,
and saying,

36. Master, which is the great commadement in the law?

This is a new rancounter with the Pharisees, who though they were refuted
sundry times before, and had heard that the Sadduces were put to silence, yet
they do resolve a new assay; and after consultation, do find out one of their
learned Rabbis, thinking to give Christ some affront upon a disputable
question concerning, What is the greatest Commandment in the Law? Doct. 1. In
these perverse men, the blindness, the boldness, the obstinacy, the malice of
Christ's enemies is to be seen, they renew their onsets frequently, They
gathered together, and sent out one to tempt him. 2. The adversaries of Christ's
grace will seem to be much for the Law, even when they are against the true end
of the Law, that is, against forgiveness of sin through Christ, which is the
greatest matter of the word of God.

Ver. 37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

38. This is the first and great Commandment.

Our Lord having to do with a proud hypocrite, puffed up with a conceit of his
own righteousness, does so answer him, as he says out the spiritual meaning
of the Law, that the man might see how short he came in the obedience thereof,
and so does teach us, 1. That the commandments are not obeyed, except the
obedience proceed from love, this is imported, Thou shall love the Lord. 2. The
commands are not satisfied, except the whole man wholly in all things obey,
with his whole mind, affections, and the strength of all the powers of soul
and body; therefore, says he, With all thy heart, soul, and mind. 3. To love
God is the greatest command, because it is the Fountain of the obedience of all
the commands; and also, because all the commands of the first Table are but
branches, and evidences in part of our love to God. 4. The great commandment is
not fulfilled, except a man in the sense of his short coming in love to God,
seek for reconciliation with him, enter in a covenant of grace with him, and
make use of his friendship, as of a reconciled God; therefore, says he, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God. 5. The commandment of loving God with all our
might, and adhering to him, as reconciled unto us, and made ours by covenant,
is first to be looked unto, as being of greatest consequence; for, This is the
first and great command, to love the Lord thy God.

Ver. 39. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. The Pharisees asked of one commandment, and our Lord in his answer,
gives two, comprehending all: this commandment is called the second, because
it is in the next room, after immediate worship of God to be looked unto, and
because it is the sum of the second Table. It is called like unto the first,
because it has the same authority, it requires like spiritual and constant
obedience as the first, and must be joined with the first, by such as would be
found obedient unto the first; and herein the envy and malice of these
Pharisees is taxed, who pretended to love God, and yet did hate the Savior,
his Son, and all peoples salvation, who must be saved only by him. Doct. 1. So
many as profess love to God, must set themselves to love their Neighbor also,
at his command; for he cannot love God, who will not love his Neighbor,
therefore, says he, The second is, Love thy Neighbor. 2. It is lawful to
love our selves, yea, it is a commanded duty after ou^ love to God, and with
our love to God, and from our love to God; that is to say, So as our love to
our selves be not in the first room, which belongs to God; so as our love to
our selves be subordinate unto the love of God, and may make us forthcoming to
the honor of God, and do not prejudge our love to God, but fu^ther the same:
for the command which says, Love thy Neighbor as thy self, says, Love thy
self, by a second and like command, depending on and flowing from the first.
3. A right ordered and measured love to our selves is the rule and measure of
our love to our neighbor; the love of God must be preferred both to our selves
and neighbor, so as we must not please our selves or our neighbor by
displeasing God, but our love to God being fixed in the own place: then in
reason, as we would have others to do unto us, do we also unto them: for, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, that is, Sincerely and constantly.

Ver. 40. On these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. The
Pharisee did move the question, concerning the greatest commandment in the
Law, meaning the moral Law; Christ having answered, telling him, that he had
not only satisfied the question concerning the greatest commandment of the
moral Law, but also had given him the sum of the whole Law, yea not only so,
but also had given him the sum and scope of the whole Books of Scripture,
whereupon does hang the whole doctrine of Moses and the Prophets; On these two
commandments says he, hang all the Law and the Prophets; and so shall we find
it to be, if we consider the matter: for the sum and scope of the Scriptures
may be comprehended in these three: The first is, To show us what duties the
perfect Law of God requires of us. The second is, To show how being found
short of our duties, and guilty of fearful transgressions of the Law, we may be
reconciled with God. The third is, To show how and by what rule we shall walk
before God in new obedience: Now all these three will befound in Christ's
answer, and in these two great commandments; for, 1. In these great commands,
the duty of perfect love is first enjoined; for it is said, Love God with all
thy heart; and thy neighbor as thy self. 2. Upon our presupposed short-coming
in our duty, the seeking unto the covenant of reconciliation is insinuate, and
enjoined in these words [ thy God] Thou shall love the Lord thy God. 3. After
the covenanting there is enjoined an endeavor of sincere setting unto the
obedience of the whole Law, with our heart, mind, and soul, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, etc. and if the words be exponed thus, then indeed upon these two
commands all the Doctrine of the Law and Prophets does hang, as explications of
them, and inducements, and directions unto the obedience of them.

Ver. 41. While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them.

42. Saying, What think ye of Christ? Whose Son is he? They ay unto him, The
son of David.

43. He says unto them, How then does David in spirit call him Lord, saying,

44. The LORD said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, til I make thine
enemies thy footstool.

45. If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?

Our Lord thinks it not sufficient, wisely to answer the tempting questions
of his adversaries, but he will also ask questions of them, to put them to
shame, and so to humble them, and withal will show forth his own Godhead
spoken of in scripture, if possibly some of them might believe and be saved;
and howsoever, that his own might be edified. Doct. 1. As it is good to be
zealous of the Law, so it is necessary to know the Messiah, who redeemeth men
from the curse of the Law: for our Lord having answered the Pharisees question
about the Law, asks them, What think ye of Christ? 2. Christ is a very man
lineally descended of David; for he is David's Son, so say even the Pharisees.
3. Christ is also very God; for he is David's Lord, equal with the Father, The
Lord said to my Lord, says David. 4. The son of David, and David's Lord
distinguished from the Father; as one of the persons of the Godhead is but one
person; for, David's God, and David's Son is here spoken of as one person. 5.
Christ is Fellow-partner of divine glory with the Father, for, Sit thou at my
right hand, says the Father. 6. Christ shall not want enemies who shall oppose
his kingdom; this is imported in, Thine enemies. 7. Christ's enemies shall be put
under his power; for it is said of the Father, Till I make thine enemies thy
footstool. 8. There is but one divine power of the Son and Father; for as the
Son reigns in majesty over his enemies, so the Father puts them down also;
for, Sit thou, till I put them down, is; Reign thou, till this be done. 9. None
can conciliat the speeches in scripture concerning Christ, except he who
believes and acknowlegeth him to be God and Man in one person; for if David
call him Lord, how is he his son? no answer, but he is both God and Man.

Ver. 46. And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man (from
that day forth) ask him any more questions. The issue of this disputation is
set down, to teach us, 1. That all Christ's enemies will be beaten in
disputation, and put to silence: the force of divine Truth prudently put forth,
is irresistible; therefore it is said, No man was able to answer him: 2. The
conviction of Gods enemies may be expected, but the conversion of all the
convicted can hardly be expected; for, They could not answer, and they durst
not ask mo questions: there is all, we hear of no good use they make of this.

CHAP. XXIII.
Our Lord painteth forth the Scribes and Pharisees in their own colors,
before the people, and denounces woe and wrath on them, to verse 37. and
destruction on Jerusalem.

Ver. 1. THen spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples,

2. Saying, The Scribes and Pharisees fit in Moses seat.

3. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but do
not ye after their works; far they say, and do not.


OUr Lord having put his adversaries to silence, does take course to save his
people from their ways. Doct. 1. The people must be warned to beware of the
contagion of corrupt Teachers, when they will not amend their doings: for this
is the course which Christ takes about the Pharisees and Scribes, 2. Albeit
the faults of teachers must not be spared, yet their authority and office must
be guarded, lest the message of God by their mouth be marred, their office must
be defended, albeit their persons be corrupt; Therefore says he, They sit in
Moses chair, that is, they succeed to Moses in the ordinary office of teaching
the word of God. 3. What Moses successors teach, as Moses successors, must be
obeyed; that is, The truth which from the warrant of Gods Word is recommended
unto us, from corrupt teachers clad with lawful authority to teach, we ought
to obey it, because the message is the Doctrine of God; albeit the Messenger be
corrupt; for it is said, Whatsoever they bid you do, as Moses successors, with
Moses warrant, from the Lords mouth, That observe and do. 2. People are in
danger to follow the example of the evil life of corrupt teachers, rather than
the command of God delivered in their doctrine, and therefore had need to be
warned; for, says he, After their works do not. 3. Whatsoever commanded works
a man does, and not for the commanded ends, before God, it is as good as no
doing: Therefore, albeit the Pharisees did many works commanded in the Law, yet
because they did them to be seen of men, and as works meritorious to oblige
God, and were more careful of the outward ceremonies of the Law, then to
observe the moral duties of justice and mercy; therefore what they did, was
counted as If they did not; and Christ says of them, They say, and do not.

Ver. 4. For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on
men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their
fingers. The Lord gives a reason of this caveat, given concerning the
Pharisees. Doct. 1. The Doctrine of the Law moral and ceremonial, separate
from the true intent of it, which is to lead unto the Gospel, where grace and
strength is to be had for righteousness and new obedience, is a yoke
unsupportable, and here called, A heavy burden, and grievous to be borne; and
therefore to press moral duties on a people, without teaching them how to
draw strength from Christ for obedience, is, To bind heavy burdens on their
shoulders. 2. Hypocrites do teach people most imperiously, and with least
compassion, contributing least of any men unto the inabling of the people unto
obedience, whether by wisdom of doctrine, or example, or prayer; therefore
says Christ, They do not move them with their finger.

Ver. 5. But all their works they do for to be seen of men; they make broad
their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments. Phylacteries
were some ribans, or fringes, whereupon were drawn the words of the Law, to put
them in mind to keep the ten Commands, as is prescribed among other ceremonies,
Exodus 13. Numbers 15.38. Deuteronomy. 6.8. and here our Lord reckons up their
faults more specially: the first is, their vain oftentation of holiness, and
ambitious seeking of vain applause of men, to which end they did write the
words of the law on the borders of their garments, as if they had been all made
up of the love of the law. Doct. 1. The nature of hypocrites is to study more
to seem religious, than to be religious) to please men with appearances, rather
than to please God in truth; for, They do, says he, All to be seen of men. 2.
Hypocrites are most in affecting of ceremonial observations, and outward parts
of commanded duties, neglecting the substance; for, They make broad, says he,
their phylacteries.

Ver. 6. And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the
Synagogues.

7. And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

Their second fault, is, vain affectation of pre-eminence, and respect in all
things above other people, in all sort of conventions within doors, and
without, at feasts, in churches, in mercats, and to have stately styles of
Rabbi, Rabbi. Doct. 1. Albeit the Lord does not condemn respects and reverence
due to men, according to their callings and places, yet he condemns love, and
ambitious affectation of these respects, saying, They love the uppermost
rooms. 2. Hypocrites and vain men, least worthy of respect or honor, are most
ambitious and desirous to have respect; for, They love the first seats, the
first Salutation, and the style of Rabbi, Rabbi.

Ver. 8. But be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master eve^ Christ, and
all ye are brethren. Christ discharges such vain titles, and gives reason for
it. Doct. 1. Stately styles whereby men are not simply distinguished for order,
and for their office cause, from other men, but also are exalted over their
brethren in stately dignity (after the manner of civil or stately styles of
honor, given to men in the kingdoms of this world) do not be seem the
Ministers of Christ; therefore says he, Be not ye called Rabbi, Rabbi, for all
ye are brethren. 2. Such as take such stately styles unto them, whereby they
will seem eminent above their brethren in that same office, are injurious to
Christ, who in the church has appointed only a Ministry, and has reserved to
himself alone all stately pre-eminence; and they are injurious also to their
fellow Ministers, whom Christ has made equal in office as brethren (howsoever
natural and civil differences, for age, and other respects be kept) For one is
your Master, says he, to wit, in stately Excellency, even Christ; for all ye
are brethren.

Ver. 9. And call no man your Father upon the earth: for one is your Father
which is in heaven. Our Lord does not discharge the simple Name of Father, but
the stately exaltation of any man under this Name, to the prejudice of God's
glory, and teaches us that we should not put too high an estimation upon any
man, for whatsoever gifts is in him, or good received from him: because this
does derogate unto the glory of God, when we attribute too much unto men; for
all the glory of father-hood, and derivation of any good thing towords us,
ought to be given unto God alone; for, One is your Father, that is in heaven,
says he.

Ver. 10. Neither be ye called Masters: for one is your Master, even Christ.
From this, learn, 1. That we are very ready to ascribe something unto our
selves, if by any gifts given unto us, any should profit or be informed;
therefore, as before he said, Be not called Rabbi; so here again, he says the
second time, Be not called Master: The meaning is, arrogate to your selves no
more then is the creatures due, when you teach others by Gods gift bestowed
upon you; and if any do ascribe unto you any more then is due, see that ye
admit not this sacrilegious commendation; that is, Be not called Master. 2. All
the authority of teaching, and all the light in the Teacher, and all the
success of teaching, does slow from the powerful Teacher Christ; for, One is
your Master, even Christ: and from him it is taken sacrilegiously, whatsoever
is given unto the creature, above the place of his instrument.

Ver. 11. But he that is greatest among you, shall be your servant. Here he
teaches the right strife for greatness, and discharges prelacy. Doct. The
Majority of the Ministers in the Church, stands not in the exalting of any
man with higher power over the rest, but in true humility and subjection of a
man unto his brethren, and being ready to serve them, for promoving the work of
God in their hands; therefore says he, He that is greatest among you, let him
be your servant.

Ver. 12. And whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased, and he that
shall humble himself, shall be exalted. This doctrine Christ does confirm by a
promise on the one hand, and a threatening on the other. Doct. 1. The more
ambitious a man shows himself, the less shall he be esteemed of by good men,
and the more shall God put contempt upon him; for, Whosoever shall exalt
himself, shall be abased. 2. The more a man in conscience of his own inlakes of
love to his brethren, and obedience unto God, shall humble himself before God
and Men, the more respect and estimation shall be put upon him; for, He that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

Ver. 13. But woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye shut up
the Kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Upon the Scribes and Pharisees Christ
denounces woe eight times, for their several vices: The first woe for hindering
the Gospel. Doct. 1. The Lords indignation is great against corrupt teachers,
and churchmen he will have more sharply handled then any other vicious
persons, saying, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees. 2. To belie our profession
is an odtous sin; Therefore says he, Woe to you hypocrites. 3. Men by nature are
exiles from Heaven, and from the grace of God offered in the gospel, but by the
right or wrong ministerial dispensation of the Word and Ordinances of God, the
door of heaven is opened or shut; You, says he, shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against men. 4. It is a fearful challenge against corrupt teachers, that they
do not come to Christ themselves, and also do divert others to their power, by
their ill example or doctrine; This is it he says, You neither go in your
selves, nor suffer others to go in.

Verse 14. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye devour
widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive
the greater damnation. A second woe is, for their avarice. Doct. 1. As ambition
and hypocrisy go together, so also ambition and avarice go together; Therefore
says he, You hypocrites devour widows houses. 2. The simple and ignorant
helpless souls are the prey of corrupt churchmen, such as are Widows
houses. 3. It is no new thing that corrupt churchmen find out shifts to catch
peoples goods, as by satisfactions, merits, indulgences, absolution,
soul-masses, etc. for, You devour widows houses. 4. The most cursed s^^ift
that can be devised, may be cloaked with the pretense of Religion; Therefore
says he, For a pretense they make long prayers. 5. The fairer pretense (...)
put upon a wicked course, or a wicked work, the sin is the greater, and the
punishment shall be the greater also; This is it he says, Therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation.

Ver. 15. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye compass sea
and land to make one profesi^e, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more
the child of hell then your selves. The third woe is, for their blind zeal, to
poison others with their errors, to make them proselytes, or to draw them to
their sect. Doct. 1. Seducers will be more busy to draw others to their
error, then Teachers of the Truth use to be diligent for drawing others to the
truth; Ye compass, says he, sea and land to make a proselyte. 2. The more
pains in false zeal, and the more speed a man uses in preverting othe^s, the
more measure of vengeance abides on him; Therefore says he, Woe unto you for
this. 3. The more a man do profit in the school of error and superstition,
the more he is the child of hell and Satan, for the original of errors is from
hell, and Satan is the father of error, superstition, and heresy, Ye make him
the child of hell, says he. 4. Young pro^^ytes, who drink in superstition at
the persuasion of learned seducers, are far more taken with the false opinions,
and more addicted to these false superstitions, then their teachers are
conceiving them to be truth; when these old deceivers do but laugh to see the
credulity of the deluded ^ this is it he says, You make them twofold more the
children of hell then your selves, to wit in respect of believing these errors
which you teach them, for in other respects the deceivers were the elder sons
of Satan.

Verse 16. Woe unto you ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by
the Temple, it is nothing: but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the Temple,
he is a debtor. The fourth woe is, for their erroneous doctrine, and being blind
guides, evidenced in their dispensing with oaths, and taking of the Name of God
in vain, esteeming nothing of an oath made by the temple, and making the oath
sworn by the gold of the temple, obligatory, ver. 16, for the teaching of (...)
error, he condemns them as blind fools, verse 17. ^he like fault he finds
with them, in their preferring an oath made by the gift on the altar, above an
oath made by the altar, verse 18. for which he reproves them as blind fools,
ver. 19. and corrects their error, to verse 23. Hence learn. 1. Corrupt
churh-men do corrupt Religion also, and mislead the people fearfully; they
become blind guides, whose office requires that they should be wise, and
Seeing-guides; in which case, Woe to the People, but chiefly Woe to the blind
guides. 2. Swearing by the creature is no new sin, for these corrupt hypocrites
did foster swearing by the creatures, as by the temple, altar, gold, and gifts.
3. Corrupt churchmen make things to be sin or no sin, as it serves their
purpose; as here they made an oath by the Temple to be none, and an oath by the
Gold of the temple to oblige. 4. To make light of an oath by the creature, as
not obligatory, does open a door to superstition and perjury: for to swear by
the temple, they said, it was nothing, and Christ asks, Whether is greater,
the gold, or the Temple which sanctifies the gold?

Ver. 17. Ye fools, and blind: for whether is greater the gold, or the temple
that sanctifies the gold? The Lord rebukes them sharply for this their
corrupt doctrine. Doct. 1. When men depart from the rule of Gods Word, in
determining of sin, they prove themselves foolish and blind; Therefore Christ
calls them, Ye fools and blind. 2. As any thing draws more near unto Goo
in relation of service, so is it in a higher degree more holy, to wit, by way
of consecration and use: for the temple that signified Christ and his church,
is more holy then the gold which signified the gifts of Christ. 3. Superstition
and error blindes the mind, and besots the heart; for he says, Ye fools and
blind.

Verse 18. And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing: but whosoever
swears by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.

19 Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater the gift, or the altar that
sanctifies the gift?

20. Whosoever therefore shall swear by the altar, swears by it, and by all things
thereon.

21 And whosoever shall swear by the temple, swears by it, and by him that
dwells therein.

^^. And he that shall swear by heaven, swears by the throne of Go^, ^id by
him that sits thereon.

Our Lord goes on to tell more of their corrupt doctrine: Hence learn, That he
that swears by the creature, whether he intend to swear by God or not;
swears indirectly by God the Creator also, because the creature has nothing
but from God, and as it is his creature; for says Christ, He that swears by
the Temple or Heaven, swears by him that dwell^th therein, etc. Such oaths
are not allowed any way here, but a double fault is taxed in the Pharisees;
first, that they taught men to swear by the creatures; next, that they made
some of such oaths not obligatory, and some of them obligatory, as they thought
fit.

Verse 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye pay tithe of
mint, and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the
other undone. The fifth woe is, for their ostentation of precise keeping of the
Law in the least things, while in the mean tim^ they despised the Law in the
greatest duties. Doct. 1. It is no new thing for hypocrites to make a business
about small matters, and in the mean time to reject the most weighty duties; for
the Pharisees, They tithed annise, and omitted mercy. The discharge of greater
duties, do not liberate a man from his obligation to do the smallest duties,
but one authority obliges unto both; for, These ought ye to have done, and not
left the other undone, says Christ.

Ver. 24 Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. For this
their practice he upbraideth them, as before. Doct. 1. The preciseness of
hypocrites is no less ridiculous, then if a man should make nice to swallow a
midge or a smaller matter, and not stand to swallow down a greater matter, as
it were an horse or an camel; Ye strain at a gnat, says he. 2. Such as take
upon them to teach others the way to heaven, had need to know it well
themselves; for it is a fearful charge to be found blind guides.

Ver. 25. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye make clean the
outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and
excess.

26. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and
platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

The sixth woe is, for pretending great holiness in eating of their meat, and
not standing with how great iniquity they did conquer and purchase their meat:
neither how they did abuse their meat in superfluity. Doct. 1. Such as get
their meat by extortion, and use it intemperately unto excess, can never
sanctify their table, whatsoever ceremonies they use: for the saying Grace at
meat by such men, is no better then if a man should wash the outside of the cup
and platter, and eat of the filthiness of the inside; They make clean the
outside, says Christ. 2. The way to eat our bread with Gods blessing, is to
sanctify our hands in our conquering, and our hearts in a wise and moderate
using the creatures, for a right end; and so our feeding shall be sanctified;
Therefore says he, Cleanse first that which is within the cup.

Ver. 27. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye are like unto
whited sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full
of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.

28. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are
full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

A seventh woe, for their deceiving of the people with the appearance of
holiness, when there were nothing such in them. Doct. 1. Hypocrites may carry
their wickedness so fai^^, as men may be deceived: for they may seem very
beautiful outwardly, when inwardly they are filthy, Like tombs plaistred
without, and full of rottenness within. 2. God will not be deceived by
hypocrites, he will find them out, and in his time will decipher them to the
world, and will pour out wrath on them; for, Woe to you, says Christ.

Ver. 29. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because ye build the
tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous.

30. And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have
been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets.

The eighth woe is, for their pretending to honor the Saints departed, and in
the mean time they were injurious to the living; yea, they were about to
murder Christ himself. Doct. 1. The Lords respect is great unto his servants,
for even after their death, he will clear their innocence and holy
conversation, and make the posterity acknowledge them for such; as here, To
build the Sepulchers of the Prophets. 2. The world do love dead Prophets better
then the living: for the living reprove their sin more particularly then the
dead; This is it he says, Ye build their sepulchers. 3. Such men are gross
hypocrites, who pretend to love good men, and yet do not love goodness, who
make protestation of their mind toward righteousness, upon condition that they
had such means as their Forefathers had, and yet do make no use of the means
which they have themselves: who can condemn their fathers faults, and yet
practice the same themselves; they are like unto the men, who said, If we had
been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers of the blood
of the Prophets.

Ver. 31. Wherefore ye be witness unto your selves that ye are children of
them which killed the Prophets.

32. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

Christ from the confession of the Pharisees, that they were descended of those
who slew the Prophets, and from their malignant opposing of his Gospel, with
intention to kill him, so soon as they could, does prove them to be every way
the children of these who slew the Prophets, whereupon he gives up with them,
and gives them over unto the fulfilling of their malice. Doct. 1. Christ's
enemies shall not want a witness of their malicious opposing of him, yea from
their own words and purposes, he shall bring matter of conviction against them;
their never-dying worm shall breed in their own bosom, as Christ says here,
Ye are against your selves witnesses. 2. Christ will give over desperate
enemies to their own malicious disposition, and will defy them; as here he
says, Fill ye up the measure of your fathers. 3. There is a measure set to be
filled up with the transgressions of the Lords enemies, and till this cup be
full to the lip, they shall be suffered to go on: but when this cup is full,
then the cup of Gods wrath shall be full also, and run over upon them to their
destruction; Therefore says he, Fill ye up the measure, that is, Go on, till
you kill me, as your fathers did the Prophets. 4. Sin ha^h the own height in
Kingdoms and Families, whereby Successors do add unto their predecessors sins,
before the Kingdom or Family be punished; Therefore says he, Fill up the
measure of your Fathers.

Ver. 33. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of hell? Now he condemns them, and threatens them with hell. Doct. 1. When the
Lord will reckon, he will make the wicked know their sin to their face, as here
he calls these men, Serpents, generation of vipers. 2. It is good that the
difficulty of being saved, be intimate unto the obstinate, if by any means they
can be driven to seek salvation; Therefore says he, How can ye escape? 3. The
end of Christ's enemies shall be condemnation unto hell; for, How can ye escape
the condemnation of hell? says he.

Ver. 34. Wherefore behold, I send unto you Prophets, and wise men, and
scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye
scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from city to city.

35. That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth from
the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias,
whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.

He foretells them, how he as Disposer of all things, is to proceed with
them, and to make up the process of their condemnation. Doct. 1. Our Lord in
the face of his enemies avowed himself to be God, having authority to send out
Prophets, and to bestow gifts on men. Behold, says he, I send to you Prophets.
2. Our Lord kn^w^th how his servants will be served in every place they come
unto, and what measure of sufferings each of them will meet from with the
wicked, saying, Some of them ye shall crucify. 3. The Lords servants (albeit
they know that sufferings abide them) must notwithstanding go on in their
message: for this is the fore-warning given unto his servants also, I send you
Prophets, and some of them ye shall kill, etc. 4. They who go on in the course
of any sin, do subscribe unto the sins of such as before them did follow that
sort of sin, and justly may be condemned and punished as guilty of the sin of
others, which they do app^ove; for so Christ reckons, saying, That on you may
come all the blood whom ye slew, etc. 5. The sufferers for righteousness, from
the beginning of the world, are all in the rank of Martyrs, and their
sufferings are kept in fresh remembrance, From righteous Abel, unto Zacharias,
the son of Iehojada, otherwise called Barachias, of whose slaughter is spoken,
2 Chronicles. 24.21. as here appears. 6. Raging persecuters look neither to place
nor person, nor consequence of their cruelty, but as blind beasts do follow
forth their own fury; for, Betwixt the por^h and the altar was Zacharias slain.

Ver. 36. Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this
generation. Now he foretells the ruin of Jerusalem, and gives them over
till the day of judgment, at what time they should know who was the Christ,
for whom they pretended to be preparing the song, which is foretold in the
Psalm 118.26. As if he had said, I foretell you, that Jerusalem, and this
Nation shall be destroyed, and after you have killed me, you shall not see me,
till the day of judgment, when you shall be forced to acknowledge me to be the
blessed Messiah, come in the Name of the Lord, which for the present, ye will
not do, Doct. 1. The destruction of Jerusalem, and rejection of the Jews, was
foretold by Christ sundry times ere it came; for here he says, O Jerusalem,
your house is left desolate unto you. 2. It is a special motive unto
repentance to tell men of the propinquity of judgment; therefore says he, All
these things shall come on this generation.

Ver. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not? In this lamentation, our Lord is not to show what power is in men's wicked
nature to convert themselves, or to make use of the means of conversion, nor
what power there is in corrupt nature to oppose that power which God puts
forth in conversion of souls: neither is he lamenting their case, as one
unable to obtain his own desired end in the salvation of such as he intended to
save: for no reason can extract these conclusions necessarily from these
speeches; and the true sense of them is obtained without any such inferences;
for our Lord, as man, and a kindly Minister of the circumcision, moved with
humane compassion of the miseries of his native Countrymen, lets forth his
love in this lamentation and weeping, while he beholds the desperate
obstinacy of the multitude running to perdition, thereby intending to make the
reprobate, who should hear of his tender bowels, inexcusable; and to move the
Elect unto repentance by this means. Doct. 1. Our Lord, as man, in the bowels
of compassion was moved in the days of his flesh, with the misery of the most
wicked, as this lamentation shows. 2. When Christ was most moved with the
provocations of the wicked, there was no sinful perturbation in him, to make
him forget to fulfill the law of love unto his most desperate enemies;
therefore he lamenteth thus, Jerusalem, Jerusalem. 3. As often as the Lord
sends forth his Ministers with offers of mercy to sinful people, so often is
he lovingly calling them to come in unto him; so says he, As a hen gathers
her chickens, how often would I have gathered thee? 4. When the Lord is about to
save his own Elect children in the visible church, the body or the greatest
part of his people may oppose the work, and nill the work which he wills; and
albeit they be not able to impede his effectual gathering of so many as he
intends to save, ye^ may they make themselves guilty of impeding and
resisting the will of God, which they cannot overcome; therefore says he to
this sense, O Jerusalem, how often was I about to convert thy children, so many
as I had elected, by the offers of mercy, which my servants made unto thee, the
visible Kirk their Mother? And thou would not, but opposed my work so far as
thou could, in slaying the Prophets, and stoning them who were sent unto
thee, for the Elects cause who were in the midst of thee. 5. The Lord will
pursue his purpose, and renew messages till he both gain his own, and also make
the reprobate inexcusable to the full; for how often, says he, Would I have
gathered thy children, and ye would not.

Ver. 38. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. Having told the sin of
the visible Kirk there, he tells them now of their judgment. Doct. When
mercy has been often offered unto a visible church, and ^hath been rejected or
opposed, it is righteousness with God to remove his dwelling from that place,
and to take away the face of a church from it; therefore says he, Thy house
shall be left desolate unto thee, even the most glorious place shall not be
spared, but when mercy finds no place, judgment shall have place.

Verse 39. For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall
say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. Here our Lord smites
these desperate enemies with irrevocable blindness, that from that time
forward, they should never get grace to acknowledge him to be the Messiah, till
at the day of Judgment they should be forced to confess him to be the true
Christ, prophesied of in the 118. Psalm. Doct. 1. It is righteousness with
Christ to smite them with judicial blindness, who refuse obstinately to
acknowledge him, when he offers himself unto them; as here he says, Ye shall
not see me henceforth, that is, You shall not perceive me to be the Messiah;
for otherwise bodily they did see him, and did crucify him, but they saw not
who he was; for had they known, they would not have crucified the God of glory.
2. At last, Christ's most cruel enemies shall see, and know, and acknowledge
him to be that blessed Messiah; for all knees shall bow to him, and all tongues
shall confess to him, and his adversaries among the rest shall say, Now we see
that Jesus is the blessed Son of God, and the true Lamb of God, Hills and
Mountains fall on us, and hide us from the wrath of the Lamb, yonder is the
blessed Savior, Who came in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. XXIV.
Our Lord having told that the Temple shall be destroyed, the disciples ask of
the time thereof, and of the signs of his coming, to verse. 4. For answer, He
forewarneth them of trial and persecution, wherein all his disciples had need
to beware, least they should be deceived: and shows the signs of the utter
destruction of Jerusalem, to verse. 23. and again teaches them, that the chief
care of his disciples should be, that they be not deceived with false Religion,
and false Christ's, wherein the danger was to be great, even until his second
coming, when he should gather all his Elect unto him, verse 32. As for the time
of the destruction of Jerusalem, he tells, that the forerunners and coming of
it should be in their own days, verse. 36. But the time of the day of
universal Judgment, and of his second coming was a secret, and should come as
the Flood unexpected, verse. 42. and therefore that it was the Disciples part to
watch, that they might be found in peace, following their calling, least wrath
should fall on them.

Ver. 1. ANd Jesus went out, and departed from the temple; and his disciples
came to him for to show him the buildings of the Temple.
THe Disciples moved at Christ's words, do regrate in a manner the destruction
of such buildings. Doct. 1. It is a hard thing to yield our minds unto the
Lord, when he does threaten to overthrow such things as we do esteem much of in
the world, as to destroy potent people, to plague a visible Church, and such
like; as here, The disciples show to him the building of the Temple, as it were
pitying that it should be destroyed.

Ve. 2. And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? verily I say
unto you, there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be
thrown down. Because our Lord was purposed by casting down the temple of
Jerusalem, to punish the peoples carnal confidence in it, and their contempt of
the Gospel, and withal to remove the Theater of the Jewish ceremonies, and the
Shadows of the Leviticall Law, therefore he renews the threatening. Doct. 1.
The outward glory of buildings shall not save them from destruction, when they
are abused, as here is threatened, There shall not be left one stone upon
another. 2. The outward glory of worldly things, which bear much bulk in men's
eyes, is little esteemed of by Christ; for the disciples show the glory of the
temple unto him, ver. 1. and here he shows it to them again, saying, See ye
not all these things? and he tells them, That not a stone shall be left upon
another.

Verse. 3. And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him
privately, saying, Tell us, When shall these things be? and what shall be the
signs of thy coming, and of the end of the world? The disciples understanding
that the Temple should be destroyed, ask some questions. Doct. Men are more
curious to know things hid in Gods secret counsel, then to make use of what is
revealed; as the disciples here, who asked, When shall these things be? when a
more useful question had been more expedient.

Ver. 4. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive
you. Our Lord answers so, as his disciples might be best edi^^ed. Doct. 1.
The Lords words serve not to satifie his peoples curiosity, but for their
instruction and utility, as here we see. 2. It is better for us to guard
against the hazard wherein we may be, before the worlds end, than to be curious
about the time when it shall end: therefore says Christ, Take heed that no man
deceive you. 3. The special danger of the church is from errors, and false
doctrine, whereby their faith may be hurt; against this should we mainely
watch, as Christ here wa^neth, Take heed that no man deceive you.

Ver. 5. For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ: and shall deceive
many To the end his disciples not only then living, but in all ages following,
should guard themselves against al sorts of temptations unto the end of the
world, he warns them of five or six sorts of temptations, or exercises
abiding them. Doct. 1. The first sort of exercise of the church, is, by sects
and heresies, the Lord will suffe^ blasphemies and Heresies to arise in the
visible church, for the punishing of some, and trial of othe^s; for, Many shall
come in my name, s^ith he, that is, Taking on the name proper to me, and
pretending themselves to be Christ. 2. When the only one true Christ is not
received, It is justice that many false pretended Christ's should come, and
deceive them who will not receive the truth in love; Therefore he forewarneth,
That they shall deceive many. 3. The impudency of the devil, and the delusion
of Heretics is admirable, that he dare suggest, and they dare avow themselves
to be Christ; yet such shall be, and shall dare to say, I am Christ. 4. The
prevailing of deceivers with the multitude (which is more ready to believe lies
than truth) should make the Lords People the more circumspect; therefore says
he, Ta^e heed, for many shall come etc.

Ver. 6. And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars: see that ye be not
troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.

7. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there
shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in diverse places.

8. All these are the beginning of sorrows.

Another sort of the temptations of the church is the terror of wars. Doct. 1.
If wars fall out about Religion and the gospel, it is no small trial;
therefore he tells us, Ye shall hear of wars. 2. We must in such times keep
fast the faith, and thereby by study to keep our hearts in peace, See, says
he, That ye be not troubled. 3. One of the reasons quieting our minds, when
wars and rumors of wars (wherein we are involved) are heard of; is, the Lord's
decree so to plague the World, and exercise us; therefore says he, These
things must be. 4. When we have digested one trouble, we must not think to
pass so, but must expect greater troubles, and pray for constant patience;
for, The end is not yet, says he. 5. It is decreed in heaven to punish the
wickedness of the World, and specially the contempt of the Gospel, by
provoking Kingdoms and Nations one against another, and to plague all by
famine, and pestilence, and earthquakes in diverse places; for it is foretold,
That Nation shall rise against Nation, etc. 6. When such evils befall Nations
in God's displeasure for their sins, and specially for abusing the Gospel, it
is but an earnest, and a beginning of the sorrows which God will bring at
length upon this wicked World; for, All these are the beginning of sorrows.

Ver. 9. Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you,
and ye shall be hated of all Nations for my Names sake. The third sort of the
exercise of Christ's Disciples, is, Persecution, imprisonment, and slaughter.
Doct. 1. Christians must resolve for the Gospel to lose their life; for, says
he, They shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you. 2. Christ's
disciples need not to look for love of this World, but rather must expect to be
hated wherever they shall come, albeit there were no other cause but the
profession of Christ's Name, and his Truth; for, Ye shall be bated of al
Nations for my Names sake, says he.

Ver. 10. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray ou^ another, and
shall hate one another. The fourth temptation, or fourth sort of exercise of
Christ's Disciples, is the apostasy of professors, when persecution arises
for the Gospel. Doct. 1. This is a narrow trial, when many who ran fast in
profession with prosp^rity, do turn their back on Christ when trouble comes;
yet it must come to pass; for, Then, says he, shall ma^y be offended; that
is, Stumble at Christ's Cross, and forsake the true Religion. 2. Such
professors as make apostasy from true Religion, shall be the chief
adversaries of the true members of the Church, Traitors and Enemies; for of
Professors it is said, They shall betray and hate one another.

Ver. 11. And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. The fifth
temptation, or fifth sort of exercise, is, The arising of many false Teachers
within the Church, who shall brangle the faith of the Godly, and deceive many.
Doct. 1. Christians may be tempted to defection by their own Teachers, who ere
people be aware, may make defection themselves, and then fall to reduce the
people; for it is said, Many false prophets shall arise. 2. This sort of
temptation is ready to prevail with people, and to draw such away whom open
persecution could not drive from the truth; for it is said, They shall deceive
many; Because disputation and opposition against the Truth, (for which we are
called to suffer) by our own Teachers, when they begin to swerve from the
Truth, is a harder onset against a man's faith, than when fire and sword is
threatened, in the case of a cause clear, and not questioned by our Teachers.

Ver. 12. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.
The sixth temptation, or sort of exercise, is, That the godly shall be
cold-rise in love one toward another, and not find respect and credit readily
one of another, and that because they shall see iniquity and hypocrisy so
abound in the visible Church, as one shall suspect another, and not dare to
trust one another; and so shall not let forth their love one toward another,
save very coldly, as it comes to pass in the case of mutual suspicion one of
another. Doct. 1. Honest men do suffer much in their estimation, when the
hypocrisy of hypocrites is discovered; for iniquity abounding, breeds
mutual suspicion of one another sincerity, a man not knowing whom to trust,
when by out-breaking of much iniquity he finds many to be false. 2. When
abounding iniquity breeds mutual jealousy, as estimation and confidence
mutual is weakened, so is mutual love diminished; Therefore says he, Because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. 3. This is a sore
trial, when beside the common adversary, the Godly do grow suspicious one of
another, and dare not trust one another, and so do grow cold in their love to
one another; it is a sore trial, I say, When iniquity abounds, and love
decreaseth.

Ver. 13. But he that shall endure to the end, the same shall he saved. After
these temptations thus in order set before us, our Lord requires constancy in
the Faith, notwithstanding of them all. Doct. 1. All these temptations must be
striven against, and overcome by them who purpose to go to Heaven; for, He that
endures to the end, shall be saved. 2. Whosoever for any of these temptations,
or any other like, shall fall off from the Faith, and following of Jesus, he
cannot be saved; for, Only he that endures to the end, shall be saved; no
other has the promise.

Ver. 14. And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world,
for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come. Our Lord
comfort his Disciples, and shows, that notwithstanding of all these
impediments, the Gospel should be preached. Doct. 1. Whatsoever persecution,
heresies, or offenses shall come, the Lord will have his Gospel going on to be
proclaimed in the midst of wars, famine, pestilence, heresies, etc. for this
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached and spread abroad in all the world in
the midst of impediments, till it go along all places of the world, whither
Christ has appointed to send it. 2. The preaching of the Gospel, where ever it
comes, proves a Testimony to them to whom it comes, one way or other; that
is, A testimony either of their decreed blessedness, if they receive it; or of
their decreed perdition, if they do reject it, or do not believe it; for, It
shall be preached for a testimony unto all nations. 3. Till the Gospel be
preached unto all Nations, so far as God has appointed, and till he have ended
his work, by preaching thereof, the end of the World shall not be; but so soon
as the Lords Work by the Gospel is ended in the World, Then shall the end come.

Ver. 15. When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy place, (whosoever reads, let him
understand.) Christ gives his Disciples some satisfaction to their question
about the signs of the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the
Temple; and to this end he leads into the Prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 9. ver.
29. to let them know that after the Messiah should be slain, the City and
Temple should be destroyed: when therefore they should see the Armies of the
Gentiles, (which were abomination to the Jews) to compass about Jerusalem, as
is expounded, Luke 21.20. he forbids them to think that the Siege should be
raised, or the City should escape, as it had done in former times; for God had
destinate the City and the Temple at that time to be ruined, as the diligent
Reader of Daniel might perceive. Doct. 1. God has instruments at his pleasure
to destroy strongest Cities, and can make these whom men abhor most, to be the
instrument of their destruction; for, The abomination of desolation, the Armies
of the Gentiles are at his call. 2. Lest the faithful should still dote upon
the ceremonies of the Law, and figurative shadows, after the Messiah's coming,
it was very needful, that the City and Temple both, whereunto the sacrifices
and chief ceremonies were astricted, should be destroyed and abolished, as the
Prophet Daniel has foretold. 3. For understanding of the Word of God, when it
is read, careful attention, and all means of knowledge must be used; Therefore
says he, Let him that reads understand.

Ver. 16. Then let them which be in Judea, flee unto the mountains.

17. Let him which is on the house top, not come down to take ^^y thing out of
his house.

18. Neither let him which is in the field, return back to take his clothes.

19. And woe unto them that are with child, and to them which give suck in those
days.

20. But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the
Sabbath Day:

21. For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning
of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.

22. And except those days shall be shortened, there should no flesh be saved:
but for the Elects sake those days shall be shortened.

That they might know how certain and sudden the overthrow of Jerusalem should
be, our Lord gives advertisement, that all the speed any man could make,
should be little enough; for escaping whereof he gives seven signs. The first
is, No place in the Country should be safe, where the soldier might march,
and that to fly to the mountains was the fittest, ver. 16. Sign 2. He who was
in the town, should make him for death, and not think to escape by flying, ver.
17, Sign 3. It should not be fit for any man in the field, and out of the
town, to return to the city, to take with him any provision for the flight, but
should do well to fly, as he might flee for his life, ver. 18. Sign 4. Such
as were with child in the country, and giving suck in that doleful time,
should be very miserable, and full of woe, being unable to fly so hastily as
the need required, verse. 19. Sign ^. It should be great mercy, if such as got
occasion to fly, might so fly, as they might rest in a foul day, (when the
unseasonablenesse of the weather might make the flight more grievous) and might
rest on the Sabbath, when to be forced to go a long journey for fear of their
life, might augment the^e griest, ver. 20. Sign 6. Never was, nor ever should
be in any war such horrible tribulation, as God should send at the destruction
of Jerusalem, ver. 21. Sign 7. The extremity of trouble should be such, that if
God should not shorten the tribulation of those days, and restrain the fury of
the Romans, against the rebellious Jews, the elect Seed of that Nation should
be rooted out, so that no memory of a Jew might remain thereafter; but because
God was to reserve an elect Seed after the rejection of the multitude,
therefore the Lord should shorten the days of wrath against the Jewish Nation,
ver. 22. Doct. 1. When the Lord is to pour out his wrath on a place, if all
circumstances being considered, a man shall find it both lawful and possible
to withdraw himself from that place, it is wisdom to be gone; for, Let them
who be in Judea, flee unto the mountains, is as much as, it shall be safer for
them in this time, to see for their own life by flight, then to dream of
resisting or escaping Gods judgment in that place. 2. If the judgment overtake
a man so suddenly, as there is no time nor means given to escape, then let men
lay by all thought of worldly goods, and bestow their minds and time on that
which is most needful, that is, for preparation unto death; Therefore says
he, He that is ^^ the House ^^p, let him not come down. 3. In such case if a
man with the loss of all he has, can have his life for a prey, he fares
well; for, Christ says in this case, He that is in the field, let him not
return. 4. In the time of general calamities, Gods ordinary benefits make a
man more miserable then if he wanted them; as children, riches, honor, when
they must now be gone, and can give no more comfort unto us, then are they the
matter of our woe; for at such a ^^me says he, Woe unto them that are with
child, etc. that is, They shall be so much the more miserable; for this W^ is
pronounced by way of Prophecy, and not denounced by way of indignation against
women with child, more then others. ^. Troubles may be mitigated by prayer unto
God, who can dispose of means of delivery, and can mix the cup of our grief, so
as our misery may be the more comportable; Therefore says he, Pray that your
flight be not in Winter. 6. Gods judgments upon the despisers of the Gospel,
and rejecter^ of mercy offered in Christ, are most severe; Therefore the
destruction of Jerusalem was of all calamities that ever came upon a people
most lamentable, for as the common history reports, a million of people
perished in the Siege, in a most fearful manner of destruction, the Body of
the Land being gathered together in it at the solemnity of the Passover; and
about fourscore and seventen thousand were made slaves, Such tribulation as was
not since the beginning of the world. 7. In most confused and calamitous times
the Lord has a care of his own Elect, and remembers mercy toward them in the
midst of wrath; For the Elects cause, says he, these days shall be short^ed.

Ver. 23. Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there*
believe it no^. Our Lord returns to direct his Disciples and the Church to
beware of whatsoever might destroy their souls, as the main thing which
concerned them to take heed unto. Doct. 1. As the main danger of the Church is
from Seducers, who shall strive to divert men from the true Christ, so their
main care should be to see that their faith misearry not; Therefore says
Christ, Believe it not, if another Christ be offered unto you. 2. As at all
times, so chiefly in times of trouble, Satan studies to delude men with
pretenses of Saviors and salvation, which are not real, because in time of
trouble men are most ready to receive anything, which does promise relief or
release, and so to embrace delusions in stead of divine help: Therefore it is
said, Then (that is, when the trouble is great) will it be said, Lo, here is
Christ. 3. After our Lords assention, neither is another Christ to be expected,
nor the true Christ to be found bodily and locally present in any place on the
earth; for, If any man shall say, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not*
so says Christ himself.

Ver. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very Elec^. Why we should be wary, he gives a reason from the
certain danger which the multitude of deceivers should bring, Doct. 1. It is
possible that false deceivers pretending themselves to be Christ, and false
prophets, drawing men away from the true Christ, may make show of great signs
and wonders, for so does Christ foretell. 2. Whosoever do teach false doctrine,
and not consonant unto the truth of scriptures, their wonders are lying
wonders, and not to believed; Therefore says he, Believe them not. 3. The power
of delusion is great and may prevail with any who is secure, and watches not;
for, They shall deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. 4. The elect
cannot altogether be seduced, and drawn away from the true Christ: because of
the power of him who has called them, but for any power in themselves they
might be seduced; for, False prophets shall deceive [if it were possible] the
very elect, but divine power does guard them against delusions of Satan, and
false prophets, that they shall not always be deceived.

Ver. 25. Behold, I have told you before. The Lord commands to make use of
the warning. Doct. 1. The Lords forewarning of the danger from false prophets,
should stir up all to be the more watchful, and it shall make men
inexcusable, if they shall be seduced; for, Behold, I have told you before,
says he. 2. The doctrine of election does not give warrant unto security, but
should be made use of for diligence and watchfulness; therefore says he,
Behold, I have told you; for God has decreed, as to save the Elect, so to save
them by his own means. 3. This forewarning shows, that albeit the elect shall
not bealtogether, and without recovery deceived, yet they may be so far
mistaken, as it had been good they had watched; much sin and misery may befall a
man by not watching, albeit at length he may be brought forth of it; for,
Behold, I have told you before, makes the Lord free of what ill
unwatchfulnesse may let in.

Ver. 26. Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert,
go not forth: behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it not. As before,
ver. 23. So here again Christ bids them beware to believe his bodily local
presence in the earth, after his Ascension, until the day of judgment. Doct.
1. Such a Christ as is not the Son of Abraham, the Son of David; such a one as
is not described to us in the scriptures, is not to be looked upon, nor
believed, nor esteemed of; such a Christ as is said to be locally present in
the earth after Christ's Ascension, a man should not go unto, nor believe any
speech of such a Christ, as shall be said to be in his body in the desert, or in
a chamber, or in a box, or in a wafer-cake, Lo here, lo there, or such like, as
the Papists have their Christ, Believe it not, says Christ himself.

Ver. 27. For as the lightning comes out of the east, and shines even unto
the west: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. He gives a reason why
such imaginations of his being on the earth in his body, is not to be believed.
Doct. after Christ's Ascension no other bodily presence of Christ, or coming
into the World is to be believed, save his second coming in glory, which shall
be on a sudden, (when men are not looking for it^) and in such evidence of
glory, that all the World from the East to the West, shall be made witnesses of
it; for, As the lightning, so shall the coming of the Son of man be, says
Christ.

Ver. 28. For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered
together. He meets with an objection, if he come in the East, or in the West,
how shall those Elect persons come unto him who shall be so far removed from
that place, as is the West from the East? he answers, and teaches, that as
the eagles from all quarters are shortly gathered unto the place where the
carcass is* so shall all the Elect be swiftly gathered together to the place
where Christ shall show his bodily presence, at his second coming to judgment.
Doct. We need not trouble our selves, about the swift dispatch of the last
judgment, how or in what place of the World the convocation of the Elect shall
be; this is sufficient, We shall meet with Christ where he shall be; for, Where
the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together.

Ver. 29. Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the sun be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. For further satisfaction
of his Disciples, Our Lord gives six signs of his second coming. Doct. 1. All
the time before the second coming of our Lord, (whatsoever comforts may be
mixed) shall be days of tribulation, and not so free of the miseries of this
life, as some do dream: for here he tells us the second coming of our Lord
shall be immediately after the tribulation of these days are ended, and brought
toward a period. 2. When all the Churches Exercises, all her Tribulations and
warfare are accomplished, then shall the comforter Jesus Christ come, to give
full refreshment immediately. 3. Yet shall his coming be in a terrible manner
to the world, with such an alteration made upon the creatures, being (now all
of them to be changed from the estate of vanity whereunto they are subject)
that Sun, Moon, and Stars, obscured by the glory of Christ, shall no more be
able to give comfort unto men, not to show forth their glory, as before, but
shall cease from their service, and lose their power, expressed here by,
Darkning, not giving light, falling from heaven, and shaking of heaven, as a
tree that casts her fruit; for so must it be ere they be made new; this is
the first sign of his coming.

Ver. 30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. The second sign or
evidence of Christ's coming, i^ the glorious shining of Christ's Person
approaching, called the sign of the Son of Man, because as the light of the
Sun approaching, is a sign of the present appearing, or rising of the Sun, so
shall the shining glory of Christ's approaching, which is more bright than the
Sun, Acts 26.13, 14. be a sign of his present appearing; what other sign of
the Son of Man beside this may be, we leave it till the time come of his
revealing of it. Doct. 1. Christ shall be seen visible Judge of quick and dead
at the last day, in his humane nature; (...) The sign of the Son of Man,
bodily descending, shall appear in heaven. The third sign of Christ's coming,
is, the mourning of all people, it being now manifest that the day of judgment
is come, the penitent shall fall on mourning and lamenting the^^ sins with a
godly sorrow, that they may be fitted for the promised consolation of wiping
all tears from the^ eyes, and the wicked shall fall on weeping for the misery
co^ing on them presently, by the sentence of their Judge. Doct. 1. Such as have
mocked at the day of judgment, and s^offed at piety, and rejected or abused
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall then mourn a great mourning, All the tribes
of the earth shall mourn. The fourth sign of his coming, is, the manifestation
of his bodily down-coming in the clouds, with power and great glory. Doct.
Howsoever Christ's first coming was in much infirmity, because he was to suffer
for us; yet his second coming being to judgment and to reward all according to
their works, as here i^ said, Shall be with power and glory.

Ver. 31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and
they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other. The fifth sign, There shall be a great sound of a
trumpet, as it were summoning all to compear before the Tribunal of Christ,
unto judgment, which teaches us, That the Day of Judgment shall be no less
terrible th^n the Day of Promulgation of the Law upon Mount Sinai; as for other
reasons, so for this, that as there was an audible Trumpet, which sounded at
the giving out of the Law, so (...) there be an audible Sound of a Trumpet at
the Day of judging Men for transgressing the Law. The sixth sign or evidence
of Christ's coming is, That the Elect being raised from death, or in stead of
death changed from this mortal life unto the estate of Immortality, the Angels
shall be set on work to gather them from all the quarters of the earth, whence
the winds do blow, or from the utmost pa^e^ of the earth, where the sight of
the Heavens have an end. Doct. Albet the Elect be now fat scattered one from
another in sundry respects, yet then shall they all meet together, not one shall
be in lacking; for the Angels shall gather Christ's Elect in unto him from one
end of heaven unto another.

Ver. 32. Now learn a parable of the fig-tree^ When (...) branch is ^et tender,
and puts forth leaves; ye know that Summer is high.

33. So likewise ye, when ye shall see all t^^^e things, know was it is near
even at the doors.

34. Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass, will all these
things be fulfilled.

35. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

After he has given the signs of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of his own
second coming, he confirmed them in the certainty of the coming of both, and
draws all this doctrine to good use: and first, he certifie^h them of the
destruction of the Temple under the parable of a fig tree; that when the
fig tree begins to bud, Summer is near. So when they should see the Jews
d^ting on false Christ's, heark^^ing to false prophets, persecuting the
preachers of the Gospel, growing tumultuous, and seditious, under hopes of a
bodily liberation from the yoke of the Romans, rumors of wars arising, Armies
coming in upon Judea, then let them persuade themselves, says he, When these
signs should appear, judgment was at the door upon that Nation, and that both
these signs, and the destruction of Jerusalem with the Temple, should all come
to pass in the days of them that were then living, verse. 33, 34, and he
forbids them to doubt hereof, because his words were more firm then heaven
or earth, verse. 35. And so much for the destruction of the Temple and the
signs and time thereof. Doct. 1. When we see some part of the truth of God come
to pass in our sight, it should help us to believe, and expect the fulfilling
of the rest: as, When we see the trees bud, we know that Summer is near. 2. It
is hard to our misbeleeving hearts to give that credit to Christ's words whereof
they are worthy: but by so much more is our Lords love to us, and care of us to
be praised and admired, that he by so many means goes about to confirm and
persuade us; therefore says he, Verily I say unto you, etc. 3. Whatsoever
Christ does say, shall be, or shall not be; his word is more firm then the
Fabric of heaven and earth; for these shall be altered, but the Lords word is
solid and endures for ever: Heaven and earth shall pass rather says, he, etc.

Ver. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the Angels in
heaven, but my Father only. Concerning the precise time of his second coming,
he says, that neither man nor Angel knows, but only the Father, whereby he
does not exclude the rest of the persons of the Godhead, but only the
creatures. Doct. 1. The peremptory time of the day of judgment and keeps it
to himself secret, and will not have it particularly known, and therefore it
should not be narrowly pryed into; for, Of this day and hour knows no man,
etc. 2. All things are not revealed, neither to the Angels nor to men, but so
much at may edify the Church, and as concerns us to know; for, My Father
only knows, says he.

Ver. 37. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of
man be.

38. For as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into
the Ark.

39. And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away: so also
shall, the coming of the Son of man be.

Our Lord draws this doctrine unto use, to stir us up unto watchfulness, and
to this end he sets before us seven motives: the first motive is, There is
no small hazard in case men be sound secure and not watching when Christ
comes, therefore watchfulness is necessary. Doct. 1. It is safer to make
ready for the day of judgment, and to watch lest we be surprised, then to be
curious to know the particular time of it; for As, the days of Noah were, etc.
2. As the old world did not believe judgment coming, albeit forewarned by
Noah, that it was coming, so fares ^^ with the world, and will be so with the
multitude of the world, till the day of judgment; for, As in the days of Noah.
3. When men believe not things concerning the day of judgment and another
life, no wonder they be given over unto, and drowned in the matters of this
life; for, They were eating, etc. that is, This and the like was al their care.
4. Whatsoever truth men do not believe when it is told them, that they do not
rightly know, though they conceive the meaning of the word told them; for it is
said, They knew not. 5. Who so believe not judgment when it is threatened, shall
feel judgment and be taken away with it, when it comes; for, The flood came
and took them all away.

Ver. 40. Then shall two be in the field, the one shall be taken and the other
left.

41. Two women shall be grinding at the mil, the one shall be taken and the other
left.

This second motive of watchfulness, teaching that at the day of judgment,
they who have lived in near fellowship, shall be shed one from another; as for
example, they who had been joined in one work, Some in the field, some in the
mi^. 2. The meanest degree of people shall be taken notice of, Even women,
laborers in the field, grinding at the mill. 3. Judgment shall pass
exceeding exactly, to take one and leave another, to pull up one to meet Christ
in the clouds, and leave another to be punished with the damned; Therefore
watchfulness is necessary.

Ver. 42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come. The
third motive teaching us, That the Lord has of set purpose kept from our
knowledge the time when Christ shall come; Therefore all should watch and be
ready, come when he will.

Verse. 43. But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in what
watch the theif would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered
his house to be broken up. The fourth motive, Set down in an example, teaching
us in sense thus much, if men will watch for avoiding of temporal
inconveniences, much more should Christ's Disciples watch to eschew eternal
destruction: and if they do^ not watch, then the worlds diligence in worldly
things, will condemn their negligence in spiritual things.

Ver. 44. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as you think not, the
Son of man comes. A fifth motive, Watchfulness makes a man ready, albeit the
Lord shall come in an hour when men think not; Therefore watch ye, that you may
be ready. Doct. The solid apprehending of the certainty of the Lords coming,
and of the uncertainty of the time, is a nomble means to set us on our watch,
and to make our selves ready; for, In such an hour as ye think not he shall
come.

Verse. 45. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made
ruler over his household, to give them mea^ in due season?

46. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.

A sixth motive, especially sorting to stir up Ministers to be watchful in
their calling, as every man in his calling, so namely a Minister, (who is
sa^^-over the Lords people as a Steward to give the children the bread of life
in due season) shall be blessed, if he be faithful, and found at his work, when
Christ comes: Therefore should every one watch, and the Minister in special,
that he may be found diligence in his calling, when his Master comes. Doct. 1.
The greatest honor which a man can do to his servant in this world, is but a
shadow, to show forth what the Lord will bestow on his faithful servants in
the world to come; this is it which he says, He shall make him ruler over all
his goods; that is, He shall put honor upon him. 2. The so^^ of; service and
trust which is put upon a Minister of the Gospel is very high, and the
happiness of a faithful and ^i^e Minister is very great; for, Who then is a
faithful and wise servant, etc. says he.

Ver. 47. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his
goods.

48. But if that evil servant shall say in his bear (...) Lord delayeth his
coming.

49. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with
the drunken.

The seventh and last motive, looking specially unto Ministers. If any man, and
especially a Minister, do not watch ado the work entrusted unto him, he shall
be destroyed ^^rfully at the Lords coming: Therefore it is necessary a watch
for the Lords coming. And here we have the portrait of an evil servant, and
namely of an unfaithful Minister: first, he has an evil heart of
mis-beliefe, he believes not Christ's coming unto Judgment, nor the Truth
which he preacher unto others, He says in his heart, ^y Master delayeth his
coming, that is, He looks not for his coming. 2. He will not fail to malign,
envy, traduce and injure to his power, the more painful and faithful his
fellow servants be; for, He smileth his fellow servants. 3. One way or other he
strengthens i^odity, and the hands of the wicked, that they should not
repent, nor turn from their iniquity; for, (...) and drinks (...) the
drunken.

Verse. 50. The Lord of that servant shall come in ^ day; when he looks not
for him; and in an hour that he is not ^ware (...).

51. And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his perse^^ with the hypocrites
^ there shall be weeping and grashing of ^^b.

This is the judgment that shall come upon all wicked servants. Doct. 1. Such
as do not make them ready for our Lords coming, but do follow their own will
and lusts, shall find themselves miserably mis^^^en; for the good which they
enjoyed or loved to have, shall be taken from them; and the evil which they
feared not, shall come upon them to the full, when they least expect it; for,
It shall be in (...) hour that be is not (...) of. 2. Unfaithful Ministers who
pretend to take charge of souls, and are not faithful in that service, a^e
ranked among the worst sort of men, that is hypocrites, and shall be of all men
most severely punished; for, He shall cut them a^^nder, says he, and give them
their portion with hypocrites.

CHAP. XXV.
In this Chapter, our Lord propounds two Parables, the one of the ten
Virgins, to verse 14. The other of the talents, to verse 31. Both tending to
prepare us for the day of his second coming, and then sets down the manner
of the last judgment, to the end.

Ver. 1. THen shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened unto ten Virgins, which
took their lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.

2. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.

3. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no ^^e with them.

4. But the wise took oil in their vessels, with their lamps.

5. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept.

6. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom comes, goye
out to meet him.

7. Then all those Virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.

8. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil, for our lamps are
gone out.

9. But the wise answered, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and
you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

10. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came, and they that were ready,
went in with him to the marriage, and the door was shut.

11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.

12. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.

13. Watch therefore, for you know neither the day, nor the hour wherein the
Son of man comes.


He scope of this Parable is set down, verse 13. to advertise us to watch,
because we know not the hour wherein Christ shall come to judgment. To this
end the visible (...) ^a compared to ten Virgins, waiting for the Bride^rooms
coming, whereof some were wise and made prepara^^, that whenever the
Bridegroom should come, they might ^e ready to go with him. The other contented
themselves ^uch an outward profession of waiting for his coming, but did (...)
prepare themselves, till tho time was past, and then it was (...) purpose to
make a business; Therefore the one sort who were ready went in, and the other
were excluded: and so shall ^t come to pass with Professors in the visible
Church, ^^osoever make themselves ready, and watch for the Lords ^^cond coming,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, which is above; and they who do not
prepare themselves, ^o not watch for his coming, shall be excluded from Christ
^ his coming. From this Parable, in so far as it tends ^^^o this scope,
Learn, 1. Christ and his Church may well be compared to the Bridegroom and the
Bride, and the spiri^all communion between them to Marriage mutually pro^ised
in espousals in this life, and to be solemnized and complea^ed at the coming of
our Lord. 2. As in the Parable, ^o in the visible Church, all do profess
themselves devoted unto Jesus Christ the Bridegroom, and to be desirous of
communion with him in Heaven, and possibly may attain to a ^amelesse
conversation, and appear Virgine-like, all waiting for the coming of our Lord
in their own and others estimation. 3. As among the Virgins in the Parable, so
in the visible Church, all are not wise Christians; but some wise, and really
such as they profess themselves to be, others are counterfeit Christians and
foolish. 4. As among the Vir^ines in the Parable, so in the visible Church,
only these are wise, who with the outward Lamps of open profession, labor to
be furnished inwardly, with the saving graces of the holy Spirit: namely, Faith
working by love, and repentance mortifying their sinful lusts, that in
newness of life they may glorify God: But whosoever are destitute of inward grace
in their heart, they are foolish: for the Lamps of their outward profession,
without oil, do serve to no purpose, when matters come to a trial. 5. As in
the Parable, the Bridegroom comes when they are not aware; So will Christ come
unto Judgment in a day and hour that men know not. 6. As in the Parable the
wise are admitted, and the foolish excluded; So they who are inwardly renewed,
and endued with the saving graces of the holy Spirit, shall be taken up to
heaven; and they who are destitute of the oil of the holy Spirit, void of true
faith, and of the renewing virtue of Gods Grace shall be excluded. 7. As in the
parable the wise could not help the foolish, nor the foolish hurt the wise; So
the society of the hypocrites with the godly in the visible church, shall not
be prejudicial to the sound christians in the day of Gods judgment; not yet
the society of the godly avail the hypocrites, among whom they have lived, but
every man shall be judged according to that which is within him. 8. As in the
parable the self-conceit of the Virgins, ver. 11, 12. helped not them; so the
opinion which unrenewed persons within the visible church have of their
interest in Christ, their vain confidence and foolish hopes grounded upon the
outward profession, and their formal practices of external duties, will not
avail them before the Lord, at that day. 9. To be watchful now, and to examine
well our own case, and to see that we be sure of the inward anointing of the
holy Spirit, whereby we are made indeed holy, is the only way to be certain of
our salvation when Christ comes to judgment; for this use Christ commands
us to make of the parable; saying, Watch therefore.

Ver. 14. For the Kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country,
who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods:

15. And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to
every man according to his several ability, and straitway took his journ^y.

16. Th^^ he that had received the five talents (...) and traded with the same,
and made them other (...) ^^lents.

17. And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two.

18. But he that had received one, went and dug in the earth, and hid his
lords money.

19. After a long time, the Lord of those servants comes and reckons with
them.

20. And so he that had received five talents, came and brought other five
talents, saying, Lord, thou delivered ^^ unto me five talents, behold, I have
gained besides them five talents more.

21. His lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and ^^full servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

22. He also that had received two talents, came and said, Lord, thou
deliveredst me two talents, behold, I have gained two other talents beside them.

23. His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

24. Then he which had received the one talent, came and said, Lord, I knew
thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and
gathering where thou have not stra^ed.

25. And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth; (...), there
thou have that is thine.

26. His Lord answered and said unto him, thou wicked and slothful servant,
thou knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed.

27. Thou ought therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at
my coming I should have received mine own with usury.

28. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten
talents.

29. For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance:
bu^ from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has.

30. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Another parable tending to put all men on work, and in special the Ministers
of the Gospel, for setting forth the glory of Christ, and of his Kingdom among
men, according to every man's ability and calling, under the similitude of a
master, giving to his servants money to trade withal, for his use. Doct. 1. As
the man in the parable traveling into a far country, disposed of his affairs,
and ordered all matters till his return; So has our Lord Jesus given exact
order in his Word to all men, and specially to his Ministers, how his house
shall be governed, and how every man should serve him, till his second coming
again. 2. As the master in the parable gives not the same number of talents to
each servant: So the Lord So the Lord gives not a like measure of gifts to
every one, but to some more, to some less, as his heavenly Wisdom thinks
expedient. 3. As in the parable, some made use of their talents, some not: So
in the visible church, some employ the gifts they have, according to their
calling, to the edifying of others, and promoving of the Kingdom of Christ,
othersome do misregard the Kingdom of Christ, and care not how it go with
Christ's matters, if their own particular go right: and therefore they make no
conscience to promove Christ's Kingdom in their vocation, as their duty set
down in his word does require. 4. As the master in the parable reckoned with
his servants, and took an account of each man's fidelity, so shall Christ call
all men, and especially Ministers to account one day, and shall search how
faithful every man has been in his service. 5. As in the parable the
faithful servant, whether his talents were fewer or more, was accepted of his
Master, and made partaker of his joy; So every man (who in the discharge of his
calling, does seek faithfully the glory of Christ, and increase of his
Kingdom) shall be accepted in the day of judgment, and put in full possession
of eternal life. 6. As before the Master in the parable, so also before Christ
in the day of judgment, no excuse shall serve, to save the slothful and
unfaithful servant (let a man deceive himself now as he list, and please
himself with pretenses as he will) all excuses shall be retorted, and made
matter of his condemnation, and the unfaithful servant shall be cast in hell.
7. As in the parable, he who had one talent, but had it not for his Masters
use, is counted as if he had none, and is deprived of the possession of what he
possessed, but not for his masters use; So whosoever has gifts whereby others
are not profited, or Christ's kingdom not promoved, what he has is counted as
if he had it not: or as if he had lost it, or put it away; and as others were
not profited by his gift, so neither shall he himself be profited by it; but he
that uses his gifts well for the glory of Christ, shall be amply rewarded; the
reason whereof he gives; for, Unto every man that has gifts, so as he has
them for his Masters use, (which is in effect to have them) It shall be given,
he shall have increase of gifts, and graces, and rewards; but such as have not
what they have, for the Lord's service, shall be deprived of all good which
they themselves might have of such gifts, and shall be utterly deprived of
whatsoever good they s^em to have, and, They themselves also shall perish.

Ver. 31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels
with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. In the rest of the
chapter, the form of the day of judgment at Christ's second coming is
described; 1. The glorious sitting down of the Judge, ver. 31. Then the
presenting of parties to be judged, and the ordering of them in their several
ranks, v. 32, 33 3. The sentence of absolution of the godly, to v. 44.4. The
sentence of condemnation of the wicked to the end: hence learn, 1. Christ's
humane nature assumed, is not to be laid down again, but the union of the
divine and humane nature is constantly to remain, that so we may take heart and
confidence, being (...) to have our Redeemer in our nature to be our judge; The
Judge shall be the Son of man. 2. His second coming shall be glorious, all
infirmities being removed, He shall come in glory. 3. The glory of Christ then
to be seen, shall be no borrowed glory, such as the creatures have, but his own
which he had before the world began for, He shall come in his own glory. 4. All
the Angels in heaven shall attend our Lord that day, to honor him, and give
service to him, as he shall employ them; for, The holy angels shall come with
him. 5. A glorious throne be^coming the Son of God, and the Judge of quick and
dead, shall be errected in the clouds, such as none can imagine how glorious it
(...) be, til they see it; for it is said, Then he shall sit upon the throne of
his glory.

Ver. 32.And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate
them one from another as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats.

33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

Thus the Judge is set: Now they who are to be judged are presented. 1 Doct. 1.
There shall be a resurrection of the dead, and a gathering together of these
that are risen, together with them who shall be then living toward the place of
his appearance, even all that were from the beginning of the world unto that
day, without exception, all shall comp^^r from the least to the greatest; for,
All Nations shall be gathered before him. 2. Albeit, now there be a confusion of
the elect and reprobate, of the godly and the wicked; yet the^ there shall be a
separation of the one from the other, as the shepherd separates the sheep from
the goats, so shall our Lord make a perfect separation of the godly from the
wicked, that not one of the one sort shall be in company with the other: for,
He shall separate the sheep. 3. The godly and Elect (compared unto sheep for
their harmlesnesse, simplicity, obedience and attendance upon the Shepherd)
shall be placed more honorably, as it were at the right hand, which the
Apostle Paul expounds, by being caught up off the earth unto the clouds, to
meet the Lord; 1 These. 3.17. But the wicked and reprobate, (compared to goats,
for their unrulinese and uncleanness) shall have the place of least respects,
for we hear nothing of their being list o^ the earth, for, He shall set the
sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left, that is, He shall set the
Elect in a more honorable place then the Reprobate.

Ver. 34. Then shall the king say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world. In the pronouncing of the sentence, learn, 1. That the judging of the
world, is a part of the Kingly Office of Christ, wherein he shall show his
Sovereign Authority, to give out decrees irrevocable, and to see them executed;
for, Then shall the King say. 2. Before the fearful sentence of condemnation
shall be pronounced upon the wicked, the godly shall be absolved, that without
fear they may hear this dreadful doom given on the reprobate; for, Then shall
he say to them on his right hand, etc. 3. The Elects complete and nearest
communion with Christ, shall not be, till they be in soul and body both
translated unto Heaven, there to be with him for ever; for now, and not before
this time, Come, says the King. 4. The godly, in whatsoever estate they be,
are no les^e beloved, and blessed by the Father, than by the Son who redeemed
them; for he says, Come ye blessed of my Father. 5. The estate which the godly
are to enjoy in Heaven, is, A Kingdom, that is, the higest honor and
happiness that can be imagined; for it is said, Com^ inherit the Kingdom. 6.
This Kingdom comes not from the Elects merit, but from Gods free-gift, derived
from the Fathers love, an inheritance not purchased by themselves, in their own
time, but Prepared for them, from the foundation of the world, that is, from
eternity, wherewith we do presently meet, when we begin to think of the
foundation of the world.

Ver. 35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave
me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in.

36. Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison,
and ye came unto me.

The manner of judging of those who are of the visible Church, where mainly
intended, as the sentence of Absolution, and the sentence of Condemnation,
describing the parties, do impo^t ^ for this concerns us most, who are
members of the visible Kirk, to take heed unto, and to make use of it. In these
words our Lord does prove the Elect to be blessed, and destinate unto the
inheritance of Heaven, by the evidence of the fruits of their faith, toward
himself. Doct. 1. The judgment of Jesus Christ shall be pronounced upon men to
whom the Gospel has come, acording to the evidence of their affection toward
him: and (...) works, specially as they stand in relation to Christ, shall be
then brought forth to bear witness, whether they have been believers or not,
whether blessed of the Father, or not; for he says here, Ye fed me, ^lad me.
2. The godly having their sins forgiven them in this World, there shall be no
mention made then of what ill was done by them, and repented of, but only of
what good they did; as here, Ye clad me, fed me, visited me, does show. 3.
Christ is so nearly conjoined with his faithful servants, the Ministers of the
Gospel, and with every faithful person, that in all their afflictions he
accounts himself afflicted, and hung^y, thirsty, sick, and in prison, when
any of his own are in that condition; for, I was an hungered, etc. says he. 4
Love to Christ's people, especially manifested in real ^eeds of charity, are
true marks of faith in Christ, and of election unto eternal life, as here
appears. 5. Even A visit performed unto any for Christ's cause, shall be
taken notice o^, and rewarded by Christ; for, Ye visited me, is reckoned up
among other effects of love.

Ver. 37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee
an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

38. When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

39. Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

This form of speech is used by Christ, to show us, that the righteous, and
such as are justified by faith, shall wonder at their works, which they in their
life time justly esteemed little of, and had no confidence in, should be so
much taken notice of, and rewarded so, as at the last day they shall perceive;
as also, they shall wonder that Christ finds himself so much concerned in
the works of love, discharged to his children for his sake; this wondering is
imported and expressed in this interrogation, When saw we thee an hungered? etc.

Ver. 40. And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me. In Christ's answer, learn, 1. That whosoever have
believed in the Messiah, from the beginning of the World, are accounted of by
him, as Brethren and sisters, and he will not be ashamed to point them forth,
and avow them his brethren; yea, he shall not be ashamed to call the least of
them his brethren, and to esteem of the least courtesy done, or kindness
shown to the least of them, as if it had been done to himself. 2. Howsoever we
can hardly believe this, yet he will have us assured of the truth hereof, for
to assure us, Verily it is so, says he.

Ver. 41. Then shall he say also unto them upon the left hand, Depart from me,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. After
the absolution of the Faithful, the wicked shall receive the sentence of
condemnation. Doct. 1. Such as were never brought unto the sense of the curse
deserved for their sins, and made to fly unto Christ Jesus to be delivered
from the curse, shall find the curse of God cleave fast to them in the last
day; then shall they be called, Ye cursed. 2. Such as did not in their life
time seek communion with God in Christ, shall be separate and chased out of his
sight with a fearful Depart ye. 3. There is not part to go unto save hell, for
them whom Christ as Judge, at the day of judgment commands to depart;
Therefore says he, Depart ye into everlasting fire. 4. The pain of hell is
most horrible, for in respect of extremity of pain, it is called Fire, and for
the indurance, it is without Ending; Therefore says he, Depart ye into
everlasting Fire. 5. Satan the prince of unclean spirits, and all the apostate
angels with him, and all the wicked of the world, who have served Satan by
their ill deeds, shall be tormented together; for it shall be said to them,
Depart ye into the fire prepared for the devil and his angels. 6. No question
is to be made of the execution and manner of their torment; for it is ready
prepared, Depart ye into the fire prepared, says he, that is, Into the
fore-devised most extreme pain that can be imagined, for tormenting of spirits
or bodies.

Ver. 42. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink: 43. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye
clothed me not; sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.

In the reason of their condemnation, Learn, 1. That the unrepented ill deeds
of the wicked, and namely their mis-regarding of the Messiah Christ, in his
Person and Members, shall prove the pretense to be just; for, You did not so
and so to me, says he. 2. The omission of good deeds will serve sufficiently
for a ditty against the wicked; for, Ye fed me not, clothed me not, etc. 3. The
common fault of all the wicked shall be found want of love to Christ and his
members; for, because they did not cherish such as did believe in Christ, it
shall be said to them, Ye did it not to me: and here it appears that all his
process concerns them especially to whom the Gospel comes; for unto them to
whom the Gospel never came, this cannot be said, and therefore we have not to
search any further of the day of judgment, then what does concern our selves,
and what we may make use of.

Ver. 44. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee and
hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee?

45. Then shall be answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to m^.

46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous
into life eternal.

In the answer which the Damned are brought in giving unto Christ, as pleading
for themselves, learn, 1. That the wicked do conceive they have such excuses as
will bear them out at the great day, but which will fail them altogether;
Therefore, When saw we thee, etc. say they. 2. If omission of duties shall be a
sufficient ditty unto condemnation, how great shall the ditty be, when all
commissions shall be joined with all omissions, and all sorts of sins shall be
joined together? for here is their ditty, In as much as ye did it not to one,
etc. 3. Misregarding of Christ's servants and children in their need of our
help, shall be interpreted a mis-regarding of Christ; for so imports, Ye did
it not to me. 4. The sentence of absolution shall be executed, as it is
pronounced, and so shall the sentence of condemnation also; Everlasting life
shall be the portion of the godly, and everlasting punishment the portion of
the ungodly; for, They shall go away, etc. but the righteous into life.

CHAP. VI.
Christ forewarneth his Disciples of the manner of his death, to be within
three days, which accordingly was fulfilled: for his enemies resolve to kill
him before the feast day, verse 5. And Christ gives warning again of his death
and burial in Simons house, by occasion of ointment poured on him, verse 13.
Then Judas sells him to the Priests, verse 16. But Christ before he was
apprehended, celebrateth the Passover, and instituteth the Sacrament of his
Supper that night he was betrayed, and forewarneth his Disciples of his being
betrayed that same night, verse 36. After which he goes to the garden, and
endures horrible agonies in his soul, verse 46. Being apprehended, he
endures hard things of the Priests and Elders, and is condemned in Caiaphas
hall, where Peter having denied him, is raised up again by repentance.

Ver. 1. ANd it came to pass, when Jesus ha^ finished all these sayings, he
said unto his Disciples,

2. Ye know that after two days is the feast of the Passover, and the Son of
man is betrayed to be cru^ified.


AFter Christ has taught his Disciples, what was fit to be told them, in
answer to their questions about the time of the day of judgment, he tells
them of the time of his passion, because that was most necessary. Doct. 1. The
Lord hides, and shows secrets to his people, as may best profit them. 2. His
foretelling the time of his sufferings, which his enemies knew not, albeit they
longed for it, shows his foreknowledge of, and resolute willingness toward
the work of redemption; for he says, After two days the Son of man shall be
betrayed.

Ver. 3. Then assembled together the chief Priests, and the Scribes; and the
Elders of the people, unto the palace of the high Priest, who was called
Caiphas.

4. And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him.

5. But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the
people.

In this wicked assembly decreeing to kill Christ, Lehrn* 1. That councels may
err, and such as have the title of rulers and elders in the Church, may prove
enemies to Christ, for such is the assembly of the chief rulers here. 2. Satan
labors to have, and often finds men of most power in Church and State, to
be against Christ; as here, Elders and Scribes. 3. The craft and malice and
blood-thirstinesse of Christ's enemies is great; as here, They resolve to take
him by subtilty, and kill him. 4. Wicked men are wise to foresee temporal
inconveniences, but blind to foresee the danger of sinning; as here, Not on
the feast day, say they, lest there be an uproar among the people^; but no fear
of God is in their heart to kill the Innocent. 5. When the people are zealous
for Christ, it muzleth the mouths of bloody dogs; as here, Lest there be an
uproar, say they, among the people, Therefore these wicked men preveened the
feast day.

Ver. 6. Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper.

7. There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious
ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat.

There is a remarkable passage of anointing of Christ unto his burial observed
here; In which history, learn, 1. That in little Bethany, as well as in great
Jerusalem, God has his own: as here, Simon, and this woman. 2. The man who is
sensible of his cleansing by Christ, will love him all his life long after; as
Simon the leper here receives, entertaineth Christ and his Disciples. 3. When
our bypast infirmities may glorify Christ, it is no shame to bear the
memorials thereof; for here the Evangelist calls him Simon the leper, though
now whole. 4. Love spares no cost; where love is hot, there nothing is dear, as
is to be seen in this woman, who breaks an alabaster box of very precious
ointment, and pours it out upon Christ.

Ver. 8. But when his Disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what
purpose is this waste?

9. For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.

10. When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for
she has wrought a good work upon me.

11. For ye have the poor always with you, but me ye have not always.

Judas bearing the bag, was offended that this ointment was not sold and put in
his custody, and moves the rest to mislike the waste, as he calls it. Doct.
1. One murmurer may infect a whole company, one Judas does ensnare in his fault
other disciples; Therefore it is said, When his Disciples saw it, they had
indignation. ^ 2. When men look after the manner of the world upon Christ, they
account all to be loss that is bestowed on him; To what purpose is this waste?
say they. 3. Avarice wants not fair pretenses; as here, It might have been
sold for much, and given to the poor, say they. 4. Good men's best actions may
be misconstrued, even by Christ's own disciples: as here may be seen. 5. It is
no small trouble to the godly, to find their good works mis-interpreted,
especially by the godly; Therefore says Christ, Why trouble ye the woman? 6.
Albeit men mis-interpret good works, yet Christ will judge aright of them, and
take part with his own, and defend them, as here is seen; She has wrought a
good work, says he. 7. Such good works as offer themselves rarely, and will
not readily occur again, should not be neglected, but instantly be followed,
and preferred to other good works, whereof more frequent occasion is offered;
as here, The poor you have always with you, says he.

Ver. 12. For in that she has poured this ointment on my body, she did it for
my burial.

13. Verily I say unto you, Whersoever this Gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, there shall also this, that this woman has done, be told for a
memorial of her.

This holy woman foresaw his death, and does the last duty unto him. Doct. 1.
The Lord knows the intentions of his honest servants, and sets a price on
their good deeds thereby; therefore says he, She did it for my burial. 2. Our
Lord knew that the gospel should be preached through the world, etc what was
to be preached also; for, Where this gospel shall be preached, says be, this
shall be told, etc. 3. True faith sees afar off, for this woman sees life in
death, believes the Lord Jesus to be the true Savior, worthy of all honor in
his death, as well as in his life; believes that he should not see corruption,
believes that his death should be a sweet smelling sacrifice to God, and the
savor of life unto his people; for, She did it, says Christ, for my burial.
4. The memorial of the just shall not go to the grave with them, but their good
deeds shall be had in everlasting remembrance: In this woman we have assurance
of it; for, This shall be preached for a memorial of her, says he. 5.
Whosoever do any thing for Christ shall never have cause to rue, Christ
accounts more of it then it is all worthy; for, She has wrought a good work on
me, says Christ, before; and now, This shall be told of her for a memorial.

Ver. 14. Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief
Priests,

15. And said unto them, What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you?
and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.

16. And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

Judas minding to have gain some way, seeks opportunity first to sell, then to
betray Christ. Doct. 1. When a wicked man is engaged to do an evil turn, he
never takes rest till he act it, as is here seen in Judas, from that time he
sought opportunity to betray Christ. 2. When men have an evil turn in their
heart, and want opportunity only, they shall not want occasion long: as Judas
minding to sell Christ, does seek and find fit Merchants, the chief Priests. 3.
God will suffer wicked men to follow their designs, even against himself,
when he sees it fit for his own glory: as here he will not hinder a Judas to go
to the high priests. 4. He that is greedy of gain, will sell his Soul and
Heaven, and Christ for money, as Judas here does. 5. He that is not Christ's
friend in truth, will soon turn Traitor, as Judas here does. 6. Hypocrites will
be found in best societies: for here a Traitor is one of the twelve. 7. The
wicked shall bear their own blame and the society shall be free: as here Judas
is named alone. 8. Secret enemies and open will easily agree together, and own
one another, as here Judas and the high Priests make a short bargain* 9. He
tha^ ^ell^th Christ knows not his worth; for, Wh^ will you gi^e me? says the
seller. 10. He that will sin and sell Christ, will do it upon a naughty
condition, ere he want all, Thirty pieces of silver, or what may be had, will
make the bargain ^all.

Ver. 17. Now the first day of the Feast of unleavened bread, the disciples
came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat
the passover? The doctrine of the covenant of grace, being delivered by our
Lord, and confirmed abundantly by miracles, the institution of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper follows, for sealing up of this covenant unto the believer;
and to this intent mention is made of Christ's last eating of the Sacrament of
the Passover, unto which was subjoyned the institution and celebration of the
Sacramental Supper; for the clearing of some circumstances whereof, and of the
duty of preparation for right receiving of it, that which is here spoken of the
Passover, does give light, Doct. 1. It is commendable to remember Gods
Ordinances in due time, and to prepare for them; as here, The first day of the
Feast, the Disciples came, and make ready for it. 2. Our Lord made himself so
poor, that he had not a house of his own, albeit he was Owner of all the earth;
as, Where will thou that we prepare? does import. 3. Our Lord subjected himself
unto the Law, and did keep exactly both the Moral and ceremonial Law, that he
might deliver us from the yoke of the one, and from the cursefor breaking of
the other, He kept the Passover. 4. The terms of Sacramental speech were well
understood by Christ's disciples as to put the thing signified for the sign,
namely by this phrase, To cat the Passover, they mean, to ^at the Lamb, the
Sacramental memorial of the Angels passing over of the houses of the Israelites
in Egypt.

Ver. 18. And be said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The
Master says, My time is at hand, I will keep the Passoever at thy house with
my Disciples.

19. And the Disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready the
Passover.

Christ directs them to a friends house, a worthy man for so holy a service.
Doct. 1. The Lord will not want friends whersoever he is, here in Jerusalem he
has friends, as he had also in Bethany, Go into the city to such a man, says
he. 1. He has such commandment of the spirits of men, as he can bow their
will to do what service he pleases, for he is sure to make such a man obey. 3.
Christ has taken on him to be our Teacher, and to him only the dignity of
Master is due; therefore he calls himself the Master. 4. It is of his own
free choice that our Lord does employ any man more th^n another; for, Go to
such a man, and say, imports this. 5. The more near our time to depart this
life does draw, the more careful should we be to have all things done by us
which should be^ done* therefore says he, My time is at hand, I will keep the
Passover. 6. It is the part of true Disciples to follow Christ's direction in
all things, and being clear in the command, to go about the obedience of it;
for, The Disciples did as Jesus appointed.

Ver. 20. Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. For
clearing of the history of the Lords Supper, which was instituted at the close
of the Passover, we have here set down the circumstances of eating of the
Passover* as time, place, and persons; whereby we have ground to conceive that
Judas was present at the Sacrament of the Passover, he being one of the
twelve: for first, seeing there is no question made, that as Judas was employed
in the Apostleship with the rest, so he was admitted also with the rest unto
the fellowship of all Worship and Divine Ordinances, and was present at so many
former feasts of the Passover as Christ did keep with his Disciples; there can
be no inconvenience to suppose him present at the Passover at this time also.
Secondly, seeing whatsoever is said by Historiographers, concerning a common
Supper, before the sacrament to be observed by the Jews (a people too much
given to their own inventions, and the traditions of Elders) it is safe^t for
us to think that Christ did keep the Law of the Passover, as was written,
Exodus 12. wherein was appointed a whole Lamb, with unleavened bread (not
prescribing how much) and sour or bitter herbs for a sauce-drink being
presupposed and included, as naturally necessary, to make the Passover to be a
Supper, and an holy Feast; all which making up sufficient store of meat, to be
a meal to so many men, and to furnish a sop to Judas ere he went forth, and
Elements also unto the new Sacrament, after he was gone; there is no ground to
make us conceive, that there was a common Supper preceding the Passover; but
when we find Judas to be eating with the rest, after their down-sitting to the
Passover, we have good ground to think that Judas was partaker of the Passover
Supper. Thirdly, seeing the Evangelist expressly says, ver. 19. that they made
ready the Passover, and verse 20. that Christ when the even was come, sat
down with the twelve, to wit, to eat the Passover, and ver. 21. That as they,
that is, Christ with the twelve, were eating, he said to them, one of you shall
betray me; we may without any scruple conclude, that Judas was present at the
Passover, and so much the more as we find, that the Evangelists hereafter do
number only eleven Disciples, until the time that Matthias, who used always
to be present with the Apostles was chosen to supply the room of Judas, and to
make up again the number of twelve, Act. 1.26. In regard of whom the Apostle
Paul had just ground to say, 1 Cor. 15.6. that Christ was seen of the twelve,
because Act. 1, 21.22. Matthias being present always with the twelve, and so
at this apparition, and reckoned with the eleven in Judas room, does make the
number complete. This being presupposed, we learn. 1. That neither is the
Sacrament the worse, nor are the communicants polluted, albeit an undiscovered
hypocrite be in company with them at the Lords Table; for Judas was one of the
twelve, with whom Christ sat down to eat the Passover, and neither the
ordinance, nor the rest of the Apostles were tainted with Judas his fault, the
pollution of the Sacrament was in Judas only, and remained with him alone. 2.
The Lord will not discover hypocritees, till they by their own deeds discover
themselves, but will suffer them to lurk among the Saints, till his own time
come, as here he suffers Judas to lurk and to eat the Passover. 3. Social
sitting at table is a very sit posture for a religious Feast, for here Christ
and his Disciples sit down at table together to eat the Passover.

Ver. 21. And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me.

22 And they were exceeding sorrowful: and began every one of them to say unto
him, Lord, is it I?

Our Lord forwarneth the Disciples that he was to be betraed by one of them,
and puts each man to try themselves. Doct. 1. It is possible that a man may
come to the Lords table the one day, and betray him shortly after; the like
fell out in Christ's own Apostles, One of you, says he, shall betray me.. 2. The
possibility that a communicant may become a Traitor, should put all men to
search themselves, as here the Apostles are put to it, saying, Is it I? 3.
Sincerety and charity will make men search and suspect themselves rather than
another, as here the Apostles say not, Is it Judas? but, Is it I? 4. The
sincere man dares not trust the deceitfulness of his own heart, but brings it
to the Searcher thereof, and relieth upon his testimony, as here the Apostles
do, saying to Christ, Is it I?

Ver. 23, And he answered and said, he that dippeth his hand with me in the
dish, the same shall betray ^e.

24 The Son of man goes as it is written of him, but ^o unto that man by whom
the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for that (...), if he had not been
born.

Christ answers their question, and takes away the stumbling block of his
suffering himself to be betrayed, by application of the prediction of the
scripture to the present date, to let them see that the betraying of him was
for^^old in the scripture. Doct. 1. A benumbed conscience, and a shameless
face are easily joined with a resolute purpose to sin, as here the Traitor
stands not to dip his hand in the dish with Christ, when he was minded
presently to betray him. 2. No kindness or good which the godly can bestow upon
the wicked, will hinder the wicked to prove Enemies to the godly, when they are
put to trial; as all Christ's kind usage of Judas, and admitting him to eat of
the dish with him, stayed him not from going to betray him. 3. The known will of
God is the best remedy to save us from stumbling at the Cross of Christ's as
here, It is written, says Christ, that he may keep them from stumbling. 4. The
prediction of Gods Word, and the foredetermination of a fact, does not exempt
the sinner, and the committer of the fact, from guilt or punishment, for not
the less it is said, Woe to that man. 5. Sin turns all the benefits of God
into curses, and makes them matter of misery; for, It had been better for the
traitor he had never been born, says Christ.

Ver. 25. Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered, and said, Master, is it I?
He said unto him, Thou have said. Judas seigneth himself a friend, and is loath
to bewray himself, by not saying as the rest did. Doct. 1. Hypocrites for shame
will profess sincerety, as the sincere do, so says Judas, Is it I? 2. A
seated conscience will make an affronted face, as here Judas dares say, Is it
I? 3. The more the hypocrite will hide his sin, the more is it brought forth,
as here, Thou have said it, says Christ.

Ver. 26. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake
it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body.

27 And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of it.

28 For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins.

Now follows a more particular relation of the institution of the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, the whole Doctrine whereof is not to be found in any of
the Evangelists or Apostles, but to be collected out of all, each contributing
their part to express the full meaning of the Lords Spirit in this matter.
Here we take up only that which Matthew says; and first we observe, that the
celebration of the first Sacramental Supper of the Lord, was joined in one
continued supperly action with the Sacrament of the passover; our Lord herein
declaring the old church and new to be one in him, and the Sacraments of both,
to have himself for their signification, for the Sacrament began, as They were
eating, that is, sitting s^ill at table, and the Supper not closed. 2. For the
nature of the action, it is required there be a Table prepared, and Elements
ready to be made use of: For the first Supper which is our pattern, was
celebrated at the same Table whereat the Passover was celebrated, whereupon
there were yet remaining Elements for eating, for this much is imported in, As
they were eating. 3. It is requisite also, that the Minister of the Gospel and
his stock, so many of them as may communicate together at one Table at once, be
assembled together, and jointly set down together, for celebration of this holy
Feast; for so was it in the pattern, As they were eating, they, that is, Christ
as minister, and his disciples as the flock. 4. The fittest posture of the
Communicants in the action of this holy Feasting, is social sitting together at
the Lords Table; for this was the behavior of the first communicants, the Lord
began to give the Sacrament As they were eating, that is, as they yet continued
sitting together socially at the Table, materials for eating not being removed,
da^ing which time men are said to be eating. 5. The Elements of this holy Feast
are only bread and wine* for, Christ took bread, and (...) cup. 6. The part of
the Minister is to take the Elements, and by the word of Institution and Prayer
to sanctify, separate and appoint them for this holy and sacramental use, so
much of them and in so far as they, shall be employed by the communicants; for,
Christ blessed the bread, blessed the cup, and gave tha^^s to the Father. 7.
The part of the Minister also is to break the bread, and give it unto the
community of the Communicants, with a command unto them in common, or in the
plural number, to take the bread, and eat it; for Christ brake the bread, and
gave it to his disciples, saying, Take ye, eat ye. 8. It is the part of the
Minister to expo^e and declare with authority in the Lords Name, what this
Bread thus blessed, thus broken, thus given and taken, does signify, exhibit
and seal up by Christ's appointment, unto the believing communicant; to wit,
that This bread is Christ's body, which speech is not to be understood
physically nor miraculously, but judicially; that is to say, in the sense that
civil judgment makes the instruments of security of any thing, to be called
by the name of it, and holden in law for it; and therefore as the instrumental
elements whereby men are infeoff'd in any house or land, or rent, being orderly
given and taken, are by the appointment of men's law, the very house, or land,
or rent, really, and truly in law made sure to the receiver, for all lawful
and profitable effects, before the Bar of civil Justice: so this bread thus
given, and thus taken, is by the institution and appointment of divine
Ordinance, in a judicial sense, the very body of Christ suffering, judicially
and truly, or really in divine Law made sure to the receiver for all profitable
effects before the Bar of divine Justice; and as the instrumental Elements of
seizing a man in a house, or land, or rent (such as are, for example cause, a
piece of earth, or a stone, or a staff, or a penny) orderly given and taken,
do signify, exhibit, and confirm in law a man's right and title unto such a
house, or land, or rent more strongly, then if a man did take the house or land
physically in his arms, if it were possible. So this bread by Divine
Ordinance, does signify, exhibit, and and confirm the Believers right and
title unto Christ's body, as suffering for the believers redemption, more
certainly and surely, then if Christ's body suffering were physically embraced
by him in his arms, if it were possible: and therefore, as the instrumental
elements of civil inseoffment, in the terms of humane ordinance, and
institution, are rightly called by the name of the lands disponed, so the
Sacramental element of bread is rightly called Christ's body, disponed in the
terms of Divine Ordinance and institution, which appoints hereby right to be
given unto us unto Christ's body, as suffering for our redemption. 9. To assure
us of full satisfaction and complete furniture for eternal life, Christ our
Lord has not only taken bread in the Sacrament, but also has instituted a
cup, that is, both meat and drink, for certifying us, that we shall have
complete nourishment in him, commanding the community of the Believers, or
communicants, in the plural number, to drink thereof; for, He also took the cup
and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye al of it. 10. As it is
necessary, that the people receive the sacramental bread with the exposition
and declaration in the Lords Name, of what it gives them right unto by Divine
Institution, so it is also necessary, that the people receive all of them the
Sacramental Cup, with declaration of what it gives them right unto by
Christ's Ordinance; for this cup, or wine in the cup, is my blood, says the
Lord, to wit, Appointed of me judicially to make you truly or really sure of
your right unto my death and the blood shed, and unto all benefits bought
thereof. 11. There is a Covenant of Redemption past between the Father and
Mediator Christ, wherein Christ was bound to lay down his life, by the
shedding of his blood to purchase to the Redeemed remission of sins: This is
impo^ted in the words of, The blood of the Covenant for the remission of sins;
showing, that the Son had before promised to pour out his blood for purchasing
remission, and the Father had granted remission upon this condition. 12. Christ
did make his Testament before his death, and left remission of sins in legacy
to his redeemed people, namely, to believing Communicants. This is imported in
the words of a Testament, for remission of sins. 13. Christ did make his
Testament two ways, one in typical promises under the Law, before he came in
the flesh: and so also in types and figures he died, as it were, and was the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the World: Again, He made his Testament after
his Incarnation in plain and clear terms, after which he fulfilled the types of
his death, and actually laid down his life for his Redeemed People: This is
imported in the words, New Testament is my blood shed, Presupposing an Old
Testament in the blood of typical lambs, and other sacrifices. 14. Conform to
this twofold manner of making of a Testament, there was also a twofold manner
of making of a Covenant of Grace, between God and the Church, in her head
Christ; one called, An Old Covenant, before he came, of typical promises,
painful and chargeable rites, and harder conditions to the external Beholder;
another after his Incarnation, called, A New Covenant of better promises, and
more comfortable conditions, because now the dimnesse of the shadow is removed,
the yoke of the ceremonies is broken, and the substance of the covenant is more
clearly seen, and this is imported in the word of new Covenant; for the word in
the original, which signifies Testament, signifies also Covenant, and is
indifferently used for either; for the Testament and Covenant, is much of the
same articles to, and with the same persons. 15. The Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, is a seal of ^he new covenant of Righteousnesse^ and eternal life by
faith in Jesus Christ the Redeemer; this is imported in the words, This cup is
my blood of the new covenant, that is, It is the seal of the new covenant
whereby I make you sure ^ight unto my blood, shed for remission of sins. 16. By
the new covenant of righteousness, and life through faith in Christ sealed in
the Sacrament, the believe^ gets right unto the covenant of redemption made
between God and Christ, to the behove of the redeemed; this is imported in the
words of Testament or covenant of blood shed, to satisfy the Father, for many,
for the remis^ion of sins.

Ver. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom. That
our Lord may put upon his disciples the impressio^ of his death shortly to
follow, and so both ^ngraft the doctrine of the Sacrament more deeply in them,
and prepare them the better for his death, he shows them, that this was the
last draught of wine he was to take in a Sacramental way with them, and that
the time was coming when he and his discipl^s should in Heaven together he
partakers of the joy, and comfort signified by this Sacramental wine, which he
calls, The drinking of it new, or in the newness of the Spirit, and not in
the oldnesse of the letter; for the extern^l Sacrament, and Sacramental
Elements, are at the last to be abolished as old: But ^he joy, and Life, and
Honor signified by the Sacramental Participation of them shall never be
abolished, shall never wax old, but shall be fresh and new for ever. Doc. 1. Our
Lord, beside all other relations which he has to the Sacrament, as the
Institutor thereof, the End thereof, the Thing signified thereby, the Minister in
the first celebration thereof, is also ^ Fellow-bangu^ter, and communi^^^ with
us in his own ^ay; for he did drink of the Sacramental wine, as it signified
communion of life, and joy with us in Heaven, I will not drink henceforth of the
fruit of the Vine, until I drink it new with you, etc. 2. Whatsoever change it
put upon the wine in the Sacrament, by instituting that it should signify and
seal up spiritual life and joy, yet alter the sanctifying of it, and in the
time of drinking of it by the communic^nts, it ^emaineth Wine, in the own
natural properties, without being (...) ^tia^; for, I will not, says he, drink
of the fruit of the Vine henceforth. 3. The drinking of the Sacramental wine is
a sign and pledge of our spiritual and new communion in life and joy in the
Kingdom of Heaven, for Christ expounds it, saying Until the Day that I shall
drink it new with you, in the Kingdom of my Father. 4. Christ will not be
content to be without his disciples in Heaven; for, I will drink it new with you
in the kingdom of my Father, says he.

Ver. 30. And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
Olives. This is the close of the whole action. Doc. 1. It is fit that God be
glorified in the Assembly of the church, by singing of Psalms; and in
particular, when the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is celebrate; for, They did
sing a hymn. 2. How sad hours soever the Lord send unto us, it is our part
always to sing his praises, for the disciples albeit they all knew that our
Lord was presently to suffer, yet They did sing unto God an hymn.

Ver. 31. Then says Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me
this night, for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the
flock shall be scattered abroad.

32. But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.

Christ foretells his disciples of their stumbling at his sufferings, and
denying of him that night, according as was foretold, Zach. 13.7. and that he
would rise again from death, and would gather them unto him, and meet them in
Galilee, whether they were to fly: yea, and that he should be there before
them. Doc. 1. The afflictions for the Gospel may be such, as the stoutest
disciples may stumble at them, and fall at a time; for, All ye shall be offended
because of me, says he. 2. The visibility of the church is not such, but that
possibly open profession of the Gospel, and open communion of Saints may be
interrupted by persecution; for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and
the Sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. 3. Christ shall be victorious
over the power of persecuters, and after a scattering, he will gather unto
himself again the upright in heart: He gives ground to us for so much saying,
After I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.

Ver. 33. Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be offended
because of thee, yet will I never be offended.

34. Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, that this night before the
cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice.

35. Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny
thee: likewise also said all the disciples.

Honest Peter cannot believe such weakness (at least) in him self, and therefore
albeit forwarned the second time, he speaks stou^ly, and so do the rest of
the disciples also. Doct. 1. Unexpert christians can hardly believe themselves
to be so weak and sinful, as the Lordsword shows them to be* but so much the
more as they have an honest purpose to stand, they have fleshly confidence in
their own strength, and do assure themselves that they shall stand in all
assays, howsoever others fall beside them; Therefore is it that Peter says,
Though all men should be offended, yet not I, although I should die, I will not
deny thee; and so also do the rest say. 2. He that trusts most to his own
strength, is nearest unto the most fearful fall; Therefore it is said to Peter,
Ere the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice.

Ver. 36. Then comes Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and says
unto the disciples, Sit ye here while I go and pray yonder. Our Lordslast
sufferings may be for memories cause distinguished by the places wherein He
suffered. First, In the Garden on moun^ Olives, to ver. 57. and next in C^iphas
hall, to the end of this chapter: Our Lord takes his eleven trusty Disciples
with him into the Garden:where he ^new the traitor with the enemies should
shortly come to apprehend him, and acquainteth his Disciples with his pu^pose
of going apart to prepare himself by prayer, for suffering. Doc. 1. As the
truth of the Gospel, so the right way of suffering for the truth must be
learned from Christ; Therefore our Lord tak^th with him his disciples unto
Gethsemane, a Garden and place where he is to begin his last sufferings, that
they might see how voluntarily and holily he addressed himself unto that
service. 2. As we should not make oftentation of going to private prayer, so
neither need we scrupulously to conceal our purpose when it may edify; for
Christ says here, Sit you here, till I go and pray yonder.

Ver. 37. And he took with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to
be sorrowful and very heavy.

38. Then says he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, evenn unto death:
tarry ye here, and watch with me.

Out of the eleven Disciples, He chooses three to be witnesses of the hardest
parts of his sufferings, even the same who were lately witnesses of his
glorious transfiguration. Doc. 1. Albeit all the redeemed be alike dear to
Christ, yet will he acquaint some with more deep passages of his sufferings then
others, and readily such as he has acquainted before with clearer sight of his
Glory; as here, He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee. 2. Our Lord
suffered for our sins, not only in his body, but also in his soul, dolor and
heaviness in a measure unspeakable; My soul, says he, is exceeding sorrowful
even unto death. 3. Our Lord kept back from his own humane nature the
consolations of the personal union thereof with the Divine nature, so far, that
he, as Man, did not despise the smallest mean of ease or relaxtion that could
be, but calls for the company of his slippery disciples; and hereby does
teach us in our sad perplexities to take the company of some of the Saints, to
whom we may reveal our mind; for, Tarry ye here, and watch with me, says he to
them.

Ver. 39. And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. Albeit their company could be of
some use, yet but of small use to him, therefore he goes on and prays. Doc. 1.
There is no ease to a perplexed soul, under the sense of wrath, till it be
alone with God, there it may sigh and groan, utter broken words, keep silence,
or freely express it self as it pleases, without misconstruction; Therefore
He goes a little from them, and fell on his face, and prayed. 2. The sense of
the wrath of God felt by Christ, and the weight of the curse due to our sins
laid upon him, was so horrible, that his holy nature looking upon it, simply as
it tends to the destruction of the creatures, could not but abhor it, and so
wish to be rid of it, if it had been possible; therefore does holy nature say,
My Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. 3. The love that our
Lord has to our redemption, and his special covenant made with the Father, for
the paying of our ransom, made him to subject his holy nature and Will to that
which otherwise is abhorred: therefore looking to the Fathers will, thus to
expiate the sins of the Redeemed, he says, Nevertheless, not as I will (in
an holy natural choice) but as thou will, let it be, I voluntarily do choose
it; that is, according to the condition past between us, for redemption of the
Elect, Let me drink this cup: and here the merit of sin, the strictness of
Divine Justice, the horror of the wrath of God, with the weight of the curse,
the mercy of God toward sinners, and the unspeakable love both of God and
Christ toward the Elect, is to be seen lively set forth before us in our Lords
passion.

Ver. 40. And he comes unto his disciples and finds them asleep, and says
unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?

41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak.

Here is a short breathing time after his wrestling, wherein he comes to his
Disciples, whom no trouble could make him forget, because for them, and for the
rest of his own people these sufferings were sustained; and finding them
asleep, he gently reproves them, and exhorts them to watch and pray by three
reasons: The first is joined with a reproof, It is but an hour you have to
watch, til you be yoked with a temptation, by occasion of my sufferings
approaching; Therefore, why do you not watch this one hour with me? The second
reason, Except you watch and pray, you may readily come under the power of
temptation, Therefore watch and pray, lest you enter into, or begin to come
under the power of temptation. The third reason is, Albeit the spirit or your
renewed part be ready and willing to resist and oppose temptations, yet the
flesh, your natural and unrenewed part is weak and ready to be overcome,
Therefore watch and pray. Doc. 1. When we are in greatest danger, and matters
most concerning us are in hand, when God calls most for our service, and we
have most need to watch, then are we readily most secure, as it fares with
these disciples whom Christ called to watch with him, and now finds them
asleep. 2. Seeing we have no strength of our own to overcome temptations, the
only way to prevail, is to watch, and pray to God for assistance; therefore
Christ says, Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. 3. Seeing the
godly are in great part flesh and unrenewed, and so are easily ensnared by
temptations, the spirit and renewed part has so much more need of the help of
spiritual exercises; for therefore Christ bids them watch and pray upon this
reason, that howsoever the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak.

Ver 42. He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father,
if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.

43. And he came and found them asleep again, for their eyes were heavy.

44. And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying
the same words,

Our Lord's Agony, under the sense of wrath, and weight of the curse due to our
sins, is renewed again and again, while he is coming and going between his
Father and his slippery Disciples, pra^ing to the Father the second and third
time, in the same wor^; for understanding whereof let us consider, that it
stands with the holiness of humane Nature, so well to be naturally and
necessarily sensible of pain and grief, as to be voluntarily patient under it;
so well to tremble, and be feared for the wrath of the Creator, as to love to
have his consolation, and to have joyful communion with him; so well naturally
and necessarily to abhor, and seek to be rid of every thing which is
destructive of it self, and separate from felt-joy in God, as to submit it
self to whatsoever trouble or cross which it shall please God to lay upon it;
and therefore it is alike agreeable to the holiness of humane Nature in Christ
to speak one word to the Father, in the language of pure holy Nature, simply
looking to what is destructive of nature, and another word from holy voluntary
resolution, subjecting the simple desires of nature to the furthering of the
supreme desires of the Creator, and so it stands well with his holiness to
say to the Father, as the truth was, to this sense, This cup of thy Wrath is so
horrible, and unspeakably terrible, that looking simply on it, I cannot be a
man and not abhor it, tremble at it, and be feared for it, and seek by all
lawful means to be rid of it, and to express so much of the simple desires of
holy humane Nature in me, Let this cup depart from me; but seeing it is thy
will, that by sufferings measured out to me, as in a cup, the price of
Redemption of the Elect shall be paid, Let me have it, Thy will be done, I
consent unto it, I will the same which thou willest, give it to me; I will
drink it to the dregs. Doct. 1. Christ trod the Winepresse of the Lords Wrath
alone, his own most entire Disciples could not so much as watch with him one
hour, in his Agony: He comes unto them thrice, and thrice finds them asleep.
2. The measure of the felt Wrath of God, and curse due to our sins, poured
forth on Christ, was such, as holy Nature could not but be astoni^d at it, and
declare how much it was to be aborred and eschewed, if love to lost souls had
not made it tolerable; for it behoved to be fearful and horrible, above all
that we can imagine, which made the Son of God thrice to pray, If it be
possible, let this cup pass from me. 3. Such is the love our Lord had to the
Redemption of the Elect, that rather then we should not be saved, he chose that
the cup of Wrath due to our sins, should kill him; and therefore no other way
of our salvation at this time being possible, love made him submit to the
condition, and say, Thy will be done.

Ver. 45. Then comes he to his Disciples, and says unto them, Sleep on now,
and take your rest; behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners.

46. Rise, let us be going, behold, he is at hand that does betray me.

The time of the Disciples preparation for the following temptation, being
spent in sleeping, our Lord does sharply rebuke them, for losing the time so,
and goes on with them to meet the Traitor, and the Soldiers with him, whom
he knew to be approaching. In Christ's speeches we must look to his meaning,
and not captiously misconstrue his words; for, Sleep on now, and take your
rest, is a reproof, telling them they shall not be suffered any longer to
sleep, or take rest, as that which follows makes plain. Doct. 1. When time
granted to prepare us for trial, is misspent in sluggishnesse and carnal rest,
the trial shall come upon us on a sudden, our carnal rest shall be taken
from us, and we must rancounter with the trouble and trial unprepared as we
are, as it fares with the Disciples, to whom it is said, Sleep on now, take
your rest: rise, let us be going. 2. Our Lord was not surprised in his
sufferings, he is God, and knew perfectly whatsoever was to befall; therefore
said he, Behold, he is at hand that betrayeth me.

Ver. 47. And while he yet spoke, lo, Judas one of the Twelve, came, and with
him a great multitude with swords and staves from the chief Priests and Elders
of the People.

48. Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall
kiss, that same is he, hold him fast.

49. And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail Master, and kissed him.

The Traitor comes, and because it was night, and Christ was not known to the
Soldiers by face; therefore he gives them a sign, whereby they should know
Christ. Doct. 1. A man unrenewed, of whatsoever gifts of learning, place in the
Church, or relation to Christ, may become a mortal Enemy to Christ: for not
only the chief Priests and Elders do send out Soldiers to take Christ, but
also one of the twelve Apostles, Judas turns Traitor. 2. An Apostate from a
good course, may readily become a Ringleader to others in ill course; for,
Judas here one of the Twelve comes, and with him a great multitude. 3.
Dissemblers and hypocrites deal plainly among their followers, but among the
godly they counterfeit; for, unto the Soldiers Judas gives a sign whereby
they shall really know Christ, that they may take him; but when he came to
Christ, he says, Hail Master, and kisseth him, in dissimulation.

Ver. 50. And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then they
came and laid hands on Jesus, and took him. Christ speaks so much upon the
Traitor, as might make him compare his pretense of friendship to his Master,
with his intention of bringing Soldiers on him, and then he suffers himself
to be taken and bound. Doct. 1. Hypocrites may deceive others and themselves,
but cannot deceive God; for here Christ puts his finger to this Traitour's
intention, saying, Wherefore came you hither? 2. To compare our profession with
our practices, and our pretenses with our intentions, is a mean to give us a
right sight of our selves, therefore is it that Christ calls Judas, Friend,
in respect of his profession; and asks him why he came, to put him to look to
his intention. 3. Christ being surety for the Redeemed, who cannot defray their
own debt, he behoved to answer unto justice for them, and therefore must he be
laid hands on, and taken.

Ver. 51. And behold one of them which were with Jesus, stretched out his hand,
and dr^w his sword, and struck a servant of the high Priests, and ^more off his
ear.

52. Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy Sword into his place: for all
they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.

53. Think thou, that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently
give me more then twelve legions of Angels?

54. But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?

One of the Disciples goes about by the sword to rescue Christ from suffering,
and is ^ep^oved, 1. For doing so without a calling. 2. Because Christ could
have helped ^h^ matter another way, if he had pleased. 3. Because the Scripture
behoved to be fulfilled, which foretold of his sufferings. Doct. 1. Rash zeal
is dangerous in Christ's matters, and gloss miscarrieth men where it is
followed, as here is to be seen, One of Christ's followers ingageth the rest to
resist the Magistrate, with the present hazard of their life, and draws on
the blot of sedition upon Religion. 2. No man shall have thanks to fight for
Christ without a warrant; for, to Peter Christ says, Put up thy Sword. 3. They
deserve to perish by the sword whosoever draws the sword, under whatsoever
pretense, without Gods warrant; for it is said, They that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword. 4. They do entertain wrong thoughts of God, whosoever go
about to help their cause by unlawful means, Think thou that I cannot help
my self? says Christ. 5. When the Lord sees it fit to glorify himself,
rather by the deliverance, than by the sufferings of his servants, he can find
means to save them, and has Angels in abundance ready, if men should fail; for
he says, Cannot I pray for legions of Angels? 6. Our Lord suffered most
willingly, with express^ purpose to fulfill the Scriptures, which do speak of
the way of our redemption; for, How, says he, shall the Scripture be
fulfilled, that thus it must be?

Ver. 55. In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as
against a thief with swords and staves to take me? I sat daily with you
teaching in the Temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

56. But all this was done, that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be
fulfilled. Then all the Disciples forsook him, and fled.

Christ clears himself, and convicteth his Enemies of an evil conscience in
their apprehending of him; because albeit openly they could not challenge him,
yet did they now in the night time come with armed men against him, as if he
had been guilty of crimes, and a fugitive from the Law. Then after he has thus
convicted them, he yeildeth himself to them, according to the Scriptures:
whereupon the Disciples flee. Doct. 1. To clear our own innocence, and to
convince the adversary of wrong done to us, may stand well with readiness to
suffer; for Christ in yiedling himself to suffering, gives us example in
both. 2. The conscience of a man's holy conversation bypast, is comfortable in
the day of suffering, as Christ here comfort himself, that they could lay
nothing to his charge, save care and painfulnesse to save their souls, by daily
teaching in the Temple. 3. The course which Christ's enemies do follow against
him, bewrays them to have an ill cause and conscience; for they come now in
the night, as against a Thief, and yet when he sat daily teaching in the
temple, they laid no hold on him. 4. The Scripture is a fit mean to lead us by
the stumbling block of the Cross; therefore says Christ, All this was done that
the scripture might be fulfilled. 5. Resolution to suffer, will fail in the day
of trial, except God give strength, as here is to be seen, The Disciples who
promised to stand fast, do all for sake Christ, and fly.

Ver. 57. And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiphas the
high Priest, where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled. These are Christ's
sufferings in the Garden: now are set down his sufferings in Caiphas Hall,
together with Peter's denial; and first, an Assembly of church men are gathered
at Caiphas House to judge him. Doc. 1. God disposes of the sufferings of his
Martyrs as he sees fittest for his glory; for these who are permitted to
apprehend Christ, are not permitted to kill him in a tumultuous way, but must
present him to judgment before Caiphas, and the Scribes and Elders assembled in
Caiphas House. 2. It is now new thing that such as have begun to persecute
Christ in any degree, go on from one degree to another, as these men who were
his adversaries in affection, had spoken against him, and consulted how to take
him, shall not now be rid of him, but he is taken and set before them in
judgment, where his part and theirs also, his innocence and their cruelty may
both be seen.

Ver. 58. But Peter followed him afar off, unto the high Priests Palace, and
went in, and sat with the servants to see the end. Peter follows on, to wit
what should befall Christ. Doc. Albeit the evidences of love to Christ, may be
cut off for a time, yet love cannot be rooted out of the heart of a sincere
disciple, for though Peter fled once, yet he follows on again; and albeit he
follows afar off, yet he seeks to be where Christ was, that he might see
the end.

Ver. 59. Now the chief Priests and Elders, and all the council, sought false
witness against Jesus to put him to death,

60. But found none:yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none.
At last came two false witnesses.

61. And said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to
build it in three days.

This corrupt church-assembly is resolute to have his life, yet will they seek
to keep a form of Justice, and to lead Witnesses. Doct. 1. Malice against the
Innocent is so shameful ^thing, that such as are most guilty of it, shun to
seem guilty; (...) these men seek to have some appearance of Witnesses against
Christ; and when they have found disagreeing false Witnesses, they do reject
them, till they find such false Witnesses (...) might agree in one, and seem
true. 2. Christ his greatest E^emies could find no fault in him, but were
forced to make that ^lau^t which was none, to wit, His foretelling of his own
death and resurrection, which was the matter of his glory and our comfort,
Destroy this Temple, and I will build it in three days, says Christ; that is,
Do your worst against me, in destroying the Temple of this Body of mine, and I
will raise it up again the third day; which words the Witnesses do alter, and
repeat them, as if he had promised to destroy the Temple of Jerusalem, and
build it again in three days; and therefore are these men justly called here
False Witnesses.

Ver. 62. And the high Priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing?
what is it, which these witness against thee? Our Lord could have answered for
himself, but because he stood in our room, he answered nothing, and was
content to be condemned for our faults, though he was free of all sin in
himself; as also, the matter witnessed was not worthy to be disputed; for
presuppose he had said so, it was no matter of accusation, he had done greater
miracles than to do this, yea the raising of his own Body promised by him, in
case the Witnesses had faithfully reported his words, was a greater work than
the building of the Temple alleged: always we learn, to his glory, and our
comfort, that against our Redeemer no more than this could be alleged.

Ver. 63. But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said unto
him, I adjure thee by the living Go^, that thou tell us, whether thou be the
Christ the Son of God. The High Priest finding all matters witnessed, to be but
frivolous, adjureth our Lord to confess, whether he were the Christ the Son of
God. Doct. 1. The Messiah by the Jews own acknowledgement behoved to be the Son
of God; for, Tell us, says the High Priest, whether thou be the Christ the Son
of God, importing that the promised Messiah, or Christ was to be no other than
the Son of God. 2. The wicked labor to make the fear of God a trap to take the
godly, when they cannot otherwise overtake them; I adjure thee by God, to tell
us, says the High Priest. 3. Profane and crafty men stand not to take the Name
of God in vain, when it may serve to their own ends; for, I adjure thee by the
living God, says the high priest, when he minds nothing but to make the
answer a snare.

Verse. 64. Jesus says unto him, Thou have said: nevertheless, I say unto you,
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of heaven. Christ avoweth himself to be what the High
Priest had said, and forewarneth them all, that though he was to them a
despised man, yet should they see him to be the Son of God, and Judge over them
at the day of judgment, and so in a manner summoneth them to answer at his
tribunal that day. Doct. 1. That Christ is the Son of God, is a truth
judicially deponed by himself, being adjured to answer upon his Oath, and
being now ready to die: for, Thou have said, says he; or, I am the same whom
thou inquirest for. 2. Such as will not receive Christ's wo^d as divine, shall
be forced to acknowledge his power to be divine; for thus says he,
Nevertheless (or though ye believe me no^) yet Ye shall see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of power: and this in part came to pass, first, in
his resurrection; next, in his Spirit poured forth on the Apostles; thirdly, in
the conversion of multitudes of souls; and fourthly, in the overthrow of the
Jewish church and Nation, in their own time, not long after. 3. Such as will not
acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God, for their salvation, shall see him come
to judge them at the last day; for, You shall see me coming in the clouds of
heaven, says Christ.

Ver. 65. Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He has spoken
blasphemy; what further need we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his
blasphemy:

66. What think ye? They answered and said, he is guilty of death.

67. Then did they spit it his face, and buffetted him, and others smote him
with the palms of their hands.

68. Saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee?

This good confession of Christ is counted blasphemy, and he therefore
condemned, buffetted, spitted upon, and mocked. Doct. 1. A man given over to
unbelief, though he pretend to desire to know truth, yet will he not believe
when truth is told him, (no not when it is confirmed by the oath of him who
cannot lie, and when it is proved by many miracles) but h^ will affront his own
conscience in all this; as here, He has spoken blaspemy said the high priest,
when Christ had told the truth which before was proved by his works, and was
undertaken to be proved yet more. 2. Profane and graceless hypocrites, when it
may serve their turn, will put on the mask of marvelloos zeal to the glory of
God; as here, The high priest does rend his clothes, and says, You have heard
his blasphemy. 3. Partiality and malice in Christ's came especially can hardly
be hid; for the high priest even when he will seem to do justice, does first
condemn Christ of blasphemy, and then asks the voice of his council. 4.
Assemblies and councels may err so far, as to agree in one to condemn Christ
to death; for here this council answered and said, He is worthy of death. 5.
Albeit Christ be most free of blasphemy, and of all sin; yet because they in
whose room he did stand, are guilty of it, and of all sort of sin, therefore it
is provided by Divine Justice, that Christ shall be condemned for our cause;
and sentence given thus, He is guilty of death. 6. What must we be worthy of,
when Christ is spitted upon, buffetted, blind-folded, and mocked for our cause?

Verse. 69. Now Peter sat without in the Palace: and a Damsel came unto him,
saying, Thou also was^ with Jesus of Galilee.

70. But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou say.

How Peter denied Christ thrice, and then repented, is set down in the end of
the chapter: wherein we learn, 1. That it is dangerous to be in the place with,
and company of Christ's enemies, wi^ hour a special calling; for the occasion
of Peter's being tempted, was his sitting in the high priests hall. 2. A small
blast of temptation is sufficient to overturn a man who is puffed up with
confidence of his own strength; as here, The voice of a Damsel ^ver ^^rneth
Peter. 3. The shifting of a confession for Christ when it is requisite, is in
effect a denial of him; for Peter's saying, He knew not what the damsel said, is
called here, A denial.

Ver. 71. And when he was gone into the porch, another maid saw him, and said
unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth.

72. And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.

The second denial foll^weth: wherein learn, 1 That when temptation does
prevaill, change of place will not hinder the tempter to pursue the victory, he
will follow on and pr^s^e his point, so long as the sickness and sin does
adhere; for, Another Damsel is set on work by Satan to tempt Peter, when he
goes out into the porch. 2. Sin grows by degrees, from the time that a man
falls therein, til he repent, he still grows worse; for, Now Peter denies
expressly, and with an oath, that he did not know Christ.

Ver. 73. And after a while came unto him them that stood by, and said to
Peter, Surely thou also art one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee.

74. Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And
immediately the cock crew.

This is the third denial, Wherein learn; the horrible tyranny of Satan, and
unspeakeable weakness of a sinner left to himself, still Satan draws men
unto deeper and further sinning, and the sinner, as he is more tempted, sins
more; for now standers by do fall on Peter, and press him yet more, and he at
last denies with oaths, and cursing of himself if be knew Christ: This was a
pitiful spectacle.

Ver. 75. And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which said unto him, Before
the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. And he went out and wept bitterly.
After this fearful fall, the Lord raises Peter up again, by bringing to his
remembrance the words which he did not believe till now; and by this means he
works repentance in him. Doct. 1. The Elect may fearfully fall but cannot
fall away utterly; for, Peter by temptation is driven to deny the Lord, but
does not lie still in the sin. 2. As the forgetting of the Lords word, opens
the door to temptation, so the calling of it to remembrance, mixed with faith,
is a means of repentance: for ere Peter's repentance be mentioned, it is said,
Peter remembered the words of the Lord. 3. Sincere repentance weepeth seriously,
and in secret: as here, Peter went out when he repented and wept bitterly.

CHAP. XXVII.
After Christ is delivered unto Pilate, Judas hangs himself, and leaves the
money to the priests to be disposed, ver. 10. Pilate examineth Christ, and
without cause condemns him, and delivers him to be scourged and crucified,
ver. 45. after which Christ's Godhead is more manifested, and he is buried with
some respect.

Ver. 1. WHen the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the
people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death.

2. And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the governor.


THe corrupt churchmen having unjustly condemned Christ, do seek now to put
him to death by the power of the civil Magistrate. Doct. 1. The wicked a^e
exceeding watchful and painful to accomplish an ill turn, especially against
Christ; for late at night, and early in the morning, are the chief Priests and
others busy to have Christ put to death. 2. It is no new thing to see corrupt
church governors abuse the civil Magistrate, in execution of their unjust and
cruel conclusions; as here the chief Priests and Elders Deliver Christ bound to
Pilate the governor.

Ver. 3. Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests and elders,

4. Saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood. And they
said, What is that to us? see thou to that.

5. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went
and hanged himself.

Now Judas his conscience is wakened, but out of time, whereupon he confesses
his sin to them who ensnared him; but finding them to despise him, he casts
back the price of his treachery, and hangs himself. Doct. 1. Though before a
sin be committed the bait and allurement is ^nly seen, and the conscience
blindfolded, kept captive and benumbed; yet after sin is committed it shall be
wakened at last, and see the ugliness of sin discovered; for as Judas sees
now, and says now, that He has betrayed the innocent blood. 2. When the evil
of sin is discovered, then is the naughtiness of every inducement unto it
discovered also; and the grief is more then any gain or pleasure inducing unto
it can counterballance; for Judas now counts little of the thirty pieces of
silver, brings back the price, and casts it down in the temple. 3. Such as
sin by the inducement of others, need not look for comfort from the inticers of
them unto it, but must bear the guiltiness of it alone; for when Judas
regrateth his sin to the Priests, What is that to us? say they to him, see thou
^e that. 4. When Justice pursues the sinner, and he flies not to Gods mercy
in Christ, there needs no other Judge, or witness, or Burrio against him,
but his own conscience only; it is sufficient to convict, condemn, and torture
him so, as he will choose to strangle himself, rather then endure the vexation
of it: for, Judas being forsaken of those who ensnared him in the sin, goes
not to God, but departs and hangs himself.

Ver. 6. And the chief Priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not
lawful for us to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.

7. And they took counsel, and bought with them the potters field to bury
strangers in.

8. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood unto this day.

This cursed money the priests will not bring into the Treasury of the Temple,
but do employ it in a charitable work, to buy a burial place for strangers,
by which means a prophecy of the Scripture is fulfilled in Gods providence.
Doct. 1. The Lord will have no off^ring made unto him, of that which is not a
man's own, and that in such a way, as may be free of all appearance of allowing
of men's unjust or dishonorable gain; for, It is not lawful, say they, Deuteronomy.
23.18. to put this money unto the treasury. 2. It is no new thing to see Christ's
most cruel adversaries deep in hypocrisy, pretending to be feared to offend in
the least things; as these men stand not to give Judas a hire to betray
innocent blood, but will not meddle with the gain, when it is cast back. 3.
Hypocrites, even when they are deepest in a mischief, will seek to hide their
course with seeming to do some good work, as these men will be charitable to
the poor, in buying a burying place to the strangers, with the price of Christ's
Blood. 4. The Lord can make the Mask of men's hypocrisy the special Means to
discover them, as here these wicked Priests do seek to hide their cruelty
against Christ, by seeming to be charitable, in buying the potters field, for
burying of strangers with the price of Christ's life; and in Gods providence it
is turned to the contrary, that this field should in all time coming bear the
name of their bloody bargain made with Judas; for, the field was called, The
field of blood unto this day, says the Evangelist.

Ver. 9. (Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet,
saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was
valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value.

10. And gave them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me.)

The Evangelist does observe the Lords overruling providence, who by this
means, fulfilled the words of the P^ophet Zachary, cha. ^1. ver. 12. where the
Lord complains of the ungratitude of the people, who accounted less of all
his personal care over them, then ordinarily men do account of their basest
servants, on whom they will, one way or other, in a short time bestow more then
what they do p^ise all the Lords labor on them to be worth, and withal the
Lord foretells that at length they should put no other price upon him, when
he should come to be bought and sold among them, say thirty pieces of silver,
with which money should be bought the potters field, for a memorial unto all
ages of their undervaluing of him. As for the calling of the Prophet Zachary by
the name of Jeremy, albeit it were presupposed that this verbal mistake did
creep into the T^xt, by the inadvertance of the first transcribers of the
Evangelists Copy; yet this is no material depraving of the Text, but such an
accident of the letter only, as an intelligent reader being acquainted with
scripture, could easily satisfy himself into, calling to mind the place of
Zachary, where this is written: but seeing it is noted, that the Hebrews
usually were called by diverse names, it is most reasonable to affirm that
Zachary was also called Jeremy, seeing in the scripture we find him called by
both their names: In the inscription of the prophecy, he is called Zacharias,
and in this Scripture Jeremias; now the Spirit who dyted Scripture, knew his
names best of any: As for the citation of the words, it is several times
observed before, that the Evangelist stood not upon letters and syllables, but
took hold of the sense, in so far as concerned their present purpose. Doct. 1.
The pastoral care which God manifested over his people by his Ministers, is of
less value to misbeleevers, then the basest service of any ^adesman; for
Christ, and all the works done by his Ministers, are not valued above thirty
pieces of silver By the children of Israel. 2. The stumbling block of the
indignities done to Christ, are best removed, when we consider that they were
all foretold in Scripture; for so does the Evangelist ward off the offense of
the cross, by telling of us, that thereby Was fulfilled what was spoken by the
Prophet.

Ver. 11. And Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked him,
saying, Art thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou say.
What our Lord suffered before the civil Judges, is here set down, and first of
what things he is accused: wherein observe, 1. That as Christ is brought before
the Ecclesiastic court, so also before the civil; and as he is charged before
the high Priest of blasphemy, which is the sum of all sins against the first
Table; so is he charged before the civil Judge of sedition and treason, the
sum of all sins against the second Table: That he might bear the imputation
of, and take away all our sins, both against the first and second Table, and
prevent our arraignment before the justice seat of God; for here while he ^tood
before the Governor, he is asked, Art thou the king of the Jews? as if he had
usurped an earthly kingdom, to the prejudice of Caesar. 2. There was not so
much as a probable appearance of sedition in Christ, but a mere calumny
alleged; Therefore Christ answered, Thou say, that is, so thou alledgest.

Ver. 12. And when he was accused of the chief Priests and elders, he answered
nothing.

13. Then says Pilate unto him, Hear thou not how many things they witness
against thee?

14. And he answered him to never a word, insomuch that the governor marvelled
greatly.

Christ being accused of many things, answered not, partly because the contrary
was notourly known, and the conscience of the chief Accusers did answer for
him; and partly, because he had taken on him to stand in our room, and to bear
our sins: therefore he held his peace, as in some sense guilty, in our name of
all, though free in himself. Doct. 1. Never was there such a person arraigned
before any court as Christ, so innocent and willing to be condemned, as guilty
of other men's faults, for he loved our Justification, more then his own
reputation; no wonder therefore that the Governor wondered greatly. 2. There is
more honesty to be expected of heathen men and pagans, then of corrupt
professors, for the chief Priests and elders do load men with false
imputations, but Pontius Pilate will not admit the accusation, till he hear
Christ's answer.

Ve. 15. Now at that feast the Governor was wont to release unto the people a
prisoner, whom they would.

16. And they had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas.

17. Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will
ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?

18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

Pilate seeks indirectly to set Christ free, knowing in his conscience that
they had delivered him for envy, and not for any fault in him: and this he does
by making use of an unwarrantable custom of releasing at the Feast some
notable prisoner, whom the people should choose. Doct. 1. It is a notable
providence tha^ Christ's sufferings were at the time of the Feast of the
Passover; for then were all the Jews gathered together unto Jerusalem, then was
a confluence of all sorts of people from all countries about, whereby Christ's
sufferings might be the more public, and the type of the sacrificing of the
paschall Lamb, more notably fulfilled; Therefore it is marked, that It was on
the feast, to wit, of the Passover. 2. It is no new thing to see corrupt
customs, prejudicial to Justice, to creep in among people, and to be kept for
gratifying of people, as here the governor was wont to Release unto the people
a prisoner, whom they would. 3. Carnal men use not to resist sin directly, but
to go about to shift it by, if they can, without the loss of credit or profit,
or any other beloved l^st; for when Pilate should have expressly dealt for
innocent Jesus, he proponeth to the people their choice, whether They will
have released Barabbas or Jesus. 4. As Avarice is one, so Envy is another of
the sins which killed Christ; as avarice is ready to sell Christ, so is malice
and envy to pursue Christ to the death: as Judas his avarice is already
manifested, so now the Priests envy is made manifest also; for, Pilate knew
that for envy they had delivered him.

Ver. 19. When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him,
saying. Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered many
things this day in a dream because of him. A special warning is given to Pilate
from his wife, to beware to condemn righteous Christ. Doct. 1. It was necessary
that by all means the righteosnesse of Christ should be born witness unto,
that in his condemnation, not for his own sins, but for ours, our justification
from sin might shine the more clearly; therefore among other testimonies of
Christ's innocence, Pilats Wife extraordinarily moved, sent unto Pilat, saying,
Have nothing to do with that just man. 2. How natural soever dreams are, yet
God has a hand in them, and sometime in a special manner does make use
thereof for notable ends; as here, Pilat's Wife is troubled in her sleep, about
the wrongs done to Christ, and Pilate the Judge has advertisement hereby, so
as in God's providence Pilate was moved, though not to set Christ free from
suffering, yet to absolve him of all fault laid to his charge.

Verse. 20. But the chief Priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they
should ask Barrabbas, and destroy Jesus.

21. The Governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye
that I release unto you? They said, Barrabbas.

22. Pilate says unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called
Christ? They all say unto him, Let him be crucified.

23. And the governor said, Why, What evil has he done? But they cried out
the more, saying, Let him be crucified.

The people choose Barrabbas, and refuse Christ by their rulers persuasion.
Doct. 1. Wicked men have a greater hatred against Christ, then against the most
vicious amongst them, as here they ask Barrabbas to be saved, and seek that
Christ may be destroyed. 2. Woe to the people when their leaders are corrupt,
for then shall they be tempted by wicked counsel; and woe unto them yet more, if
they follow their wicked directions, for so might they be led with these cursed
Jews to preserve Barrabbas, and destroy Christ. 3. Half friendship, lake
warm affection toward Christ, wily-working for him, so as men who are Christ's
adversaries, may be pleased also, may well show the righteousness of Christ's
cause, but cannot deliver him or his servants from suffering, nor exempt the
cold-rise friend from sin: therefore either must a man be a right down friend,
plain, and frank for Christ, or nothing. Pilates wiles striving to save Christ,
and to please the people also, do not serve the turn, but do rather ensnare
him, and inrage Christ's adversaries the more; for, They cried out the more,
Let him be crucified.

Ver. 24. When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing but that rather a
tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person, see ye to it. Pilat
overcome with the temptation of pleasing the People, first absolveth Christ,
and then yeildeth him over to the fury of his adversaries, and will have them
only to be guilty of his death. Doct. 1. He that is not resolute to resist sin
upon all hazards, will yield to it at last, as Pilat does here. 2. Ignorant men
are easily deceived, counting themselves free of such sins, as men, or
inconveniences from men do press them unto, as Pilat is here; for because the
people made a tumult, he washes his hands, and says, I am innocent of the
blood of this just person. 3. Whatsoever be the fault of instruments in a
wicked deed, the prime authors and instigatours have the chief guiltiness;
therefore not without ground says Pilate to the Jews, See you to it.

Ver. 25. Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on
our children. The mad people, deluded by their leaders, take on them the guilt
without fear. Doct. The stupidity of a misled conscience is fearful, when it
is most deep in guiltiness, it dare defy Gods Justice, in the opinion it has
of its own innocence, as here the people answer ^ilate, His blood be upon us,
wherein their mouth does pronounce their own doom, and Wrath is from that time
come on them unto this day.

Ver. 26. Then released he Barrabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus,
he delivered him to be crucified. Thus is Jesus absolved from all guiltiness
in himself, and declared in the face of his Accusers to be a just person, and
yet is he dealt with as a guilty man, scourged and delivered to be crucified,
wherein we must look up unto the dispensation of a higher Judge, (who had the
sins of the whole Elect in a Roll, to charge upon him, and now to exact of him,
above what he had already suffered, yet more satisfaction to justice, for the
full Redemption of his people) that so they may behold him, as he is, to wit,
the eternal, and only begotten Son of God, in his humane Nature suffering,
according to the paction of Redemption past between him and the Father, all
that Justice could crave for the expiation of our sins, and purchase of
righteousness and life eternal unto us: and to this end we must take along
with us in all Christ's sufferings, 1. The consideration of the worthiness of
the person who is surety suffering for us, that he is the Lord God Almighty,
filling the whole Earth with his Glory, the Redeemer and holy One of Israel,
personally united with our Nature, now upon him while he stands before
Pontius Pilate. Secondly, The consideration of the fearful and horrible
deservings of sin in us, which calls for our everlasting torments, with the
curse of God upon us. Thirdly, the consideration of the strictness of Divine
Justice, which will have sin punished condignly, and will neither quit the
sinner without a ransom, nor the Redeemer without full satisfaction and
punishment, equivalent to the principal Debtors deservings. Fourthly, the
consideration of the wonderful grace of God, who is content to take
satisfaction unto justice for the sins of men from one man in the name of all
those, for whom he offers to satisfy. Fifthly, the consideration of the
unspeakable love of God, who gives his own eternal Son to be the man, who
shall pay for the rest of the adopted children. Sixthly, the consideration of
the meekness and patience of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who loved
us, and gave himself for us, even to the cursed Death of the cross, yea to be
made a curse for us, that we might obtain the blessing of righteousness and
eternal life through him: if these considerations go along with us, we shall
see our selves worthy for ever of the shame and torment which our Lord endured
for a short time, and we shall see Christ in his deepest humiliation shining
gloriously in our eyes; our faith shall find food, and our sins shall find
poison in the sufferings of our Redeemer. Doct. 1. Such as think they cannot
stand, except by the good will of Princes or People, whenever they are put to
declare themselves, whether they love Christ or the World better, will
certainly choose to please Princes or People, whatsoever may become of Christ;
as here the People will have Barabbas set free, and Christ executed, to please
their Rulers; and Pilate will both release Barabbas, and scourge Christ, to
give unto the People satisfaction. 2. It is no wonder that Christ's Servants
find hard measure of men at the Bar of Justice; for, no fault is found in
Christ, And yet he is scourged, and delivered to his Adversaries to be
crucified. 3. Christ's Servants should resolve after lesser sufferings, to
endure yet more, and at last to suffer death; for Christ after suffering of
many things is scourged, and then delivered to be crucified. 4. Our sins
deserve to be punished with extremity of pain and torment, and with extremity
of shame and disgrace; for our Redeemer behoved to be scourged and crucified
also.

Ver. 27. Then the Soldiers of the Governor took Jesus into the common Hall,
and gathered unto him the whole Band of soldiers.

28. And they stripped him, and put on him a Scarlet Robe.

29. And when they had platted a Crown of Thorns, they put it upon his Head,
and a Reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked
him, saying, Hail King of the Jews.

30. And they spit upon him, and took a Reed, and smote him on the Head.

31. And after they had mocked him, they took the Robe from off him, and put
his own Raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

While the cross is making ready, the Soldiers fall on Christ, and abuse him
despitefully. Doct. 1. When Governors and great men are against Christ, no
wonder to see their Servants against him also, and to go about to please their
Masters by wronging of Christ's members; for here, The Soldiers of the
Governor gathered together to take their sport in abusing Christ himself. 2.
As the Doctrine of Christ's Godhead is counted Blasphemy by the corrupt
Church-rulers, Chap. 26.65. So is Christ's by graceless Statesmen, and
Servants of civil Rulers; the Soldiers of the civil Governor here do make a
laughing stock of Christ, the King of the Jews, offering him a Soldiers coat
for a Robe, a Reed for a Scepter, Thorns for a Crown, a mocking Beck for
Reverence, spitting on his Face, for a Kiss of love and subjection, and
smiting on the head of loyalty and service; but so behoved our pride and vain
glory to be punished and explate. 3. The malice of Christ's enemies will not be
satiate with less then blood; for when they have mocked Christ, and shamefully
used him, They led him away to be crucified.

Ver. 32. And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him
they compelled to bear his Cross. Our Lord was so exercised in the Garden
through agony of Spirit, so tossed all the night with the Soldiers, so agitate
and vexed before the judgment seat of Caiphas and Pilat; so sore spent by
scourging, by buffeting, by piercing his Head with Thorns, that now there
remained not so much natural strength in his body, as to bear the tree of the
cross through the way unto the place of execution; therefore they finding one
Simon of Cyrene by the way, coming from his work in the field, they compel him
to bear Christ's cross. Doc. 1. It was not by any humane strength that Christ
did bear the weight of the curse of God, due to our sins; for as his body, so
also his natural strength of body was like another man's; and here he who upon
the tree of the cross bare our sins (which are of more weight then all the
mountains, and the sand of the Sea) has not so much natural strength, as to
bear that tree unto the place of execution: for Simon, a fresh man, must bear
it after him. 2. The death of the cross was so shameful, so abhorred, and so
cursed a death, that none of all the multitude which followed him would touch
the cross, but Simon must be compelled to bear it.

Ver. 33. And when they were come into a place called Golgotha, that is to say,
a place of a skul. Follows that which our Lord did suffer in Golgotha, or
Calvary, (to which place; the skuls or bones of malefactors executed, there to
be seen apparently, did give the name) ^ filthy place without the Town, ^s was
fore-signified by the offering of these beasts which we^e burnt without the
camp. Doc. Our sins deserve that punishment should be poured in upon us by the
conduit of every sense, that as we have abused all our senses unto sin, so we
in every one of them should be tormented: for beside wearines and much pain,
the place of Christ's execution is Golgotha, where the sight of dead men's bones
forme^ly executed as malefactors, and the scent of their rotten relics might
offend both his sight and smell.

Ver. 34. They gave him vinegar to drink, mingled with gal: and when he had
tasted thereof, he would not drink.

A further degree of suffering, is his thi^st, which he could have willingly
quenched with wate^; but they gave Him vinegar and gal to drink; no wonder he
was thirsty, being now spent with his bloody swear and Agony in the Garden,
being tossed and toiled all night, scourged and beaten, and burdened with the
cross, and such like other exe^^ises. Doct. 1. For our abuse of meat and
drink, and to the end that liberty might be purchased unto us to eat and drink
the Sweet with Gods blessing, Christ our Lord is put to thirst, and not so much
as a cup of cold water is furnished unto him, but in stead of the common favor
of some refreshful drink, usually granted even to Malefactors; the Father out
of justice, and his Enemies out of malice, Give unto him to drink of vinegar
mixed with gall. 2. Our Lord, how great soever his pain was, was so patient in
his suffering, that he would not hasten his own death by such a drink;
therefore, Having tasted thereof, he would not drink: thereby also teaching
us, that no pain nor misery should make us so impatient; as to do any thing
which may shorten our life.

Ver. 35. And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet; They parted my Garments
among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. Our Lords Enemies go on to
fulfill their malice, mean-time they do nothing but what was agreed upon in the
counsel of God, and was foretold in the Scripture. Doct. 1. No other death
could satisfy men's cruel malice, or Gods justice, or was fit to deliver us
from the curse of the Law due to us, except the cursed death of the cross,
therefore they crucified him. 2. Though the death of the cross had in it shame
abundant above all other sorts of death; yet for satisfaction of justice, for
expiation of our abuse of apparel, and for purchasing unto us not only
liberty, wi^h Gods blessing, to put on comely raiment, each man according to
his place; but also to cover our sinful nakedness with righteousness and
glory, our Lord was stripped naked, and his garments parted in his sight. 3. It
is necessary in looking upon our Lords suffe^ings, that we keep our eye upon
the determinate counsel of God, and upon the Prophesies, and Types,
foretelling the sufferings of the Messiah, that we may be kept from stumbling
at the cross of our Lord; for this was done, that what was typified in
thespoliation of David's goods, might be literally fulfilled in Christ, They
parted my garments among them.

Ver. 36. And sitting down, they watched him there. It was necessary, that
Jesus being nailed on the cross, should lay down his life, and that we should
be certified of the complete payment of our ransom, therefore malice on men's
part, and divine justice and Wisdom on Gods part, do provide for a guard to
secure the cross, and to be witnesses of the certainty of our Lords suffering.
Doct. God so disposes of matters, that when his Enemies are doing their worst
against him, they are doing most for him, contrary to their mind; therefore it
is marked, that They who crucified Christ, sat down, and watched him there.

Ver. 37. And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS, THE
KING OF THE JEWS. It was ordinary to put the cause of men's crucifying over
their head upon the cross, for the clearing of Justice, and shaming of the
condemned: but here is a Superscription put over Christ's Head intended for
shame, namely to brand him fasly with the calumny of usurpation of an earthly
kingdom, yet it tended indeed to his glory, for Christ is indeed Jesus the
Savior, indeed a King, and specially of the Jews, or the true Israelites of
God. Doct. 1. All the shame which men could devise against Christ, i^ matter of
his glory, the mouths and hands of the wicked are so ruled by God, that when he
pleases they shall honor him, nil they will they, as the Inscription of the
cross is here a crown of glory to Christ. 2. No wonder to see Christ's servants
charged of treason, when we see what the wicked made to be Christ's ditty. 3.
Christ died for no fault in himself, for even his ditty was no fault, and
Pilate absolved him.

Ver. 38. Then were there two Thieves crucified with him, one on the right
hand, and another on the left. There are here two thieves crucified, to bear
Christ company, and he is set in the midst as a greater malefactor then either
of them. Doc. 1. Though humane justice could not charge Christ as a sinner, yet
our sins being imputed, that he might bear them on the Tree, divine justice can
well put our Cationer with his own consent, in the chiefest room of sinners;
for here is Christ reckoned among Thieves, Robbers, Throat-cutters, Traitors,
and is executed in the midst of them. 2. No wonder that Christ's Servants (how
innocent soever) be accounted of, and used as malefactors, seeing Christ is
crucified between two thieves. 3. Wonderful is our Lords love, who is contented
to be used as a malefactor, that we malefactors might be set free.

Ver. 39. And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads.

40 And saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thy self, if thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.

When malice has done what it can to Christ's body, now Satan in his
instruments makes assault on his mind, by mocking his holiness and fellowship
with God, and so will God's justice have it, that our sins may be condignly
punished in Christ's person. Doct. 1. It is the top and height of affliction to
be mocked in trouble; for here cruel mockings are marked as the cap-stone of
the malice of Christ's Enemies. 2. The affliction of the most vile malefactor
will find more compassion and humanity from beholders, than Christ or his
followers; for, They who go by, revile none of the thieves on the cross, but
Christ only. 3. How unjustly soever Christ or his Servants be condemned of men,
the World will hold all accusations of them to be true, as here, the deposition
of false Witnesses is made a reproach unto Christ, Thou that destroyest the
Temple* say they. 4. The World does think that the cross and fellowship with
God, cannot consist together; the cross so blinds their eyes that they
cannot see the glory of the Saints, as here they think Christ cannot be Gods
Son, because he is crucified. No wonder that in trouble the adoption of Gods
children be questioned also, If thou be the Son of God, say they. 5. No proof
of the Saints interest in God, will suffice Satan and his instruments, except
they will give such evidences as he and they do prescribe, and which cannot be
given without sin and offending of God; for, If thou be the Son of God, say
they, come down from the cross. 6. No temptation so, sore, no dart so
poysonable as is the question of the grounds of Faith; If thou be the Son of
God, is the sharpest arrow which Satan could shoot.

Ver. 41. Likewise also the chief Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and
Elders, said,

42. He saved others, himself he cannot save: if he be the King of Israel, let
him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.

43. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he
said, I am the Son of God.

In the mocking of the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders, here marked, as
a higher degree of insolent insulting over Christ, Learn, 1. That the
opposition which men of place and understanding do make unto Christ, and the
Wrongs which they do, are observed of God, and agreged by the gifts, office,
and place, which they have above the rest of the people; as here, such men are
marked by themselves, with a special description of them, The chief Priests
mocked him. 2. Present sufferings do blind worldly men's eyes so, as they can
neither see the glory of the Saints bygone, nor to come; for all Christ's
Miracles and Evidences of his being the Savior of others, are counted nothing
of now, by these Wretches, because of his sufferings; and yet in these
sufferings, Christ was doing the part of a Savior, more than in any of his
miracles: for not his miracles, but his sufferings, are the price of our
redemption. 3. The most vile and wicked reprobates will offer to believe, upon
such conditions as they themselves shall prescribe unto God, as here these men
do; but they who will not believe upon the grounds of Faith, offered unto them,
shall not have any such grounds as they would be at, Come down from the Cross,
say they, and we will believe him: but Christ will not come down, till he
satisfy justice for us. 4. It is the nature of misbelief to esteem little of
whatsoever God has said or done, except he satisfy present demands, and take
orders and directions from the misbeliever, Let him come down now, and we will
believe him: He saved others, himself he cannot save, and such like say they.
5. The world will not believe that Gods love toward a man, and the subjection
of him unto trouble till he die, can consist together; Therefore, Let God
deliver him, say they, if he will have him. 6. The world count faith in God,
which endures longer then prosperity lasts, or then prosperity may be had in
this life, to be but fancy; Therefore mockingly, say they, He trusted in God,
let him deliver him now: as if they said, His trust is nothing, if he be
suffered to die on the cross. 7. The point of truth, which the devil and
reprobate men can least endure, is the Doctrine of the Godhead of Christ,
which is the Rock whereupon the Elect are builded; Therefore, say they, He
said, I am the Son of God. This point among all did gall them most.

Ver. 44. The thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his
teeth. Christ suffers at the hands of those that were crucified with him; it
is not unusual in the Scripture, to speak indefinitely of a plurality, that
which is to be instanced of any one of that sort: for the meaning is, that not
only common beholders, and formerly known enemies, did mock our Lord, but also
the two thieves hanging now on the cross beside him, justly condemned for
their robbery, were not free of mocking the innocent Son of God; for one of
them did cast the same scoff in his teeth also. Doct. 1. It is no wonder to
see the innocence of Christ mocked by rascals; for our Lord did suffer cruel
mocking by a condemned robber. 2. Straits and torments will not tame a
reprobate, even in the threshold of hell he will blaspheme God, without a cause
offered, as here is to be seen.

Ver. 45. Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land, unto
the ninth hour. In the midst of this infirmity of the humane Nature, Christ
lets forth the Glory of his Godhead in showing himself Lord of Heaven and
Earth, as by other evidences remarked by the rest of the Evangelists, so by
darkning the whole land, at the Noontide of the Day, for the space of three
Hours; and drawing (as it were) the curtain of darkness over his naked Body,
while he hung upon the cross, and thus not suffering the creatures to show
their glory, where their Maker is suffering the extremity of Shame. Doct. Our
Lord did not empty himself in the days of his humiliation, but so as he did
ever let some spark of his Glory appear to such as believed in him, whereby
they might discern the Divine Majesty of his Person, even in his lowest
condition.

Ver. 46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli,
Eli, lama-sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Our Lord, a little before his Death, being now under the full weight and
burden of the curse due to our sins, and finding all sensible consolation from
Heaven and Earth withdrawn from his humane Spirit, breaks forth into this
heavy representation of his case, in the words of Psalm 22. wherein this agony
was foretold. By which speech we understand, that howsoever the humane Nature
of the Mediator, kept constantly the same room in Gods estimation and love,
and could no more be loosed from the incomprehensible-fervent love of God, then
the Personal Union of the Divine and humane Nature could be dissolved; yet was
it necessary, that it should suffer the punishment of our sins, and feel the
effects of the wrath and curse of God due to us for sin, in as high a degree
and measure, as should be equivalent to our perpetual destruction, and be
found satisfactory to Divine Justice for us: and therefore, albeit it was
impossible that the humane nature could be deserted, in regard of Gods love, or
of sustaining strength, or in regard of inherent Holiness, or any other thing
else necessarily joined with the stability of the Hypostaticall Union, yet in
regard of sensible consolation, it was not only possible, but also necessary,
that for a time it should be deserted, and should taste of horrible
bitterness, and accompanying such a desertion; and this sort of torment and
anguish of Spirit could as well consist with the personal Union, as the Pain
and Torment of Body could consist with it: yea, as the Personal Union gave way
to his death, and remained fast till the time of the separation of His Soul and
body, so did it also give way to the temporal affliction of his humane Spirit,
and to this desertion in regard of Felt comfort, and yet remained constantly
fixed, and unmovable notwithstanding; and if any should doubt how Christ his
persuasion of the union of the two Natures, and of the necessity and
profitablenesse of his sufferings could stand with this expression, let us
consider, that no persuasion of whatsoever truth can make holy Nature senseless
of what is destructive of it, nor hinder it to express how it is naturally
affected, and what it naturally feels; and as persuasion of the necessity and
profitableness of the searing of a bleeding wound with a hot iron, cannot
hinder nature to be sensible of the pain, or to cry out in the sense thereof;
so no knowledge or persuasion of the Personal Union of the two Natures in
Christ, or certainty of the necessity and profitablenesse of his sufferings
could reasonably hinder such an expression as this, wherein persuasion of love,
and union with God, cries, My God, my God; and holy nature, filled with the
sense of wrath, due to our sins, and destitute of all comfortable feeling of
Gods presence for the time, cries forth, Why have thou forsaken me? not by way
of quarelling, but by way of admiring the terriblenesse, and abhorring the
bitterness of Divine Wrath now felt, to be far surpassing all humane
apprehension, which could precede the feeling of it. Doct. 1. Christ our
surety, beside all the sufferings which he suffered in his body, did suffer
also sorrow, grief, anguish, torment, and desertion, in regard of comfort in
his soul; for this and other expressions prove so much. 2. Our sins deserved
that we should have been utterly forsaken of God, and it behoved our Redeemer
to taste a little of the hell of being forsaken, ere we could be redeemed. 3.
Heaviness of spirit, sense of wrath, appearance of being forsaken, and want of
fell consolation, may consist with the Love of God toward a mants person, yea
and with a man's adoption unto the state of a child of God, for here is
consists with the personal union of the Manhood of Christ with the Divine
Nature. 4. Whenever natural sense does miss the consolations of God, faith
must gripe more straightly unto God, as Christ his faith does here, crying, My
God, my God, when sense sees nothing but forsaking.

Ver. 47. Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, This man
calls for Elias. This his speech unto God, some of the beholders did mock,
and say of him as much as if he had left God, and prayed to Elias. Doct. 1. No
wonder the griefs and troubles of the souls of Gods children be ridiculous to
the World; for even the deep anguish of Christ, and his prayer to the Father,
were mocked by some, as here we see. 2. In common reason it is a just reproach
for any man to call upon any other, except God only; for even profane sinners
here do make it a matter of mocking to pray to Elias, supposing that Christ had
done so, This man calls for Elias, say they.

Ver. 48. And straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it
with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. Here in his thirst,
as was before signified Psalm. 69. vinegar is given him to drink. Doct. No
consolation, no not so much as a drink of water was yielded unto our Lord, till
he paid all our debt, but only what could be devised to augment his grief; as
here, They gave him vinegar to drink.

Ver. 49. The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save
him. They had wrested his Prayer before, as if he had prayed not to God, but to
Elias: now they mock also the falsely supposed Prayer to Elias, in this speech,
importing, that there was no help for him neither from God nor Man. Doct. 1.
Satan by what means he can, does drive hard to have men despairing, when they
are in extremity, as here speaking by his instruments, he tempts Christ. 2.
Till Christ had ended the work of redemption, all sort of vexations did run
together, and by course upon him; for now, unto all the former exercises in
body and soul, he must hear his prayer unto the father wrested and mocked, he
must see himself insulted over, as a man smitten and plagued of God, and as
forsaken of God and man; Let us see, say they, if Elias will come to him.

Ver. 50. Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice yielded up the
ghost. In this close of Christ his suffering, learn, 1. That the Son of God
according to his manhood verily died, and his soul was separate from his body;
for, He yielded up the ghost. 2. He died not by constraint, but willingly; for
of his own accord. He yielded up his Spirit. 3. In dying, he was conqueror
over death; for before death could come at him, as a weakling which cannot live
any longer, Christ being so strong, as To cry with a loud voice, sets upon
death, and yields up the ghost.

Ver. 51. And behold, the vail of the temple was rent in twain, from the top to
the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent. Our Lord being dead
as man, lets forth the glory of his Godhead more then before in four
wonders. The first wonder is, The vail of the temple, or the mid-wal of
partition, which divided between the Sanctuary and the body of the temple, was
rent in twain from the top to the bottom, wherein Christ gave all men to
understand, 1. That his death was the fulfilling, and the accomplishment of all
the Levitical rites and figures of the temple, and of all the ceremonies
annexed unto it, and that now they were to be esteemed as rent, and to be done
away. 2. That now by the Gospel sealed up in his death, the way unto heaven was
made plain and open. 3. That the partition wall between Jew and Gentiles, to
wit, The ceremonial Law, which divided them asunder, was rent, and no more to
stand in force.

The second wonder, is, The earth did quake: whereby the Lord gave men to
understand, 1. That as he is Lord of heaven, which had given testimony unto
him, by hiding its glory, when he is suffering shame; so also he is Lord of the
earth, which now does tremble before her Lord. 2. That he was to shake the
heavens and the Earth by the gospel of his sufferings, and of the redemption
purchased unto sinners by his sufferings.

The third wonder, is, The rocks rent, to show the power of Jesus, who could
subdue the greatest difficulties, and overcome the hardness of whatsoever
obstinate hearts, upon whom he pleases to show his power.

Ver. 52. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of the Saints which
slept, arose,

53. And came out of their graves after his Resurrection, and went into the
holy city, and appeared unto many.

The fourth wonder, is, The opening of the graves, and the resurrection of many
deceased Saints after Christ's resurrection. which was done, 1. To show that
Christ died and was buried, not to remain under the great power of death and
the grave, but to quicken the dead, and to raise them out of their graves; and
that he neither died nor rose for his own particular, but that he might redeem
his own from death, and give unto them resurrection and life. 2. To let us
understand that he is the Savior of all those that believed in him before his
Incarnation, and were deceased, who were to be saved by the Messiah, no less
then of those who believed since; and that the former are partakers of the
fruit of his death and resurrection, no less then the later. 3. The death of
the godly is only a sleep of the body, till the morning of the Resurrection
come; for it is said, The bodies of the Saints which slept. 4. Resurrection,
and the rest of the effects of Christ's death and resurrection, are benefits
only unto the Saints, therefore only the bodies of the Saints arose. 5. Albeit
the great Harvest of Christ's death and resurrection is not to be expected till
the day of judgment, yet the first fruits of that Harvest are abundantly
manifested, In that many of the bodies of the Saints arose. 6. The resurrection
of the Saints depends upon the resurrection of Christ, who is their Head;
for, He is the first born from the dead; The rest who arose unto an immortal
life, came out of their graves after his resurrection. 7. The wonders which our
Lord did work, were all able to abide the light, and wanted not sufficient
witnesses; for among the rest, these Saints which were raised out of their
graves, came into Jerusalem, and appeared unto many. 8. Such as did not believe
in Jesus, and did not belong unto his election, were not worthy to be called to
be witnesses of the blessing following upon his death and resurrection: it is
sufficient that these Saints raised from death, did appear to many; for they
which believe in any measure shall have confirmation abundant, that they may
believe still more; unto them that have, it shall be given, others are worthy
to be despised. 9. Albeit a visible Church be very corrupt, yet so long as
there is a number of true believers in it, so long as it has not gotten a bill
of divorcement from God, it is to be esteemed of honorably, as a Church
belonging unto Christ; Therefore is Jerusalem here called, The holy City.

Ver. 54. Now when the Centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus,
saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly,
saying, Truly, this was the Son of God. These wonders wanted not their
effects; for the Captain of the Guard, and the Soldiers which were with him,
were convinced by these wonders, that truly Christ was the Son of God. Doct.
1. The Lords works as well as his word, do the errand for which they are sent;
for when the wonders were seen, the Soldiers were afraid, and confessed the
Deity of Jesus Christ, saying, Truly, this was the Son of God. 2. Profane
Soldiers are more easily gained unto Christ, then misbelieving Rabbis, for we
hear thus much of the one, but nothing of the other, that they were any whit
moved. 3. Christ's love is such, that when sinners are doing him all the
dishonor they can, he will reveal himself unto them, and overcome them with
free love: for here is a Centurion, and other Soldiers with him, turned
Subjects to him, and confessors of his Name: even when he is hanging dead on
the cross, life springs forth of him to open the eyes of these Soldiers to
see his Godhead, and gives them courage to confess it in his deepest
humiliation.

Ver 55. And many women were there (beholding afar off) which followed Jesus
from Galilee, ministering unto him.

56. Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses,
and the mother of Zebedees children.

When the Disciples were fled except John, It is observed here, that many women
waited on, and were witnesses of Christ's Death. Doct. 1. It is usual with the
Lord, to show his power and grace most upon the weak and the despised; for here
he gives strength and courage to women to attend his sufferings, when men had
failed. 2. Whatsoever grace the Lord bestows upon his own, it is so bestowed,
as their weakness in themselves does usually appear also; for these women
attend, But for fear, they behold afar off. 3. The power of faith in Christ,
and love to him is such, that it will make these that are weakest in the midst
of fear and infirmities, to spare no travel nor expenses, but to hazard, if
need be, their life for him; Many, even women, were there, who had followed
Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him. 4. So acceptable unto Christ are the
evidences of Believers love, that he will subject himself to the standing in
need thereof, and will receive the fruit of their love, and cause to register
it for the parties honor, and others edification; as here he causes to write
down, that these women ministered unto him of their means, followed him out of
Galilee, and attended on him at his death; The name of some of whom he causes
to be set down, to let us see, that none of them, nor such as they, are
forgotten.

Ver. 57. When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named
Joseph, who also himself was Jesus disciple.

58. he went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus: then Pilate commanded the
body to be delivered.

59. And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,

60. And laid it in his own tomb, which he had hewn out in the Rock; and he
rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed.

61. And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary sitting over against the
Sepulcher.

The manner of our Lords burial is set down to verse 61. and the securing of
the burial place by the adversa^ies, to the end: Our Lord being dead, it was
expedient that he should be buried, 1. That the type of Jonah, and other
figures in Scripture should be fulfilled. 2. That the truth of his death might
be known. 3. That his burial might be as a step lower in humiliation, so also
a mid passage unto a more glorious resurrection. 4. That he might sanctify our
burials, and by following death, as it were, to its den, make a way through the
grave unto our resurrection, and full victory over death and the grave. Doct.
1. When shame and sufferings are ended, some degrees of glory do begin, as God
provideth here for an honorable burial unto Christ, after the shame of the
cross is past. 2. Grace makes no difference of rich or poor, but sanctifies
riches and poverty to his own; for, Joseph of Arimathea is a rich man, and a
Disciple of Jesus also. 3. Love to Christ fears no inconveniences, neither
thinks shame of any service unto Christ, for Joseph goes boldly unto Pilate,
and professes it a favor to have liberty to take care of Christ's crucified
body. 4. Christ both in life and death was a friend to magistracy, he will have
justice satisfied, and order kept in his taking down from the cross, no less
then in his crucifying, he will be taken down at Pilates command. 5. God
provided for Christ's burial so, as it should be known, that he verily arose;
for he is put in A new Tomb, hewn out of a rock, wherein never man did lie
before him. 6. As persons are more zealous for Christ, so are they more
particularly taken notice of by God; Therefore these women which did attend him
so carefully, are specially spoken of. 7. Love will never shed with Christ, in
what condition soever he be, and will bestow on him what it may; as these holy
women do bestow looks upon the place he is put into, when they can do no more.

Verse. 62. Now the next day that followed the day of the preparation, the
chief Priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate.

63. Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise again.

64. Command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure, until the third day,
left his disciples come by night and steal him away, and say unto the people,
He is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse then the first.

65. Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch, go your way, make it as sure as ye
can.

66. So they went and made the sepulcher sure, sealing a stone, and setting a
watch.

To make the matter of our Lords burial and resurrection yet more clear,
Divine providence makes use of the adversaries malice; they think to keep
Christ under, and to provide against his resurrection, by setting a guard about
the Sepolchre, and sealing of the stone. Doct. 1. Christ's enemies are vexed
about him, how to suppress him, as here is to be seen; while he is alive, and
while he is dead they can never be secure enough, for fear he shall overcome
them: when they have him dead, they know not how to make the sepulcher sure. 2.
They make of his words, and of his servants words, as best serves their
purpose; for when he told them that though they destroyed the Temple of his
body, yet he would raise it again the third day, they passed by his meaning,
and made it a matter of his ditty; and now they take up his meaning and make
advantage of it against him. 3. When Christ and his cause is brought low, every
wicked man will speak as he pleases, as here they call the God of truth, A
deceiv^r. 4. Hypocrites do respect religion, only for their own ends, and as it
may serve their turn: They pretended to have great respect to the sabbath, that
they may have Christ shortly out of the way; and now they stand not to pollute
the sabbath, by making a business to secure his sepulcher. 5. Magistrates are
in a dangerous condition when the rulers of the church are enemies to Christ,
they will ever be insnaring them in some one thing or other against Christ, as
here Pilat is used. 6. He that sets not God before his eyes, but is given to
please men, will prove a slave to every man's affection; such a man is Pilat,
who grants whatsoever Christ's enemies do require. 7. Whatsoever power of
craftiness can work for obscuring of Christ's glory, his enemies will go about
it carefully, albeit with ill success; as here, They seal the gravestone, and
set a watch, thinking to keep Christ fast in the tomb.

CHAP. XXVIII.
In this chapter Christ's resurrection is declared by Angels, to verse. 9. By
Christ himself, ver. 11. by the watch to the priests, who do corrupt the watch,
and make them to lie for money, verse. 16. Christ meets with his disciples,
and authorizeth them to teach and baptize all Nations.

Ver. 1. IN the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day
of the week came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulcher.
OUr Lord having satisfied Justice for us to the full, in his obedience unto
the death, could not be holden by death, but as the Son of God in Power,
behoved to rise again according to the prediction of the Scriptures, that he
might give Righteousness, and Resurrection unto eternal Life, to all his
Redeemed Ones, who do fly unto him for refuge. In these two women, who are
made the first witnesses of his resurrection, learn, 1. The Power of Love and
Faith in that soul which has found peace of conscience through Christ, will
not suffer the Believer to be unmindfull of him, as appears in Mary
Magdalene, and that other Mary, They must know what is become of him, They come
to see the Sepulcher the third day after his Burial. 2. As any are before
others in love to Christ, so are they in account in Gods books; for this is the
third time, that Mary Magdalene is honorably made mention of, for her love to
our Lord. 3. It is wisdom to moderate the expressions of Love and Zeal, so as
commanded duties be nor neglected; for, These holy women do observe the
Sabbath, and come not forth, till it he ended.

Ver. 2. And behold there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and
sat upon it. In the manner of the Lord's Resurrection, learn, 1. That as our
Lords Death was shameful, in suffering the punishment due to our sins, so his
Resurrection for our Justification was wonderfully glorious: for as Heaven sent
forth an Angel for his service now, so the Earth trembled when he stirred to
arise out of it, There was a great earthquake, and an Angel descended from
Heaven. 2. Christ will make use of his creatures so, as he sees most fit for
his own Glory; for some base rascal^ shall crucify him, honorable Joseph of
Arimathea shall bury him, an Angel shall roll the stone from the tomb. 3.
Albeit all the Angels be at our Lords call, yet he will make use only of one
or two in a service, when one or two ^^ sufficient for his purpose, as here one
spoken of, is abundant to roll away the stone, and to be Porter to him at his
going out of the Sepulcher; one is sufficient to affray and boast all the
Priests guard set about the Sepulcher; for this one Angel, when he had rolled
away the stone, sat upon it, as a Commander.

Ver. 3. His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow.

4. And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.

In the description of the Angel, learn, 1. That Angels take upon them bodily
shapes, when their commission to speak to men, and to be seen of men requires
so; as here this Angels countenance, and his garments are observed. 2. Great
must be the Majesty of our Lord Jesus, when his servants countenance is like
lightning, and his garment white as snow. 3. The plots of Christ's adversaries
are turned about, as engines of war against themselves; for these keepers are
sent forth to keep Christ within the tomb, and now they are made, nill they
will they, witnesses of his resurrection. 4. Such as are most stout against
Christ, shall be most afraid and astonished when he shows his Glory; for, The
keepers now do shake, and become as dead men.

Ver. 5. And the Angel answered, and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I
know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified.

6. He is not here: for he is risen, as he said: come, see the place where the
Lord lay.

The Angel speaks comfortably to these two women, and shows them that
Christ is risen, and commands them to carry the news unto the Apostles. Doct.
1. By the same means the Lord can terrify his adversaries, and comfort his
people: those he suffers to lie still in their terror, these he comfort;
Fear not ye, says the Angel unto the women: as much as, these keepers may look
for wrath; but, Fear not ye. 2. Such as are seeking after Jesus, may take
comfort, whatsoever come; for upon this ground the Angel says, Fear not, I
know ye are seeking Jesus. 3. We have no reason to be ashamed of Christ's
cross, when the Angels avow Christ crucified to be the Lord. 4. If God should
use Kings and Emperors to be Preachers of Christ's cross and resurrection, it
should be no disparagement to their high place; for this message is worthy of
such an Angel as this ^o be messenger, and even the Angels do not so much
honor the message, as they are honored by it: and who is he who thinks
himself too good to be a Preacher of the Gospel? 5. Christ's body after his
resurrection, retains the natural properties of a body, it is in one place,
and not in another, the Scripture knows no ubiquity of his body; for, He is
not here, says the Angel, he is risen. 6. No rest for our faith, save in our
Lords word; if it be once received, then other things serve to confirm faith;
for first, He is risen, as he said, says the Angel, and then bids them,
Come see where the Lord lay. 7. It is a sufficient argument to prove that
Christ's body is not present in a place, if sense perceive it not present, for
the Angel proves that Christ is not in the Sepulcher by this reason, Come see
the place where the Lord lay, he is not here.

Ver. 7 And go quickly, and tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead;
and behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him; lo, I
have told you. The Angel sends away these women, to carry joyful tidings to
the scattered Apostles. Doc. 1. Albeit women be debarred from the ordinary
office of preaching the Gospel, yet it may serve them sufficiently for
encouragement to believe in Jesus, that beside other extraordinary passages of
Christ's respect unto them, their Sex is honored with the carrying of the
first tidings of the resurrection. Go tell his Disciples, that he is risen from
the dead, says the Angel to the women. 2. What concerns Gods glory, and
others comfort in the day of grief, should be diligently gone about without
delay; Go quickly. 3. Christ is that good Shepherd who gathers his people
unto him, after that the storm of persecution has scattered them, and driven
them from him; for here, he sends his Angel to his feeble Disciples, to
conveen them unto him in Galilee. 4. The Lord pitieth the infirmity of his
people, and appoints their Assemblies where they may be most secure and safe;
as here, he trusts his Disciples not at Jerusalem at the first, but in their
own Country, Galilee. 5. The Lords order is first to crave belief of his
hearers, and then to give them proof by sight and sensible experience; as here
the Angel gives command to carry the tidings of the truth delivered, and then
promises that after that, They shall see him in Galilee. 6. It is a special
prop to our faith, to consider from what Author the word of Faith comes unto
us, and by what Messenger; Therefore says the Angel, Behold, I have told you.

Ver. 8 And they departed quickly from the Sepulcher, with fear and great joy,
and did run to bring his Disciples word. These faithful women believe and
tremble, and run away, and carry these good news. Doct. 1. Such as know what a
heart grieved for want of Christ means, will be very ready to comfort such as
are in such a grief, as these holy women are glad to carry good news to the
Heart-broken Disciples. 2. Mixed affections, fear and joy, at one time may well
consist in the heart of a Believer: One may tremble at the Majesty of God, and
rejoice in his Friendship, manifested by any means which he pleases; for thus
are these godly Souls affected. 3. It is a choice good disposition to believe
the Lords Word, and diligently to go about the obedience of it, in fear and
trembling, such as here is to be seen in these Women, having believed the glad
tidings, They run quickly with fear and joy, and bring the Disciples word.

Ver. 9. And as they went to tell his Disciples, behold, Jesus met them,
saying, All bail. And they came, and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.

10. Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my Brethren, that they
go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.

They meet with Christ as they are in the way. Doct. 1. Such ^as obey the
directions of Gods Servants, and do use prescribed Means that they may meet
with Christ, shall find him ere they be aware, much sooner then they expected;
as these women do meet Christ, before they looked for him; as they went his
errand, Jesus met them. 2. Joyful is the meeting which a Soul has with
Christ, as here, Christ bids hese women, All bail, or rejoice, and they Lay
hold on him, and worship him. 3. An humble sinner may be homely with Christ, as
these Women Fall down, and worship him, and hold him by the feet. 4. Such as
believe Gods Word in the mouth of his Messengers, shall find confirmation of it
by Christ himself; for here the Lord bids them do the same things, which the
Angel had commanded before, To carry news to the Apostles. 5. For all that can
be said unto us, our Faith is still mixed with some doubtings, which breeds
fear, and Christ only can remove them; therefore says he here, Be not afraid.
6. The weakest of believers are much beloved and esteemed of by Christ: Oh how
high love and estimation is this, Go tell my Brethren. 7. The place wherein
Christ is most welcome to preach, shall be most honored by his presence; as
here, in Galilee, says he, shall they see me. 8. Howsoever our Lord be
purposed to give sensible satisfaction to his people in due time, yet does he
ever require some belief of his Word in the mouth of his Servants, and some
obedience of Faith to go before it; Therefore says he, Tell them that they go
to Galilee, and adds, There shall they see me.

Ver. 11. Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the
city, and showed unto the chief Priests all the things that were done. The
Watch set by the Priests to guard the Sepulcher, come, and tell the Priests how
Christ is risen. Doct. 1. The Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection were not only
Angels and holy men and women, but also the profane soldiers, who were set to
watch his Sepulcher; for, The watch came, and showed the things that were done.
2. The Lord not only will disappoint his enemies, but also triumph over them;
for the watch whom the Priests sent out to obscure his glory, came back to the
city, and showed these things to the chief Priests.

Verse 12. And when they were assembled with the Elders, and had taken
counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers. When they know that he is
risen, and so behoved to be convinced that he was the Son of God, powerfully
manifested by resurrection from the dead, they resolve to bear down the truth.
Doc. 1. Christ's malicious enemies are of the devils nature, they will never
cease to oppose him, though they know him to be the Son of God: as appears in
these chief Priests and Elders. 2. The madness of malicious adversaries of the
Gospel, and the slavery of Satan's captives, is wonderful, as here is seen; for
after they are assembled, they resolve to corrupt the witnesses against the
light of their conscience. 3. Money is a great Idol in the world, when the
Priests and elders think it may over-balance the most precious Truth, and are
confident for gain to make the soldiers make a lie against the resurrection of
the known Messiah. 4. The more men be engaged in a sin, they are the more
forward to go on in it, and will spa^e no cost to gain their point; for, These
Priests and Elders gave but thirty pieces of silver to have Christ crucified,
but here they gave large money to keep down the report of his resurrection.

Ver. 13. Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while
we slept.

14. And if this come to the governors cares, we will persuade him, and secure
you.

15. So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is
commonly reported among the Jews until this day.

They devise a lie, and do hire the soldiers to vent it. Doct. 1. Calumnies
and lies devised by Christ's adversaries, are the special Engine which they use
against the gospel; when al other devises do fail, they make service to Satan
by this means; such is this lie here. 2. They who are entered in service of
ungodly masters, can hardly win out, still new and worse employment is
furnished unto them; as these godless soldiers are set on, from step to step
in this ungodly course of opposing Christ. 3. The wicked care not what shame
they do put upon themselves, and one upon another, to gain their point, in case
they cannot come to their purpose another way; as these men are put to say,
that they slept when they should have watched, (which was a disgrace and a
capital fault) that they might make out their devise against Christ. 4. Such
as do tempt unto sin, labor to make the sinner secure from worldly
inconveniences, but cannot secure them against Gods Justice: as the Priests
here do undertake to secure the Soldiers at the Governors hands, but no
further. 5. A profane person will make sale of conscience, and tongue, and all
for money; as here, the soldiers take the money upon the condition offered. 6.
Such as can be content to be silent, and to keep up truth for any earthly gain,
will yield also to speak contrary to known truth for gain; as these men took
the money, and did as they were taught. 7. Such as do not apprehend any wrath
from God for sin, do seek no guard against it, but do think it sufficient to be
secure at men's hands; as here, Money, and Assurance to be secure at the
Governors hand, suffice these soldiers; having these granted unto them, They
do as they were taught. 8. He that takes the bait of sin, will also swallow
the hook; for so soon as these men took the money, They did as they were
taught. 9. Where truth is rejected, a lie will be received, were it never so
incredible, and it is righteousness with God so to plague those that do not
receive the truth in love; for what less probable speech could be spoken, than
that Christ's few and fearful Disciples should hazard to open the Sepulcher,
when a Guard of soldiers were about it, that all the Guard set about the
Sepulcher should be sleeping at once, and be so fast asleep, as the great stone
of the Sepulcher should be rolled back, and none be awake? yea, that there
should be an earthquake in the mean time, and none of them for this be awaked?
and yet This saying finds credit among the misbelieving Jews.

Ver. 16. Then the eleven Disciples went away into Galilee, into a Mountain
where Jesus had appointed them.

17. And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.

Beside sundry other meetings which Christ had with his Apostles, we have here
a solemn and appointed meeting, which we judge to be that meeting wherein there
were above five hundred Brethren, whereof the Apostle Paul speaks, 1 Cor.
15.6. In which meeting Christ establishes a Ministry in his church, for
Preaching of the Word, Administration of the Sacraments, and exercise of
Discipline for the better observation of his commands unto the end of the
World. Doct. 1. Let the Lord show himself to us as he pleases, it is our duty
to attend and keep what means and meetings he has appointed, as the eleven
Disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where he had appointed them.
2. Christ loves the Assembly of his Saints, and does not disappoint the
expectation of those that wait upon him in the appointed means; for in the
appointed place it is said, The Apostles saw him. 2. The Faith of believers is
not always alike vigorous and active, neither in comparison one of another,
nor in comparison of a man with himself at diverse times: for here are disciples
who doubt nothing of Christ's Resurrection when they see him; and some also are
who doubted at the first sight. 4. As Faith is clear and vigorous, so does it
see Christ to be God, and brings the soul down before him to worship; for
such as did not doubt, When they saw him, they worshipped him.

Ver. 18. And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto
me in heaven and in earth.

19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and
lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World. Amen.

To remove all doubting from every man, Christ draws nearer to them, and
speaks to the people in open audience, and gives order for gathering and
ruling his church unto the end of the World. Doc. 1. The Lord draws near unto
his own, and communicates himself familiarly to them, when it is needful,
and leaves no means unassayed which may remove doubting from his weak
Disciples, as here knowing that some doubted, He came and spoke in their
hearing. 2. Christ not only as the Son of God, has joint, equal and the same
Sovereignty in Heaven and Earth with the Father, communicate unto him by
eternal Generation, but also as God Incarnate, God-man, he has supreme and
absolute Authority given unto him over all things in Heaven and Earth, to and
for the church, all things, for the good thereof, being put under his Feet,
without exception of any thing, save of him who has put all things under his
Feet: and he has supreme, sole, and absolute Authority, as only Head and King
of the Church, to appoint and maintain the way and means of gathering,
preserving and ruling his church, and all the affairs thereof unto the end of
the World; for so much will these Words, being compared with other Scriptures,
bear, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. 3. Christ has
instituted a Ministry of Teachers and rulers of his church, to continue from
his Resurrection unto the end of the World; for he says, Go ye, make
Disciples, Teach them obedience unto me, I will be with you to the end of the
world. 4. The community of Ministers and Rulers of the church respective, have
all the Nations of the earth under their charge, to gather Disciples unto
Christ out of them; Go, make all nations disciples, says he. Now these are
made disciples whosoever are given up unto Christ, to be taught and governed by
him, whether by themselves, or being brought by others who have power of them,
as Parents and Masters are dedicate and consecrate unto Christ, who has said
of children elsewhere, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not, All those may and should be taken charge of, admitted into the Church as
Disciples, and baptized; for he says, Go, make Disciples of all Nations, and
baptize them. 6. The community of believers, or the body of covenanted and
baptized disciples, are not the subject of this authority granted for gathering
of churches, administration of doctrine, Sacraments, Discipline, and other
public Ordinances: but the community of the Ministers, Teachers, and Rulers,
contradistinguished from the body of Disciples, which is taught and governed;
for it is said, Go ye, my Ministers; make ye Disciples, Baptize ye, and Teach
ye them. 7. Ministers or church-rulers in this their Ecclesiastics charge, do
not derive their power and authority from any under Heaven, but from Christ,
who has made all in heaven and in earth* and who gives unto them a commision
to make disciples unto him out of all nations; for after he has said, All
power is given to me, He subjoyneth, Go ye therefore, and make Disciples of
all Nations. 8. The commission of Christ's Ministers does extend unto the
drawing Nations into subjection unto Christ, and into covenant with him, to be
his disciples, and to obey all his commandments, only by way of doctrine; for,
Go, says he, by Doctrine make all nations Disciples, this is the force of
the Word Teach, in the Original. 9. The Ministers of the Gospel Teaching and
Ruling-elders respective, are the true successors of the Apostles, in the
dispensation of the Doctrine, Sacraments, and Discipline appointed by Christ,
for they are appointed in the same Parent with the Apostles, and spoken unto in
the Person by Christ, saying, I will be with you unto the end of the world. 10.
Baptism is the seal of the covenant, made between God and all initiate
Disciples, elder and younger; for after that they are commanded to make
disciples, they are commanded to baptize them, Go make Disciples, and baptize
them. 11. There are three persons in the Godhead distinct one from another in
order of subsistence and Operation, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
for so bears the text. 12. These three are one GOD undivided in Essence and
Operation, equal and one in Authority and Power, their Name and their exercise
of Authority is one; for it is said, Baptizing them not in the names, but in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 13. The Covenant of Grace on
both sides is made for cleansing and putting away sin, according to the way
and order prescribed by GOD, in whose Name Baptism or sprinkling with water,
for assuring Disciples of remission of sins through CHRIST, and obliging them
to study Holiness, is given and taken. 14. The Ministers and Rulers of the
Church are limited unto the commands given to them from CHRIST: they may not
injoyne unto the Church any thing save the commands of CHRIST; These, and all
these, and only these must they teach; Teaching them, says he, to observe
whatsoever I commanded you. 15. The baptized Disciples of Christ may not walk
as they list, but must study to observe all that Christ has commanded his
Ministers to teach them; for he says, Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. 16. Faithful Ministers have assurance of
Christ's assistance and blessing, in whatsoever part or time of the World they
fall into; I am with you, says he, unto the end of the world. 17. People need
not fear to join themselves in church society with any Nation, under such
Pastors as do faithfully teach whatsoever Christ has commanded: for Christ
has promised to be with such Teachers, and to bless their labors to the end
of the world; Behold, I am with you to the end of the World. 18. This whole
Gospel is solid Truth, and worthy to be embraced, to be sealed, and to be
settled upon by all Men, according as the Evangelist gives example unto us,
closing the whole doctrine, and this last Promise, with AMEN.

FINIS.

