TWO TREATISES. IN THE ONE OF WHICH, THE NATVRE OF BODIES; IN THE OTHER, THE
NATVRE OF MAN'S SOVLE; IS LOOKED INTO: IN WAY OF DISCOVERY, OF THE IMMORTALITY
OF REASONABLE SOVLES.

(...)
(...),
(...);
Animae naturam, absque totius natura,
Sufficienter cognosci posse, existimas?
Plato in Phoedr. AT PARIS, Printed by GILLES BLAIZOT.

M. DC. XLIIII. WITH PRIVILEGE.

TO MY SON KENELME DIGBY.
SON,
The calamity of this time being such, as has bereaft me of the ordinary
means of expressing my affection to you; I have been casting about, to find
some other way of doing that in such sort, as you may receive most profit by
it. Therein I soon pitched upon this consideration; That Parents owe unto
their children, not only material subsistence for their body; but much more,
spiritual contributions to their better part, their mind. I am much bound to
God, that he has endewed you with one very capable of the best instructions:
and withal, I do therefore esteem my self obliged, to do my utmost for
moulding it to its most advantage. If my aim therein do prove successful,
you will with more ease digest those inconveniences and distresses, which
already you have begun to be acquainted with, and that threaten daily worse
unto you. For how can a man suffer his heart to be dejected at the privation of
any temporal blessings, whiles he considers the inanity of them; and that
nothing is worthy his serious thought, but what may accompany him to his
eternal habitation? What needs he fear the desolations of war, and the
worst that they can do against him, who have his estate in their power, when he
may be rich with a much nobler treasure, that none but himself can rob him
of? Without doubt, he that shall seriously reflect upon the excellency of his
own nature, and upon the admirable perfect and happy state he shall most
certainly arrive unto, if he but weane himself from those worldly
impediments, that here clogge his souls flight; can not choose but look with
a disdainefull eye, upon the glattering tryfles, that weak spirits delight
themselves withal. If he deem it not requisite (as of old, the famous wise
man did) to throw away those encumbrances, to the end he may the more freely
attend unto divine contemplations (for worldly goods, duly used, may be very
aduantagious both to ones self, and to others) yet at the least, he will not
repine at fortunes recalling of what she formerly had but lent him, and but
permitted him the use of.

To the end then that you may be armed against the worst that may arrive unto
you, in this unhappy state of affairs, in our distressed country; I send you
those considerations of the nature and Immortality of humane souls, which of
late, have been my chief entertainment. The progress you have already made
in the study of Philosophy, has (I am persuaded) enabled you to benefitt your
self, with what I have written upon this subject: on the serious examining of
which, if you will employ but half the time, that I have done in spinning out
my thoughts, and weauing them into the piece you see, I doubt not but you will
thereby receive so much contentement, as well as profit, that you will not
repent you of your pains. Besides that, intellectual entertainements are the
purest, and the noblest, and the most proportionate to man's nature, and prove
the most delightful to him, when they are duly relished. You will presently
agree, that the matter j handle, is the most important and the most weighty,
within the whole extent of humane nature, for a worthy and a gallant person to
employ himself about. The advantage which man has over unreasonable
creatures, is, that what he does, is by election; and he is himself master of
all his actions; whereas they are impelled by outward causes, unto all they
do: it is properly said of them, that aguntur magis quam agunt: He only is
free: and in all varietyes of circumstances, has the power to choose one, and
to reject an other. Now, to have this election wisely made, and becoming a man,
requires that it be steered by knowledge. To do any thing well, a man must
first know thoroughly all that concerns the action he is about; and chiefly
the end of it. And certainly, of all his actions, the government of himself,
is the most important, and neereliest concerning him. The end of that
government, and of all a man's aims, is by all men agreed to be Beatitude:
that is, his being completely well, and in a condition of enjoying the most
happiness, that his nature is capable of. For arrival whereunto, it is
impossible to pitch upon the direct and sure means, unless it be first
determined, whether the Beatitude we speak of, do belong to this life, or be
not to be attained, till we come to the next: or rather, whether or no, there
be an other life besides this, to be happy in. For if there remains an
eternity unto us, after the short revolution of time we so swiftly run over
here on earth; it is clear, that all the happiness which can be imagined in
this fleeting state, is not valuable, in respect of the future; nor any thing
we do here is considerable, otherwise then as it conduces to the making our
condition then, better or worse. Now the way to be sure of this, is either
infallible authority, or evident science. They that rely on the first, depend
of others: and they only who know, are absolutely complete of themselves; and
have within themselves, the principles whereby to govern their actions, in
what is of highest consequence to them. It is true, every body is not of a
strain of wit and judgment, to be of this rank: and who are not, must be
contented to believe others, and be satisfied with what is taught them. But he
that will be of a superior orb, must make this his study. This is the adequate
entertainment of a worthy person.

To conceive how high and excellent, this science of governing a man in order
to Beatitude in the next world is, we may consider, how among all arts that
concern this life, the art of a statesman, unto whom belongs to see a
common wealthwell governed, is by much the noblest. All other arts, are but
ministerial to him. He makes use of the soldier, of the lawyer, of the
orator, of the antiquary, of the physician, as best conduces to the end he
aymeth at, of making the commonwealth he governs, happy and flourishing. All
other meaner trades serve him in a yet lower degree. Yet after all, he must
take his measures from the Metaphysitian or Divine. For since the government
of a society of men, aymeth at giving them the best being they are capable of;
and since Man's well being here in this life, is but instrumentally good, as
being the means for him to be well in the next life; It is evident, that the
statesmans art, is but isntrumental to that, which shows, how every
particular man must govern his life, to be partaker of a happy eternity. And
consequently, if a statesman have not this science, he must be subject to a
brauer man then himself, whose province is to direct all his actions unto this
end. We are told, how reverently great Caesar listened to the discourses of
learned Achoreus, how obseruant Alexander was of his Master Aristotle, how
secure Nero trod, whiles Seneca guided his steps, how humble Constantine was
to saint Syluesters precepts, how Charlemaine governed himself in his most
important actions, by Alcuines advise: In a word, all the great men of
antiquity, as well among the Romans, as among the Gretians, had their
Philosophers, and Divines in their kind, belonging to them; from whom they
might derive rules of living and doing as they ought upon all occasions, if
themselves were not Masters in that superior and all directing science. He that
sees not by his own light, must in this dangerous ocean steer by the
lantern which an other hangs out to him. If the person he relyeth upon,
either withholdeth the light from him, or shows him a false one, he is
presently in the dark, and can not fail of loosing his way. How great an
authority had the Augurs and priests among the rude Romans, to forbid any
public act, or to break any assembly upon pretense of Religious duties, when
they liked not the business that was in agitation? The like may interessed
Divines among Christians do, if the ministers of state have not some insight
into Divinity. He leads a vexatious life, that in his noblest actions is so
gored with scruples, that he dares not make a step, without the authority of
an other to warrant him.

Yet I do not conclude, that he whom I design by the character of a brave
man, should be a professed or a complete Metaphytian or Divine, and consummate
in every curious circumstance that belongs to this science; it suffices him
to know it in bulk; and to have so much Divinity, as in common occurrents, to
be able to govern himself; and in special ones, to understand what, and why
his Divine persuades him to any thing; so that even then, though not without
help, yet he governs himself, and is not blindely governed by an other. He
that aymeth at being a perfect horseman, is bound to know in general (besides
the art of riding) the nature and temper of horses; and to understand the
different qualities of bittes, saddles, and other vtensiles of a horseman; But
the utmost exactness in these particulars, belongs to farriers, saddlers,
smithes, and other tradesmens of all which, the iuditious rider knows how to
make due use, when he has occasion, for his principal end; which is, orderly
governing his horse. In like manner, he whom we design by a complete brave
man, must know solidely the maine end of what he is in the world for: and
withal, must know how to serve himself when he pleases, and that it is
needful to him, of the Divines high contemplations, of the Metaphysitians
subtle speculations, of the natural Philosophers minute observations, of the
Mathematicians nice demonstrations; and of whatsoever else of particular
professions, may conduce to his end; though without making any of them his
professed business.

To lay grounds for such knowledge as this, is the scope of my ensuing
discourse. My first aim, was to begett it in my self: to which end, the
digesting my thoughts into order, and the setting them down in writing, was
necessary: for without such strict examination of them, as the penning them
affords one means to make, they would hardly have avoided being disioynted
and rouing ones. Now that I have done that, my next aim is that you, unto whom
I wish as much good as to my self, may reap as much benefit by the studying
it, as I have done by the composing it. My end then being a private one (as
looking no further then you my son, and my self) I have not endeavored to
express my conceptions either in the phrase, or in the language of the
schools. It will serve our turn, to comprehend the substance, without
confining our selves to any scrupulous exactness, in what concerns only
form. And the same consideration has made me pass slightly over many
particulars, in my first Treatise of the Nature of Bodies; upon which learned
and witty men might spinne out large volumes. For in that part, I aim no
further, then to show what may be effected by corporeal agents. There,
possibility serves my turn, as well as the determinate indivisible point of
truth. I am obliged to that, only in my maine great theme; which is the soul.
In regard of which, the numerous crooked narrow cranies, and the restrained
flexuous riuolets of corporeal things, are all contemptible, further then the
knowledge of them serves to the knowledge of the soul. And a gallant man,
whose thoughts fly at the highest game, requires no further insight into
them, then to satisfy himself by what way they may be performed; and deemeth
it far too mean for him, to dwell upon the subtilest of their mysteries for
science sake.

Besides this liberty that the scope I aim at allows me of passing very
cursorily over sundry particulars; I find now at my reading over all together,
what I have written to deliver it to the Printer, that even in that which I
ought to have done to comply with my own design and expectation, I am fallen
very short; so that if I had not unwarily too far engaged my self for the
present publishing it, truly I should have kept it by me, till I had once
again gone over it. I find the whole piece very confusedly done; the style
unequal and unpolished; many particulars (when they are not absolutely
necessary to my maine drift) too slightly touched, and far from being driven
home: and in a word, all of it seems to be rather but a loose model and
roughcast of what I design to do, then a complete work thoroughly finished.

But since by my ouerforward promising of this piece to several frindes, that
have been very earnest for it, I have now brought my self to that pass, that
it would ill become me to delay any longer the publishing of some thing upon
this subject; and that obligations of an other nature permit me not at the
present to dwell any longer upon this (besides that, so laysy a brain as mine
is, grows soon weary when it has so entangled a skeane as this is to
unwind) I now send it you as it is; but with a promise, that at my first
leisure, I will take a strict survey of it; and then in an other edition, will
polish, correct and add what shall appear needful to me. If any man shall
take the book out of your hand, invited by the title and subject to look into
it; I pray you in my behalf represent unto him, how distant my profession is,
and how contrary my education has been, from writing of books. In every art,
the plainest that is, there is an apprentiship necessary, before it can be
expected one should work in it a fashionable piece. The first attemptes are
always very imperfect ayminges; and are scarce discernable what they are
meaned for, unless the master guide his scholars hand. Much more will the
same happen in so difficult and spiny an affair, as the writing upon such a
nice and copious subject as this is, to one that is so wholly ignorant of the
laws of method as I am.

This free and ingenuous acknowledgement on my side, will I hope prevail with
all ingenuous persons, who shall read what I have written, to advertise me
fairly (if they judge it worth their while) of what they dislike in it: to the
end that in an other more accurate edition, I may give them better
satisfaction. For besides what faylinges may be in the matter, I can not doubt
but that even in the expressions of it, there must often be great obscurity and
shortenesse; which I, who have my thoughts filled with the things themselves,
am not aware of. So that, what per adventure may seem very full to me, because
every imperfect touch brings into my mind the entire notion and whole chain
of circumstances belonging to that thing I have so often beaten upon; may
appear very crude and maimed to a stranger, that can not guess what I would
be at, otherwise then as my direct words do lead him.

One thing more I shall wish you to desire of them who happily may peruse these
two Treatises; as well for their own sakes, as for mine. And that is, that they
will not pass their censure upon any particular piece, or broken parcel of
either of them, taken by it self. Let them draw the entire thridde through
their fingers, and let them examine the consequentnesse of the whole body of
the doctrine I deliver; and let them compare it by a like survey with what is
ordinarily taught in the schools: and if they find in theirs, many brackes and
short ends which can not be spunne into an even piece, and in mine, a fair
coherence throughout; I shall promise my self a favorable doom from them,
and that they will have an acquiescence in themselves to what I have here
presented them with: whereas, if they but rauell it over loosely, and pitch
upon disputing against particular conclusions, that at the first encounter of
them single, may seem harsh unto them, (which is the ordinary course of flashy
wits, who can not fadome the whole extent of a large discourse) it is
impossible but that they should be very much unsatisfied of me; and go away
with a persuasion, that some such truths as upon the whole matter are most
evident (one stone in the arch supporting an other, and the whole) are mere
chymeras and wild paradoxes.

But (Son) it is time my book should speak it self, rather then I speak
any longer of it here. Read it carefully over, and let me see by the effects
of your governing your self, that you make such right use of it, as I may be
comforted in having chosen you to bequeath it unto. God in heaven bless you.
Paris the last of August 1644.

Your Loving Father KENELME DIGBY.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS* AND MATTERS HANDLED IN THE FIRST TREATISE CONCERING
BODIES.
CHAP. I. THe Preface. A Preamble to the whole discourse; concerning notions in
general. page 1.. 1. Quantity is the first, and most obuious affection of a
body ibid.. 2. Words do not express things as they are in themselves, but
only as they are painted in the minds of men. page 2.. 3. The first error
that may arise from hence; which is a multiplying of things, where no such
multiplication is really found. ibid.. 4. A second error; the conceiving of
many distinct things as really one thing. page 3.. 5. Great care to be taken
to avoid the errors, which may arise from our manner of understanding things.
page 4.. 6. Two sorts of words to express our notions, the one common to all
men, the other proper to scholars. page 5.. 7. Great errors arise by wresting
words from their common meaning to express a more particular or studied
notion. page 6.

CHAP. II. Of Quantity. page 8.. 1. We must know the vulgar and common notion
of Quantity that we may understand the nature of it. ibid.. 2. Extension or
diuisibility is the common notion of Quantity. page 9.. 3. Parts of Quantity
are not actually in their whole. page 10.. 4. If parts were actually in their
whole, Quantity would be composed of indiuisibles. ibid.. 5. Quantity can not
be composed of indiuisibles. page 11.. 6. An objection to prove that parts
are actually in Quantity; with a declaration of the mistake from whence it
proceeds. page 12.. 7. The solution of the former objection: andthat sense
can not discern whether one part be distinguished from another, or no* page
13.. 8. An enumeration of the several specieses of Quantity, which confirms
that the essence of it is diuisibility. page 14.

CHAP. III. Of Rarity and Density. page 15. 1. What is meant by Rarity and
Density. ibid.. 2. It is evident that some bodies are rare and others dense;
though obscure, how they are such. page 16.. 3. A breife enumeration of the
several properties belonging to rare and dense bodies. ibid.. 4. The opinion
of those Philosophers declared, who putt rarity to consist in an actual
division of a body into little pates. page 17.. 5. The former opinion rejected,
and the ground of their error discovered. page 18.. 6. The opinion of those
Philosophers related, who putt rarity to consist in the mixtion of vacuity
among bodies. page 19.. 7. The opinion of vacuities refuted. page 20.. 8.
Rarity and Density cosist in the several proportions which Quantity has to
its substance. page 22.. 9. All must admit in Physical bodies, a
Metaphysicall composition. page 24.

CHAP. IV. Of the four first qualities: and of the four Elements. page 26..
1. The notions of density and rarity have a latitude capable of infinite
variety. ibid. 2. How moystnesse and dryness are begotten in dense bodies.
page 27.. 3. How moystnesse and dryness are begotten in rare bodies. page 28..
4. Heat is a property of rare bodies, and cold of dense ones. page 28.. 5. Of
the two dense bodies, the less dense is more cold: but of the two rare ones,
the less rare is less hot. page 29.. 6. The extreme dense body is more dry,
then the extreme rare one. page 30.. 7. There are but four simple bodies: and
these are rightly named Elements. ibid.. 8. The Author does not determine
whether every element does comprehend under its name one only lowest species,
or many: nor whether any of them be found pure. page 31.

CHAP. V. Of the operations of the Elements in general. And of their
Actiuities compared with one another. page 32. 1. The first operation of the
Elements is division, out of which resulteth local motion. ibid.. 2. What
place is: both notionally, and really. page 33.. 3. Local motion is that
division, whereby a body cha^eth its place. page 34.. 4. The nature of quantity
of it self is sufficient to unite a body to its place. ibidem.. 5. All
operations amongst bodies, are either local motion, or such as follow out of
local motion. page 35.. 6. Earth compared to water in actiuity. page 36.. 7.
The manner whereby fire gets in fuel: proves that it exceeds earth in
actiuity. ibid.. 8. The same is proved by the manner, whereby fire comes ut
of fuel and works upon other bodies. page 37.

CHAP. VI. Of Light: what it is. page 39.. 1. In what sense the Author
rejects qualities. ibid.. 2. In what sense the Author does admit of
qualities. page 40.. 3. Five arguments proposed to prove that light is not a
body. page 41.. 4. The two first reasons to prove light to be a body are, the
resemblance it has with fire; and because if it were a quality, it would
always produce an equal to it self. page 42.. 5. The third reason; because
if we imagine to our selves the substance of fire to be rarifyed, it will have
the same appearences which light has. page 43.. 6. The fourth reason, from the
manner of the genertion and corruption of light, which agrees with fire.
ibid.. 7. The fifth reason; because such properies belong to light as agree
only unto bodies. page 45.

CHAP. VII. Two objections answered against light being fire, a more ample
proof of its being such. ibid.. 1. That all light is hot and apt o heat.
ibid.. 2. The reason why our bodies for the most part do not feel the heat of
pure light. page 46.. 3. The experience of burningglasses, and of soultry
gloomy weather, prove light to be fire. page 48.. 4. Philosophers ought not to
be judge ot things by the rules of vulgar people. ibidem.. 5. the different
names of light and fire proceed from different notions of the same substance.
page 49.. 6. The reason why many times fire and heat are deprived of light.
page 50.. 7. What becomes of the body of light, when it dies ibid.. 8. An
experiment of some who pretend, that light may be precipitated into powder.
page 51.. 9. The Authors opinion concerning lamps, pretended to have been
found in tombs, with inconsumptible lights. ibid.

CHAP. VIII. An answer to three other objections formely proposed, against
light being a substance. page 53.. 1. Light is not really in every part of the
room it enlighteneth, nor fills entirely any sensible part of it, though it
seem to us to do so. ibid.. 2. Tha least sensible point of a diaphanous body,
has room sufficient to contain both air and light, together with a
multitude of beams issuing from several lights, without penetrating one
another. page 54.. 3. That light does not enlighten any room in an instant;
and that the great celerity of its motion does make it inperceptible to our
senses. page 56.. 4. The reason why the motion of light, is not discerned
comingtowardes us; and that there is some real tardity in it. page 58.. 5. The
planets are not certainly ever in that place where they appear to be. page
59.. 6. The reason why light being a body, does not by its motion shatter other
bodies into pieces. ibid.. 7. The reason why the body of light is never
perceived to be fanned by the wind. page 61.. 8. The reasons, for, and against
lights being a body, compared together. page 62.. 9. A summary repetition of
the reasons, which prove that light is fire. ibidem.

CHAP. IX. Of local Motion in common. page 63.. 1. No local motion can be
performed without succession. ibid.. 2. Time is the common measure of all
succession. page 64.. 3. What velocity is, and that it can not be infinite.
ibid.. 4. No force so little, that is not able to move the greatest weight
imaginable. page 65.. 5. The chief principle of Mechanikes deduced out of the
former discourse. page 66.. 6. No moveable can pass from rest to any
determinate degree of velocity, or from a lesser degree to a greater, without
passing through all the intermediate degrees, which are below the obtained
degree. page 67.. 7. The conditions which help to motion, in the moveable are
three, in the medium, one. page 69.. 8. No body has any intrinsecall virtue to
move it self toward any determinate part of the universe. page 70.. 9. The
increase of motion is always made in the proportion of the odd numbers.
ibid.. 10. No motion can increase for ever without coming to a periode. page
72.. 11. Certain problemes resolved concerning the proportion of some moving
Agents compared to their effects. page 73.. 12. When a moveable comes to rest,
the motion does decrease according to the rules of increase. page 75.

CHAP. X. Of Gravity and Leuity; and of Local Motion, commonly termed
Natural. page 76.. 1. Those motions are called natural, which have constant
causes; and those violent, which are contrary to them. ibid.. 2. The first and
most general operation of the sun, is the making and raising of atoms.
ibid.. 3. The light rebounding from the earth with atoms, causes two streams
in the air; the one ascending the other descending; and both of them in a
perpendicular line. page 77.. 4. A dense body placed in the air between the
ascending and descending stream, must needs descend. page 78.. 5. A more
particular explication of all the former doctrine touching gravity. page 79..
6. Gravity and leuity do not signify an intrinsecall inclination to such a
motion in the bodies themselves which are termed heavy and light. page 81.. 7.
The more dense a body is, the more swiftly it descends. ibid.. 8. The
velocity of bodies descending does not increase in proportion to the difference
that may be between their several densities. page 82.. 9. More or less
gravity does produce a swifter or a slower descending of a heavy body.
Aristotle's argument to disprove motion in vacuo, is made good. page 84.. 10.
The reason why at the inferior quarter of a circle, a body does descend
faster by the arch of that quarter, then by the chord if it. page 85.

CHAP. XI. An answer to objections against the causes of natural motion,
auowed in the former chapter; and a refutation of the contrary opinion. page
86.. 1. The first objection answered; why a hollow body descends slower then
a solid one. page 86.. 2. The second objection answered, and the reasons
shown, why atoms do continually overtake the descending dense body. page 88..
3. A curious question left undecided. page 89.. 4. The fourth objection
answered; why the descent of the same heavy bodies, is equal in so great
inequality of the atoms which cause it. ibidem.. 5. The reason why the shelter
of a thick body does not hinder the descent of that which is under it. page
91.. 6. The reason why some bodies sink, others swim. page 92.. 7. The fifth
objection answered concerning the descending of heavy bodies in streams. page
93.. 8. The sixth objection answered: and that all heavy elements do weigh in
their own spheres. page 95.. 9. The seventh objection answered: and the reason
why we do not feel the course of the air and atoms that beat continually
upon us. ibidem.. 10. How in the same body, gravity may be greater then
density, and density then gravity; though they be the same thing. page 96.. 11.
The opinion of grauities being an intrinsecall inclination of a body to the
center, refuted by reason. page, 97.. 12. The same opinion refuted by several
experiences. page 98.

CHAP. XII. Of Violent Motion. page 100.. 1. The state of the question touching
the cause of violent motion. ibid.. 2. That the medium is the only cause,
which continues violent motion. ibidem.. 3. A further explication of the
former doctrine. page 101.. 4. That the air has strength enough to continue
violent motion in a moveable. page 102.. 5. An answer to the first objection;
that air is not apt to conserve motion* And how violent motion comes to
cease. page 103.. 6. An answer to the second objection; that the air has no
power over heavy bodies. page 104.. 7. An answer to the third objection, that
an arrow should fly faster broadwayes then long ways. page 105.

CHAP. XIII. Of three sorts of violent motion, Reflection, Vndulation, and
Refraction. page 106.. 1. That reflection is a kind of violent motion. ibid.. 2.
Reflection is made at equal angles. ibid.. 3. The causes and properties of
vndulation. page 107.. 4. Refraction at the entrance into the reflectent body
is toward the perpendicular; at the going out it, is from it; when the second
superficies is parallel to the first. page 108.. 5. A refutation of Monsieur
Des Carts his explication of refraction page 109.. 6. An answer to the
arguments brought in favor of Monsieur Des Carts his opinion. page 111.. 7.
The true cause of refraction of light both at its entrance, and at its going
out from the reflecting body. page 112.. 8. A general rule to know the nature
of reflection and refractions in all sorts of surfaces. page 113.. 9. A body
of greater parts and greater pores, makes a greater refraction then one of
lesser parts and lesser pores. page 114.. 10. A confirmation of the former
doctrine, out of the nature of bodies that refract light. page 115.

CHAP. XIV. Of the composition, qualities, and generation of Mixed bodies. page
116.. 1. The connection of this chapter with the rest, and the Authors intent in
it. ibid.. 2. That there is a least cise of bodies; and that this least cise is
found in fire. page 117.. 3. The first conjunction of parts is in bodies of
least cise; and it is made by the force of Quantity. ibid.. 4. The second sort
of conjunction, is compactednesse in simple Elements, and it proceeds from
density. page 118.. 5. The third conjunction is of parres of different
Elements, and it proceeds from quantity and density together. ibid.. 6. The
reason why liquide bodies do easily join together; and dry ones difficultly.
page 119.. 7. That no two hard bodies can touch one an other immediately.
ibid.. 8. How mixed bodies are framed in general. page 121.. 9. The cause of
the several degrees of solidity in mixed bodies. ibid.. 10. The rule where
unto are reduced all the several combinations of Elements in compounding of
mixed bodies. page 122.. 11. Earth and water are the basis of all permanent
mixed bodies. page 123.. 12. What kind of bodies those are where water is the
basis, and earth the predominant Element over the other two. ibid.. 13. Of
those bodies, where water being the basis air is the predominant Element.
ibid.. 14. What kind of bodies result, where water is the basis and fire the
predominant Element. page 124.. 15. Of those bodies, where water is in excess,
it alone being both the basis, and the predominant Element. page 125.. 16. Of
those bodies, where Earth alone is the basis, and also the predominant in
excess over the other three Elements. ibid.. 17. Of those bodies where Earth
is the basis, and water the predominant Element over the other two. ibid.. 18.
Of those bodies, where earth being the basis air is the predominant. ibid..
19. Of those bodies, where Earth being the basis, fire is the predominant. page
126.. 20. All the second qualities of mixed bodies, arise from several
combinations of the first qualities: and are at last resolved into several
degrees of rarity and density. ibid.. 21. That in the planets and stars there
is a like variety of mixed bodies cause by light as here upon Earth. page 127..
22. In what manner the Elements do work upon one an other, in the composition
of mixed bodies: and in particular fire which is the most active. ibid.. 23. A
particular declaration touching the generation of mettalls. page 128.

CHAP. XV. Of the dissolution of Mixed bodies. page 130.. 1. Why some bodies
are brittle, and others tough, or apt to withstand outward violence the first
instrument to dissolve mixed bodies. ibid.. 2. How outward violence does work
upon the most compacted bodies. page 131.. 3. The several effects of fire, the
second and chiefest instrument to dissolve all compounded bodies. ibid.. 4. The
reason why some bodies are not dissolved by fire. page 132.. 5. The reason why
fire melts gold, but can not consume it. ibid.. 6. Why lead is easily
consumed and calcined by fire. page 133.. 7. Why and how some bodies are
divided by fire into spirits, waters, oils saltes and earth. And what those
parts are. ibid.. 8. How water the third instrument to dissolve bodies,
dissolueth calx into salt; and so into Terra damnata. page 135.. 9. How water
mingled with salt, becomes a most powerful Agent to dissolve other bodies.
page 136.. 10. How putrefaction is caused. ibid.

CHAP. XVI. An explication of certain Maxims touching the operations, and
qualities of bodies: and whether the Elements be found pure in any part of the
world. page 137.. 1. What is the sphere of actiuity in corporeal Agents.
ibid.. 2. The reason why no body can work in distance. page 138.. 3. An
objection answered against the manner of explicating the former axiom. page
139. 4. Of reaction: and first in pure local motion, that each Agent must
suffer in acting and act in suffering. ibid.. 5. The former doctrine applied
to other local motions designed by particular names. And that Suisseths
argument is of no force against this way of doctrine. page 141.. 6. Why some
notions do admit of intension and Remission; and others do not. ibid.. 7. That
in every part of our habitable world; all the four Elements, are found pure in
small atoms; but not in any great bulk. page 142.

CHAP. XVII. Of Rarefaction and Condensation the two first motions of
particular bodies. page 144.. 1. The Authors intent in this and the following
chapters. ibid.. 2. That bodies may be rarifyed, both by outward heat; and how
this is performed. page 145.. 3. Of the great effects fo Rarefaction. page
147.. 4. The first manner of condensation, by heat. page 148.. 5. The second
manner of condensation by cold. page 149.. 6. That ice is not water rarifyed
but condensed. page 151.. 7. How wind, snow, and hail are made; and wind by
rain allayed. page 152.. 8. How parts of the same or diverse bodies, are
joined more strongly together by condensation. page 153.. 9. Vacuites can not
be the reason, why water impregnated to the full with one kind of salt, will
notwithstanding receive more of an other. page 154.. 10. The true reason of the
former effect. page 155.. 11. The reason why bodies of the same nature do join
more easily together then others. page 156.

CHAP. XVIII. Of an other motion belonging to particular bodies, called
Attraction; and of certain operations, termed Magical. page 157.. 1. What
Attraction is, and from whence it proceeds. ibid.. 2. The true sense of the
Maxim, that Nature abhors from vacuity. page 158.. 3. The true reason of
attraction. page 159.. 4. Water may be brought by the force of attraction to
what height soever. page 160.. 5. The doctrine touching the attraction of water
in siphons. ibid:. 6. That the siphon does not prove water to weigh in its own
orb. page 161.. 7. Concerning attraction caused by fire. page 162.. 8.
Concerning attraction made by virtue of hot bodies, amulets etc. page 163.. 9.
The natural reason given for diverse operations, esteemed by some to be
magical. ibid.

CHAP. XIX. Of three other motions belonging to particular bodies Filtration,
Restitution, and Electricall attraction. page 166.. 1. What is Filtration; and
how it is effected. ibid.. 2. What causes the water in filtration to ascend.
page 167.. 3. Why the filter will not drop unless the labell hang lower then
the water. ibid.. 4. Of the motion of Restitution: and why some bodies stand
bent, others not. page 168.. 5. Why some bodies return only in part to their
natural figure; others entirely. page 170.. 6. Concerning the nature of those
bodies which do shrink and stretch. page 171.. 7. How great and wonderful
effects, proceed from small, plain, and simple principles. ibid.. 8.
Concerning Electricall attraction, and the causes of it. page 172.. 9. Cabeus
his opinion refuted concerning the cause of Electricall motions. page 174.

CHAP. XX. Of the Loadestones generation; and its particular motions. page
175.. 1. The extreme heat of the sun under the zodiake, draws a stream of
air from each Pole into the torride zone. ibid.. 2. The atoms of these two
streams coming together are apt to incorporate with one an other. page 176..
3. By the meeting and mingling together of these streams at the Equator,
diverse riuolets of atoms of each Pole, are continuated from one Pole to te
other. page 177.. 4. Of these atoms incorporated with some fit matter in the
bowels of the earth, is made a stone. page 179.. 5. This stone works by
emanations, joined with agreeing streams that meet them in the air; and in
fine it is a loadestone. ibid.. 6. A method for making experiences upon any
subject. page 181.. 7. The loadestones generation by atoms flowing from both
Poles, is confirmed by experiments observed in the stone it self. ibid.. 8.
Experiments to prove that the loadestone works by emanations* meeting with
agreeing streams. page 182.

CHAP. XXI. Positions drawn out of the former doctrine, and confirmed by
experimental proofs. page 185..1. The operations of the loadestone are
wrought by bodies and not by qualities. ibid.. 2. Objections against the former
position answered. page 186.. 3. The loadestone is imbued with his virtue from
an other body. ibid.. 4. The virtue of the loadestone is a double, and not one
simple virtue. 188.. 5. The virtue of the laodestone works more strongly in
the Poles of it then in any other part. ibid.. 6. The laodestone sends forth
its emanations spherically. Which are of two kinds: and each kind is strongest
in that hemisphere, through whose polary parts they issue out. ibid.. 7.
Putting two loadestones within the sphere of one an other, every part of one
laodestone, does not agree with every part of the other loadestone. page 189..
8. Concerning the declination and other respects of a needle, toward the
loadestone it touches. ibid.. 9. The virtue of the laodestone goes from end
to end in lines almost paralelle to the axis. page 191.. 10. The virtue of
loadestone is not perfectly sphericall though the stone be such. page 192.. 11.
The intention of nature in all the operations of the loadestone, is to make an
union betwixt the attractiue and attracted bodies. ibid.. 12. The maine globe
of the earth is not a loadestone. ibid.. 13. The laodestone is generated in all
parts or climats of the earth. page 193.. 14. The conformity betwixt the two
motions of magnetike things, and of heavy things. ibid.

CHAP. XXII. A solution of certain Problemes concerning the loadestone, and a
short sum of the whole doctrine touching it. page 194.. 1. Which is the
North, and which the South Pole of a loadestone. ibid.. 2. Whether any bodies
besides magnetike ones be attractiue. ibid.. 3. Whether an iron placed
perpendicularly toward the earth does get a magneticall virtue of pointing
toward the north, or toward the south in that end that lies downewardes.
page 195.. 4. Why loadestones affect iron better then one an other. ibid.. 5.
Gilberts reason refuted touching a capped loadestone, that takes up more iron
then one not capped; and an iron impregnated that in some case draws more
strongly then the stone it self. ibid.. 6. Galileus his opinion touching the
former effects refuted. page 196.. 7. The Authors solution to the former
questions. page 197.. 8. The reason why in the former case, a lesser loadestone
does draw the interiacent iron from the greater. page 198.. 9. Why the
variation of a touched needle from the north, is greater, the nearer you go to
the Pole. page 199.. 10. Whether in the same part of the world a touched needle
may at one time vary more from the north and at an other time less. page
200.. 11. The whole doctrine of the loadestone summed up in short. page 201.

CHAP. XXIII. A description of the two sorts of living creatures; Plants, and
Animals: and how they are framed in common to perform vital motion. page
203.. 1. The connection of the following Chapters with the precedent ones.
ibid.. 2. Concerning several compositions of mixed bodies. page 204.. 3. Two
sorts of living creatures. page 205. 4. An engine to express the first sort
of living creatures. ibid.. 5. An other engine by which may be expressed the
second sort of living creatures. page 207.. 6. The two former engines and some
other comparisons applied to express the two several sorts of living
creatures. ibid.. 7. How plants are framed. page 209.. 8. How sensitive
creatures are formed. page 210.

CHAP. XXIV. A more particular suruay of the generation of Animals; in which is
discovered what part of the animal is first generated. page 213,. 1. The
opinion that the seed contains formally every part of the parent. ibid.. 2.
The former opinion rejected. page 214.. 3. The Authors opinion of this
question. page 215.. 4. Their opinion refuted, who hold that every thing
contains formally all things. page 216.. 5. The Authors opinion concerning
the generation of Animals declared, and confirmed. page 217.. 6. That one
substance is changed into an other. page 219.. 7. Concerning the hatching of
chickens, and the generation of other Animals. page 220.. 8. From whence it
happens that the deficiences, or excrescences of the parents body, are often
seen in their children. page 221. 9. The difference between the Authors
opinion, and the former one. p. 222. 10. That the heart is imbued with the
general specifike virtues of the whole body; whereby is confirmed the doctrine
of the two former paragraphes. page 223.. 11. That the heart is the first part
generated in a living creature. page 225.

CHAP. XXV. How a Plant or Animal comes to that figure it has. page 226.. 1.
That the figure of an Animal is produced by ordinary second causes, as well as
any other corporeal effect. page 226. 2. That the several figures of bodies
proceed from a defect in one of ^he three dimensions, caused by the concurrance
of accidental causes. page 227. 3. The former doctrine is confirmed by
several instances. page 228 4. The same doctrine applied to Plants. page 229.
5. The same doctrine declared in leafes of trees. ibid.. 6. The same applied to
the bodies of Animals page 230. 7. In what sense the Author does admit of Vis
formatrix. page 231

CHAP. XXVI. How motion begins in living creatures. And of the motion of the
heart; circulation of the blood; Nutrition; Augmentation; and corruption or
death. page 232. 1. Fromwhence does proceed the primary motion and growth in
Plants. ibid.. 2. Monsieur des Carts his opinion touching the motion of the
heart. p. 233. 3. The former opinion rejected. ibid.. 4. The Authors opinion
concerning the motion of the heart. page 234. 5. The motion of the heart
depends originally of its fibers irrigated by blood. page 236. 6. An
objection answered against the former doctrine. page 237. 7. The circulation of
the blood, and other effects that follow the motion of the heart. page 238. 8.
Of Nutrition. page 239. 9. Of Augmentation. page 240. 10. Of death and
sickness. page 241

CHAP. XXVII. Of the motions of sense; and of the sensible qualities in
general; and in particular of those which belong to Touch, Taste, and Smelling.
page 242. 1. The connection of the subsequent chapters with the precedent.
ibid.. 2. Of the senses and sensible qualities in general. And of the end for
which they serve. ibid.. 3. Of the sense of touching: and that both it and its
qualities are bodies. 244. 4. Of the taste and its qualities: that they are
bodies. page 245. 5. That the smell and its qualities are real bodies. ibid..
6. Of the conformity betwixt the two senses of smelling and tasting. p. 246. 7.
The reason why the sense of smelling is not so perfect in man as in beasts:
with a wonderful history of a man who could wind a sent as well as any beast.
page 247

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the sense of hearing, and of the sensible quality sound. p.
249. 1. Of the sense of hearing: and that sound is purely motion. ibid.. 2. Of
diverse arts belonging to the sense of hearing: all which confirm that sound
is nothing but motion. page 250. 3. The same is confirmed by the effects caused
by great noises. page 251. 4. That solid bodies may conueye the motion of the
air or sound to the organe of hearing. page 252. 5. Where the motion is
interrupted there is no sound. ibid.. 6. That not only the motion of the air
but all other motions coming to our ears make sounds. page 253. 7. How one
sense may supply the want of an other. ibid.. 8. Of one who could discern
sounds of words with his eyes. page 254. 9. Diverse reasons to prove sound to be
nothing else but a motion of some real body. page 256

CHAP. XXIX. Of Sight; and Colors. page 257. 1. That Colors are nothing but
light mingled with darkness; or the disposition off a bodies superficies apt
to reflect light so mingled. ibid.. 2. Concerning the disposition of those
bodies which produce white or black colors. page 259. 3. The former doctrine
confirmed by Aristotle's authority, reason, and experience. ibid.. 4. How the
diversity of colors do follow out of various degrees of rarity and density.
page 260. 5. Why some bodies are Diaphanous others opacous. page 261. 6. The
former doctrine of colors confirmed by the generation of white and Black in
bodies. page 262

CHAP. XXX. Of luminous or apparente Colors. page 262. 1. Apparitions of
colors through a prisme or triangular glass are of two sorts. ibid.. 2. The
several parts of the object make several angles at their entrance into the
prisme. page 263. 3. The reason why some times the same object appears
throwgh the prisme in two places: and in one place more lively, in the other
place more dim. ibid.. 4. The reason of the various colors that appear in
looking throwgh a prisme. page 264. 5. The reason why the prisme in one
position, may make the colors appear quite contrary to what they did, when it
was in an other position. page 265. 6. The reason of the various colors in
general by pure light passing through a prisme. page 266. 7. Upon what side
every color appears that is made by pure light passing through a prisme.
page 267

CHAP. XXXI. The causes of certain appearances in luminous Colors; with a
conclusion of the discourse touching the senses and the sensible qualities.
page 268. 1. The reason of each several color in particular caused by light
passing through a prisme. page 268. 2. A difficult problem resolved touching
the prisme. page 270. 3. Of the rainebow, and how by the color of any body we
may know the composition of the body it self. page 272. 4. That all the
sensible qualities are real bodies resulting out of several mixtures of
rarity and density. page 273. 5. Why the senses are only five in number: with a
conclusion of all the former doctrine concerning them. page 274

CHAP. XXXII. Of sensation, or the motion whereby sense is properly exercised.
275. 1. Monsieur des Carts his opinion touching sensation. ibid.. 2. The
Authors opinion touching sensation. page 276. 3. Reasons to persuade the
Authors opinion. page 277. 4. That vital spiritts are the immediate
instruments of sensation by conueying sensible qualities to the brain. page
278. 5. How sound is conveyed to the brain by vital spirits. page 279. 6. How
colors are conveyed to the brain by vital spirits. page 280. 7. Reasons
against Monsieur des Carts his opinion. ibid.. 8. That the symptoms of the
palsy do no way confirm Monsieur des Carts his opinion. page 282. 9. That
Monsieur des Carts his opinion, can not give a good account, how things are
conserved in the memory. ibid.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Memory. page 284. 1. How things are conserved in the memory.
ibid.. 2. How things conserved in the memory are brought back into the
fantasy. page 285. 3. A Confirmation of the former doctrine. page 286 4. How
things renewed in the fantasy, return with the same circumstances that they
had at first. page 286. 5. How the memory of things past is lost, or
confounded: and how it is repaired again. page 287

CHAP. XXXIV. Of voluntary motion: Natural faculties: and passions. page 288.
1. Of what matter the brain is composed. ibid.. 2. What is voluntary motion.
page 289. 3. What those powers are which are called natural faculties. ibid..
4. How the attractiue and secretiue faculties work. page 290. 5. Concerning
the concoctiue faculty. page 291. 6. Concerning the retentiue and expulsive
faculties. ibid.. 7. Concerning expulsion made by Physic. page 292. 8. How
the brain is moved to work voluntary motion. page 292. 9. Why pleasing
objects do dilate the spirits, and displeasing ones contract them. page 294.
10. Concerning the five senses for what use and end they are. ibid.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the material instrument of Knowledge and Passion; of the
several effects of Passions; of Pain and Pleasure; and how the vital spirits
are sent from the brain into the intented parts of the body, without
mistaking their way. page 296. 1. That Septum Lucidum is the seat of the
fancy. ibid.. 2. What causes us to remember not only the object it self, but
also that we have thought of it before. page 297. 3. How the motions of the
fantasy, are derived to the heart. ibid.. 4. Of pain and pleasure. page 298.
5. Of Passion. ibid.. 6. Of several pulses caused by passions. page 299. 7. Of
several other effects caused naturally in the body by passions. p. 300. 8. Of
the diaphragma. page 302. 9. Concerning pain and pleasure caused by the memory
of things past. page 303. 10. How so small bodies as atoms are, can cause so
great motions in the heart. page 304. 11. How the vital spirits sent from the
brain, do run to the intended part of the body without mistake. ibid.. 12.
How men are blinded by Passion. page 305

CHAP. XXXVI. Of some actions of beasts, that seem to be formal acts of
reason, as doubting, resolving, inuenting. page 306. 1. The order and connection
of the subsequent Chapters. ibid.. 2. From whence proceeds the doubting of
beasts. page 307. 3. Concerning the invention of Foxes and other beasts.
ibid.. 4. Of foxes that catch hens by lying under their roost, and by gazing
upon them. page 309. 5. From whence proceeds the foxes invention to rid
himself of fleas. page 311. 6. An explication of two other inventions of
foxes. page 312. 7. Concerning Mountagues argument to prove that dogs make
syllogismes. ibid.. 8. A declaration how some tricks are performed by foxes,
which seem to argue discourse. page 313. 9. Of the Iaccatrays invention in
calling beasts to himself. page 314. 10. Of the Iaccalls design in serving
the lion. ibid.. 11. Of several inventions of fisshes. ibid.. 12. A discovery
of diverse things done by hares, which seem to argue discourse. page 315. 13.
Of a fox reported to have weighed a goose, before he would venture with it
over a river; and of fabulous stories in common. page 316. 14. Of the several
cryings and tones of beasts: with a refutation of those authors who maintain
them to have complete languages. page 317

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the docility of some irrational animals; and of certain
continuate actions of a long tract of time so orderly performed by them, that
they seem to argue knowledge in them. page 319. 1. How hawks and other
creatures are taught to do what they are browght up to. ibid.. 2. Of the
Baboone that played on a guitarre. 320. 3. Of the teaching of Elephantes and
other beasts to do diverse tricks. 321. 4. Of the orderly train of actions
performed by beasts in breeding their young ones. page 322

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of prescience of future euentes, prouidencies, the knowing of
things never seen before; and such other actions, observed in some living
creatures; which seem to be even above the reason that is in man himself.
page 327. 1. Why beasts are affraide of men. ibid.. 2. How some qualities
caused at first by chance in beasts, may pass by generation to the whole
offspring. page 328. 3. How the parents fantasy does oftentimes work strange
effects in their issue. page 329. 4. Of Antipathies. page 330. 5. Of
Sympathies. page 333. 6. That the Antipathy of beasts toward one an other,
may be taken away by assuefaction. page 334. 7. Of longing marks seen in
children. page 335. 8. Why diverse men hate some certain meats, and
particularly cheese. 336. 9. Corcerning the providence of Aunts in laying up in
store for winter. 337. 10. Concerning the foreknowing of beasts. page 338

The Conclusion of the first Treatise. page 340
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS AND MATTERS HANDLED IN THE SECOND TREATISE CONCERNING
MAN'S SOVLE.
THE Preface. page 349
CHAP. 1. Of simple Apprehensions. page 355. 1. What is a right apprehension of
a thing. ibid.. 2. The very thing it self is truly in his understanding who
rightly apprehends it. page 356. 3. The Apprehension of things coming unto
us by our senses, are resoluable into other more simple apprehensions. page
358. 4. The apprehension of a Being is the most simple and Basis of all the
rest. ibid.. 5. The apprehension of a thing is in next degree to that of Being,
and it is the Basis of all the subsequent ones. ibid.. 6. The apprehension of
things known to us by our senses, does consist in certain respects betwixt
two things. page 359. 7. Respect or relation has not really any formal
being, but only in the apprehension of man. ibid.. 8. That Existence or being
is the proper affection of man: and that man's soul is a comparing power. page
360. 9. A thing by coming into the understanding of man, loses nothing of its
own peculiar nature. ibid.. 10. A multitude of things may be united in man's
understanding without being mingled or confounded together. page 361. 11. Of
abstracted and concrete terms. page 362. 12. Of universal notions. page 363.
13. Of apprehending a multitude under one notion. page 364. 14. The power of
the understanding reaches as far as the extent of being. page 365

CHAP. II. Of Thinking and Knowing. page 365. 1. How a judgment is made by the
understanding. ibid.. 2. That two or more apprehensions are identifyed in the
soul by uniting them in the stock of being. page 366. 3. How the notions of a
substantive and an adjective, are united in the soul, by the common stock of
being. page 367. 4. That a settled judgment becomes a part of our soul. page
368. 5. How the soul comes to deem or settle a judgment. ibid.. 6. How
opinion is begotten in the understanding. page 371. 7. How faith is begotten in
the understanding. page 372. 8. Why truth is the perfection of a reasonable
soul: and why it is not found in simple apprehensions as well as in
Enuntiations. ibid.. 9. What is a solid judgment, and what a slight one. page
373. 10. What is an acute judgment, and what a dull one. page 375. 11. In what
consists quickness and Clearenesse of judgment: and there oposite vices.
ibid.

CHAP. III. Of Discoursing. page 376. 1. How discourse is made. ibid.. 2. Of
the figures and moodes of Syllogismes. ibid.. 3. That the life of man as man,
does consist in discourse, and of the vast extent of it. page 377. 4. Of humane
actions, and of those that concern ourselves. page 379. 5. Of humane actions
as they concern our neighbors. page 380. 6. Of Logike. ibid.. 7. Of Grammar.
page 381. 8. Of Rhetorike. ibid.. 9. Of Poetry. page 382. 10. Of the Power of
speaking. ibid.. 11. Of arts that concern dumb and insensible creatures. page
383. 13. Of Arithmetike. ibid.. 14. Of Prudence. ibid.. 15. Observations upon
what has been said in this Chapter. page 384

CHAP. IIII. How a man proceeds to Action. page 386. 1. That humane actions
proceed from two several principles, understanding and sense. ibid.. 2. How
our general and inbred maxims do concur to humane action. page 387. 3.
That the rules and maxims of arts do work positiuely in us though we think
not of them. page 388. 4. How the understanding does cast about when it wants
sufficient grounds for action. page 389. 5. How reason does rule over sense and
passion. ibid.. 6. How we recall our thoughts from distractions. page 390. 7.
How reason is sometimes overcome by sense and passion. page 391

CHAP. V. Containing proofs out of our single apprehensions, that our soul is
incorporeall. page 393. 1. The connection of the subsequent Chapters with the
precedent. ibid.. 2. The existence of corporeal things in the soul by the
power of apprehension, does prove her to be immateriall. page 394. 3. The
notion of being, which is innate in the soul, does prove the same. ibid.. 4.
The same is proved by the notion of respects. page 396. 5. That corporeal
things are spiritualized in the understanding by means of the souls working
in and by respects. ibid.. 6. That the abstracting of notions from all
particular and individual accidents, does prove the immaterialitie of the
soul. page 397. 7. That the universality of abstracted notions does prove the
same. ibid.. 8. That collectiue apprehensions do prove the same. page 398. 9.
The operations of the soul drawing always from multitude to unity, do prove
the same. 399. 10. The difference betwixt the notion of a thing in our
understanding, and the impression that correspondeth to the same thing in our
fancy, does prove the same. page 400. 11. The apprehension of negations and
priuations do prove the same. 401

CHAP. VI. Containing proofs of our souls operations in knowing or deeming
any thing, that she is of a spiritual nature. page 400. 1. The manner of
judging or deeming by apprehending two things to be iden^ified does prove the
soul to be immateriall. ibid.. 2. The same is proved by the manner of
apprehending opposition in a negative judgment. page 403. 3. That things in
themselves opposite to one an other having no opposition in the soul, does
prove the same. page 404. 4. That the first truths are identified to the
soul. page 405. 5. That the soul has an infinite capacity, and consequently
is immateriall. page 406. 6. That the opposition of contradictory propositions
in the Soul does prove her immaterialitie. ibid.. 7. How propositions of
eternal truth, do prove the immaterialitie of the soul. page 407

CHAP. VII. That our discoursing does prove our soul to be incorpore all.
page 408. 1. That in discoursing the soul contains more in it at the same
time then is in the fantasy, which proves her to be immateriall. ibid.. 2.
That the nature of discourse does prove the soul to be ordered to infinite
knowledge, and consequently to be immateriall. page 409. 3. That the most
natural objects of the soul are immateriall, and consequently the soul her
self is such. ibid.

CHAP. VIII. Containing proofs out of our manner of proceeding to action, that
our soul is incorporeall. page 410. 1. That the souls being a power to order
things proves her to be immateriall. ibid.. 2. That the souls being able to
move without being moved, does prove her to be immateriall. page 411. 3.
That the souls proceeding to action with an universality, and indifferency
does prove the same. page 412. 4. That the quiet proceeding of reason does
prove the same. page 414. 5. A conclusion of what has been said hitherto in
this second Treatise. ibid.

CHAP. IX. That our soul is a Substance, and Immortal. page 415. 1. That Man's
Soul is a substance. ibid.. 2. That man is compounded of some other substance
besides his body. ibid.. 3. That the soul does subsist of it self
independently of the body. page 416. 4. Two other arguments to prove the same:
one positive, the other negative. page 417. 5. The same is proved because the
soul can not be obnoxious to the cause of mortality. ibid.. 6. The same is
proved because the soul has no contrary. page 418. 7. The same is proved
from the end for which the soul was created. ibid.. 8. The same is proved
because she can move without being moved. page 420. 9. The same is proved
from her manner of operation which is grounded in being. ibid.. 10. Lastly it
is proved from the science of Morality, the principles whereof would be
destroyed if the soul were mortal. page 421

CHAP. X. Declaring what the soul of a man, separated from his body, is: and
of her knowledge and manner of working. page 422. 1. That the soul is one
simple knowing act which is a pure substance and nothing but substance. ibid..
2. That a separated soul is in no place, and yet is not absent from any place.
page 424. 3. That a separated soul is not in time nor subject to it. ibid.. 4.
That the soul is an active substance, and all in it is actiuitie. page 425. 5.
A description of the soul. page 426. 6. That a separated soul knows all
that which she knew whilst she was in her body. ibid.. 7. That the least
knowledge which the soul acquireth in her body of any one thing, does cause
in her, when she is separated from her body a complete knowledge of all
things whatsoever. page 427. 8. An answer to the objections of some
Peripatetikes who maintain the soul to perish with the body. page 429. 9 The
former Peripatetikes refuted out of Aristotle. page 431. 10. The operations of
a separated soul compared to her operations in her body. ibid.. 11. That a
separated soul is in a state of pure being, and consequently immortal. page
432

CHAP. XI. Showing what effects, the diverse manners of living in this world, do
cause in a soul, after she is separated from her body. p. 433. 1. That a soul
in this life is subject to mutation, and may be perfected in knowledge. ibid..
2. That the knowledges which a soul gets in this life, will make her
knowledge in the next life more perfect, and firm. page 434. 3. That the
souls of men addicted to science whilst they lived here, are more perfect in
the next world, then the souls of unlearned men. page 435. 4. That those
souls which embrace virtue in this world will be most perfect in the next, and
those which embrace vice most miserable. ibid.. 5. The state of a vicious soul
in the next life. page 437. 6. The fundamental reason why as well happiness
as misery is so excessive in the next life. page 439. 7. The reason why man's
soul requires to be in a body, and to live for some space of time joined with
it. page 441. 8. That the misery of the soul in the next world, proceeds out
of inequality, and not out of falsity of her judgments. page 442

CHAP. XII. Of the perseverance of a soul, in the state she finds herself
in, at her first separation from her body. page 443. 1. The explication, and
proof of that maxim, that, if the cause be in act, the effect must also be.
ibid.. 2. The effects of all such agents as work instantaneously, are complete
in the first instant that the agents are putt. ibid.. 3. All pure spirits do
work instantaneously. page 444. 4. That a soul separated from her body can
not suffer any change after the first instant of her separation. ibid.. 5. That
temporal sins are justly punished with eternal pains. page 445 The
Conclusion. page 446

THE PREFACE.
THIS writing was designed to have seen the light under the name of one
treatise. But after it was drawn in paper; as I cast a view over it, I found
the prooemiall part (which is that which treats of Bodies) so ample in
respect of the other (which was the end of it; and for whose sake I meddled
with it) that I readily apprehended my reader would think I had gone much
astray from my text, when proposing to speak of the immortality of Man's Soul,
three parts of four of the whole discourse, should not so much as in one word
mention that soul, whose nature and proprieties I aimed at the discovery of.
To avoid this incongruity, occasioned me to change the name and unity of the
work; and to make the suruay of bodies, a body by it self* though subordinate
to the treatise of the soul. Which notwithstanding it be less in bulk then
the other; yet I dare promise my Reader, that if he bestow the pains requisite
to perfect him self in it, he will find as much time well spent in the due
reading of it, as in the reading of the former treatise, though far more
large.

But I discern an objection obuious to be made; or rather a question; why I
should spend so much time in the consideration of bodies, whereas none that
has formerly written of this subject, has in any measure done the like. I
might answer that they had, upon other occasions, first written of the nature
of bodies: as I may instance in Aristotle; and sundry others, who either have
themselves professedly treated the science of bodies, or have supposed that
part sufficiently performed by other pens. But truly, I was by an unavoidable
necessity hereunto obliged: which is, a current of doctrine that at this day,
much reigns in the Christian Schools, where bodies and their operations, are
explicated after the manner of spiritual things. For we having very slender
knowledge of spiritual substances, can reach no further into their nature,
then to know that they have certain powers, or qualities; but can seldom
penetrate so deep, as to descend to the particulars of such Qualities, or
Powers. Now our modern Philosophers have introduced such a course of learning
into the schools, that unto all questions concerning the proper natures of
bodies, and their operations, it is held sufficient to answer, they have a
quality, or a power to do such a thing. And afterward they dispute whether
this Quality or Power, be an Entity distinct from its subject, or no; and how
it is seperable, or inseparable from it, and the like. Conformable to this, who
will look into the books, which are in vogue in these schools, shall find
such answers and such controversies every where, and few others. As, of the
sensible qualities: ask what it is to be white or red, what to be sweet or
sower, what to be odoriferous, or stinking, what to be cold or hott? And you
are presently paid with, that it is a sensible quality, which has the power to
make a wall white or red, to make a meat agreeable or disagreeable to the
taste, to make a grateful or ungrateful smell to the nose etc: Likewise they
make the same questions and resolutions, of Gravity and Leuity: as whether they
be qualities, that is, entities distinct from their subject: and whether they
be active or passive; which when they have disputed slightly, and in common,
with logical arguments; they rest there, without any further searching into
the physical causes or effects of them. The like you shall find of all strange
effects of them. The loadestone and Electricall bodies are produced for
miraculous, and not vnderstandable things; and in which, it must be
acknowledged, that they work by hidden qualities, that man's wit cannot reach
unto. And ascending to living bodies, they give it for a Maxim: that life is
the action of the same Entity upon it self: that sense is likewise a work of
an intrinsecall power, in the part we call sense, upon it self. Which, our
predecessors held the greatest absurdities that could be spoken in Philosophy.
Even some Physicians, that take upon them to teach the curing of our bodies, do
often pay us with such terms, among them, you have long discourses of a
retentiue, of an expulsive, of a purging, of a consolidating faculty: and so of
every thing that either passes in our body, or is applied for remedy. And the
meaner sort of Physicians know no more, but that such faculties are; though
indeed they that are truly Physicians, know also in what they consist; without
which knowledge it is much to be feared, Physicians will do more harm then
good.

But to return to our subject: this course of doctrine in the schools, has
forced me to a great deal of pains in seeking to discover the nature of all
such actions (or of the maine part of them) as were famed for incomprehensible:
for what hope could I have, out of the actions of the soul to convince the
nature of it to be incorporeall; if I could give no other account of bodies
operations, then that they were performed by qualities occult, specificall, or
incomprehensible? Would not my adversary presently answer, that any operation,
out of which I should press the souls being spiritual, was performed by a
corporeal occult quality: and that as he must acknowledge it to be
incomprehensible, so must I likewise acknowledge other qualities of bodies, to
be as incomprehensible: and therefore could not with reason press him, to show
how a body was able to do such an operation, as I should infer must of
necessity proceed from a spirit, since that neither could I give account how
the loadestone drew iron, or looked to the north; how a stone, and other heavy
things were carried downewardes; how sight or fantasy was made; how digestion
or purging were effected; and many other such questions, which are so slightly
resolved in the schools?

Besides this reason, the very desire of knowledge in my self; and a
willingness to be auaylable unto others (at the least so far as to set
them on seeking for it, without having a prejudice of impossibity in attaining
it) was unto me a sufficient motive, to enlarge my discourse to the bulk it is
risen unto. For what a misery is it, that the flower and best wits of
Christendom, which flock to the Universities, under pretense and upon hope of
gaining knowledge, should be there deluded; and after many years of toil and
expense, be sent home again, with nothing acquired more then a faculty, and
readynesse to talk like parrats of many things; but not to understand so much
as anyone; and withal with a persuasion that in truth nothing can be known?
For setting knowledge aside, what can it avail a man to be able to talk of
any thing? What are those wranglinges, where the discovery of truth is neither
sought, nor hoped for, but merely vanity and ostentation? Does not all tend,
to make him seem and appear that which indeed he is not? Nor let any body
take it ill at my hands, that I speak thus of the modern schools: for
indeed it is rather themselves then I that say it. Excepting Mathematikes, let
all the other schools pronounce their own minds, and say ingenuously,
whether they themselves believe they have so much as any one demonstration,
from the beginning to the ending of the whole course of their learning. And if
all, or the most part, will agree that any one position is demonstrated
perfectly, and as it ought to be, and as thousands of conclusions are
demonstrated in Mathematikes; I am ready to undergo the blame of having
calumniated them, and will as readily make them amends. But if they neither
will, nor can; then their own verdict clears me: and it is not so much I, as
they, that make this profession of the shallowness of their doctrine. And to
this purpose I have often hard the lamentations of diverse, as great wits as
any that converse in the schools, complaining of this defect. But in so great
an evidence of the effect, proofs are superfluous.

Wherefore I will leave this subject, to declare what I have here designed, and
gone about, toward the remedy of this inconvenience. Which is, that whereas
in the schools, there is a loose method, or rather none; but that it is
lawful, by the liberty of a commentator, to handle any question, in any place
(which is the cause of the slightness of their doctrine, and can never be the
way to any science or certitude) I have taken my beginninges from the commonest
things that are in nature: namely, from the notions of Quantity, and its first
differences: which are the most simple, and radical notions that are, and in
which all the rest are to be grounded. From them I endeavor by immediate
composition of them, and deriuation from them, to bring down my discourse to
the Elements, which are the primary, and most simple bodies in nature. From
these, I proceed to compounded bodies; first, to those that are called mixed;
and then, to living bodies: declaring in common the proprieties and operations
that belong unto them. And by occasion as I pass along, I light here and there
on those operations, which seem most admirable in nature, to show how they are
performed; or at the least, how they may be performed: that though I miss in
particular of the industry of nature, yet I may nevertheless hitt my intent;
which is, to trace out a way, how these, and such like operations may be
effected by an exact disposition, and ordering (though intricate) of
quantitatiue and corporeal parts: and to show, that they oblige us not to
recurre unto hidden and inexplicable qualities. And if I have declared so many
of these, as may begett a probable persuasion in my reader, that the rest,
which I have not touched, may likewise be displayed, and showed to spring out
of the same grounds, if curious and constant searchers into nature, will make
their task to penetrate into them; I have therein obtained my desire and
intent; which is only, to show from what principles, all kinds of corporeal
operations do proceed; and what kind of operations all these must be, which may
issue out of these principles: to the end, that I may from thence, make a
step to raise my discourse to the contemplation of the soul; and show, that
her operations are such, as cannot proceed from those principles; which being
adequate and common to all bodies, we may rest assured, that what cannot issue
from them, cannot have a body for its source.

I will therefore end this preface, with entreating my reader to consider, that
in a discourse proceeding in such order as I have declared, he must not expect
to understand, and be satisfied, with what is said in any middle or later part,
unless he first have read, and understood what goes before. Wherefore, if he
cannot resolve with himself, to take it along orderly as it lies from the
beginning, he shall do himself (as well as me) right, not to meddle at all
with this book. But if he will employ any time upon it, to receive advantage
by it, he must be content to take the pains to understand thoroughly every
particular as it is set down. And if his memory will not serve him to carry
every one along with him, yet at the least let, him be sure to remember the
place where it is handled, and upon occasion, return a look back upon it,
when it may stand him in steed. If he thinks this diligence too burdensome,
let him consider that the writing hereof, has cost the Author much more
pains: who as he will esteem them exceedingly well employed, if they may
contribute ought to the content or advantage of any free and ingenuous mind; so
if any others shall express a neglect of what he has with so much labor
hewed out of the hard rock of nature; or shall discourteously cavil at the
notions he so freely imparteth unto them; all the ressentment he shall make
thereof, will be to desire the first, to consider, that their slight esteem of
his work, obliges them to entertain their thoughts with some more noble and
more profittable subject, and better treated, then this is: and the later sort,
to justify their dislike of his doctrine, by delivering a fairer and more
complete body of Philosophy, of their own. Which if hereupon they do, his
being the occasion of the ones bettering themselves, and of the others
bettering the world, will be the best success he can wish his book.

APPROBATIONES DOCTORVM.
EGo infra scriptus natione Anglus, and in sacra Theologiae Facultate
Parisiensi Magister, fidem facio me librum perlegisse Anglicano idiomate
scriptum; cui titulus, Two treatises, in the one of which the nature of bodies,
in the other the nature of man's soul is looked into, in way of discovery of
the immortality of reasonable souls, Authore nobilissimo, and vndequaque
eruditissimo viro Kenelmo Digbaeo Anglo. In quo nihil deprehendiaut fidei, aut
pietati Catholicae, and Romanae Ecclesiae dissonum vel indignum. Quod etiam
spondeo, priusquam typis exoluetur, candi^iori ac duplicato calculo testatum
fore. Interea vero ne tantum sub modio lumen vel parumper delitescat, hoc ipsum
proprio firmaui chirographo. Datum Parisiis Kalendis Martijab Incarnationis
anno 1644.

H. HOLDEN.

BY leave and order from our sacred Faculty, we under written Doctors of
Deuinitie of the University of Paris have read over this book, entitled, Two
treatises, in the one of which the nature of bodies, in the other the nature of
man's soul is looked into, in way of discovery of the immortality of
reasonable souls. Written by Sir Kenelme Digby, and containing an hundred and
sixteen shites, printed in folio by Gilles Blaizor 1644. Which, as well for
its chief subjects sake, that never ought to be slightly handled, as also for
its new and exotticke assertions in matters both of soul and body, we have
the more diligently perused. And whether it has hitte or missed of the truth,
we must needs eesteme and highly extolle the authors manly design to aim at
evidence. Especially in this schepticke age, wherein so few profess, or think
it possible to know with certitude. Yea wherein even many of those, who to the
vulgar seem Masters of learning, acknowledge all philosophies decisions only
problematicall; and thence laboring to make their voluminous relations of each
others phansies and opinious pass for science, have quite banished her their
schools. But here we find a large and lofty soul, who not satisfied with
unexamined words and ambiguous terms, longing to know dyues deeply into the
bowels of all corporeal and compounded things: and then deuinely speculats
the nature of immateriall and subsistent forms. Nor this by wrangling in aerie
names with chimericall imaginations and fained suppositions of unknown
qualities, but strongly stryuing to disclosehereall and connaturall truth of
each thing in it self, and of one constant and continued thridde, weaues his
whole work into one web. Where many of the most abstruse and enigmaticke
questions of natures secrets, (hitherto unresolved, and for the most part
weakly represented in empty language and verbal shadows) are made no less
plain and evident in their inward beings and effects, then pleasant and
grateful in their wellclothed outside and expression. In which, though to the
blind and common crowde (to whom all that's unusual is a paradox) there may
perhapps appear what they will dare call extrauagant, and to the midlecyzed
gymnastickes what they will conceive ill grownded, though ingenious quesses, yet
surely will the more solid reflections of all knowing men begette a liking of
its acquaintance. Howsoever this we can and do affirm and testifye (although
the author's prodigious parts and public credit makes void our approbation)
that nothing contained in either of those two treatises, discussing only the
ordinary course of nature, does any way tend to the disadvantage of the faith
or piety of our Catholic Roman church, whereof this Author professes him
self a dutiful and obedient child. And therefore we sign and subscribe our
names here unto. Paris this 10. of November 1644.

H. HOLDEN. E. TYRREL.


IDEM LATIN.
VEnia ac iussu Sacrae nostrae Facultatis, Nos infrascripti S. Theologiae
Doctores Academiae Parisiensis, perlegimus librum hunc, cui titulus, Duo
tractatus, in quorum vno natura corporum, altero natura humanae animae
inspicitur, ad inuestigandam animarum rationalium immortalitatem. Authore
Kenelmo Digbaeo Equite aurato, centum and sexdecim schedas continentem, typis
Aegidij Blaizot in folio excusum Anno 1644. Quem, tum ob eius praecipuum
subiectum, quod nunquam leuiter tractari conuenit, tum maxim ob nouas quasdam
and inusitatas assertiones, tam in animae quam corporum materia, tanto
diligentiori studio peruoluimus. In quo sieve ipsas veritatis apices adeptus
sit, sieve non, audaces certe authoris animos, in ipsam euidentiam attentando
non possumus non magnopere commendare: in hoc sceptico praesertim aeuo, in quo
tam pauci profitentur, aut possibile reputant fieri posse vt quidquam certo
cognoscatur: imo veroin quo plurimi eorum qui vulgi opinione scientiarum
magistri habentur, quotquot sunt philosophiae positiones, non nisi totidem
problemata agnoscunt: quique proinde portentosis voluminibus sua aliorumque
placita loco verae scientiae nobis obtrudere volentes, eam prorsus scholis suis
exterminarunt. At hic generosiorem animum inuenimus, qui nudis hisce ac
inexplicatis voculis haud acquiescens, sed veritatis ardore succensus, eam
altius in ipsis rerum corporearum visceribus perscrutatur: ac tum demum
immaterialium and subsistentium formarum naturam perspicacissima mentis acie
speculatur. Nec ad hoc contentiosis vtitur verborum rixis, aut chimericas,
incognitasque qualitates in subsidium conuocat, sed genuinam cuiusque ^ei,
prout in se est, exhibens veritatem, vnoque, and eo continuo, scientiae filo
totum opus contexit. In quo plurima ex abstrusioribus naturae secretis (quae
hactenus aut omnino non innotuerunt, aut ad summum vmbratili verborum fuco sunt
obuoluta) non minus clara and euidentia quoad interiores eorum naturas and
effectus, quam grata and iucunda quoad exteriorem ornatum exhibentur. Inter
quae nonnihil fortasse occurret, quod plebeo hominum generi (cui omne
inusitatum paradoxi loco habetur) long a veritatis scopo alienum videri
poterit; aut quod moderatioribus gymnasiastis, inualidis quidem innixum
fundamentis, attamen non nisi ingeniosis adinuentum coniecturis: Erit
nihilominus quod post maturam discussionem, omnium vere doctorum animos ad sui
amorem ac desiderium alliceat. Quicquid sit, hoc saltem nos possumus, ac de
facto testamur and notum facimus (vtvt Authoris conspicua fame ac dignitas
testimonium nostrum inutile reddat) nihil in vtrolibet horum tractatuum
contentum, in quibus ordinarius solum naturae processus consideratur, in
praeiudicium fideitendere, aut pietatis Catholicae Romanae Ecclesiae, cuius
author hic se filium obedientissimum profitetur. In cuius proinde rei
testimonium hic nostra subscripsimus nomina, and subsignauimus. Actum Parisiis
10. Nouembris anno 1644.

H. HOLDEN. E. TYRREL.


ERudita est haec lucubratio, eruditis edita cogitationibus, nihil habet
orthodoxis repugnans Maximis, mage maximum magnae Britanniae decus loquitur
authorem; vere virum, and primis Christiani orbis componendum Heroibus, ea
doctrinae and fortitudinis laud, eo Castrensis and literarij pulueris vsu, iis
pro patria and Religione negotiationibus, ea potenti suada, tam supereminenti
politia, tot terra, marique rebus gestis inclytum, vt eius commentario
praelatum Nomen, non modo lucis ipsi vsuram, sed and quouis terrarum inoffenso
pede commeandi, and iura ciuium vindi^^ndi promereatur. Sic censuit Parisiis in
Collegio Plessaeo 11. Nouembris Anno Domini 1644.

IACOBVS DVLAEVS in sacra Facultate Paris. Doctor Theologus.

PRAE^LARVM istud Opus, and aureum Viri nobilissimi, illustrissimi Equitis
aurati, Domini mei D. Kenelmi Digbaei, non est cur adgrediar approbare vel
audeam. Satis illud probatum reddiderint Sapientissimi MM. NN. quibus, me
absente, longeque alibi Gentium constituto, hanc prouinciam demandauit sacra
nostra Facultas Parisiensis. Iuuat tamen admirari, ac venerari singularem at
que praecellentem Viri Genium, parique virtute and foelicitate Ingenium.
Peragrauerat olim Oceanum, mareque mediterraneum naualibus pugnis, victorijs,
triumphis parua, sed been instructa classicula, tot and tam miranda patrauerat,
quot, and quanta deinceps alij, ne regijs quidem classibus, sunt assequuti.
Martigenam dixisses aut Neptunigenam. Nunc Apollini quoque sacrum se, and
charum ostendit; Mineruae, Musarumque Alumnum. Principijs quippe subnixus pure
naturalibus, paucis quidem, sed validis, been prouisis, diligenter selectis,
ferrea, vt ita dicam, Naturae claustra perrumpit, atque refringit. Ast quodnam
mihi verbum exciderat* apetit leniter potius, and recludi^. Sinus, penetralia,
recessus, viscera, mentis acumine pererrat: diuitiarum illinc thesauros eruit:
vtendos, fruendos nobis elargitur. Principia illius, and elementa, ipsorumque
inter sese texturam and coagmentationem explicat; indeque exorientia mixta,
perfecta, imperfecta, viuentia, animata, mouentia, rationis expertia,
rationalia, horumque omnium virtutes, operationes, effectus: tum, quibus
instrumentis ista moliatur Natura Architectrix. Hisce attenta mente perpensis,
and quousque pertingere valeat formarum, quae plane sunt materiales, vis and
potestas; tum demum clara luce visendum ostendit, Formam nostram, non animam
duntaxat esse, qua sumus, vegetamur, mouemur, sentimus, sed and animum,
mentemque, Ar. 3. de anima.
qua sapimus, and intelligimus: Hac nos praeterita reminiscendo recolere;
praesentia supra ipsa reflectendo intueri* futura, non ex aeris humorumve
immutatione, sed ratiocinando, and vera prouidentia, in alteram quoque aetatem,
and saecula prospicere, and praecauere: Quin and eumdem animum, cum caetera
permeauerit intelligibilia, reuocata in se sua atque subducta ratiocinatione*
eam supra semetipsam conuertere, ac retorquere: ac vere suam omnem energiam
tunc exerere and studiosissime exercere; qui sese eumdem testetur manifest and
intelligentem esse, and intelligibile. Assequi istud non posse Agentia,
omnimodis a materia dependentia. Hinc ipsum euinci spiritualem, and immortalem
esse, and sine corpore potentem subsistere* Abstractae propterea statum, vim,
virtutem, functiones, operationes persequitur accurate, and assequitur; quantum
fi ri potest in sublustribus and opacis terrenae commorationis nostrae
vmbraculis. At o bone Deus! Dum campos and lata mentis praetoria perlustrat,
abstrusioraque voluntatis liberrimae receptacula; abditosque grandis memoriae
recessus, and quae reponuntur illic miris tamquam cellis and caueis; quam inde
miranda nobis egerit, quam stupenda producit? Res illic esse innumerabiles,
quarum sonos verborum and nominum, tenuesue, languidas, emortuas per sensum
hauserimus vmbras and imagines; viuidas autem and veraces intus nos habere
earum notiones atque rations; illius etiam quo quid est, quidquid est, sieve,
vt more nostro loquar, essentiarum ab omni materia depuratarum, definitiones,
diuisiones, quaeque ex illis sequuntur demonstrationes. Nostrum nos timorem
sine timore recolere, nostramque tristes laetitiam; vitam nos beatam
praelibare, and purum ab omni foece gaudium, quod in vno hominum nemine sumus
experti. Ad imitationem summi, post Apostolorum tempora, ingenio and doctrina
Theologi, exclamare libet: Quale tibi fabricatus es cubile in mente mea Domine?
Quale tibi sanctuarium aedificasti? Quid ego nunc styli nitorem, and vbertatem
depraedicem? Exemplorum similitudinum, experimentorum copiam and varietatem?
Scientiarum omnium vnica in dissertatione breuiarium and anacephaloeosim?
Hisce, Vir natalitijs, ingenio, doctrina summus, riuulis, floribus, luminibus
ita irrigauit, conuestiuit, distinxit, laeta reddidit horrida, vt videbantur
arua and aspera contemplationis Physicae, vt certare possint cum laetissimis,
and amoenissimis hortis aliorum, and suburbanis. Gratulor magnae Britanniae,
quondam foecundae maximorum ingeniorum parenti, and altrici; quae ne hoc quidem
aeuo senectute caduco, aut phroenisi laborante, sese indicat sterilem and
effo^tum. Gratulor linguae Anglicanae, locupletissimae iam antea, and
suauissimae; cuius t^men pomoeria long lateque protulit Author hic
splendidissimus. Gratulor Philologis and Philosophis Anglis, quibus viam
praeiuit, qua se quoque possint vulgo eximere, atque in libertatem aslerere;
and horridiuscula quaeque and inculta nitidissime edisserere. Gratulor denique
generosissimo beatae prolis parenti, tam altam animi pacem, tranquillitatem,
magnitudinem; vt inter nouercantis fortunae procellas, bellorum tumultus, aulae
strepitus, ista tamen procudere valuerit.

H. MAILLARD.

THE FIRST TREATISE DECLARING THE NATVRE AND OPERATIONS OF BODIES.
THE FIRST CHAPTER A Preamble to the whole discourse; concerning notions in
general.
IN delivering any science; Quantity is the first, and most obuious affection
of a body.
the cleerest and smoothest method, and most agreeable to nature; is to begin
with the consideration of those things, that are most common and obuious; and
by the dissection of them to descend by orderly degrees and steps (as they
lie in the way) unto the examination of the most particular and remote ones.
Now, in our present intended suruay of a body, the first thing which occurreth
to our sense in the perusal of it, is its Quantity, bulk, or magnitude* and
this seems by all mankind, to be conceived so inseparable from a body as when
a man would distinguish a corporeal substance from a spiritual one (which is
accounted indivisible) he naturally pitcheth upon an apprehension of its having
bulk, and beind solid, tangible, and apt to make impression upon our outward
senses; according to that expression of Lucretius, who studying nature in a
familiar and rational manner tells us; Tangere enim and tangi, nisi corpus
nulla potest res.
And therefore in our inquiry of bodies, we will observe that plain method
which nature teaches us, and will begin with examining what Quantity is, as
being their first and primary affection* and that which makes the things we
treat of, be what we intend to signify by the name of body.

Words do not express things as they are in themselves, but only as they
are painted in the minds of men.
But because there is a great variety of apprehensions framed by learned men,
of the nature of Quantity (though indeed nothing can be more plain and simple
then it is in it self) I conceive it will not be amiss, before we enter into
the explication of it, to consider how the mystery of discoursing and
expressing our thoughts to one an other by words (a prerogative belonging only
to man) is ordered and governed among us: that so, we may avoid those rocks,
which many, and for the most part, such as think they spinne the finest
thriddes, do suffer shippewracke against in their subtilest discourses. The
most dangerous of all which, assuredly is when they confound the true and real
natures of things, with the conceptions they frame of them in their own
minds. By which fundamental miscarriage of their reasoning, they fall into
great errors and absurdities: and whatsoever they build upon so ruinous a
foundation, proves but vselesse cobwebbes or prodigious Chymeras. It is true,
words serve to express things: but if you observe the matter well; you will
perceive they do so, only according to the pictures we make of them in our
own thoughts, and not according as the things are in their proper natures.
Which is very reasonable it should be so; since the soul, that gives the
names, has nothing of the things in her but these notions, and knows not
the things otherwise then by these notions: and therefore can not give other
names but such as must signify the things by mediation of these notions. In
the things, all that belongs unto them is comprised under one entire Entity:
but in us, there are framed as many several distinct formal conceptions, as
that one thing shows it self unto us with different faces. Every one of
which conceptions seems to have for its object a distinct thing, because the
conception it self is as much severed and distinguished from another
conception or image, arising out of the very same thing that begott this, as it
can be from any image painted in the understanding by an absolutely other thing.

The first error that may arise from hence; which is a multiplying of things,
where ^o such multiplication is really found.
It will not be amiss to illustrate this matter by some familiar example.
Imagine I have an apple in my hand: the same fruit works different effects
upon my several senses: my eye tells me it is green or red: my nose that it
has a mellow sent: my taste that it is sweet, and my hand that it is cold and
weighty. My senses thus affected, send messengers to my fantasy with news of
the discoueries they have made: and there, all of them make several and
distinct pictures of what enters by their doors. So that my Reason (which
discourses upon what it finds in my fantasy) can consider greenenesse by it
self, or mellownesse, or sweetness, or coldness, or any other quality
whatsoever, singly and alone by it self, without relation to any other that is
painted in me by the same apple: in which, none of these have any distinction
at all, but are one and the same substance of the apple, that makes various
and different impressions upon me, according to the various dispositions of my
several senses: as hereafter we shall explicate at large. But in my mind,
every one of these notions is a distinct picture by it self, and is as much
severed from any of the rest arising from the same apple, as it would be from
any impression or image made in me, by a stone or any other substance
whatsoever, that being entire in it self and circumscribed within its own
circle, is absolutely sequestered from any communication with the other: so
that, what is but one entire thing in it self, seems to be many distinct
things in my understanding. Whereby, if I be not very cautious, and in a
manner wrestle with the bent and inclination of my understanding (which is apt
to refer the distinct and complete stamp it finds within it self, unto a
distinct and complete original character in the thing) I shall be in danger
before I am aware, to give actual Beings to the quantity, figure, color,
smell, taste, and other accidents of the apple, each of them distinct one from
an other, as also from the substance which they clothe; because I find the
notions of them really distinguished (as if they were different Entities) in my
mind. And from thence I may infer, there is noe contradiction in nature to
have the accidents really severed from one an other, and to have them actually
subsist without their substance: and such other mistaken subtilities; which
arise out of our unwary conceiting that things are in their own natures,
after the same fashion as we consider them in our understanding.

And this course of the minds disguising and changing the impressions it
receives from outward objects, A second error* the conceiving of many distinct
things as really one thing.
into appearances quite differing from what the things are in their own
real natures; may be observed not only in multiplying Entities, where in truth
there is but one: But also in a contrary manner, by comprising several
distinct things, under one single notion; which if afterward it be reflected
back upon the things themselves, is the occasion of exceeding great errors,
and entangleth one in vnsuperable difficulties. As for example: looking upon
several cubes or deyes, whereof one is of gold, an other of lead, a third of
yuory, a fourth of wood, a fifth of glass and what other matter you please;
all these several things agree together in my understanding, and are there
comprehended under one single notion of a cube; which (like a painter that were
to design them only in black and white) makes one figure that represents
them all. Now if remoouing my consideration from this impression which the
several cubes make in my understanding, unto the cubes themselves, I shall
unwarily suffer my self to pin this one notion upon every one of them, and
accordingly conceive it to be really in them; it will of necessity fall out by
this misapplying of my intellectual notion to the real things, that I must
allow Existence to other entities, which never had nor can have any in nature.

From this conception, Platos Idaeas had their birth; for he finding in his
understanding, one universal notion that agreed exactly to every Individual
of the same species of substance, which imprinted that notion in him; and
conceiving that the picture of any thing must have an exact correspondence with
the thing it represents; and not considering that this was but an imperfect
picture of the individual that made it: he did thence conceive, there was
actually in every individual substance one universal nature running through
all of that species, which made them be what they were. And then considering
that corporeity, quantity, and other accidents of matter, could not agree with
this universal subsistent nature, he denied all those of it: and so,
abstracting from all materiality in his Idaeas, and giving them a real and
actual subsistence in nature, he made them like Angels, whose essences and
formal reasons were to be the Essence and to give Existence unto corporeal
indiuiduals: and so, each idaea was embodyed in every individual of its
species. Unto which opinion (and upon the same grounds) Auerroes did lean, in
the particular of men's souls. Likewise, Scotus finding in his understanding an
universal notion springing from the impression that indiuiduals make in it,
will, have a like universal in the thing it self, so determining universals
(to use his own language and terms) to be aparterei; and expressing the
distinction they have from the rest of the thing, by the terms of actu
formaliter sed non realiter: and thereby makes every individual comprise an
universal subsistent nature in it. Which inconvenience other modern
Philosophers seeking to avoid, will not allow these universals a real and
actual subsistence; but will lend them only a fictitious Being, so making
them as they call them Entia rationis. But herein again they suffer themselves
to be carried down the stream before they are aware by the understanding
(which is apt to pin upon the objects, the notions it finds within it self
resulting from them) and do consider an unity in the things which indeed is
only in the understanding.

Great care to be taken to avoid the errors, which may arise from our manner
of understanding things.
Therefore one of our greatest cares in the guidance of our discourse, and a
continual and sedulous caution therein, ought to be used in this particular,
where every error is a fundamental one, and leads into inextricable
labyrinthes, and where that which is all our level to keep us upright and
even (our understanding) is so apt, by reason of its own nature, and manner of
operation to make us slide into mistaking and error. And to sum up in short
what this discourse aymeth at, we must narrowly take heed, least reflecting
upon the notions we have in our mind, we afterward pin those ayery
superstructures upon the material things themselves, that begott them; or
frame a new conception of the nature of any thing by the negotiation of our
understanding upon those impressions which it self makes in us: whereas, we
should acquiesce and be content with that natural and plain notion, which
springs immediately and primarily from the thing it self: which when we do
not, the more we seem to excel in subtility, the further we go from reality
and truth; like an arrow, which being wrong leuelled at hand, falls widest
when shot in the strongest bow.

Now to come to an other point that makes to our present purpose. Two sorts of
words to express our notions; the one common to all men, the other proper to
scholars.
We may observe there are two sorts of language to express our notions by. The
one belongs in general to all mankind, and the simplest person, that can but
apprehend and speak sense, is as much judge of it, as the greatest Doctor in
the schools: and in this, the words express the things properly and
plainly, according to the natural conceptions that all people agree in making
of them. The other sort of language, is circled in with narrower bounds; and
is understood only by those that in a particular and express manner have
been trained up unto it: and many of the words which are proper to it, have
been by the authors of it, translated and wrested from the general
conceptions of the same words, by some metaphore, or similitude, or allusion,
to serve their private turns. Without the first manner of expressing our
notions, mankind could not live in society together, and converse with one an
other: whereas, the other has no further extent, then among such persons as
have agreed together to explicate and design among themselves particular
notions peculiar to their arts and affairs.

Of the first kind, are those ten general heads, which Aristotle calls
Praedicaments: under which he (who was the most judicious orderer of notions,
and directour of men's co^ceptions that ever lived) has comprised whatsoever
has or can have a being in nature. For when any object occurreth to our
thoughts, we either consider the essential and fundamental Being of it; or we
refer it to some species of Quantity; or we discover some qualities in it; or
we perceive that it does, or that it suffers some thing; or we conceive it
in some determinate place, or time, and the like. Of all which, every man
living that enjoys but the use of reason, finds naturally within himself
at the very first naming of them, a plain, complete, and satisfying notion;
which is the same without any the least variation, in all mankind; unless it
be in such, as have industriously and by force, and with much labor, perplexed
and depraved those primary and sincere impressions, which nature had freely
made in them.

Of the second sort, are the particular words of art by which learned men use
to express what they mean in sciences; and the names of instruments, and of
such things as belong to trades, and the like: as a sine, a tangent, an
epicycle, a deferent, an axe, a trowell, and such others; the intelligence of
which, belongs not to the generality of mankind; but only to Geometricians,
Astronomers, Carpenters, Masons, and such persons as converse familiarly and
frequently with those things. To learn the true signification of such words,
we must consult with those that have the knowledge and practice of them: as in
like manner, to understand the other kind of plain language, we must observe
how the words that compose it are apprehended, used, and applied by mankind in
general: and not receive into this examination the wrested or Metaphorical
senses of any learned men, who seek oftentimes (beyond any ground in nature)
to frame a general notion that may comprehend all the particular ones, which
in any sense, proper or improper, may arise out of the use of one word.

Great errors arise by wresting words from their common meaning to express a
more particular or studied notion.
And this is the cause of great errors in discourse; so great and important,
as I cannot too much inculcate the caution requisite to the avoiding of this
rock. Which that it may be the better apprehended, I will instance in one
example of a most plain and easy conception wherein all mankind naturally
agrees, how the wresting it from its proper, genuine, and original
signification, leads one into strange absurdities; and yet they pass for
subtle speculations. The notion of being in a place, is naturally the same in
all men living: ask any simple artisan; Where such a man, such a house, such a
tree, or such a thing is; and he will answer you in the very same manner as
the learnedest Philosopher would do: he will tell you, the man you ask for,
is in such a church, sitting in such a piew, and in such a corner of it; that
the house you enquire after, is in such a street, and next to such two
buildinges on each side of it; that the tree you would find out, is in such a
forest, upon such a hill, near such a fountain, and by such a bush; that the
wine you would drink of, is in such a cellar, in such a part of it, and in
such a caske. In conclusion, no man living that speaks naturally and freely
out of the notion he finds clearly in his understanding, will give you
other answer to the question of where a thing is, then such a one as plainly
expresses his conceit of being in place, to be no other, then a bodies being
environed and enclosed by some one, or several others that are immediate unto
it; as the place, of a liquor, is the vessel that contains it; and the place
of the vessel, is such a part of the chamber, or house that it rests upon,
together with the ambient air; which has a share in making up the places of
most things. And this being the answer, that every man whatsoever will
readily give to this question; and every asker being fully satisfied with it;
we may safely conclude, that all their notions and conceptions of being in a
place, are the same; and consequently, that it is the natural and true one.

But then some others, considering that such conditions as these will not agree
unto other things, which they likewise conceit to be in a place (for they
receive it as an Axiom from their sense, that whatsoever is, must be
somewhere, and whatsoever is no where, is not at all) they fall to casting
about how they may frame some common notion to comprehend all the several
kinds of being in place, which they imagine in the things they discourse of.
If there were nothing but bodies to be ranked by them in the Predicament of
place; then that description I have already set down, would be allowed by
them, as sufficient. But since that spirits and spiritual things, (as Angels,
rational souls, verities, sciencies, arts, and the like) have a being in
nature; and yet will not be comprised in such a kind of place as a body is
contained in; they rack their thoughts to speculate out some common notion of
being in place, which may be common to these, as well as to bodies; like a
common accident agreeing to diverse subjects. And so in the end, they pitch
upon an Entity, which they call an Vbi: and they conceit the nature and
formal reason of that to be, the ranking of any thing in a place, when that
Entity is thereunto affixed. And then they have no further difficulty, in
settling an Angel or any pure spirit, or immateriall essence, in a place as
properly, and as completely, as if it were a corporeal substance. It is but
assigning an Vbi to such a spirit, and he is presently riueted to what place
you please: and by multiplying the Vbies, any individual body unto which they
are assigned, is at the same instant in as many distant places, as they allott
it different Vbies: and if they assign the same Vbi to several bodies, so
many several ones as they assign it unto, will be in one and the same place:
and not only many bodies in one place, but even a whole body in an
indivisible, by a kind of Vbi that has a power to resume all the extended
parts, and enclose them in a point of place. All which prodigious conceits and
impossibilities in nature, do spring out of their mistake in framing
Metaphysicall and abstracted conceptions, instead of contenting themselves with
those plain, easy, and primary notions, which nature stampeth a like in all
men of common sense, and understanding. As who desires to be further
instructed in this particular, may perceive, if he take the pains to look
over what M. White has discoursed of Place in the first of his Dialogues De
Mundo. Unto which book, I shall from time to time (according as I shall have
occasion) refer my Reader in those subjects the Author takes upon him to
prove; being confident that his Metaphysicall demonstrations there, are as
firm, as any Mathematical ones (for Metaphysicall demonstrations have in
themselves as much firmness, certainty and euidency as they) and so will
appear as evident, as they, unto whosoever shall understand them thoroughly,
and shall frame right conceptions of them: which (how plain soever they seem
to be) is not the work of every pretender to learning.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Of Quantity.
We must know the vulgar and common notion of Quantity that we may understand
the nature of it.
AMONG those primary affections which occur in the perusal of a body,
Quantity (as I have observed in the precedent chapter) is one and in a manner
the first and the root of all the rest. Therefore (according to the caution we
have been so prolixe in giving, because it is of so maine importance) if we
aim at right understanding the true nature of it, we must examine, what
apprehension all kinds of people (that is mankind in general) makes of it.
By which proceeding, we do not make the ignorant multitude judge of that
learning which grows out of the consideration of Quantity: but only of the
natural notion which serves learned men for a basis and foundation to build
scientificall super-structures upon. For although, sciencies be the works and
structures of the understanding governed and leuelled by the wary and strict
rules of most ingenious artificers: yet the ground upon which they are raised,
are such plain notions of things, as naturally and without any art do
present themselves to every man's apprehension: without which for matter to
work upon, those artificial reflections would leave the understanding as
unsatisfied; as a cook would the appetite, by a dish upon which he should have
exercised all his art in dressing it, but whose first substance were not meat
of solid nutriment. It is the course market that must deliver him plain
materials to employ his cunning upon: and in like manner, it is the
indisciplined multitude that must furnish learned men with natural
apprehensions, and notions to exercise their wits about: which when they
have, they may use and order ad reflect upon them as they please: but they must
first receive them in that plain and naked form, as mankind in general
pictureth them out in their imaginations.

And therefore the first work of scholars, is to learn of the people Quem
penes, arbitrium est and ius and norma loquendi,
what is the true meaning and signification of these primary names, and what
notions they begett in the generality of mankind of the things they design.
Of the common people then, we must enquire what Quantity is: and we shall soon
be informed, if we but consider what answer any sensible man will make upon
the soddaine to a question whereof that is the subject: for, such vnstudyed
replies express sincerely the plain and natural conceptions, which they that
make them, have of the things they speak of. And this of Quantity, is the
plainest and the first, that nature printeth in us, of all the things we see,
feel, and converse with all; and that must serve for a ground unto all our
other inquiries and reflections: for which cause, we must be sure not to
receive it wrested or diguised from its own nature.

If then any one be asked; Extension or diuisibility is the common notion of
Quantity.
what Quantity there is in such a thing, or how great it is; he will presently
in his understanding compare it with some other thing, (equally known by both
parties) that may serve for a measure unto it; and then answer, that it is as
big as it, or twice as big, or not half so big, or the like: in fine,
that it is bigger or lesser then an other thing, or equal to it.

It is of maine importance to have this point thoroughly and clearly
understood; therefore it will not be amiss to turn it and veiw it a little
more particularly. If you ask what Quantity there is, of such a parcel of
cloth, how much wood in such a piece of timber, how much gold in such an
ingott, how much wine in such a vessel, how much time was taken up in such an
action; he that is to give you an account of them, measures them by else, by
feet, by inches, by pounds, by ounces, by gallons, by pintes, by days, by
hours, and the like; and then tells you, how many of those parts, are in the
whole that you enquire of. Which answer, every man living will at the instant,
without study, make to this question; and with it, every man that shall ask,
will be fully appayed and satisfied: so that it is most evident, it fully
expresses the notions of them both, and of all mankind, in this particular.

Wherefore, when we consider that Quantity is nothing else, but the extension
of a thing; and that this extension, is expressed by a determinate number of
lesser extensions of the same nature; (which lesser ones, are sooner and more
easily apprehended then greater; because we are first acquainted and conversant
with such; and our understanding graspeth, weighs and discerns such more
steadily; and makes an exacter judgment of them) and that such lesser ones
are in the greater which they measure, as parts in a whole; and that the whole
by comprehending those parts, is a mere capacity to be divided into them: we
conclude, that Quantity or Biggnesse, is nothing else but diuisibility; and
that a thing is big, by having a capacity to be divided, or (which is the
same) to have parts made of it.

This is yet more evident (if more may be) in Discrete Quantity (that is, in
number) then in continued Quantity, or extension. For if we consider any number
whatsoever, we shall find the essence of it, consists in a capacity of being
resolved and divided into so many unities, as are contained in it; which are
the parts of it. And this species of Quantity being simpler, then the other,
serves for a rule to determine it by* as we may observe in the familiar
answers to questions of continued Quantity, which express by number, the
content of it: as when one delivers the Quantity of a piece of ground, by
such a number of furlonges, acars, perches, or the like.

Parts of Quantity are not actually in their whole.
But we must take heed of conceiving, that those parts, which we consider to
discern the nature of Quantity, are actually and really in the whole of any
continued one that contains them. Else, feet, inches, are no more real
Entities in the whole that is measured by them, and that makes impressions of
such notions in our understanding; then in our former example, color, figure
mellownesse, taste, and the like are several substances in the apple that
affects our several senses with such various impressions. It is but one
whole that may indeed be cut into so many several parts: but those parts
are not really there, till by division they are parcelled out: and then, the
whole (out of which they are made) cease to be any longer; and the parts
succeed in lieu of it; and are, every one of them, a new whole.

This truth, is evident out of the very definition we have gathered of
Quantity. For since it is Diuisibility (that is, a bare capacity to division)
it follows that it is not yet divided: and consequently that those parts are
not yet in it, which may be made of it; for division, is the making two, or
more things, of one.

If parts were actually in their whole, Quantity would be composed of
indiuisibles.
But because this is a very great controversy in schools; and so important to
be determined and settled, as without doing so, we shall be liable to maine
errors in searching the nature and operations of bodies; and that the whole
progress of our discourse, will be uncertain and wavering, if this principle
and foundation be not firmly laid: we must apply our selves, to bring some
more particular and immediate proof of the verity of this assertion. Which we
will do, by showing the inconvenience, impossibility, and contradiction, that
the admittance of the other leads unto. For if we allow actual parts to be
distinguished in Quantity, it will follow that it is composed of points or
indiuisibles, which we shall prove to be impossible.

The first will appear thus: if Quantity were divided into all the parts into
which it is diuisible, it would be divided into indiuisibles (for nothing
diuisible, and not divided, would remain in it) but it is distinguished into
the same parts, into which it would be divided, if it were divided into all
the parts into which it is diuisible; therefore it is distinguished into
indiuisibles. The mayor proposition is evident to any man that has eyes of
understanding. The minor, is the confession or rather the position of the
adversary, when he says that all its parts are actually distinguished. The
consequence cannot be calumniated, since that indiuisibles, whether they be
separated or joined, are still but indiuisibles; though that which is composed
of them be diuisible. It must then be granted that all the parts which are in
Quantity, are indiuisibles; which parts being actually in it, and the whole
being composed af these parts only, it follows, that Quantity is composed
and made of indiuisibles.

If any should cavil at the supposition, and say we stretch it further then
they intend it, by taking all the parts to be distinguished; whereas they
mean only that there are parts actually in Quantity, abstracting from all*
by reason that all, in this matter would infer an infinity, which to be
actually in any created thing, they will allow to be impossible. Our answer
will be, to represent unto them how this is barely said, without any ground or
color of reason, merely to euade the inconvenience, that the argument drives
them unto. For if any parts be actually distinguished, why should not all be
so? What prerogative have some that the others have not? And how came they by
it? If they have their actual distinction out of their nature of being
parts, then all must enjoy it a like, and all be equally distinguished, as the
supposition goes: and they must all be indiuisibles as we have proved.
Besides to prevent the cavil upon the word all, we may change the expression
of the Proposition into a negative: for if they admit (as they do) that there
is no part in Quantity, but is distinguished as far as it may be
distinguished, then the same conclusion follows with no less evidence; and
all will prove indiuisibles, as before.

But it is impossible that indiuisibles should make Quantity; Quantity cannot
be composed of indiuisibles.
for if they should, it must be done either by a finite and determinate number,
or by an infinite multitude of them. If you say by a finite; let us take (for
example) three indiuisibles, and by adding them together, let us suppose a
line to be composed; whose extent being only longitude, it is the first and
simpliest species of Quantity, and therefore whatsoever is diuisible into
parts, must be at the least a line. This line thus made, cannot be conceived
to be divided into more parts then into three; since doing so you reduce it,
into the indiuisibles that composed it. But Euclide has demonstratiuely
proved beyond all cavil, (in the tenth proposition of his sixth book of
Elements) that any line whatsoever may be divided into whatsoever number of
parts; so that if this be a line, it must be diuisible into a hundred or a
thousand, or a million of parts: which being impossible in a line, that being
divided into three parts only, every one of those three is incapable of
further division; it is evident, that neither a line, nor any Quantity
whatsoever, is composed or made of a determinate number of indiuisibles.

And since that this capacity of being diuisible into infinite parts, is a
property belonging to all extension (for Euclides demonstration is universal)
we must needs confess that it is the nature of indiuisibles, when they are
joined together, to be drowned in one another, for otherwise there would result
a kind of extension out of them, which would not have that property; contrary
to what Euclide has demonstrated. And from hence it follows that Quantity
cannot be composed of an infinite multitude of such indiuisibles; for if this
be the nature of indiuisibles, though you putt never so great a number of them
together, they will still drown themselves all in one indivisible point. For
what difference can their being infinite, bring to them, of such force as to
destroy their essence and property? If you but consider how the essential
composition of any multitude whatsoever, is made by the continual addition of
unities, till that number arise; it is evident in our case that the infinity of
indiuisibles must also arise, out of the continued addition of still one
indivisible to the indiuisibles presupposed: then let us apprehend a finite
number of indiuisibles, which (according as we have proved) do make no
extension, but are all of them drowned in the first; and observing how the
progress unto an infinite multitude, goes on by the steps of one and one,
added still to this presupposed number; we shall see, that every indivisible
added and consequently the whole infinity, will be drowned in the first number,
as that was in the first indivisible.

Which will be yet plainer, if we consider that the nature of extension
requires that one part be not in the same place, where the other is: then if
this extension be composed of indiuisibles, let us take two points of place
in which this extension is, and inquire whether the indiuisibles that are in
each one of these points, be finite or infinite. If it be answered that they
are finite, then the finite indiuisibles in those two points make an
extension; which we have proved impossible. But if they be said to be
infinite; then infinite indiuisibles are drowned in one point, and consequently
have not the force to make extension. Thus then it remains firmly
established, That Quantity is not composed of indiuisibles (neither finite, nor
infinite ones) and consequently, that parts are not actually in it.

An objection to prove that parts are actually in Quantity; with a
declaration of the mistake from whence it proceeds.
Yet before we leave this point, although we have already been somewhat long
about it, I conceive it will not be tedious, if we be yet a little longer, and
bend our discourse to remove a difficulty that even sense it self seems to
object unto us. For does not our eye evidently inform us, there are fingers,
hands, arms, legs, feet, toes and variety of other parts, in a man's body?
These are actually in him, and seem to be distinct things in him, so
evidently, that we cannot be persuaded, but that we see, and feel, the
distinction between them: for every one of them, has a particular power of
actual working and doing what belongs unto its nature to do: each finger is
really there; the hand is different from the foot; the leg from the arm;
and so of the rest. Are not these parts then actually and really in a man's
body? And is not each of them as really distinguished from any other?

This appears at the first sight to be an insuperable objection, because of
the confirmation and evidence that sense seems to give it. But looking
nearly into the matter, we shall find that the difficulty arises not from
what sense informs us of; but from our wrong applying the conditions of our
notions unto the things that make impressions upon our sense. Sense judges
not which is a finger, which is a hand, or which is a foot. The notions
agreeing to these words, as well as the words themselves, are productions of
the understanding: which considering several impressions made upon the sense
by the same thing as it has a virtue, and power to several operations,
frames several notions of it: as in our former example, it does of color,
figure, taste and the like, in an apple. For as these are not different bodies
or substances, distinguished one from an other; but are the same one entire
thing, working severally upon the senses, and that accordingly, makes these
different pictures in the mind; which are there as much distinguished, as if
they were pictures of different substances. So, the parts which are considered
in Quantity, are not diverse things: but are only a virtue or power to be
diverse things: which virtue, making several impressions upon the senses,
occasioneth several notions in the understanding: and the understanding is so
much the more prone to conceive those parts as distinct things, by how much
Quantity is nearer to be distinct things, then the qualities of the apple are.
For Quantity, is a possibility to be made distinct things by division: whereas
the others, are but a virtue to do distinct things. And yet (as we have
touched above) nothing can be more manifest, then that if Quantity be
diuisibility (which is a possibility, that many things may be made of it)
these parts are not yet diverse things. So that, if (for example) a rod be
laid before us, and half of it be hid from our sight, and the other half
appear; it is not one part or thing that shows it self, and an other part
or thing that does not show itself: but it is the same rod or thing, which
shows it self according to the possibility of being one new thing, but does
not show it self according to the possibility of being the other of the two
things, it may be made by division. Which example, if it be well considered
will make it much more easily sink into us, that a hand, or eye, or foot, is
not a distinct thing by it self; but that it is the man, according as he has
a certain virtue or power in him to distinct operations. For if you sever any
of these parts from the whole body; the hand can no more hold; nor the eye
see; nor the foot walk; which are the powers that essentially constitute them
to be what they are: and therefore they are no longer a hand, an eye, or a
foot.

Now then to come to the objection; The solution of the former objection: and
that sense cannot discern whether one part be distinguished from another, or
no.
let us examine how far, sense may be allowed to be judge in this
difficulty: and we shall find, that sense cannot determine any one part in a
body: for if it could, it would precisely tell, where that part begins or
ends: but it being agreed upon, that it begins and ends in indiuisibles;
it is certain, that sense cannot determine of them. If then sense cannot
determine any one part, how shall it see that it is distinguished from all
other parts? Again; considering that all that whereof sense is capable, is
diuisible, it still tells us, that in all it sees, there are more parts
then one: and therefore it can not discern, nor inform us of any that is one
alone: nor knows what it is to be one; for it never could discern it: but
what is many, is many ones and can not be known, by that, which knows not,
what it is to be one: and consequently sense can not tell us, that there are
many. Wherefore it is evident, that we may not rely upon sense for this
question. And as for reason, she has already given her verdict.

So that nothing remains but to show, why we talk as we do, in ordinary
discourse, of many parts: and that what we say in that kind, is true,
notwithstanding the unity of the thing. Which will appear plainly, if we
consider that our understanding has a custom for the better discerning of
things, to impose upon a thing as it is under one notion, the exclusion of it
self as it is under other notions. And this is evident unto all scholars, when
the mark of exclusion is expressly putt: as when they speak of a white
thing, adding the reduplication, as it is white: which excludes all other
considerations of that thing, besides the whiteness of it: but when it comes
under some particular name of the thing, it may deceive those that are not
cunning: though indeed, most men discover it in such names as we call
abstracted; as humanity, animality, and the like. But it easily deceives when
it comes in concrete names; as it does in the name of Part in general, or in
the names of particular parts; as a hand, an eye, an inch, an elle, and others
of the like nature: for as you see that a part excludes both the notion of the
whole, and of the remaining parts: so does a hand, an eye, an elle, exclude
all the rest of that thing, whereof the hand is a hand, and the elle is an
elle, and so forth. Now then, as every man sees evidently that it can not be
said; the wall as it is white is plaster or stone: no more can it be said, that
the hand of a man is a foot; because the word hand signifies as much in it
self, as if the man were taken, by reduplication, to be the man as he is hand,
or as he has the power of holding. So likewise, in the rod we spoke of
before; it can not be said that the part seen is the part unseen; because the
part seen, signifies the rod as it is a possibility to be made by division
such a thing, as it appears to the sight. And thus it is clear how the
difficulty of this point, arises out of the wrongful applying the conditions
of our notions, and of names, to the objects and things which we know: where
of we gave warning in the beginning. Chap. 1.. 2.3.


An enumeration of the several specieses of Quantity, which confirms that
the essence of it is diuisibility.
After which there remains no more to be said of this subject, but to
enumerate the several specieses of Quantity, according to that division which
Logitians for more facility of discourse have made of it. Namely, these six:
magnitudine, place, motion, time, number, and weight. Of which, the two first
are permanent, and lie still exposed to the pleasure of whosoever has a mind
to take a suruay of them. Which he may do by measuring what parts they are
diuisible into; how many else, feet, inches, a thing is long broad or deep;
how great a place is; whether it be not bigger or lesser then such an other;
and by such considerations as these; which do all agree in this, that they
express the essence of those two specieses of Quantity, to consist in a
capacity of being divided into parts.

The two next; motion and time; though they be of a fleeting propriety, yet it
is evident that in regard of their original and essential nature, they are
nothing else but a like diuisibility into parts; which is measured by passing
over so great or so little distance; and by years, days, hours, minutes, and
the like. Number we also see is of the same nature; for it is diuisible into so
many determinate parts, and is measured by unities, or by lesser numbers so or
so often contained in a proposed greater. And the like is evident of weight,
which is diuisible into pounds, ounces, drammes, or grains; and by them is
measured. So that looking over all the several specieses of Quantity; it is
evident, our definition of it is a true one, and expresses fully the essence
of it, when we say it is diuisibility, or a capacity to be divided into parts:
and that no other notion whatsoever, besides this, reaches the nature of it.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of Rarity and Density.
I INTEND in this Chapter to look as far as I can into the nature and causes
of the two first differences of bodies, What is meant by Rarity and Density.
which follow out of Quantity as it concurreth with substance to make a body:
for, the discovery of them, and of the various proportions of them among
themselves, will be a great and important step in the journey we are going.
But the scarcity of our language is such, in subiets removed from ordinary
conversation, (though in others, I think none is more copious or expressiue)
as affords us not apt words of our own to express significantly such
notions as I must busy my self about in this discourse. Therefore I will
presume to borrow them from the Latin school, where there is much ado about
them. I would express the difference between bodies, that under the same
measures and outward bulk, have a greater thinnenesse and expansion, or
thickness and solidity, one then an other; which terms, (or any I can find in
English) do not signify fully those affections of Quantity that I intend here
to declare: therefore I will do it under the names of Rarity and Density; the
true meaning of which will appear by what we shall hereafter say.

It is evident that some bodies are rare and others dense; though obsu^e, how
they are such.
It is evident unto us, that there are different sorts of bodies, of which
though you take equal quantities in one regard, yet they will be unequal in
an other. Their magnitudes may be the same, but their weights will be
different; or contrariwise, their weights being equal, their outward
measures will not be so. Take a pint of air; and weigh it against a pint of
water, and you will see the balance of the last go down amain: but if you
drive out the air by filling the pint with lead, the other pint in which the
water is, will rise again as fast: which if you pour out, and fill that pint
with quickesiluer, you will perceive the lead to be much lighter: and again,
you will find a pint of gold heavier then so much Mercury. And in like manner,
if you take away of the heavy bodies till they agree in weight with the
lighter, they will take up and fill different proportions, and parts of the
measure that shall contain them.

But from whence this effect arises, is the difficulty that we would lay open.
Our measures tell us their quantities are equal; and reason assures us,
there can not be two bodies in one and the same place; therefore when we see
that a pint of one thing outweigheth a pint of an other that is thinner, we
must conclude that there is more body compacted together in the heavy thing
then in the light: for else how could so little of a solid or dense thing, be
stretched out, to take up so great room, as we see in a basen of water that
being rarifyed into smoke or air, fills a whole chamber? and again,
shrink back into so little room, as when it returns into water, or is
contracted into ice? But how this comprehension of more body in equal room is
effected, does not a little trouble Philosophers.

A breife enumeration of the several properties belonging to rare and dense
bodies.
To find a way that may carry us through these difficulties that arise out of
the Rarity and Density of bodies, let us do as Astronomers when they enquire
the motions of the Spheres and Planets: they take all the Phenomena or several
appearances of them to our eyes; and then attribute to them such orbs,
courses, and periodes, as may square and fit with every one of them; and by
supposing them, they can exactly calculate all that will ever after happen to
them in their motions. So let us take into our consideration the chief
properties of rare and dense bodies, and then cast with our selves to find out
an hypothesis, or supposition (if it be possible) that may agree with them all.

First, it seems unto us that dense bodies have their parts more close and
compacted, then others have, that are more rare and subtle. Secondly they are
more heavy, then rare ones. Again, the rare are more easily divided then the
dense bodies: for water, oil, milk, honey, and such like substances will not
only yield easily to any harder thing that shall make its way through them;
but they are so apt to division and to loose their continuity, that their
own weights will overcome and break it: whereas in iron, gold, marble, and
such dense bodies, a much greater weight and force, is necessary to work that
effect. And indeed if we look well into it, we shall find that the rarer
things, are as diuisible in a lesser Quantity, as the more dense are in a
greater: and the same force will break the rarer thing into more and lesser
parts, then it will an equal one that is more dense. Take a stick of light
wood of such a biggenesse that being a foot long, you may break it with your
hands, and an other of the same biggenesse, but of a more heavy and compacted
wood, and you shall not break it, though it be two foot long: and with equal
force you may break a loaf of bread into more and less parts, then a lump
of lead that is of the same biggenesse. Which also will resist more to the
division of fire (the subtilest diuider that is) then so much water will; for
the little atoms of fire (which we shall discourse of hereafter) will pierce
and cut out in the water, almost as little parts as themselves, and mingling
themselves with them they will fly away together, and so convert the whole body
of water into subtle smoke: whereas the same Agent, after long working upon
lead, will bring it into no less parts then small grains of dust, which it
calcineth it into. And gold, that is more dense then lead, resists
peremptorily all the dividing power of fire; and will not at all be reduced
into a calx or lime by such operation as reduced lead into it.

So that remembering, how the nature of Quantity is Diuisibility; and
considering that rare things are more diuisible then dense ones; we must
needs acknowledge that the nature of Quantity is some way more perfectly in
things that are rare, then in those that are dense. On the other side, more
compacted and dense things, may happily seem to some to have more Quantity
then those that are rare; and that it is but shruncke together; which may be
stretched out and driven into much greater dimensions then the Quantity of rare
things, taking the quantities of each of them equal in outward appearance. As
gold may be beaten into much more and thinner leaf, then an equal bulk of
silver or lead. A wax candle will burn longer with equal light, then a
tallow candle of the same biggenesse; and consequently, be converted into a
greater Quantity of fire and air. Oil will make much more flame then spirit
of wine, that is far rarer then it.

These and such like considerations, The opinion of those Philosophers
declared, who putt rarity to consist in an actual division of a body into
little parts.
have much perplexed Philosophers, and have driven them into diverse thoughts
to find out the reasons of them. Some observing that the dividing of a body
into little parts, makes it less apt to descend, then when it is in greater;
have believed the whole cause of litghnesse and rarity to be derived from
division. As for example; they find that lead cut into little pieces, will not
go down so fast in water, as when it is in bulk: and it may be reduced into
so small atoms, that it will for some space swim upon the water like dust of
wood.

Which assumption is proved by the great Galileus; unto whose excellent wit
and admirable industry, the world is beholding, not only for his wonderful
discoueries made in the heavens, but also for his accurate and learned
declaring of those very things that lie under our feet. He, about the 90th
page of his first Dialogue of motion, does clearly demonstrate how any real
medium must of necessity resist more the descent of a little piece of lead, or
any other weighty matter, then it would a greater piece: and the resistance
will be greater and greater as the pieces are lesser and lesser. So that, as
the pieces are made less, they will in the same medium sink the slower; and
do seem to have acquired a new nature of lightness by their diminution: not
only of having less weight in them then they had; as half an ounce is less
then a whole ounce: but also of having in themselves a less proportion of
weight to their bulk then they had; as a pound of cork, is in regard of its
magnitude lighter then a pound of lead: so as they conclude, that the thing
whose continued parts are the lesser, is in its own nature the lighter and
the rarer; and other things whose continued parts are greater, they be
heavier and denser.

The former opinion rejected, and the ground of their error disco^ered.
But this discourse reaches not home: for by it, the weight of any body being
discovered by the proportion it has to the medium, in which it descends, it
must ever suppose a body lighter then it self in which it may sink and go to
the bottom. Now of that lighter body, I enquire what makes it be so; and you
must answer by what you have concluded, that it is lighter then the other,
because the parts of it are less, and more severed from one an other: for if
they be as close together, their division avails them nothing, since things
sticking fast together, do work as if they were but one, and so a pound of
lead though it be filed into small dust, if it be compacted hard together, will
sink as fast as if it were in one bulk.

Now then allowing the little parts to be separated, I ask, what other body
fills up the spaces between those little parts of the medium in which your
heavy body descended? For if the parts of water are more severed then the
parts of lead, there must be some other substance to keep the parts of it a
sunder: let us suppose this to be air: and I ask, whether an equal part of
air, be as heavy as so much water? or whether it be not? If you say, it is;
then the compound of water and air, must be as heavy as lead; seeing that
their parts, one with an other, are as much compacted as the parts of lead
are. For there is no difference whether those bodies, whose little parts are
compacted together be of the same substance, or of diverse, or whether the one
be divided into smaller parts then the other, or no, (so they be of equal
weights) in regard of making the whole equally heavy: as you may experience, if
you mingle pinnedust with a sand of equal weight, though it be beaten into
far smaller divisions then the pinnedust, and putt them in a bag together.

But if you say that air is not so heavy as water; it must be, because every
part of air has again its parts more severed by some other body, then the
parts of water are severed by air. And then, I make the same instance of that
body which seuereth the parts of air. And so, at the last (since there can
not actually be an infinite process of bodies one lighter then an other) you
must come to one, whose little parts filling the pores and spaces between the
parts of the others, have no spaces in themselves to be filled up.

But as soon as you acknowledge such a body to be lighter and rarer then all
the rest, you contradict and destroy all you said before. For by reason of its
having no pores, it follows by your rule, that the little parts of it must be
as heavy, if not heavier, then the little parts of the same bigness of that
body whose pores it fills; and consequently it is proved by the experience we
alleged of pinnedust mingled with sand that the little parts of it, can not
by their mingling with the parts of the body in which it is immediately
contained, make that lighter then it would be if these little parts were not
mingled with it. Nor would both their parts mingled with the body which
immediately contains them, make that body lighter. And so proceeding on in
the same sort through all the mingled bodies, till you come to the last, that
is immediately mingled with water; you will make water nothing the lighter, for
being mingled with all these; and by consequence it should be as heavy and as
dense as lead.

Now that which deceived the authors of this opiniion, was that they had not a
right intelligence of the causes which made little parts of bodies (naturally
heavy) descend slowly, in regard of the velocity of greater parts of the same
bodies descending: the doctrine of which we intend to deliver hereafter.

Others therefore perceiving this rule to fall short, The opinion of those
Philosophers related, who putt rarity to consist in the mixtion of vacuity
among bodies.
have endeavored to piece it out by the mixtion of vacuity among bodies;
believing it is that which makes one rarer then an other. Which mixtion they
do not putt always immediate to the maine body they consider: but if it have
other rarer and lighter bodies mingled with it, they conceive this mixtion
immediate only to the rarest, or lightest. As for example; a crystal being
lighter and consequently rarer then a diamond, they will not say that there is
more vacuity in a crystal then in a diamond; but that the pores of a crystal
are greater, and that consequently there is more air in a crystal to fill the
pores of it, then is in a diamond; and the vacuities are in the air, which
abounding in a crystal, more then in a diamond, makes that lighter and rarer
then this, by the more vacuities that are in the greater Quantity of air which
is migled with it.

But against this supposition, a powerful adversary is urged: for Aristotle,
in his 4th book of Physickes, has demonstrated that there can be no motion in
vacuity. It is true, they endeavor to euade his demonstration (as not reaching
home to their supposition) by acknowledging it to be an evident one in such a
vacuity as he there speaks of; which he supposed to be so great a one that a
body may swim in it as in an ocean, and not touch or be near any other body:
whereas this opinion excludes all such vast inanity, and admits no
vacuities but so little ones as no body whatsoever can come unto but will be
bigger then they; and consequently, must on some side or other touch the
corporeal parts which those vacuities divide; for they are the seperations of
the least parts, that are, or can be, actually divided from one an other:
which parts, must of necessity touch one an other on some side; or else, they
could not hang together to compose one substance; and therefore, the dividing
vacuities, must be less then the divided parts. And thus, no body will ever
be in danger of floating up and down without touching any thing: which is the
difficulty that Aristotle chiefly impugneth.

The opinion of vacuities refuted.
I confess I should be very glad that this supposition might serve our turn,
and save the Phoenomena that appear among bodies, through their variety of
Rarity and Density: which if it might be, then would I straight go on to the
inquiring after what followed out of this ground, as Astronomers (to use our
former similitude) do calculate the future appearances of the celestial bodies
out of those motions and orbs they assign unto the heavens. For as this
apprehension of vacuity in bodies is very easy and intelligibile: so the other
(which I conceive to be the truth of the case) is exceedingly abstracted, and
one of the most difficult points in all the Metaphysickes: and therefore I
would (if it were possible) avoid touching upon it in this discourse, which I
desire should be as plain and easy, and as much removed from scholasticke
terms, as may be.

But indeed, the inconveniences that follow out of this supposition of
vacuities, are so great, as it is impossible by any means to slide them over.
Dialog. 1. del Mouim. page 81.
As for example; let us borrow of Galilaeus the proportion of weight between
water and air. He shows us how the one is 400 times heauyer then the other.
And Marinus Ghetaldus teaches us that gold is 19 times heauyer then water: so
that gold must be 7600 times heauyer then air. Archimed. Promot.
Now then considering that nothing in a body can weigh, but the solid parts
of it; it follows that the proportion of the parts of gold in a sphere of an
inch diameter, is to the parts of air of a like dimension as 7600 is to one.
Therefore in air it self the vacuities that are supposed in it, will be to
the solid parts of it in the same proportion as 7600 to one. Indeed, the
proportion of difference will be greater: for even in gold many vacuities must
be admitted, as appears by the heating of it which shows that in every the
least part, it is exceeding porous. But according to this rate, without
pressing the inconvenience any further; the air will by this reckoning appear
to be like a nett, whose holes and distances, are to the lines and thriddes, in
the proportion of 7600 to one; and so, would be liable to have little parts of
its body swim in those greater vacuities; contrary to what they strive to
avoid. Which would be exceedingly more, if we found on the one side any bodies
heauyer and denser then gold, and that were so solid as to exclude all
vacuities; and on the other side should balance them with such bodies as are
lighter and rarer then air; as fire is, and as some will have the ether to
be. But already the disproportion is so great, and the vacuity so strangely
exceeds the body in which it is, as were too great an absurdity to be
admitted.

And besides, it would destroy all motion of small bodies in the air, if it be
true (as Aristotle has demonstrated in the 4th book of his Physickes) that
motion can not be made, but among bodies, and not in vacuo.

Again, if rarity were made by vacuity, rare bodies could not be gathered
together, without loosing their rarity and becoming dense. The contrary of
which, we learn by constant experience; as when the smith and glassemender,
drive their white and fury fires, (as they term them;) when air pierces
most in the sharp wind; and generally we see that more of the same kind of
rare bodies, in less place, works most efficaciously according to the nature
that resulteth out of that degree of rarity. Which argues, that every little
part is as rare as it was before (for else it would loose the virtue of working
according to that nature;) but that by their being crowded together, they
exclude all other bodies that before did mediate between the little parts of
their maine body; and so, more parts being gotten together in the same place
then formerly there were, they work more forcibly.

Thirdly; if such vacuities were the cause of rarity; it would follow that
fluide bodies being rarer then solid ones, they would be of themselves
standing, like nets or cobbewebbes: whereas contrariwise, we see their
natures are to run together, and to fill up every little creek and corner:
which effect, following out of the very nature of the things themselves; must
needs exclude vacuities out of that nature.

And lastly; if it be true (as we have showed in the last Chapter) that there
are no actual parts in Quantity; it follows of necessity, that all Quantity
must of it self be one; as Metaphysickes teach us: and then, no distance can
be admitted between one Quantity and an other.

And truly, if I understand Aristotle right; he has perfectly demonstrated,
that no vacuity is possible in nature; neither great nor little: and
consequently, the whole machine raised upon that supposition, must be ruinous.
His argument is to this purpose. What is nothing, can not have parts: but
vacuum is nothing (because as the adversaries conceive it, vacuum is the want
of a corporeal substance in an enclosing body, within whose sides nothing is,
whereas a certain body might be contained whithin them, as if in a paile or
bowl of a gallon, there were neither milk, nor water, nor air, nor any other
body whatsoever) therefore, vacuum can not have parts. Yet those who admit it
do putt it expressly for a space; which does essentially include parts. And
thus they putt two contradictories, nothing and parts, that is, parts and no
parts; or something and nothing; in the same proposition. And this, I conceive
to be absolutely unavoidable.

Rarity and Desity consist in the several proportions, which Quantity has to
its substance.
For these reasons therefore, I must entreat my readers favor, that he will
allow me to touch upon metaphysickes a little more then I desire or intended:
but it shall be no otherwise, then as is said, of the dogs by the river Nilus
side; who being thirsty, lap hastily of the water, only to serve their
necessity as they run along the shore. Thus then; remembering how we
determined that Quantity is Diuisibility: it follows, that if besides
Quantity there be a substance or thing which is diuisible; that thing, if it be
condistinguished from its Quantity or Diuisibility, must of it self be
indivisible: or (to speak more properly) it must be, not diuisible. Putt then
such substance to be capable of the Quantity of the whole world or universe:
and consequently, you putt it of it self indifferent to all, and to any part
of Quantity: for in it, by reason of the negation of Diuisibility, there is no
variety of parts, whereof one should be the subject of one part of Quantity,
or another of another; or that one should be a capacity of more, another of
less.

This then being so, we have the ground of more or less proportion between
substance and quantity: for if the whole quantity of the universe be putt into
it, the proportion of Quantity to the capacity of that substance, will be
greater then if but half that quantity were imbibed in the same substance. And
because proportion changes on both sides by the single change of only one
side: it follows that in the latter, the proportion of that substance to its
Quantity, is greater; and that in the former, it is less; howbeit the
substance in it self be indivisible.

What we have said thus in abstract, will sink more easily into us if we
apply it to some particular bodies here among us, in which we see a difference
of Rarity and Density; as to air, water gold, or the like; and examine if the
effects that happen to them, do follow out of this disproportion between
substance and Quantity. For example let us conceive that all the Quantity of
the world were in one uniform substance, then the whole universe would be in
one and the same degree of Rarity ad Density: let that degree, be the degree
of water; it will then follow, that in what part soever there happens to be a
change from this degree, that part will not have that proportion of quantity to
its substance, which the quantity of the whole world had to the presupposed
uniform substance. But if it happens to have the degree of rarity which is
in the air, it will then have more quantity in proportion to its substance,
then would be due unto it according to the presupposed proportion of the
quantity of the universe to the foresaid uniform substance; which in this case
is as it were the standard to try all other proportions by. And contrariwise,
if it happens to have the degree of Density which is found in Earth or in
gold; then it will have less quantity in proportion to its substance, then
would be due unto it according to the fore said proportion, or common standard.

Now to proceed from hence, with examining the effects which result out of
this compounding of Quantity with substance, we may first consider, that the
definitions which Aristotle has given us of Rarity and Density, are the same
we drive at: he tells us, that that body is rare whose quantity is more,
and its substance less; that, contrariwise dense, where the substance is more
and the quantity less. Now if we look into the proprieties of the bodies we
have named, or of any others, we shall see them all follow clearly out of
these definitions. For first, that one is more diffused, an other more
compacted; such diffusion and compaction, seem to be the very natures of
Rarity and Density, supposing them to be such as we have defined them to be;
seeing that, substance is more diffused by having more parts, or by being in
more parts; and is more compacted by the contrary. And then, that rare bodies
are more diuisible then dense ones, you see is coincident into the same conceit
with their diffusion and compaction. And from hence again it follows, that
they are more easily divided in great, and likewise, that they are by the force
of natural Agents diuisible into lesser parts: for both these (that is
facility of being divided, and easy diuisibility into lesser parts) are
contained in being more diuisible; or in more enjoying the effect of quantity,
which is diuisibility. From this again follows, that in rare bodies there is
less resistance to the motion of an other body through it, then in dense ones;
and therefore a like force passes more easily through the one, then through
the other. Again; rare bodies are more penetratiue and active then dense ones;
because being (by their ouerproportion of quantity) easily diuisible into
small parts, they can run into every little pore, and so incorporate
themselves better into other bodies, then more dense ones can. Light bodies
likewise must be rarer, because most diuisible, if other circumstances concur
equally.

Thus you see decyphered unto your hand, the first division of bodies flowing
from Quantity as it is ordained to substance for the composition of a body:
for since the definition of a body is; A thing which has parts; and quantity
is that, by which it has parts; and the first propriety of quantity is, to be
bigger or less; and consequently the first differences of haueing parts, are
to have bigger or less, more or fewer; what division of a body can be more
simple, more plain, or more immediate, then to divide it by its Quantity as
making it to have bigger or less, more or fewer parts in proportion to its
substance?

Neither can I justly be blamed for touching thus on Metaphysickes, to
explicate the nature of these two kinds of bodies; for Metaphysickes being the
science above Physickes, it belongs unto her to declare the principles of
Physickes: of which, these we have now in hand, are the very first step. But
much more, if we consider that the composition of quantity with substance, is
purely Metaphysicall; we must necessarily allow the inquiry into the nature of
Rarity and Density, to be wholly Metaphysicall; seeing that the essence of
Rarity and Density, stands in the proportion of quantity to substance; if we
believe Aristotle, (the greatest master that ever was, of finding out
definitions and notions) and trust to the uncontrollable reasons we have
brought in the precedent discourse.

All must admit in Physical bodies, a Metaphysicall composition.
This explication of Rarity and Density, by the composition of substance with
quantity, may peradventure give little satisfaction unto such as are not used to
raise their thoughts above Physical and natural speculations: who are apt to
conceive, there is no other composition or resolution, but such as our senses
show us in compounding and dividing of bodies according to quantatiue parts.
Now this obliges us to show that such a kind of composition and division as
this, must necessarily be allowed of, even in that course of doctrine which
seems most contrary to ours. To which purpose, let us suppose that the
position of Democritus or of Epicurus is true; to wit, that the original
composition of all bodies, is out of very little ones of various figures; all of
them, indivisible, not Mathematically, but Physically: and that this infinite
number of indiuisibles, does floate in an immense ocean of vacuum or imaginary
space. In this position, let any man who conceiueth their grounds may be
maintained, explicate how one of these little bodies is moved. For, taking two
parts of vacuum, in which this body successively is; it is clear, that
really, and not only in my understanding, it is a difference in the said body,
to be now here, now there: wherefore, when the body is gone thither, the notion
of being here, is no more in the body; and consequently, is divided from the
body. And therefore, when the body was here; there was a composition, between
the body, and its being here: which, seeing it can not be betwixt two parts of
Quantity, must of necessity be such a kind of composition, as we putt between
quantity and substance. And certainly, let men wrack their brains never so
much, they will never be able to show how motion is made, without some such
composition and division, upon what grounds soever they proceed.

And if then they tell us, that they understand not how there can be a
diuisibility between substance and quantity; we may reply, that to such a
diuisibility two things are required; first that the notions of substance and
quantity be different; secondly, that the one of them may be changed without
the other. As for the first, it is most evident we make an absolute
distinction between their two notions; both, when we say that Socrates was
bigger a man then a boy; and when we conceive that milk or water whiles it
boyleth, or wine whiles it works, so as they run over the vessels they are
in; are greater and possess more place then when they were cool and quiet,
and filled not the vessel to the brimme. For howsoever, witty explications may
seem to euade, that the same thing is now greater, now lesser; yett it can not
be avoided, but that ordinary men, who look not into Philosophy, do both
conceive it to be so, and in their familiar discourse express it so; which
they could not do, if they had not different notions of the substance, and of
the quantity of the thing they speak of. And though we had no such evidences,
the very names and definitions of them would putt it beyond strife: all men
calling substance, a thing; quantity, biggenesse: and referring a thing, to
Being; as who would say; that which is: but biggenesse, to some other of like
nature, unto which it is compared; as, that it is half as big, twice as
big, or the like.

This then being unavoidable, that the notions are distinguished; there
remains no difficulty, but only in the second, namely that the one may be
changed, and the other not. Which reason and demonstration do convince, as we
have showed. Wherefore, if any shall yett further reply, that they do not
understand how such change is made; we shall answer, by asking them whether
they know; how the change of being sometimes here, sometimes there is made by
local motion in vacuum, without a change in the body moved. Which question,
if they can not satisfy; they must either deny that there is any local motion
in vacuum; or else admit a change in quantity, without a change in substance;
for this latter is as evidently true, as they suppose the former to be; though
the manner how they are effected, be alike obscure in both, and the reason of
the obscurity, the same in both.

With which we will conclude the present Chapter; adding only this note. That
if all Physical things and natural changes do proceed out of the
constitution of rare and dense bodies in this manner, as we do putt them, (as
the work we have in hand intends to show) then, so manifold effects will so
convince the truth of this doctrine which we have declared, that there can
remain no doubt of it: neither can there be any, of the diuisibility of
quantity from substance; without which, this doctrine can not consist. For it
can not be understood, how there is a greater proportion of quantity then of
substance; or contrariwise, of substance then of quantity; if there be not a
real diuisibility between quantity and substance. And much less can it be
conceived, that the same thing has at one time a greater proportion of
quantity, and at an other time a less; if the greater or lesser proportion,
be not seperable from it; that is, if there be not a diuisibility betwixt it
and substance, as well as there are different notions of them. Which to prove
by the proper principles belonging to this matter, would require us to make a
greater inroade into the very bowels of Metaphysickes, and to take a larger
circuit, then is fitting either for the subject, or for the intended breuity
of this treatise.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Of the four first qualities: and of the four Elements.
The notions of density and rarity have a latitude capable of infinite variety.
THE subject of our discourse hitherto, has been three simple notions;
Quantity, Rarity, and Density. Now it shall be to inquire if by compounding
these with gravity or weight (which is one of the specieses of Quantity above
mentioned and of which I shall speak at lardge hereafter) we may begett any
further qualities, and so produce the four first bodies, called Elements. In
imitation of Logitians, who by compounding such propositions as of themselves
are evident to man's nature as soon as they are proposed, do bring forth new
knowledges: which thriddes they still entermixe and weaue together, till they
grow into a fair piece. And thus the sciencies tehy so much labor for, and
that have so great an extent, do result out of few and simple notions in their
beginninges.

But before we fall to mingling and comparing them together, I think it will
not be amiss to set down, and determine what kind of things we mean by
rare and what by dense; to the end that when the names are agreed upon, we may
slip into no error by mistaking them. So then, although there be several
considerations, in regard of which, rarity and density may be differently
attributed to bodies: yet because man's discerning them, to be able to discourse
accordingly of them, is the principal respect for which their denominations
are to be allotted them: we may with reason call those things dense, wherein
a man finds a sensible difficulty to part them; and those rare, where the
resistance is imperceptible.

And unto these two notions of rarity and density, we must allow a great
latitude, far from consisting in an indivisible state; for seeing that
rarefaction makes a lesser body equal to a bigger; and that all inequality
betwixt two bodies, has the conditions of a body; it follows that the
excess of one body over an other, consists of infinite parts into which it
might be divided: and consequently, that what is rarefied, passes as many
degrees as the inequality or excess has parts. And the same law being in
condensation, both dense and rare things must be acknowledged to be capable of
infinite variety, and diversity of states in regard of more and less in the
same kind.

These things being premised; How moystnesse and dryness are begotten in
dense bodies.
and calling to mind that it is the nature of density to make the parts of a
dense thing compact, and stick together, and be hardly diuisible; and on the
contrary side, that it is the nature of rarity, to diffuse and extend a rare
thing, and to prepare and approach it to division, according to the proportion
of the degree of rarity which it has; and that weight does abound where there
is excess of density, and is very little or none in excess of rarity: we may
now begin in our imagination to putt these qualities into the scales one
against an other, to see what effects they produce in bodies. And first, let
us weigh gravity against density or sticking together of parts: which sticking
or compactednesse being natural to density, requires some excess of gravity
in proportion to the density, or some other outward violence, to break it. If
then in a dense body the gravity overcome the density, and do make the parts
of it break a sunder, it will draw them downewardes toward the center that
gravity tends unto, and will never let them rest till they come thither,
unless some impediment meet them by the way and stop their journey: so
that such a body will, as near as possibly it can, lie in a perfect sphericall
figure in respect of the center; and the parts of it will be changed and
altered, and thrust on any side that is the ready way thither; so that by the
force of gravity working upon it, it will run as far as it meets with
nothing to hinder it from attaining this sphericall superficies. Wherefore such
bodies, for the most part, have noe settled outside of their own; but do
receive their figure and limits from such letts as hinder them from attaining
to that sphericalnesse they aim at.

Now Aristotle (whose definitions, are in these matters generally received, as
fully expressing the notions of mankind) tells us, and our own experience
confirms it, that we use to call those things moist, which run in such
sort as we have here set down; and that we term those things dry, which
have a consistence within themselves; and which to enjoy a determinate figure,
do not require the stop or hinderance of an other body to limit and circle
them in: which will be the nature of those that have a greater proportion of
density in respect of their gravity.

And thus, out of the comparison of density with weight, we have found two
more qualities then we yett had met withal, namely wettenesse and dryness.
For although a body be dense, (which of its own nature, singly considered,
would preserve the continuity of its parts, as making the body hardly
diuisible; whereby it would be dry) yet if the gravity that works upon it, be
in proportion greater then the density; it will sever the parts of it, and
make them run to the center, and so become fluide and moist: though not in
the eminentest degree that may be of fluidity and moisture; by reason that if
the like ouerproportion of gravity happen in a rare body, it will there more
powerfully work its effect, then it can in a dense body; because a rare body
will more easily obey, and yield to the gravity that mastereth it, then a dense
one will; and consequently, will be more fluide and moist then it.

Now on the other side, in weighing rarity against gravity; if it happen that
the rarity overcome the gravity, How moystnesse and dryness are begotten in
rare bodies.
then the gravity will not change the figure of a body so proportioned, but
what figure it has from its proper natural causes, the same will still
remain with it: and consequently, such a body will have terms of its own and
will not require an ambient body to limit, and circle it in: which nature, we
call dry.

But if the proportion of the gravity be the greater and do overcome the
rarity; then, by how much the rarity is greater, so much the more will the
gravity force it, to apply it self equally and on all sides to the center: and
such a body will the more easily receive its figure from an other, and will be
less able to consist of it self: which properties, we attribute to
wettenesse or moisture. So that it appears, how the qualities of wett and
dry, which first we found in things that were dense, are also common to that
nature of bodies, which we term rare.

And thus, by our first inquiry after what kind of bodies do result out of the
compounding of rarity and density with gravity, we discover four different
sorts: some dense ones that are dry, and others likewise dense that are moist:
then again, some rare ones that are likewise moist, and other rare ones that
are dry.

But we must not rest here: let us proceed a little further, to search what
other properties these four kinds of bodies will have; Heat is a property of
rare bodies, and cold of dense ones.
which we shall best discover, if we apply them severally to some other
compounded body (of which nature, are all those we converse with or see) and
then consider the effects which these do work upon it. To begin with that,
which we said, is so excessiuely rare that gravity has no power over it. If
we look upon the multitude of little parts it may be divided into, whereof
every one will subsist by it self (for we have already proved it dry) and
then suppose them to be moved with force and strength against the body we
apply them to: it must necessarily follow, that they will forcibly get into
the porousnesse of it, and pass with violence between part and part, and of
necessity separate the parts of that thing one from an other; as a knife or
wedge does a solid substance, by having their thinnest parts pressed into
it: so that if in the compounded thing, some parts be more weighty, others
more light, (as of necessity there must be) the heauiest will all fall lowest,
the lightest will fly uppermost, and those which are of a mean nature between
the two extremes, will remain in the middle. In sum, by this action of an
extreme rare body upon a compounded one, all the parts of one kind that were
in the compounded one, will be gathered into one place; and those of diverse
kinds into diverse places: which is the notion whereby Aristotle has expressed
the nature of heat; and is an effect, which daily experience in burning and
boiling, teaches us to proceed from heat. And therefore we can not doubt,
but that such extreme rare bodies are as well hot as dry.

On the other side, if a dense thing be applied to a compound, it will (because
it is weighty) press it together: and if that application be continued on all
sides, so that noe part of the body that is pressed be free from the siege of
the dense body that presses it, it will form it into a narrower room, and
keep in the parts of it, not permitting any of them to slip out. So that
what things soever it finds within its power to master, be they light or
heavy, or of what contrary natures soever, it compresseth them as much as it
can, and draws them into a less compass, and holds them strongly
together, making them stick fast to one an other. Which effect, Aristotle
took for the proper notion of cold* and therefore gave for definition of the
nature of it, that it gathers things of diverse natures: and experience
shows us in freesing, and all great coolinges, that this effect proceeds
from cold.

But if we examine which of the two sorts of dense bodies (the fluide or the
consistent) is most efficacious in this operation; Of the two dense bodies, the
less dense is more cold: but of the two rare ones the less rare is less hot.
we shall find that the less dense one is more capable of being applied round
about the body it shall besiege; and therefore will stop closer every little
hole of it, and will more easily send subtle parts into every little vein of
it; and by consequence, shrink it up together and coagulate, and constringe it
more strongly, then a body can that is extremely dense; which by reason of its
great density, and the stubbornness of its parts, can not so easily bend and
plye them to work this effect. And therefore, a body that is moderately dense,
is colder then an other that is so in excess; seeing that cold is an active or
working power, and that which is less dense does excel in working.

On the contrary side, rare bodies being hot, because their subtle parts
enuironing a compounded body will sink into the pores of it, and to their
power separate its parts; it follows that those wherein the gravity
ouercometh the rarity, are less hot then such others as are in the extremity,
and highest excess of rarity: both, because the former are not able to pierce
so little parts of the resisting dense body, as extreme rare ones are; and
likewise, because they more easily take plye by the obstacle of the solid ones
they meet with, then these do.

So that out of this discourse we gather, that of such bodies that differ
precisely by the proportion of Rarity and Density; those which are extremely
rare, are in the excess of heat, and are dry withal: that weighty rare
bodies are extremely humide, and meanly hot: that fluide dense bodies are
moist, though not in such excess as rare ones that are so; but are coldest of
any: and lastly, that extreme dense bodies are less cold then fluide dense
ones, and that they are dry.

The extreme dense body is more dry, then the extreme rare one.
But whether the extreme dense bodies, be more or less dry then such as are
extremely rare, remains yet to be decided. Which we shall easily do, if we
but reflect that it is density which makes a thing hard to be divided, and
that rarity makes it easy: for, a facility to yield unto division, is nothing
else but a plyablenesse in the thing that is to be divided, whereby it easily
receives the figure, which the thing that divides it does cast it into. Now
this plyablenesse belongs more to rare then to dense things: and
accordingly, we see fire bend more easily, by the concameration of an oven,
then a stone can be reduced into due figure by hewing. And therefore, since
dryness is a quality that makes those bodies wherein it reigns, to conserve
themselves in their own figure and limits, and to resist the receiving of any
from an other body; it is manifest that those are dryest, wherein these effects
are most seen; which is, in dense bodies: and consequently, excess of
dryness must be allotted unto them, to keep company with their moderate
coldness.

There are but four simple bodies: and these are rightly named Elements.
Thus we see that the number of Elements assigned by Aristotle, is truly and
exactly determined by him; and that there can be neither more nor less of
them; and that their qualities are rightly allotted to them: which to settle
more firmly in our minds, it will not be misse-spent time to sum up in
short, the effect of what we have hitherto said to bring us unto this
conclusion. First, we showed that a body is made, and constituted a body by
quantity. Next, that the first division of bodies is into rare and dense ones;
as differing only by having more and less quantity. And lastly, that the
conjunction of gravity with these two, breeds two other sorts of
combinations: each of which is also twofold; the first sort, concerning rarity;
out of which arises one extremely hot and moderately dry, and an other
extremely humide and moderately hot: the second sort, concerning density; out
of which, is produced one that is extremely cold and moderatly wett, and an
other extremely dry and moderatly cold. And these are the combinations whereby
are constituted, fire, air, water, and earth.

So that we have thus, the proper notions of the four Elements; and have both
them and their qualities driven up and resolved into their most simple
principles: which are, the notions of Quantity, and of the two most simple
differences of quantatiue things, Rarity and Density. Beyond which, man's wit
can not penetrate; nor can his wishes aim at more in this particular: seeing
he has attained to the knowledge af what they are, and of what makes them, be
so, and that it is impossible they should be otherwise: and this, by the most
simple and first principles, which enter into the composition of their nature.
Out of which it is evident, that these four bodies are Elements: since they
can not be resolved into any others, by way of physical composition;
themselves, being constituted by the most simple differences of a body. And
again, all other bodies whatsoever must of necessity, be resolved into them,
for the same reason; because no bodies can be exempt from the first
differencies of abody. Since then, we mean by the name of an Element, a body
not composed of any former bodies, and of which all other bodies are composed,
we may rest satisfied that these are rightly so named.

But whether every one of these four elements, The Author does not determine
whether every element does comprehend under its name one only lowest species,
or many: nor whether any of them be found pure.
do comprehend under its name one only lowest species, or many (as, whether
there be one only species of fire, or several; and the like of the rest) we
intend not here to determine. Yet we note, that there is a great latitude in
every kind; seeing that, Rarity and Density (as we have said before) are as
diuisible as quantity. Which latitudes, in the bodies we converse withal, are
so limited that what makes it self and other things be seen (as being
accompanied by light) is called fire. What admits the illuminatiue action of
fire, and is not seen, is called air. What admitteh the same action, and is
seen (in the rank of Elements) is called water. And what through the density
of it admits not that action, but absolutely reflecteth it, is called earth.

And out of all we said of these four Elements, it is manifest there can not
be a fifth: as is to be seen at large in every Aristotelian Philosopher that
writes of this matter. I am not ignorant that there are sundry objections used
to be made, both against these notions of the first qualities, and against this
division of the Elements: but because they, and their solutions, are to be
found in every ordinary Philosopher; and that they be not of any great
difficulty; and that the handling them, is too particular for the design of
this discourse, and would make it too prolixe; I refer the Reader to seek
them for his satisfaction, it those authors that treat physickes professedly,
and have delivered a complete body of Philosophy.

And I will end this Chapter with aduertising him (least I should be
misunderstood) that though my disquisition here has pitched upon the four
bodies of fire, air, water, and earth; yet it is not my intention to affirm,
that those which we ordinarily call so, and do fall daily within our use, are
such as I have here expressed them: or that these Philosophical ones (which
arise purely out of the combination of the first qualities) have their
residence or consistence in great bulkes, in any places of the world, be they
never fo remote: as, fire, in the hollow of the moons orb; water, in the
bottom of the sea; air, above the clouds; and earth below the mines. But
these notions are only to serve for certain Idaeas of Elements; by which, the
four named bodies, and the compoundes of them, may be tried and receive their
doom of more or less pure and approaching to the nature from whence they have
their denomination. And yet I will not deny, but that such perfect Elements
may be found in some very little quantities, in mixed bodies: and the greatest
abundance of them, in these four known bodies that we call in ordinary
practice, by the names of the pure ones: for they are least compounded, and
approach most to the simpleness of the Elements. But to determine absolutely
their existence, or not existence, either in bulk or in little parts;
depends of the manner of action among bodies: which as yet we have not
meddled with.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Of the Operations of the Elements in general. And of their
Actiuities compared with one another.
The first operation of the Elements is division, out of which resulteth local
motion.
HAVING by our former discourse, inquired out what degrees and proportions of
rarity and density compounded with gravity, are necessary for the production of
the Elements, and first qualities; whose combinations, frame the Elements: our
next consideration, in that orderly progress we have proposed unto our selves
in this treatise (wherein our aim is, to follow successively the steps,
which nature has printed out unto us) will be to examine the operations of the
Elements, by which they work upon one an other. To which end, let us propose
to our selves: a rare and a dense body encountering one an other by the impulse
of some exterior agent. In this case, it is evident, that since rarity implies
a greater proportion of Quantity, and quantity is nothing but diuisibility,
rare bodies must needs be more diuisible then dense ones: and consequently,
when two such bodies are pressed one against an other; the rare body not being
able to resist division so strongly, as the dense one is; and being not
permitted to retire back, by reason of the externe violence impelling it
against the dense body; it follows, that the parts of the rare body must be
severed, to let the dense one come between them: and so the rare body
becomes divided, and the dense body the diuider. And by this we see that the
notions of diuider and diuisible, do immediately follow rare and dense bodies;
and do so much the more properly agree unto them, as they exceed in the
qualities of Rarity and Density.

Likewise, we are to observe in our case, that the dense or dividing body must
necessarily cut and enter further and further into the rare or divided body;
and so the sides of it be joined successively to new and new parts of the rare
body that gives way unto it, and forsake others it parts from. Now the rare
body being in a determinate situation of the universe, (which we call being in
a place, and is a necessary condition belonging to all particular bodies) and
the dense body coming to be within the rare body, whereas formerly it was not
so: it follows, that it loses the place it had, and gains an other. This
effect, is that which we call local motion.

And thus we see, What place is both notionally, and really.
by explicating the manner of this action, that local motion is nothing else,
but the change of that respect or relation, which the body moved has to the
rest of the universe, following out of Division: and the name of local motion,
formally signifies only the mutation of a respect to other extrinsecall
bodies, subsequent to that division. And this is so evident and agreeable to
the notions that all mankind (who, as we have said, is judge and master of
language) naturally frames of place; as I wonder much why any will labor to
give other artificial and intricate doctrine of this that in it self is so
plain and clear. What need is there to introduce an imaginary space (or with
Ioannes Grammaticus, a subsistent quantity) that must run through all the
world; and then entayle to every body an ayery entity, an inconceivable mood,
an unintelligible Vbi, that by an intrinsecall relation to such a part of the
imaginary space, must thereunto pin and fasten the body it is in? It must
needs be a ruinous Philosophy that is grounded upon such a contradiction, as
is the allotting of parts unto that, which the authors themselves (upon the
matter) acknowledge to be merely nothing; and upon so weak a shift, (to
deliver them from the inconueniencies that in their course of doctrine other
circumstances bring them unto) as is the voluntary creating of new imaginary
Entities in things, without any ground in nature for them. Learned men should
express the advantage and subtility of their wits, by penetrating further
into nature, then the vulgar; not, by vexing and wresting it from its own
course. They should refine, and carry higher; not contradict and destroy the
notions of mankind, in those things that it is the competent Judge of: as it
undoubtedly is, of those primary notions which Aristotle has ranked under ten
heads: which (as we have touched before) every body can conceive in gross:
and the work of scholars, is to explicate them in particular; and not to make
the vulgar believe they are mistaken, in framing those apprehensions that
nature taught them.

Out of that which has been hitherto resolved it is manifest, that place
really and abstracting from the operation of the understanding, is nothing else
but the inward superficies of a body that compasses and immediately contains
an other. Which ordinarily, being of a rare body that does not show it self
unto us (namely, the air) is for the most part unknown by us. But because
nothing can make impression upon our mind, and cause us to give it a name;
otherwise then by being known: therefore our understanding to make a complete
notion, must add something else to this fleeting and vnremarkable superficies
that may bring it unto our acquaintance. And for this end we may consider
further, that as this superficies has in it self, so the body enclosed in it
gains, a certain determinate respect unto the stable and immoouable bodies
that enuiron it. As for example, we understand such a tree to be in such a
place, by having such and such respects to such a hill near it, or to such a
house that stands by it, or to such a river that runs under it, or to such
an immoouable point of the heaven that from the suns rising in the aequinox
is called east, and such like. To which purpose, it imports not whether
these, that we call immoouable bodies and points, be truly so, or do but seem
so to mankind. For man talking of things according to the notions he frames
of them in his mind, (speech, being nothing else but an expression to an other
man, of the images he has within himself) and his notions being made
according to the seeming of the things; he must needs make the same notions,
whether the things be truly so in themselves, or but seem to be so, when that
seeming or appearance is always constantly the same.

Local motion is that division, whereby a body changes its place.
Now then, when one body dividing an other, gets a new immediate clothing;
and consequently, new respects to the stable and immoouable bodies (or seeming
such) that enuiron it; we do vary in our selves the notion we first had of that
thing; conceiving it now accompanied with other circumstances and other
respects then formerly it had. Which notion we express by saying, it has
changed its place; and is now no longer where it was at the first. And this
change of place, we call Local motion: to wit, the departing of a body from
that hollow superficies which enclosed it; and its changing unto an other;
whereby it gains new respects to those parts of the world that have, or in
some sort may seem to have, immobility and fixed stablenesse. So as hence it
is evident that the substance of local motion consists in division; and that
the alteration of Locality follows division; in such sort as becoming like or
unlike of one wall to an other, follows the action whereby one of them
becomes white.

The nature of quantity of it self is sufficient to unite a body to its place.
And therefore in nature we are not to seek for any entity or special cause of
applying the moved body to a place as place, (which is but a respect
consequent to the effect of division) but only to consider what real and
physical action unites it to that other body, which is called its place, and
truly serves for that effect. And consequently, they who think they have
discovered a notable subtility by bringing in an Entity to unite a body to its
place, have strained beyond their strength, and have grasped but a shadow.
Which will appear yet more evident, if they but mark well how nothing is
diuisible, but what of it self (abstracting from division) is one. For the
nature of division, is the making of many; which implies, that what is to be
divided, must of necessity be not many before it be divided. Now quantity being
the subject of division, it is evident that purely of it self, and without any
force or adjoined helps, it must needs be one, wheresoever some outward agent
does not introduce multiplicity upon it. And whenever other things work
upon quantity as quantity, it is not the nature and power of their operation,
to produce unity in it and make it one; for it is already one: but
contrariwise, the immediate necessary effect that flows from them in this
case, is to make one quantity many, according to the circumstances that
accompany the diuider, and that which is to be divided. And therefore, although
we may seek causes why some one thing sticks faster together then some
other, yet to ask absolutely why a body sticks together, were prejudicial
to the nature of quantity; whose essence is, to have parts sticking together,
or rather, to have such unity, as without it, all diuisibility must be excluded.

Out of which discourse it follows, that in local motion we are to look
only for a cause or power to divide, but not for any to unite. For the very
nature of quantity unites any two parts that are indistant from one an other,
without needing any other cement to glue them together: as we see the parts of
water and all liquide substances, do presently unite themselves to other parts
of like bodies, when they meet with them, and to solid bodies if they chance
to be next unto them. And therefore it is vain to trouble our heads with
Unions and imaginary Moodes to unite a body to the place it is in, when their
own nature makes them one as soon as they are immediate to each other. And
accordingly, if when we see a boule move, we would examine the causes of that
motion, we must consider the quantity of air or water it makes to break from
the parts next unto it, to give place unto it self: and not speculate upon an
intrinsecall relation from the body to a certain part of the imaginary space
they will have to run through all things. And by ballancing that quantity of
air or water which it divides, we may arrive to make an estimate of what
force the boule needs to have for its motion.

Thus having declared that the locality of motion, All operations amongst
bodies, are either local motion, or such as follow out of local motion.
is but an extrinsecall denomination, and no reality in the thing moved; we
may now cast an eye upon a vast consequence that may be deduced out of what we
have hitherto said. For if we consider the nature of a body, that is, that a
body is a body by quantity; and that the formal notion of quantity is nothing
else but diuisibility; and that the adaequate act of diuisibility, is division:
it is evident, there can be no other operation upon quantity, nor (by
consequence) among bodies, but must either be such division, as we have here
explicated, or what must necessarily follow out of such division. And division,
(as we have even now explicated) being local motion; it is evident, that all
operations among bodies, are either local motion, or such as follow out of
local motion. Which conclusion, howsoever unexpected, and may at the first
hearing appear a Paradoxe; will nevertheless by the ensuing work receive
such evidence, as it can not be doubted of; and that, not only by force of
argumentation and by necessity of notions (as is already deduced) but also by
experience, and by declaration of particulars as they shall occur.

Earth compared to water in actiuity.
But now to apply what we have said, to our proposed subject: it is obuious to
every man, that seeing the diuider is the agent in division and in local
motion; and that dense bodies, are by their nature diuiders; the earth, must
in that regard be the most active among the Elements, since it is the most
dense of them all. But this seems to be against the common judgment of all
the searchers of nature; who unanimously agree that fire is the most active
Element. As also, it seems to impugn what we our selves have determined,
when we said, there were two active qualities, heat and cold, whereof the
first was in its greatest excess in fire, and the latter in water.

To reconcile these, we are to consider that the action of cold in its greatest
height, is composed of two parts; the one is a kind of pressing; and the
other, is penetration which requires applicability. Of which two, the former
arises out of density, but the latter, out of moderation of density, as I have
declared in the precedent Chapter. Wherefore the former will exceed more in
earth; * 6.
though the whole be more eminent in water. For though considering only the
force of moving (which is a more simple and abstracted notion, then the
determination and particularisation of the Elements, and is precedent to it)
therein earth has a precedence over water: yet taking the action as it is
determined to be the action of a particular Element, and as it concurreth to
the composition or dissolution of mixed bodies; in that consideration (which is
the chief work of Elements, and requires an intime application of the
Agents) water has the principality and excess over earth.

The manner whereby fire gets into fuel: proves that it exc^edeth earth
in actiuity.
As for fire it is more active then either of them; as it will appear clearly
if we consider, how when fire is applied to fuel, and the violence of blowing
is added to its own motion; it incorporateth it self with the fuel, and in
a small time conuerteth a great part of it into its own nature, and shattereth
the rest into smoke and ashes. All which proceeds from the exceeding
smallness and dryness of the parts of fire; which being moved with violence
against the fuel, and thronging in multitudes upon it; they easily pierce the
porous substance of it, like so many extreme sharp needles.

And that the force of fire is as great and greater, then of earth, we may
gather out of our former discourse; where having resolved, that density is the
virtue by which a body is moved and does cut the medium; and again
considering that celerity of motion, is a kind of density, (as we shall by and
by declare) it is evident, that since blowing must of necessity press
violently and with a rapide motion, the parts of fire against the fuel, and
so condense them exceedingly there, (both by their celerity, and by bringing
very many parts together there;) it must needs also give them actiuity and
virtue to pierce the body they are beaten against.

Now, that celerity is a kind of density, will appear by comparing their
natures. For if we consider that a dense body may be dilated so as to possess
and fill the place of a rare body that exceeded it in bigness; and by that
dilatation, may be divided into as many and as great parts as the rare body
was diuisible into; we may conceive that the substance of those parts, was by
a secret power of nature foulded up in that little extension in which it was
before. And even so, if we reflect upon two rivers of equal channels and
depths, whereof the one goes swifter then the other; and determine a certain
length of each channel, and a common measure of time: we shall see that in
the same measure of time, there passes a greater bulk of water in the
designed part of the channel of the swifter stream, then in the designed part
of the slower, though those parts be equal.

Neither does it import, that in velocity we take a part of time, whereas in
density it seems that an instant is sufficient; and consequently, there would
be no proportion between them. For knowing Philosophers do all agree that
there are no instants in time, and that the apprehension of them proceeds
merely from the manner of our understanding. And as for parts in time, there
can not be assumed any so little, in which the comparison is not true: and so in
this regard, it is absolutely good.

And if the Reader have difficulty at the disparity of the things which are
pressed together in density and in celerity; for that in density there is only
substance, and in celerity there is also quantity, crowded up with the
substance; he will soon receive satisfaction, when he shall consider that this
disparity is to the advantage of what we say, and makes the nature of density
more perfect in celerity, and consequently more powerful in fire then in
earth. Besides, if there were no disparity, The same is proved by the manner,
whereby fire comes out of fuel and works upon other bodies.
it would not be a distinct species of density, but the very same.

By what we have spoken above, it appears how fire gets into fuel; now
let us consider how it comes out: for the actiuity of that fierce body, will
not let it lie still and rest, as long as it has so many enemies round about
it to rouse it up. We see then that as soon as it has incorporated it self
with the fuel, and is grown master of it by introducing into it so many of
its own parts, (like so many soldiers, into an enemies town) they break out
again on every side with as much violence as they came in. For by reason of
the former resistance of the fuel; their continual streaming of new parts
upon it, and one ouertaking an other there where their journey was stopped,
(all which is increased by the blowing,) does so exceedingly condense them into
a narrower room then their nature affects, that as soon as they get
liberty, and grow masters of the fuel, (which at the first was their prison)
they enlarge their place, and consequently come out and fly abroad; ever
aiming right forwards from the point where they begin their journey: for the
violence wherewith they seek to extend themselves into a larger room, when
they have liberty to do so; will admit no motion but the shortest, which is,
by a straight line.

So that if in our fantasy, we frame an image of a round body all of fire; we
must withal presently conceive, that the flame proceeding from it, would
diffuse it self every way indifferently in straight lines; in such sort, that
the source serving for the center, there would be round about it an huge sphere
of fire and of light; unless some accidental and externe cause, should
determine its motion more to one part then to an other. Which compass, because
it is round, and has the figure of a sphere, is by Philosophers termed the
sphere of its actiuity.

So that it is evident, that the most simple and primary motion of fire, is a
flux in a direct line from the center of it, to its circumference, taking the
fuel for its center: as also, that when, it is beaten against a harder body,
it may be able to destroy it, although that body be in its own nature, more
dense then fire. For the body against which it presses; either has pores, or
has none, (as, the Elements have none:) if it has pores; then the fire, by
reason of the violent motion of the impellent, drives out the little bodies
which fill up those pores, and succeeding in their room, and being multiplied
there, causes those effects which in our discourse of the Elemenrs we assigned
to heat. But if it have no pores; it will be either rare or dense: if it be
rare; then, in case that the force of the impellent be greater then the
resistance of the rare body, it will force the fire to divide the rare body.
But if it be dense; as, some atome of earth; then, though at the first it can
not divide it; yet by length of time and by continual beating upon it, it may
come to wear off some part of it, the force of the impellent, by little and
little bending the atome of the earth, by driving a continual stream of a
lesser part of fire, against some determinate part of the atome. By which word
Atome; no body will imagine we intend to express a perfect indivisible, but
only, the least sort of natural bodies.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Of Light: what it is.
HAVING said thus much of fire; In what sense the Author rejects qualities.
the near relation that is between it and light, inuiteth us in the next
place to bend our eyes to that which uses to dazell theires who look unwarily
upon it. Certainly, as among all the sensible qualities, it is the principal;
so among all corporeal things, it seems to aim rightest at a spiritual
nature, and to come nearest unto it. And by some has been judged to be
spiritual; if our eyes be capable to see spirits. No meaner man then
Aristotle, leads the dance to hold light a quality, and mainely to deny it
any bodily subsistence. And there has followed him no fewer, then almost all
the world ever since. And the question imports no less, then the whole
doctrine of qualities; for admit light to be a body, and hardly any man will
hold up his hand in defense of any other quality: but if it be a quality; then
all others come in by parity and for company.

But before we go any further, it will not be amiss to express what we mean
when we reject qualities; and how, in some sense, we are content to admit
them. According to that description that Philosophers ordinarily do make of
them, (and especially the modern) we can by no means give way unto them. I
confess ingenuously, I understand not what they mean by them; and I am
confident, that neither do they. For the very notion, that their first words
seem to express of them, they contradict again, before they make an end of
describing what they are. They will have them to be real Entities or Things,
distinct from the bodies they accompany: and yet, they deny them a subsistence
or self being; saying they do but inhere in their subject, which supporteth
them; or which is all one, that their being is a dependence of a subject.

If they will reflect upon what they say, and make their thoughts and their
words agree; they will find, that the first part of their description, makes
them complete substances; which afterward, in words they flattely deny: and
it is impossible to reconcile these two meaninges. A real Entity or thing,
must necessarily have an Existence or Being of its own: which they allow them.
And whatsoever has so; becomes a substance: for it subsisteth by its own
Existence; or, (to say plainer) is what it is by its own Being; and needs
not the existence of an other thing to give it a Being. And then presently to
say that it does not subsist of it self; or that it requires the subsistence
of a substance, to make it Be; is a pure contradiction to the former.

This arises from a wrong notion they make to themselves of substance,
existence and subsistence: and from their not consulting sufficiently with
their own thoughts, as well as studying in books. They meet there with
different terms; by help of which, they keep themselves from contradiction
in words, but not in effect. If the terms were rightly conceived, and notions
duly fitted to them, (which requires deep meditation upon the things
themselves, and a brain free from all inclination to siding, or affection to
opinions for the authors sakes, before they be well understood and examined)
many of those disputes would fall to the ground, in which oftentimes both sides
loose themselves, and the question, before they come to an end. They are in the
dark before they are aware: and then, they make a noise, only with terms;
which like too heavy weapons that they can not weild, do carry their strokes
beyond their aim. Of such nature, are the qualities and moodes, that some
modern Philosophers have so subtilised upon. And in that sense, we utterly
deny them: which being a question appertaining to Metaphysickes, it belongs
not to our present purpose to engage our selves further in it.

In what sense the Author does admit of qualities.
But, as they are ordinarily understood in common conversation, we allow them.
And our work is but to explicate and show the particulars in retaile, of what
men naturally speak in gross. For that, serves their turn to know what one
an other means: whereas, it belongs only unto a Philosopher, to examine
the causes of things. Others, are content with the effects: and they speak
truly and properly when they design them. As for example: when they say that
fire burns by a quality of heat that it has, or that a deye is square by
the quality of a cubicall figure that is in it; they speak as they should do.
But if others will take occasion upon this, to let their understanding give a
Being unto these qualities, distinct from the substances in which they conceive
them; there they miss. If we consider the same man hungry, or thirsty, or
weary, or sleepy, or standing, or sitting; the understanding presently makes
within it self, real things of sleep, hunger, thirst, weariness, standing,
and sitting. Whereas indeed, they are but different affections or situations of
the same body. And therefore we must beware of applying these notions of our
mind, to the things as they are in themselves: as much as we must, of
conceiving those parts to be actually in a continued quantity, whereof we can
frame actually distinct notions in our understanding. But as, when ordinary men
say, that a yard contains three feet; it is true in this sense, that three
feet may be made of it; but that whiles it is a yard, it is but one quantity
or thing, and not three things: so, they who make profession to examine
rigorously the meaning of words, must explicate in what sense it is true that
heat and figure (our former examples) are qualities: for such we grant them to
be; and in no wise do contradict the common manner of speech; which enters
not into the Philosophical nature of them.

We say then, that qualities are nothing else but the proprieties, or
particularities wherein one thing differs from an other. And therefore
Logicians, call substantial differencies, substantial qualities: and say,
they are praedicated in Quale quid. But the Praedicament of Quality, is ordered
by Aristotle to conclude in it those differences of things, which are neither
substantial nor quantitatiue, and yet are intrinsecall and absolute. And so,
that which the understanding calls heat, and makes a notion of, distinct
from the notion of the fire from whence it issues to burn the wood that is
near it; is nothing else, in the fire, but the very substance of it in such a
degree of rarity; or a continual stream of parts issuing out of the maine
stock of the same fire, that enters into the wood, and by the rarity of it
makes its way through every little part, and divides them. All which actions,
are comprised by the understanding, under one notion of burning: and the power,
(which is fire it self) to do these actions, under one notion of the quality
of heat: though burning in effect, and explicated Philosophically, be nothing
else but the continuance of those material motions we have even now described.
In like manner, the cubicall figure of a deye, is nothing else but the very
body of the deye it self, limited by other bodies from being extended beyond
those dimensio^s it has: and so the quality of figure or squarenesse, which in
common speech is said to be in it; is truly, the substance it self, under such
a consideration as is expressed by that word.

But to come to our question, Five arguments proposed to prove that light is
not a body.
upon the decision of which depends the fate of all the fictitious Entities,
which in the schools are termed qualities. The chief motives that persuade
light to be one of those; may, to my best remembrance, be reduced to five
several heads. The first is, that it illuminateth the air in an instant, and
therefore, can not be a body: for a body requirreth succession of time to move
in: whereas, this seems to spread it self, over the whole hemisphere in an
instant; for as far as the sun is distant from us, he no sooner raises his
head above our horizon, but his darts are in our face: and generally, no
imagination can be framed, of any motion it has in its dilatation.

The next is; that whereas no body can admit an other into its place, without
being removed away it self, to leave that room unto the aduenient one;
nevertheless, plain experience shows us daily, that two lights may be in
the same place; and the first is so far from going away at the coming of the
second, that the bringing in of a second candle, and setting it near the
first, increases the light in the room; which diminishes again when the
second is removed away. And by the same reason; if light were a body, it
should drive away the air (which is likewise a body) wheresoever it is
admitted: for within the whole sphere of the irradiation of it, there is no
point wherein one may set their eye, but light is found. And therefore; if it
were a body, there would be no room for air in that place which light takes
up. And likewise, we see that it penetrateth all solid bodies, (and
particularly glass,) as experience shows, in wood, stone, metals, and any
other body whatsoever, if it be made thin enough.

The third argument, why light can not be a body, is, that if it were so, it
can be none other but fire, which is the subtilest, and most rarifyed of all
bodies whatsoever. But if it be fire, then it can not be without heat: and
consequently, a man could not feel cold in a sunneshining day. The contrary of
which is apparent all winter long; whose brighest days oftentimes prove the
coldest. And Galilaeus with diverse others since, did use from the sun to
gather light in a kind of stone that is found in Italy (which is therefore by
them called, la calamita della luce) and yet no heat appeared in it. A glow
worm will give light to read by, but not to warm you any whitt at all. And
it is said, that diamonds and carbuncles will shine like fire in the greatest
darkes; yet no man ever complained of being served by them, as the foolish
Satyr was by kissing of a burning coal. On the contrary side; if one consider
how great heates may be made without any light at all, how can one be
persuaded that light and heat shoud be the same thing, or indeed any whitt of
kin?

The fourth motive to induce us to believe that light can not be a body; is the
sudden extinction of it, when any solid body comes between the fountain
of it, and the place where he sends his beams. What becomes of that great
expansion of light that shined all about, when a cloud interposeth it self
between the body of the sun and the streams that come from it? Or when it
leaves our horizon to light the other world? His head is no sooner out of our
sight; but at the instant all his beams are vanished. If that which fills
so vast a room were a body, some thing would become of it: it would at least
be changed to some other substance; and some relikes would be left of it; as
when ashes remain of burned bodies: for nature admits not the annihilation
of any thing.

And in the last place; we may conceive that if light were a body, it would be
shaken by the winds, and by the motion of the air; and we should see it
quauer in all blustering weather. Therefore, summing up all we have said; it
seems most improbable, and indeed wholly impossible, that light should be a
body; and consequently, must have his place among qualities.

The two first reasons to prove light to be a body are, the resemblance it has
with fire; and because if it were a quality, it would always produce an equal
to it self.
But on the other side; before we apply ourselves to answer these objections,
let us take a short suruay of those inducements, that prevail with us to
believe light a body, notwithstanding so forcible oppositions. I admit so
far of the third argument, as to allow light to be fire: for indeed it can
not be imagined to be anything else; all properties agreeing so fully between
them. But withal I must add; that it is not fire in every form, or fire
joined with every substance, that expresses it self by light; but it is fire
extremely dilated, and without mixture of any other gross body. Let me hold
a piece of linen or paper, close by the flame of a candle, and by little, and
little remove it further and further of; and me thinks my very eyes tell me,
that there is upon the paper some part of that which I see in the candle; and
that it grows still less and less like as I remove the paper further from
it: so that, if I would believe my sense; I should believe it as very a body
upon the paper, as in the candle; though enfeebled, by the laxity of the
channel in which it flows.

And this seems to be strengthened, by the consideration of the adversaries
position: for if it were a quality; then, seeing it has no contrary to destroy
or stop it, it should still produce an equal to it self, without end or
growing feeble, whenever it meets with a subject capable to entertayne it,
as air is.

The better to apprehend how much this faint resemblance of flame upon the
paper, The third reason; because if we imagine to our selves the substance of
fire to be rarifyed, it will have the same appearances which light has.
makes for our purpose; let us turn the leaf, and imagine in our own
thoughts, after what fashion that fire which is in the flame of a little candle,
would appear unto us, if it were dilated and stretched out to the utmost
extent, that excess of rarity can bring it unto. Suppose that so much flame,
as would fill a cone of two inches height and half an inch diameter should
suffer so great an expansion as to replenish with his light body a large
chamber: and then, what can we imagine it would seem to be? How would the
continual driving it into a thinner substance, as it streameth in a perpetual
flood from the flame, seem to play upon the paper? And then judge whether it
be likely to be a body or no, when our discourse suggesteth unto us, that if it
be a body, those very appearances must follow, which our eyes give us evidence
are so in effect. If gold beaten into so ayery a thinnenesse as we see guilders
use, does remain still gold notwithstanding the wonderful expansion of it:
why shall we not allow, that fire dilated to his utmost periode, shall still
remain fire; though extremely rarifyed beyond what is was?

We know that fire is the rarest and the subtilest substance that nature has
made among bodies; The fourth reason, from the manner of the generation and
corruption of light, which agrees with fire.
and we know likewise, that it is engendered by the destroying and feeding upon
some other more gross body: let us then calculate, when the oil, or tallow,
or wax of a candle, or the bulk of a fagott or billet, is dilated and
rarifyed to the degree of fire; how vast a place must it take up?

To this let us add what Aristotle teaches us; that fire is not like a
standing poole, which continues full with the same water; and as it has no
wast, so has it no supply: but it is a fluent and brookelike current. Which
also we may learn, out of the perpetual nutriment it requires: for a new
part of fuel, being converted into a new part of fire (as we may observe, in
the little atoms of oil, or melted wax, that continually ascend apace up the
week of a burning candle or lamp) of necessity the former must be gone to
make room for the latter; and so, a new part of the river is continually
flowing.

Now then, this perpetual flux of fire, being made of a gross body that so
rarifyed will take up such a vast room; if it dye not at the instant of its
birth, but have some time to subsist (be it never so short,) it must needs
run some distance from the fountain whence it springs. Which if it do; you
need not wonder, that there should be so great an extent of fire as is
requisite to fill all that space which light replenisheth; nor, that it should
be still supplied with new, as fast as the cold of the air kills it: for
considering that flame is a much grosser substance then pure fire, (by reason
of the mixture with it, of that viscous oily matter, which being drawn out of
the wood and candle, serves for fuel to the fire, and is by little and little
converted into it;) and with all reflecting upon the nature and motion of fire,
(which is, to dilate it self extremely, and to fly all about from the center
to the circumference;) you can not choose but conceive, that the pure fire
struggling to break away from the oily fuel (which is still turning into new
fire) does at length free his wings from that birdlime, and then flies
abroad with extreme swiftness, and swells and dilateth it self to a huge
bulk, now that it has gotten liberty; and so fills a vast room; but
remains still fire till it dye: which it no sooner does, but it is still
supplied with new streams of it, that are continually strained, and as it were
squeesed, out of the thick flame, which did imprison it, and kept it within
it; till growing fuller of fire then it could contain (by reason of the
continual attenuating the oily parts of it, and converting them into fire) it
gives liberty unto those parts of fire, that are next the superficies, to fly
whither their nature will carry them.

And thus, discourse would inform a blind man (after he has well reflected on
the nature of fire) how it must needs fill a mighty extent of place; though it
have but a narrow beginning at the springhead of it: and that there, by reason
of the condensation of it, and mixture with a grosser body, it must needs
burn other bodies: but that when it is freed from such mixture, and suffers
an extreme expansion, it can not have force to burn, but may have means to
express it self to be there present by some operation of it upon some body
that is refined and subtilised enough to perceive it. And this operation, a
seeing man, will tell you is done upon his eyes, (whose fittenesse to receive
impression from so subtle an Agent, Anatomistes will teach you.) And I
remember, how a blind schoolmaster that I kept in my house to teach my
children, (who had extreme subtle spirits, and a great tenderness through his
whole body; and met with few distractions, to hinder him from observing any
impression, never so nicely made upon him) used often to tell me, that he felt
it very perceptibly in several parts of his body; but especially in his
brain.

But to settle us more firmly in the persuasion of light his being a body (and
consequently fire; The fifth reason; because such properties belong to light as
agree only unto bodies.
) let us consider that the properties of a body, are perpetually incident to
light; look what rules a ball will keep in its reboundes; the same, does
light in its reflections: and the same demonstration, does alike convince the
one and the other. Besides, light is broken like a body; as when it is snapped
in pieces by a tougher body. It is gathered together into a little room, by
looking or burning glasses; as water is, by ordering the gutters of a house so
as to bring into one cisterne, all that raineth dispersedly upon the whole
roof. It is severed and dispersed by other glasses; and is to be wrought upon,
and cast hither and thither, at pleasure; all, by the rule of other bodies.
And what is done in light, the same will likewise be done in heat, in cold, in
wind, and in sound. And the very same instruments, that are made for light;
will work their effects in all these others, if they be duly managed.

So that certainly, were it not for the authority of Aristotle and of his
learned followers, that presses us on the one side; and for the seemingnesse
of those reasons we have already mentioned, which persuadeth us on the other
side; our very eyes would carry us by stream into this consent, that light is
no other thing but the nature and substance of fire, spread far and wide, and
freed from the mixture of all other gross bodies. Which will appear yet more
evident in the solutions of the oppositions we have brought against our own
opinion: for in them there will occur other arguments of no less importance
to prove this verity, then these we have already proposed.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. Two objections answered against light being fire; with a
more ample proof of its being such.
HAVING then said thus much to persuade us of the corporeity of this subtle
thing, That all light is hot and apt to heat.
that so queintly plays with our eyes: we will in the next place examine
those objections that at the beginning we did set down against its being a
body: and if after a through discussion of them, we find they do in truth
conclude nothing of what at the first sight they bear so great a show of; but
that we shall be able, perfectly to solue and enerue their force; no body will
think it rashness in us to crave leave of Aristotle that we may dissent from
him in a matter that he has not looked to the bottom of; and whose opinion
therein, can not be defended from plain contradictions and impossibilities. It
is true, never any one man looked so far as he into the bowels of nature; he
may rightly be termed the Gemus of it; and whosoever follows his principles
in the maine, can not be led into error: but we must not believe, that he, or
any man else that relyeth upon the strength and negotiation of his own reason,
ever had a privilege of infallibility entayled to all he said. Let us then
admire him for what he has delivered us: and where he falls short, or is
weary in his search, and suffers himself to be borne down by popular
opinions against his own principles (which happens very seldom to him) let
us seek to supply and relieve him.

But to pursue our intent: we will begin with answering the third objection;
which is, that if light were fire, it must heat as well as enlighten where it
shines. There is no doubt but it does so: as is evident by the weather
glasses, and other artificial musical instruments (as organs and virginals
that played by themselves) which Cornelius Drebbel (that admirable master of
mechanikes) made to show the king. All which, depended upon the rarefaction and
condensation of some subtle body, conserved in a cauity within the bulk of
the whole instrument: for as soon as the sun shined, they would have motion
and play their parts. And there is no doubt but that grew out of the
rarefaction of the subtle liquor he made use of, which was dilated, as soon
as the air was warmed by the sun beams. Of whose operation, it was so
sensible, that they no sooner left the horizon, but its motion ceased. And if
but a cloud came between the instrument and them, the music would presently
go slower time. And the ancient miracle of Memnons statue, seems to be a
iuggling of the Aehiopian Priests, made by the like invention.

The reason why our bodies for the most part do not feel the heat of pure
light.
But though he and they found some spiritual and refined matter, that would
receive such notable impressions, from so small alterations of temper. Yet it
is no wonder that our gross bodies are not sensible of them, for we can not
feel heat, unless it be greater then that which is in our sense. And the
heat there, must be in proportion to the heat of our blood: which is in a
high degree of warmeth. And therefore it is very possible that an exceeding
rarifyed fire, may cause a far less impression of heat then we are able to
feel. Consider, how if you set pure spirit of wine on fire, and so convert
it into actual flame; yet it will not burn, nor scarce warm your hand: and
then, can you expect, that the light of a candle, which fills a great room,
should burn or warm you as far as it shines?

If you would exactly know what degree of heat, and power of burning, that
light has, which (for example) shines upon the wall in a great chamber, in
the midst whereof there stands a candle: do but calculate, what
ouerproportion of quantity all the light in the whole room bears, to the
quantity of the little flame at the top of the candle; and that is the
ouerproportion of the force of burning which is in the candle, to the force of
burning which is in so much light at the wall as in extension is equal to the
flame of the candle. Which when you have considered you will not quarrel at
its not warming you at that distance; although you grant it to be fire,
streaming out from the flame as from the spring that feeds it, and extremely
dilated (according to the nature of fire, when it is at liberty) by going so
far, without any other gross body to imprison or clogge it.

It is manifest, that this rule of examining the proportion of burning in so
much of the light, as the flame is, (by calculating the proportion of the
quantity or extension of all the light in the room to the extension of the
flame of the candle, and then comparing the flame of the candle, to a part of
light equal in extension unto it) is a good and infallible one, if we abstract
from accidental inequalities: since, both the light and the flame, are in a
perpetual flux; and all the light, was first in the flame; which is the
spring, from whence it continually flows. As in a river wherein every part
runs with a settled stream; though one place be straighter, and an other
broader; yet of necessity, since all the water that is in the broad place came
out of the narrow; it must follow that in equal portions of time there is no
more water, where it has the liberty of a large channel, then where the
banks press it into a narrower bed, so that there be no inequalities in the
bottom.

In like manner, if in a large stoue, a basen of water be converted into
steame; that rarifyed water which then fills the whole stoue, is no more then
what the basen contained before: and consequently, the power of moistening
which is in a footes extension (for example) of the stoue wherein that steame
is, must be in proportion to the virtue of wetting in the footes extension of
water; as the quantity of that great room which the steame fills, is to the
quantity of the water contained in the basin: for although the rarifyed water
be not in every least part of that great place it seems to take up; by reason
that there is air, in which it must swim. Yet the power of wetting that was
in the basin of water, is dilated through the whole room, by the conjunction
of the miste or dew to all the sensible parts of the air that is in the
room: and consequently the power of wetting, which is in any foot of that
room, is in a manner as much less then the power of wetting which was in the
foot of water, as if the water were rarifyed to the quantity of the whole
room, and no air were left with it.

And in the same manner, it fares with dilated fire, as it does with dilated
water: with only this difference peradventure that fire grows purer, and
more toward its own nature by dilatation; whereas water becomes more mixed
and is carried from its nature by suffering the like effect. Yet dilated water
will in proportion moisten more then dilated fire will burn: for the
rarefaction of water, brings it nearer to the nature of air (whose chief
propriety is moisture,) and the fire that accompanies it when it raises it
into steame, gives it more powerful ingression into what body it meets
withal: whereas fire, when it is very pure, and at entire liberty to stretch
and spread it self as wide as the nature of it will carry it gets no
advantage of burning by its mixture with air: and allthough it gains force
by its purity, yet by reason of its extreme rarefaction it must needs be
extremely fainte. But if by the help of glasses, you will gather into less
room that which is diffused into a great one; and so condense it as much as it
is (for example) in the flame of a candle; then that fire, or compacted light,
will burn much more forcibly then so much flame: for there is as much of it in
quantity (excepting what is lost in the carriage of it;) and it is held in
together in as little room; and it has this advantage besides, that it is
clogged with no gross body to hinder the actiuity of it.

The experience of burning-glasses, and of soultry gloomy weather prove light
to be fire.
It seems to me now, that the very answering this objection, does (besides
repelling the force of it) evidently prove that light is nothing but fire in
his own nature, and exceedingly dilated: for if you suppose fire, (for
example, the flame of a candle) to be stretched out to the utmost expansion
that you may well imagine such a gross body is capable of; it is impossible it
should appear and work otherwise, then it does in light as I have showed
above. And again, we see plainly, that light gathered together burns more
forcibly then any other fire whatsoever, and therefore must needs be fire.

Why then shall we not confidently conclude, that what is fire before it
gets abroad, and is fire again when it comes together, does likewise
remain fire during all its journey? Nay even in the journey it self, we have
particular testimony that it is fire: for light returning back from the earth
charged with little atoms (as it does in soultry gloomy weather) heateth much
more then before; just as fire does, when it is imprisoned in a dense body.

Philosophers ought not to judge of things by the rules of vulgar people.
Philosophers ought not to judge by the same rules that the common people does.
Their gross sense, is all their guide: and therefore they can not apprehend
any thing to be fire, that does not make it self be known for such by burning
them. But he that iudiciously examineth the matter; and traceth the pedigree
and periode of it; and sees the reason why in some circumstances it burns,
and in others it does not; is too blame, if he suffer himself to be led by
others ignorance, contrary to his own reason. When they that are curious in
perfumes, will have their chamber filled with a good sent in a hot season,
that agrees not with burning perfumes, and therefore make some odoriferous
water be blown about it by their servants mouths that are dexterous in that
Ministry, (as is used in Spain in the summer time;) every one that sees it
done, though on a sudden the water be lost to his eyes and touch, and is
only discernable by his nose; yet he is well satisfied that the sent which
recreateth him, is the very water he saw in the glass extremely dilated by the
forcible sprouting of it out from the servants mouth, and will by little and
little fall down and become again palpable water as it was before; and
therefore doubts not but it is still water whiles it hangs in the air
divided into little atoms. Whereas one that saw not the beginning of this
operation by water, nor observed how in the end it shows it self again in
water; might the better be excused, if he should not think that what he
smelled were water blown about the air, nor any substance of it self
(because he neither sees nor handles it) but some aduentitious quality he
knows not how adhering to the air. The like difference is between
Philosophers that proceed orderly in their discourses, and others that pay
themselves with terms which they understand not. The one, see evidence in what
they conclude; whiles the others guess wildely at random.

I hope the Reader will not deem it time lost from our maine drift, which we
take up thus in examples and digressions: The different names of light and fire
proceed from different notions of the same substance.
for if I be not much deceived, they serve exceedingly to illustrate the
matter: which I hope I have now rendered so plain, as no man that shall have
well weighed it, will expect that fire dilated into that rarifyed substance
which mankind (who according to the different appearance of things to their
sense, gives different names unto them) calls light, should burn like that
grosser substance which from doing so they call fire; nor doubt but that they
may be the same thing more or less attenuated; as leaf gold, that flies in
the air as light as down, is as truly gold as that in an ingott which being
heavier then any other substance falls most forcibly unto the ground.

What we have said of the vnburning fire (which we call light) streaming from
the flame of a candle; may easily be applied to all other lights deprived of
sensible heat, whereof some appear with flame, others without it: of the first
sort of which, are the innoxious flames that are often seen on the hair of
men's heads, and horses manes, on the mastes of ships, over graves, and fatt
marish grounds, and the like: and of the latter sort, are glow worms, and the
light conseruing stones, rotten wood, some kinds of fish and of flesh when
they begin to putrify, and some other things of the like nature.

Now to answer the second part of this objection, that we daily see great
heates without any light, The reason why many times fire, and heat are
deprived of light.
as well as much light without any heat, and therefore light and fire can not
be the same thing: you may call to mind, how dense bodies are capable of great
quantities of rare ones; and thereby, it comes to pass that bodies which
repugne to the dilatation of flame, may nevertheless have much fire enclosed
in them. As in a stoue; let the fire be never so great, yet it appears not
outwardes to the sight, although that stoue warm all the rooms near it. So
when many little parts of heat are imprisoned in as many little celles of
gross earthy substance, (which are like so many little stoues to them) that
imprisonement will not hinder them from being very hot to the sense of feeling
(which is most perceptible of dense things.) But because they are choked with
the closeness of the gross matter wherein they are enclosed, they can not
break out into a body of flame or light, so to discover their nature: which
(as we have said before) is the most unfit way for burning; for we see that
light must be condensed, to produce flame and fire; as flame must be, to burn
violently.

What becomes of the body of light, when it dies.
Having thus cleared the third objection, (as I conceive;) let us go on to the
fourth; which requires that we satisfy their inquisition, who ask what
becomes of that vast body of shining light (if it be a body) that fills all
the distance between heaven and earth; and vanishes in a moment, as soon as
a cloud or the moon interp^seth it self between the sun and us; or that
the sun quitteth our hemisphere? No sign at all remains of it after the
extinction of it, as does of all other substances; whose destruction, is the
birth of some new thing. Whither then is it flowne? We may be persuaded that a
mist is a corporeal substance, because it turns to drops of water upon the
twigges that it enuironeth: and so we might believe light to be fire, if after
the burning of it out, we found any ashes remaining: but experience assures
us, that after it is extinguished, it leaves not the least vestigium behind it
of having been there.

Now, before we answer this objection, we will entreat our adversary to call
to mind, how we have in our solution of the former, declared and proved that
the light which (for example) shines from a candle, is no more then the flame
is, from whence it springs, the one being condensed, and the other dilated;)
and that the flame is in a perpetual flux of consumption about the
circumference, and of restoration at the center, where it sucketh in the
fuel: and then, we will enquire of him, what becomes of that body of flame
which so continually dies and is renewed, and leaves no remainder behind it;
as well as he does of us, what becomes of our body of light, which in like
manner is always dying and always springing fresh? And when he has well
considered it, he will find that one answer will serve for both.

Which is: that as the fire streameth out from the fountain of it, and grows
more subtle by its dilatation, it sinketh the more easily into those bodies it
meets withal: the first of which, and that enuironeth it round about, is
air. With air then, it mingleth and incorporateth it self; and by
consequence, with the other little bodies that are mingled with the air: and in
them, it receives the changes which nature works; by which, it may be turned
into the other Elements, if there be occasion; or be still conserved in bodies
that require heat.

Upon this occasion, An experiment of some who pretend, that light may be
precipitated into powder.
I remember a rare experiment that a noble man of much sincerity, and a
singular frind of mine, told me he had seen: which was, that by means of
glasses made in a very particular manner, and artificially placed one by an
other, he had seen the sun beams gathered together, and precipitated down
into a brownish or purplish red powder. There could be no fallacy in this
operation: for nothing whatsoever, was in the glasses when they were placed and
disposed for this intent: and it must be in the hot time of the year; else
the effect would not follow. And of this Magistery, he could gather some days,
near two ounces in a day. And it was of a strange volatile nature: and would
pierce and imprint his spiritual quality into gold it self (the heauiest and
most fixed body we converse withal) in a very short time. If this be plainly
so, without any mistaking; then, men's eyes and hands may tell them what
becomes of light when it dies, if a great deal of it were swept together.
But from what cause soever this experience had its effect, our reason may be
satisfied with what we have said above: for I confess, for my part, I believe
the appearing body might be some thing that came along with the sun beams,
and was gathered by them; but not their pure substance.

Some peradventure will object those lamps, The Authors opinion concerning
lamps, pretended to have been found in tombs, with inconsumptible lights.
which both ancient and modern writers have reported to have been found in
tombs and vrnes, long time before closed up from men's repair unto them to
supply them with new fuel: and therefore they believe such fires to feed
upon nothing; and consequently, to be inconsumptible and perpetual. Which if
they be, then our doctrine that will have light to be nothing but the body of
fire perpetually flowing from its center, and perpetually dying; can not be
sound: for in time, such fires would necessarily spend themselves in light:
although light be so subtle a substance that an exceeding little quantity of
fuel, may be dilated into a vast quantity of light. Yet still there would be
some consumption; which how imperceptible soever in a short time, yet after a
multitude of reuolutions of years, it must needs discover it self.

To this I answer: that for the most part, the witnesses who testify
originally the stories of these lights, are such as a rational man can not
expect from them that exactness or nicety of observation, which is requisite
for our purpose; for they are usually, gross laboring people, who as they
dig the ground for other intentions, do stumble upon these lamps by chance
before they are aware: and for the most part, they break them in the finding;
and they imagine they see a glimpse of light, which vanishes before they can
in a manner take notice of it; and is peraduanture but the glistering of the
broken glass or glased pott, which reflecteth the outward light as soon as by
rummaging in the ground and discovering the glass, the light strikes upon it;
(in such manner as some times a diamond by a certain encountering of light in a
dusky place, may in the first twincling of the motion, seem to sparkle like
fire:) and afterward, when they show their broken lamp, and tell their tale
to some man of a pitch of wit above them, who is curious to inform himself
of all the circumstances that may concern such lights; they strain their
memory to answer him satisfactorily unto all his demandes: and thus, for his
sake they persuade themselves to remember what they never saw. And he again on
his side, is willing to help out the story a little. And so, after awhile, a
very formal and particular relation is made of it. As happens in like sort,
in reporting of all strange and unusual things: which, even those that in
their nature abhor from lying, are naturally apt to strain a little and
fashion up in a handsome mould; and almost to persuade themselves they saw more
then they did: so innate it is unto every man, to desire the having of some
preeminence beyond his neighbors; be it but in pretending to have seen some
thing which they have not.

Therefore, before I engage my self in giving any particular answer to this
objection of pretended inconsumptible lights, I would gladly see the effect
certainly auerred and undoubtedly proved: for, the testimonies which Fortunius
Licetus produces (who has been very diligent in gathering them, and very
subtle in discoursing upon them; and is the exactest author that has written
upon this subject) do not seem unto me to make that certainty, which is
required for the establishing of a ground in Philosophy. Nevertheless, if
there be any certain experience in this particular, I should think that there
might be some art by circulation of fuel, to maintain the same light for a
great company of years. But I should not easily be persuaded, that either
flame or light could be made without any manner of consuming the body which
serves them for fuel.

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. An answer to three other objections formerly proposed,
against light being a substance.
HAVING thus defended our selves from their objections, Light is not really in
every part of the room it enlighteneth, not fills entirely any sensible part
of it, though it seem to us to do so.
who would not allow light to be fire; and having satisfied their inquisition,
who would know what becomes of it when it dies, if it be a body: we will now
apply our selves to answer their difficulties, who will not let it pass for
a body, because it is in the same place with an other body; as, when the sun
beams enlighten all the air, and when the several lights of two distinct
candles are both of them every where in the same room. Which is the substance
of the second maine objection.

This of the iustling of the air, is easily answered thus* that the air being
a very diuisible body, does without resistance yield as much place as is
requisite for light. And that light, though our eyes judge it diffused every
where, yet is not truly in every point or atome of air: but to make us see it
every where, it suffices that it be in every part of the air which is as
big as the black or sight of our eye; so that we can not set our eye in any
position where it receives not impressions of light. In the same manner as
perfumes: which though they be so gross bodies that they may be sensibly
wasted by the wind; nevertheless, they do so fill the air, that we can putt
our nose in no part of the room, where a perfume is burned, but we shall smell
it. And the like is of mistes; as also of the sprouted water to make a perfume,
which we mentioned above.

But because pure discourses, in such small thriddes as these, do but weakly
bind such readers as are not accustomed unto them; and that I woudl (if it be
possible) render this treatise intelligible to every rational man, how ever
little versed in scholastike learning (among whom I expect it will have a fairer
passage, then among those that are already deeply imbued with other
principles:) let us try if we can herein inform our selves by our sense, and
bring our eyes for witness of what we say. He then that is desirous to
satisfy himself in this particular; may putt himself in a dark room,
through which the sun sends his beams by a cranie or little hole in the
wall; and he will discover a multitude of little atoms flying about in that
little stream of light; which his eye can not discern, when he is environed on
all sides with a full light. Then let him examine, whether or no there be
light in the midst of those little bodies: and his own reason will easily
tell him, that if those bodies were as perspicuous as the air, they would not
reflect upon our eyes, the beams by which we see them. And therefore, he will
boldly conclude, that at the least such parts of them as reflect light unto
us, do not admit it, nor let it sink into them. Then let him consider the
multitude of them; and the little distance betwixt one an other; and how
nevertheless they hinder not our sight; but we have it free to discover all
objects beyond them, in what position soever we place our eye: and when he thus
perceives that these opacous bodies, which are every where, do not hinder the
eye from judging light to have an equal plenary diffusion through the whole
place that it irradiateth; he can have no difficulty to allow air, (that is
diaphanous, and more subtle far then they, and consequently, diuisible into
lesser atoms, and having lesser pores, gives less scope unto our eyes to
miss light, then they do) to be every where mingled with light, though we see
nothing but light, and can not discern any breach or division of it.

Especially, when he shall add unto this consideration; that the subtle body
which thus fills the air, is the most visible thing in the world; and that,
whereby all other things are seen: and that the air which it mingleth it
self with, is not at all visible, by reason of the extreme diaphaneity of it,
and easy reception of the light into every pore of it without any resistance or
reflection: and that such is the nature of light, as it easily drowneth an
obscure body, if it be not too big: and not only such, but even other light
bodies: for so we know as well the fixed stars as the planets, are concealed
from our sight, by neerenesse to the sun; neither the lightness of the one,
nor the bigness of the other, prevailing against the darkening of an exuperant
light: and we have daily experience of the same, in very pure crystal
glasses, and in very clear water; which though we can not discern by our
sight, if they be in certain positions; nevertheless, by experience we find
that they reflect much light, and consequently have great store of opacous
parts: and then he can not choose but conclude, that it is impossible, but
light should appear as it does, to be every where, and to be one continued
thing; though his discourse withal assure him it is every where mingled with
air.

The least sensible point of a diaphanous body, has room sufficient to
contain both air and light, together with a multitude of beams issuing from
several lights, without penetrating one an other.
And this very answer I think will draw with it by consequence, the solution
of the other part of the same objection; which is, of many lights joining in
the same place; and the same is likewise, concerning the images of colors
every where crossing one an other without hinderance. But to raise this
contemplation a strain higher; let us consider, how light being the most rare
of all known bodies, is of its own nature (by reason of the diuisibility that
follows rarity) diuisible into lesser parts then any other; and particularly
then flame; which being mixed with smoke and other corpulency, falls very
short of light. And this, to the proportion in which it is more rare then the
body it is compared unto. Now a great Mathematician having devised how to
measure the rarefaction of gunnepowder into flame, Willebrord Snell.
found the diameter to times increased; and so concluded, that the body of the
flame, was in proportion to the body of the gunnepowder it was made of, as
125000 is to one. Wherefore, by the immediately proceeding consequence, we find
that 125000 parts of flame may be couched in the room of one least part of
gunnepowder, and peradventure, many more, considering how porous a body
gunnepowder is. Which being admitted, it is evident that although light were as
gross as the flame of gunnepowder, and gunnepowder were as solid as gold; yet
there might pass 125000 rays of light, in the space wherein one least part of
gunnepowder might be contained: which space, would be absolutely invisible unto
us, and be contained many times in the bigness of the sight of a man's eye. Out
of which we may gather what an infinity of objects may seem unto us to cross
themselves in the same indivisible place, and yet may have room sufficient for
every one to pass his way, without hindering his fellow. Wherefore, seeing
that one single light could not send rays enough to fill every little space of
air that is capable of light, and the less, the further it is from the flame)
it is obuious enough to conceive, how in the space where the air is, there is
capacity for the rays of many candles.

Which being well summed up will take away the great admiration how the beams
of light, though they be corporeal, can in such great multitudes, without
hindering one an other, enter into bodies and come to our eye: and will show,
that it is the narrowness of our capacities, and not the defect of nature,
which makes these difficulties seem so great; for she has sufficiently
provided for all these subtle operations of fire; as also for the entrance of
it into glass, and into all other solid bodies that are diaphanous (upon
which was grounded the last instance the second objection pressed:) for all
such bodies being constituted by the operation of fire (which is always in
motion) there must needs be ways left for it both to enter in and to
euaporate out. And this is most evident in glass which being wrought by an
extreme violent fire and swelling with it, as water and other things do by the
mixture of fire; must necessarily have great store of fire in it self whiles
it is boiling; as we see by its being red hot. And hence it is, that the
workmen are forced to let it cool by degrees in such relentinges of fire as
they call their nealing heates; least it should shiuer in pieces by a violent
succeeding of air in the room of the fire; for that being of greater parts
then the fire, would strain the pores of the glass too soddainly, and break
it all in pieces to get ingression: whereas in those nealing heates the air
being rarer, lesser parts of it succeed to the fire, and leisurely stretch
the pores without hurt. And therefore we need not wonder that light passes so
easily through glass; and much less, that it gets through other bodies;
seeing, the experience of Alchymistes does assure us that it is hard to find
any other body so impenetrable as glass.

That light does not enlight en any room in an instant; and that the great
celerity of its motion does make it imperceptible to our senses.
But now to come to the answer of the first, and in appearance most powerful
objection against the corporeity of light; which urges that his motion is
performed in an instant, and therefore can not belong to what is material and
clothed with quantity. We will endeavor to show how unable the sense is to
judge of sundry sorts of motions of Bodies, and how grossly it is mistaken in
them. And then, when it shall appear that the motion of light must necessarily
be harder to be observed then those others: I conceive, all that is raised
against our opinion by so incompetent a judge, will fall flatt to the ground.

First then, let me putt the reader in mind, how if ever he marked children
when they play with firestickes, they move and whirle them round so fast, that
the motion will cosen their eyes, and represent an entire circle of fire unto
them: and were it somewhat distant, in a dark night, that one played so with a
lighted torch, it would appear a constant wheel of fire without any
discerning of motion in it. And then, let him consider how slow a motion that
is in respect of what it is possible a body may participate of: and he may
safely conclude, that it is no wonder though the motion of light be not
descryed, and that indeed no argument can be made from thence to prove that
light is not a body.

But let us examine this consideration a little further, and compare it to the
motion of the earth or heavens: let the appearing circle of the fire, be some
three foot diameter, and the time of one entire circulation of it, be the
sixtieth part of a minute; of which minutes, there are 60. in an hour; so that
in a whole day, there will be but 86400. of these parts of time. Now the
diameter of the wheel of fire being but of three foot, the whole quantity of
space that it moves in that atome of time will be at the most 10. foot;
which is three paces and a foot: of which parts, there are near eleven
millions in the compass of the earth: so that if the earth be moved round in
24. hours, it must go near 130. times as fast as the boys stick does, which
by its swift motion deceives our eye. But if we allow the sun, the moon,
and the fixed stars to move; how extreme swift must their flight be, and how
imperceptible would their motion be in such a compass as our sight would reach
unto? And this being certain, that whether the earth or they do move, the
appearances to us are the same* it is evident, that as now they can not be
perceived to move (as peradventure they do not;) so it would be the very same
in show to us, although they did move. If the sun were near us, and galloped
at that rate; surely we could not distinguish between the beginning and
ending of his race: but there would appear one permanent line of light from
East to West, without any motion at all: as the torch seems to make, with so
much a slower motion, one permanent immooueable wheel of fire.

But contrary to this effect, we see that the sun and stars by only being
removed further from our eyes, do cosen our sight so grossly that we can not
discern them to be moved at all. One would imagine that so rapide and swift
a motion, should be perceived in some sort or other, (which, whether it be in
the earth, or in them, is all one to this purpose.) Either we should see them
change their places whiles we look upon them, as arrows and birds do when
they fly in the air: or else, they should make a stream of light bigger then
themselves, as the torch does. But none of all this happens: let us gaze
upon them so long and so attentively that our eyes be dazeled with looking, and
all that while they seem to stand immooueable* and our eyes can give us no
account of their journey till it be ended. They discern it not whiles it is in
doing: so that if we consult with no better cownsailour then them, we may
wonder to see that body at night setting in the West, which in the morning we
beheld rising in the East.

But that which seems to be yett more strange, is, that these bodies move
cross us, and nevertheless are not perceived to have any motion at all.
Consider then how much easier it is for a thing that moves toward us, to be
with us before we are aware. A nimble fencer will put in a thrust so quick,
that the foil will be in your bosom, when you thought it a yard off; because
in the same moment you saw his point so far distant, and could not discern
it to move toward you, till you felt the rude salutation it gave you. If then
you will compare the body of light with these others that thus deceive us in
regard of motion; you must needs agree it is much rashness to conclude it
has no motion, because we can not discern the succession of it. Consider that
it is the subtilest of all the bodies that God has made. Examine the paths of
it, which for the smallness of their thriddes, and the extreme diuisibility of
them, and their pliant application of themselves to whatsoever has pores, are
almost without resistance. Calculate the strange multiplication of it, by a
perpetual momentary renouation of its streams. And cast with your self, with
what extreme force it springs out and flies abroad. And on the other side,
reflect how all these things are directly opposite and contrary in those other
great bodies, whose motion nevertheless appears not unto us till it be done
and past. And when you have well weighed all this; you must needs grant that
they who in this case guide themselves merely by what appears unto their
eyes, are ill iudgers of what they have not well examined.

The reason why the motion of light, is not discerned coming toward us* and
that there is some real tardity in it.
But peradventure some who can not all of a soddaine be weaned from what their
sense has so long fed them with; may ask yet further, how it chances that we
have no effects of this motion? It shows not it self in the air, coming to
us a far of. It stays not a thought, or slackneth his speed in flying so
vast a space as is from the sun to us. In fine there is no discovery of it.

But if Galileus his conception be well grounded; that lightning gives us an
incling of its motion, beginning from a little and increasing to a greater: or
if Monsieur des Carts his opinion that it goes slower in refraction, be true:
we shall not need to study long for an answer. But in Galileus his
experience, it may be the breaking of the cloud which receives that
succession of motion which we see: and no slownesse that light can acquire by
the resistance of the refracting body, can be so great as to make that
difference of lines which Monsieur Des Carts most ingeniously (though I much
doubt not truly) has applied to yield the reason of refraction: as will
appear in our further discourse.

Therefore, these being uncertain; we will, to show the unreasonableness of
this question, suppose there may be some obseruable tardity in the motion of
light; and then ask of them, how we should arrive to perceive it? What sense
should we employ in this discovery? It is true, we are satisfied that sound
takes up time in coming to our ears: but it is, because our eyes are nimbler
then they, and can perceive a good way distant the carpenters axe falling upon
the timber that he heweth, or the fire flashing out of the canon, before they
hear any news of them: but shutt your eyes; or enquire of a blind man; and
then neither you nor he can tell whether those soundes fill your ears at the
very instant they were begotten, or have spent some time in their journey to
you. Thus then our eyes instruct our ears. But is there any sense quicker then
the sight? or means to know speedier then by our eyes? Or can they see light,
or any thing else; until it be with them? We may then assuredly conclude, that
its motion is not to be discerned as it comes upon us; nor it self to be
perceived, till its beams are in our eyes.

But if there were any means to discover its motion, surely it must be in some
medium, through which it must struggle to get, as fire does through iron;
which increasing there by degrees, at last (when it is red hot) sends
beams of light quite through the plate that at the first refused them
passage. And it makes to this purpose, that the lightconseruing stones which
are gathered in Italy, must be set in the sun for some while before they
retain light: and the light will appear in them when they are brought back
into the dark, greater or lesser (until they come to their utmost periode)
according as they have been longer or a lesser while in the sun. And our
eyes the longer they remain in the light, the more dazeled they are if they be
suddenly passed into the dark. And a curious experiencer did affirm, that
the likeness of any object (but particularly he had often observed it of an
iron grate) if it be strongly enlightened will appear to an other, in the eye
of him that looks strongly and steadily upon it till he be dazeled by it;
even after he shall have turned his eyes from it. And the wheel of fire could
never be made appear unto our eye by the whirling of the firesticke we even
now spoke of; unless the impression made by the fire from one place, did
remain in the eye a while after the fire was gone from the place whence it
sent that ray. Whence it is evident, that light, and the pictures of objects,
do require time to settle and to unsettle in a subject. If then light makes a
greater impression with time, why should we doubt but the first comes also in
time; were our sense so nimble as to perceive it?

But then it may be objected, The planets are not certainly ever in that place
where they appear to be.
that the sun would never be truly in that place in which unto our eyes it
appears to be: because that, it being seen by means of the light which
issues from it; if that light required time to move in, the sun (whose
motion is so swift) would be removed from the place where the light left it,
before it could be with us to give tidinges of him. To this I answer, allowing
that peradventure it may be so. Who knows the contrary? Or what inconvenience
would follow, if it be admitted? Indeed, how can it be otherwise? In
refraction, we are sure it is so: and therefore at no time but when the sun
is perpendicularly over our heads, we can be certain of the contrary
allthough it should send its light to us in an instant. Unless happily the
truth of the case should be, that the sun does not move about us; but we
turn to his light: and then, the objection also loses its aim.

But the more we press the quickness of light; The reason why light being a
body, does not by its motion shatter other bodies into pieces.
the more we engage our selves in the difficulty why light does not shatter the
air in pieces, as likewise all solid bodies whatsoever: for the masters of
natural Philosophy do tell us, that a softer thing with a great velocity, is
as powerful in effect when it gives a blow, as a harder thing going slowly.
And accordingly experience teaches us, that a tallow candle shot in a gunne,
will go through a brod or kill a man. Wherefore light having such an infinite
celerity, should also have an irresistable force, to pierce and shatter, not
only the air, but even the hardest bodies that are. Peradventure some may
think it reasonable to grant the consequence (in due circumstances) since
experience teaches us that the congregation of a little light by a glass, will
set very solid bodies on fire, and will melt metals in a very short space;
which shows a great actiuity; and the great actiuity shows a great
percussion, burning being effected by a kind of attrition of the thing burned.
And the great force which fire shows in gunnes and in mines, being but a
multiplication of the same, does evidently convince that of its own nature, it
makes a strong percussion, when all due circumstances concur. Whereas it
has but little effect, if the due circumstances be wanting; as we may observe
in the insensible burning of so rarifyed a body as pure spirit of wine
converted into flame.

But we must examine the matter more particularly, and must seek the cause why
a violent effect does not always appear, wheresoever light strikes; for the
which we are to note that three things do concur to make a percussion
great. The bigness, the density and the celerity of the body moved. Of which
three, there is only one in light; to wit, celerity: for it has the greatest
rarity, and the rays of it are the smallest parcels, of all natural bodies.
And therefore since only celerity is considerable in the account of lights
percussions, we must examine what celerity is necessary to make the stroke of a
ray sensible: first then we see that all the motes of the air, nay even
feathers and strawes, do make no sensible percussion when they fall upon us:
therefore we must in light have at the least a celerity that may be to the
celerity of the straw falling upon our hand (for example,) as the density of
the straw is to the density of light, that the percussion of light may be in
the least degree sensible. But let us take a corn of gunnepowder insteede of a
straw (between which there can not be much difference) and then putting that
the density of fire, is to the density of gunnepowder as 1. to 125000; and that
the density of the light we have here in the earth, is to the density of that
part of fire which is in the suns body, as the body of the sun is to that
body which is called Orbis magnus, (whose semidiameter is the distance between
the sun and the earth*) which must be in subtriple proportion of the diameter
of the sun to the diameter of the great orb: it follows that 125000. being
multiplied by the proportion of the great orb unto the sun (which Galileo
tells us is as 106000000. unto one) will give a scantling of what degree of
celerity light must have more then a corn of gunnepouder, to recompense the
excess of weight which is in a corn of gunnepouder, above that which is in a
ray of light, as big as a corn of gunnepouder. Which will amount to be much
greater then the proportion of the semidiater of Orbis magnus, to the
semidiater of the corn of gunnepouder: for if you reckon 5. grains of
gunnepouder to a barley corns breadth, and 12. of them in an inch, and 12.
inches in a foot, and 3. feet in a pace, and 1000. paces in a mile, and 3500.
miles in the semidiameter of the earth, and 1208. semidiameters of the earth,
in the semidiameter of the Orbis magnus, there will be in it but 9132480000000.
grains of gunnepouder; whereas the other calculation makes light to be
13250000000000. times raver then gunnepouder; which is almost ten times a
greater proportion then the other. And yet this celerity supplyeth but one of
the two conditions wanting in light to make its percussions sensible, namely
density. Now because the same velocity, in a body of a lesser bulk, does not
make so great a percussion as it does in a bigger body; and that the
littleness of the least parts of bodies follows the proportion of their
rarity: this vast proportion of celerity must again be drawn into it self,
to supply for the excess in bigness that a corn of gunnepouder has over an
atome of light: and the product of this multiplication will be the celerity
required to supply for both defects. Which evidently shows, it is impossible
that a ray of light should make any sensible percussion, though it be a body.
Especially considering that sense never takes notice of what is perpetually
done in a moderate degree. And therefore, after this minute looking into all
circumstances, we need not have difficulty in allowing unto light the greatest
celerity imaginable, and a percussion proportionate to such a celerity in so
rare a body; and yett not fear any violent effect from its blows: unless it
be condensed, and many parts of it be brought together to work as if they
were but one.

As concerning the last objection; The reason why the body of lighlt is never
perceived to be fanned by the wind.
that if light were a body, it would be fanned by the wind: we must first
consider what is the cause of a things appearing to be moved: and then
examine what force that cause has in light. As for the first part; we see that
when a body is discerned now in one place, now in an other, then it appears
te be moved. And this we see happens also in light; as when the sun or a
candle is carried or moves, the light thereof in the body of the candle or
sun seems to be moved along with it. And the likes is in a shining cloud
or comete.

But to apply this to our purpose: we must note that the intention of the
objection is, that the light which goes from the fire to an opacous body far
distant without interruption of its continuity, should seem to be iogged or
putt out of its way, by the wind that crosses it. Wherein the first failing
is, that the obiectour conceiueth light to send species unto our eye from the
midst of its line: whereas with a little consideration he may perceive, that
not light is seen by us but that which is reflected from an opacous body to
our eye: so that the light he means in his objection, is never seen at all.
Secondly; it is manifest that the light which stricketh our eye, does strike it
in a straight line; and seems to be at the end of that straight line,
wheresoeur that is; and so can never appear to be in an other place: but the
light which we see in an other place, we conceive to be an other light. Which
makes it again evident, that the light can never appear to shake, though we
should suppose that light may be seen from the middle of its line; for no part
of wind or air can come into any sensible place in that middle of the line,
with such speed that new light from the source does not illuminate it sooner
then it can be seen by us: wherefore it will appear to us illuminated as
being in that place: and therefore, the light can never appear shaken. And
lastly, it is easier for the air or wind to destroy the light, then it is to
remove it out of its place: wherefore, it can never so remove it out of its
place, as that we should see it in an other place. But if it should remove it,
it would wrappe it up within it self and hide it.

The reasons, for and against lights being a body, compared together.
In conclusion; after this long dispute concerning the nature of light: if we
consider well what has been said on both sides (to which much more might be
added, but that we have already trespassed in length, and I conceive, enough is
said to decide the matter) an equal judge will find the balance of the
question to hang upon these terms: that, to prove the nature of light to be
material and corporeal, are brought a company of accidents well known to be
the proprieties of quantity or bodies; and as well known to be in light. Even
so far as that it is manifest, that light in its beginning before it be
dispersed, is fire; and if again it be gathered together, it shows it self
again to be fire. And the receptacles of it, are the receptacles of a body:
being a multitude of pores; as the hardness and coldness of transparent
things, do give us to understand; of which we shall hereafter have occasion to
discourse.

On the contrary side, whatsoever arguments are brought against lights being a
body, are only negatiues. As, that we see not any motion of light; that we do
not discern, where the confines are between light and air; that we see not
room for both of them, or for more lights to be together; and the like: which
is to oppose negative proofs against affirmative ones; and to build a doctrine
upon the defect of our senses; or upon the likeness of bodies which are
extremely unlike, expecting the same effects from the most subtle as from the
most gross ones. All which, together with the authority of Aristotle and his
followers, have turned light into darkness, and have made us almost deny the
light of our own eyes.

A summary repetition of the reasons, which prove that light is fire.
Now then, to take our leave of this important question: let us return to the
principles from whence we began, and consider; that seeing fire is the most
rare of all the Elements, and very dry: and that out of the former it has that
it may be cut into very small pieces; and out of the latter, that it
conserueth its own figure, and so is apt to divide, whatsoever fluide body:
and joining to these two principles, that it multiplyeth extremely in its
source. It must of necessity follow that it shoots out in great multitudes,
little small parts into the air and into other bodies circu^fused, with great
dilatation, in a sphericall manner. And likewise that these little parts are
easily broken; and new ones, still following the former, are still multiplied
in straight lines from the place where they break. Out of which it is evident,
that of necessity it must in a manner fill all places; and that no sensible
place is so little, but that fire will be found in it, if the medium be
capacious. As also, that its extreme least parts will be very easily swallowed
up in the parts of the air, which are humide; and by their enfolding, be as
it were quite lost; so as to loose the appearance of fire. Again that in its
reflections, it will follow the nature of grosser bodies, and have glidinges
like them; which is that, we call refractions. That, little streaminges from it
will cross one an other in excessive great numbers, in an insensible part of
space, without hindering one an other. That its motion will be quicker then
sense can judge of; and therefore, will seem to move in an instant, or to
stand still as in a stagnation. That if there be any bodies so porous with
little and thick pores; as that the pores arrive near unto equalling the
substance of the body; then, such a body will be so filled with these little
particles of fire, that it will appear as if there were no stop in its
passage, but were all filled with fire; and yet, many of these little parts
will be reflected. And whatsoever qnalities else we find in light, we shall be
able to derive them out of these principles, and show that fire must of
necessity do what experience teaches us that light does. That is to say in
one word, it will show us that fire is light. But if fire be light, then light
must needs be fire. And so we leave this matter.

THE NINETH CHAPTER. Of Local Motion in common.
THOUGH in the fifth chapter, No local motion can be performed without
succession.
we made only earth the pretender in the controversy against fire for
superiority in actiuity; (and in very truth, the greatest force of gravity does
appear in those bodies which are eminently earthy:) nevertheless, both water
and air (as appears out of the fourth chapter of the Elements) do agree with
earth in having gravity. And gravity, is the chief virtue to make them
efficients. So that upon the matter, this plea is common to all the three
Elements.

Wherefore, to explicate this virtue, whereby these three weighty Elements do
work; let us call to mind what we said in the beginning of the last chapter
concerning local motion: to wit that according as the body moved, or the
diuider did more and more enter into the divided body; so, it did join it
self to some new parts of the medium or divided body, and did in like manner
forsake others. Whence it happens that in every part of motion, it possesses
a greater part of the medium then it self can fill at once. And because by
the limitation and confinednesse of every magnitude unto just what it is, and
no more; it is impossible that a lesser body should at once equallise a
greater. It follows that this division or motion whereby a body attaineth to
fill a place bigger then it self, must be done successively: that is, it must
first fill one part of the place it moves in, then an other; and so proceed
on, till it have measured it self with every part of the place from the first
beginning of the line of motion to the last periode of it where the body
rests.

By which discourse it is evident, that there can not in nature be a strength
so great as to make the least or quickest mooueable that is, to pass in an
instant, or all together, over the least place that can be imagined: for that
would make the moved body (remaining what it is, in regard of its biggenesse)
to equallise ad fit a thing bigger then it is. Therefore it is manifest, that
motion must consist of such parts as have this nature; that whiles one of them
is in being, the others are not yet: and as by degrees every new one comes to
be; all the others that were before, do vanish and cease to be. Which
circumstance accompanying motion, we call succession.

Time is the common measure of all succession.
And whatsoever is so done, is said to be done in time: which is the common
measure of all succession, for, the change of situation of the stars, but
especially of the sun and moon, is observed more or less by all mankind:
and appears alike to every man: and (being the most known, constant, and
uniform succession that men are used unto) is as it were by nature it self
set in their way and offered unto them as fittest to estimate and judge all
other particular successions, by comparing them both to it, and among
themselves by it. And accordingly we see all men naturally measure all other
successions, and express their quantities, by comparing them to the
reuolutions of the heavens; for days, hours, and years, are nothing else but
they, or some determinate parts of them: unto some of which, all other motions
and successions must of necessity be referred, if we will measure them. And
thus we see how all the mystery of applying time unto particular motions, is
nothing else but the considering how far the Agent that moves the sun,
causes it to go on in its journey, whiles the Agent that moves a particular
body, causes it to perform its motion.

What velocity is, and that it can not be infinite.
So that it is evident, that velocity is the effect of the superproportion of
the one Agent over a certain medium, in respect of the proportion which an
other Agent has to the same medium. And therefore, velocity is a quality by
which one succession is intrinsecally distinguished from an other: though our
explication, uses to include time in the notions of velocity and tardity.
Velocity then, is the effect (as we said) of more strength in the Agent. And
having before expressed, that velocity is a kind of density; we find that this
kind of density is an excellency in succession; as permanent density, is an
excellency in the nature of substance, though an imperfection in the nature of
quantity (by which we see, that quantity is a kind of base alloy added to
substance.) And out of this it is evident, that by how much the quicker the
motion is in equal mediums, by so much the agent is the perfecter which
causes it to be so quick. Wherefore, if the velocity should ascend so much as
to admit no proportion between the quickness of the one and the tardity of
the other, all other circumstances being even, excepting the difference of the
agents; then there must be no proportion between the agents. Nor indeed can
there be any proportion between them though there were never so great
differences in other circumstances, as long as those differences be within any
proportion. And consequently, you see that if one agent be supposed to move in
an instant, and an other in time; whatsoever other differences be in the bodies
moved and in the mediums; nevertheless the agent which causes motion in an
instant, will be infinite in respect of the agent which moves in time. Which
is impossible: it being the nature of a body, that greater quant^ty of the same
thing h^th greater virtue, then a less quantity has; and therefore, for a
body to have infinite virtue, it must have infinite magnitude.

If any should say the contrary; affirming that infinite virtue may be in a
finite body; I ask, whether in half that body (were it divided) the virtue
would be infinite or no? If he acknowledge that it would not; I infer thence,
that neither in the two parts together th^re can be infinite virtue: for two
finites can not compose and make up one infinite. But if he will have the
virtue be infinite in each half, he therein allows that there is no more
virtue, in the whole body then in one half of it: which is against the nature
of bodies. Now that a body can not be infinite in greatness, is proved in the
second knott of Mr. whites first Dialogue of the world. And thus it is evident,
that by the virtue of pure bodies there can be no motion in an instant.

On the other side, No force so little, that is not able to move the greatest
weight imaginable.
it follows that there can not be so little a force in nature, but that giving
it time enough, it will move the greatest weight that can be imagined: for,
the things we treat of, being all of them quantities; they may by division
and multiplication, be brought unto equality. As for example* supposing the
weight of a mooueable, to be a millio^ of pounds* and that the moouer is able
to move the millioneth part of one of those pounds, in a million of years,
the millioneth part of a pace, through a medium of a certain rarity. Now,
seeing that years may be multiplied so, as to equalize the force of this
moouer, unto the weight of the mooueable. It follows clearly that in so many
millions of years, this force may move the whole weight of a million of
pounds, through the determined medium in a determinate number of millions of
years, a million of paces: for such a force is equal to the required effect;
and by consequence, if the effect should not follow, there would be a complete
cause putt, and no effect result from it.

But peradventure it is needful to illustrate this point yet further: suppose
then a weight never so great to be A, and a force never so little to be B. Now
if you conceive that some other force moves A, you must withal conceive that
it moves A some space, since all motion implies necessarily that it be
through some space: let that space be CD. And because a body can not be moved
in a space in an instant, but requires some time to have its motion performed
in; it follows that there must be a determined time, in which the conceived
force must move the weight A through the space CD: let that time be OF. Now
then; this is evident, that it is all one to say that B moves A, and to say
that B moves A through a space in a time; so that if any part of this be left
out, it can not be understood that B moves A. Therefore to express
particularly the effect which B is to do upon A, we must say that B must move
A a certain space in a certain time. Which being so we may in the next place
consider that this effect of moving A may be diminished two ways, either
because the space it is to be moved in, is lessened; or the time taken up in
its motion, is increased: for, as it is a greater effect, to move A through
the space CD, in a less time then OF, so it is a less effect to move the same
A, through the space CD, in a greater time then OF; or through a less space
then CD in the time OF. Now then, this being supposed, that it is a less
effect to move A through CD, in a greater time then OF, it follows also,
that a lesser virtue is able to move it through CD in a greater time then OF,
then the virtue which is required to move it, through the same space in the
time OF. Which if it be once granted (as it can not be denied) then multiplying
the time, as much as the virtue or force required to move A through CD in the
time OF is greater then the force B; in so much time, the force B will be able
to move A through CD. Which discourse is evident, if we take it in the common
terms: but if it be applied to action, wherein physical accidents intervene;
the artificer must have the judgment to provide for them, according to the
nature of his matter.

The chief principle of Mechanikes deduced out of the former discourse.
Upon this last discourse does hang the principle which governs Mechanikes, to
wit, that the force and the distance of weights counterpoising one an other,
ought to be reciprocal. That is, that by how much the one weight is heauyer
then the other, by so much must the distance of the lighter from the fixed
point upon which they are moved, be greater then the distance of the greater
weight from the same point: for it is plain that the weight which is more
distant, must be moved a greater space, then the nearer weight, in the
proportion of the two dista^ces. Wherefore, the force moving it must carry it
in a velocity of the said proportion to the velocity of the other. And
consequently, the Agent or moouer, must be in that proportion more powerful
then the contrary moouer. And out of this practice of Geometricians in
Mechanikes (which is confirmed by experience) it is made evident that if other
conditions be equal, the excess of so much gravity will make so much
velocity. And so much velocity in proportion, will recompense so much gravity.

Out of the precedent conclusions, No moveable can pass from rest to any
determinate degree of velocity, or from a lesser degree to a greater, without
passing through all the intermediate degrees, which are below the obtained
degree.
an other follows: which is, that nothing recedeth from quiet or rest, and
attaineth a great degree of celerity, but it must pass through all the degrees
of celerity that are below the obtained degree. And the like is, in passing
from any lesser degree of velocity unto a greater: because it must pass
through all the intermediate degrees of velocity. For by the declaration of
velocity which we have even now made, we see that there is as much resistance
in the medium to be overcome with speed, as there is for it to be overcome in
regard of the quantity, or line of extent of it: because (as we have said) the
force of the Agent in counterpoises, ought to be increased as much as the line
of extent of the medium which is to be overcome by the Agent in equal time,
does exceed the line of extent of the medium, along which the resistent body
is to be moved. Wherefore, it being proved that no line of extent, can be
overcome in an instant, it follows that no defect of velocity which requires
as great a superproportion in the cause, can be overcome likewise in an instant.

And by the same reason by which we prove that a mooueable can not be drawn
in an instant from a lower degree of velocity to a higher, it is with no less
evidence concluded that no degree of velocity can be attained in an instant:
for divide that degree of velocity into two halfes, and if the Agent had
overcome the one half, he could not overcome the other half in an instant:
much less therefore is he able to overcome the whole (that is, to reduce the
mooueable from quiet to the said degree of velocity) in an instant.

An other reason may be, because the moouers themselves (such moouers as we
treat of here) are bodies likewise moved, and do consist of parts: whereof
not every one part, but a competent number of them, does make the moving body
to be a fit Agent able to move the proposed body in a proposed degree of
celerity. Now this Agent meeting with resistance in the mooueable, and not
being in the utmost extremity of density, but condensable yet further, (because
it is a body;) and that every resistance (be it never so small) does work
something upon the moouer (though never so hard) to condense it; the parts of
the moouer that are to overcome this resistance in the mooueable, must (to
work that effect) be condensed and brought together as close as is needful,
by this resistance of the mooueable to the moouer; and so, the remote parts of
the moouer, become nearer to the mooueable, which can not be done but
successively, because it includes local motion. And this application being
likewise diuisible, and not all the parts flocking together in an instant to
the place where they are to exercise their power; it follows, that whiles
there are fewer moving parts knitt together, they must needs move less and
more weakly, then when more or all of them are assembled and applied to that
work. So that, the motive virtue increasing thus in proportion to the
multiplying of the parts applied to cause the motion; of necessity, the effect
(which is obedience to be moved, and quickness of motion in the mooueable)
must do so too: that is, it must from nothing, or from rest, pass through all
the degrees of celerity until it arrive to that which all the parts together
are able to cause.

As for example, when with my hand I strike a ball; till my hand touches it,
it is in quiet; but then, it begins to move; yet with such resistance, that
although it obey in some measure the stroke of my hand, nevertheless it
presses the yielding flesh of my palm backwardes toward the upper and bony
part of it. That part then ouertaking the other, by the continued motion of my
hand; and both of them joining together to force the ball away; the impulse
becomes stronger, then at the first touching of it. And the longer it
presses upon it, the more the parts of my hand do condense and unite
themselves to exercise their force; and the ball therefore must yield the more;
and consequently, the motion of it grows quicker and quicker, till my hand
parts from it. Which condensation of the parts of my hand increasing
successively by the parts joining closer to one an other, the velocity of the
balls motion (which is an effect of it) must also increase proportionably
thereunto. And in like manner, the motion of my hand and arm, must grow
quicker and quicker and pass all the degrees of velocity between rest and the
utmost degree it attaineth unto: for seeing they are the spirits swelling the
nerves, that cause the arms motion, (as we shall hereafter show;) upon its
resistance, they flock from other parts of the body to overcome that
resistance. And since their journey thither requires time to perform it in;
and that the nearest come first; it must needs follow, that as they grow more
and more in number, they must more powerfully overcome the resistance; and
consequently, increase the velocity of the motion, in the same proportion as
they flock thither; until it attain that degree of velocity, which is the
utmost periode that the power, which the Agent has to overcome the resistance
of the medium, can bring it self unto. Between which and rest, or any
inferior degree of velocity, there may be designed infinite intermediate
degrees, proportionable to the infinite diuisibility of time, and space in
which the moouer does move. Which degrees do arise out of the reciprocal
yielding of the medium. And that is likewise diuisible in the same infinite
proportion.

Since then, the power of all natural Agents is limited; the moouer (be it
never so powerful) must be confined to observe these proportions; and can not
pass over all these infinite designable degrees in an instant; but must allott
some time (which has a like infinity of designable parts) to balance this
infinity of degrees of velocity: and so consequently, it requires time, to
attain unto any determinate degree. And therefore can not recede immediately
from rest unto any degree of celerity; but must necessarily pass through all
the intermediate ones.

Thus it is evident that all motion which has a beginning must of necessity
increase for some time. And since the works of nature are in proportion to
their causes, it follows that this increase is in a determinate proportion.
Which Galileus (unto whom we owe the greatest part of what is known concerning
motion) teaches us how to find out; and to discover what degree of celerity
any mooueable that is moved by nature, has in any determinate part of the
space it moves in.

Having settled these conditions of motion; The conditions which help to
motion, in the moveable are three, in the medium, one.
we shall do well in the next place to enquire after the causes of it: as well
in the body moved, as also in the mouer that occasioneth the motion. And
because we have already showed, that local motion is nothing in substance but
division: we may determine that those causes which contribute to division, or
resist it, are the causes which make, or resist local motion. It has also
been said, that Density has in it a power of dividing; and that Rarity is the
cause of being divided; likewise we have said that fire, by reason of its small
parts, into which it may be cut (which makes them sharp) has also an
eminence in dividing: so that we have two qualites, density and tenuity or
sharpness which concur actiuely to division. Dialog. 1. of Motion.
We have told you also how Galileus has demonstrated that a greater quantity
of the same figure and density, has a privilege of descending faster then a
lesser. And that privilege consists in this, that the proportion of the
superficies to the body it limiteth (which proportion the greater it is, the
more it retardeth) is less in a greater bulk then in a smaller.

We have therefore three conditions concurring to make the motion more
efficacious: namely, the density, the sharpness, and the bulk of the
mooueable. And more then these three, we can not expect to find in a moved
body: for quantity has but three determinations: one, by density and rarity;
of which, density is one of the three conditions: an other, by its parts; as
by a foot, a spanne, etc; and in this way we have found that the greater
excels the lesser: the third and last, is by its figure; and in this we find
that subtle or edged quantities do prevail over blunt ones. Seeing therefore,
that these three determinations be all that are in quantity; there can be no
more conditions in the body moved (which of necessity is a finite quantity) but
the three named.

And as for the medium which is to be divided, there is only rarity and
density (the one, to help; the other, to hinder,) that require consideration
on its side. For neither figure, nor littleness and greatness, do make any
variation in it. And as for the Agent, it is not as yet time, before we have
looked further into the nature of motion, to determine his qualities.

No body has any intrinsecall virtue to move it self toward any determinate
part of the universe.
Now then let us reflect how these three conditions do all agree in this
circumstance, that they help nothing to division, unless the body in which
they are, be moved and pressed against the body that is to be divided, so that
we see no principle to persuade us, that any body can move it self toward
any determinate part or place of the universe, of its own intrinsecall
inclination. For besides that the learned Author of the Dialogues de Mundo (in
his third Dialogue, and the second knott) has demonstrated that a body can not
move unless it be moved by some extrinsecall Agent; we may easily frame unto
our selves a conceit, of how absurd it is to think that a body by a quality
in it can work upon it self: as if we should say, that rarity (which is but
more quantity) could work upon quantity; or that figure (which is but that the
body reaches no further) could work upon the body: and in general, that the
manner of any thing, can work upon that thing whose manner it is. For
Aristotle and St. Thomas, and their intelligent commentatours, declaring the
notion of Quality; tell us that to be a Quality is nothing else but to be the
determination or modification of the thing whose quality it is.

Besides, that the natural manner of operation is, to work according to the
capacity of the subject: but when a body is in the midst of an uniform
medium or space, the subject is equally prepared on all sides to receive the
action of that body. Wherefore (though we should allow it a force to move) if
it be a natural Agent, and have no understanding, it must work indifferently
on all sides, and by consequence, can not move on any side. For if you say
that the Agent in this case (where the medium is uniform) works rather upon
one side then upon an other; it must be because this determination is within
the Agent it self, and not out of the circumstant dispositions: which is the
manner of working of those substances that work for an end of their own; that
is, of understanding creatures, and not of natural bodies.

Now he that would exactly determine what motion a body has, or is apt to
have; The increase of motion is alwayse made in the proportion of the odd
numbers.
determining by supposition the force of the Agent, must calculate the
proportions of all these three conditions of the mooueable, and the quality of
the medium: which is a proceeding too particular for the intention of our
discourse. But to speak in common, it will not be amiss to examine in what
proportion, motion does increase; since we have concluded that all motion
proceeds from quiet by a continual increase. Galileus (that miracle of our
age, and whose wit was able to discover whatsoever he had a mind to employ it
about) has told us that natural motion, increases in the proportion of the
odd numbers. Which to express by example, is thus: suppose that in the going
of the first yard it has one degree of velocity, then in the going of the
second yard it will have three degrees, and in going the third it will have
five: and so onwardes, still adding two to the degrees of the velocity for
every one of the space. Or to express it more plainly; if in the first minute
of time it goes one yard of space, then in the next minute it will go three
yardes, in the third it will go five, in the fourth seven, and so forth.

But we must enlarge this proposition, unto all motions, (as we have done the
former, of the increase it self in velocity;) because the reason of it is
common to all motions. Which is; that all motion (as may appear out of what we
have formerly said) proceeds from two causes; namely, the Agent or the force
that moves; and the disposition of the body moved, as it is composed of the
three qualities we lately explicated. In which is to be noted, that the Agent
does not move simply by its own virtue, but it applies also the virtue of
the body moved, which it has to divide the medium when it is putt on. As when
we cut with a knife, the effect proceeds from the knife pressed on by the
hand; or from the hand as applying and putting in action the edge and cutting
power of the knife. Now this in Physickes and nature is clearly parallel to
what in Geometry and Arithmetike the Mathematicians call drawing one number or
one side into an other; for as in Mathematikes, to draw one number into an
other is to apply the number drawn unto every part of the number into which it
is drawn; as if we draw three into seven we make twenty one, by making every
unity or part of the number seven to be three: and the like is of lines in
Geometry. So in the present case, to every part of the hands motion we add
the whole virtue of the cutting faculty which is in the knife, and to every
part of the motion of the knife, we add the whole pressing virtue of the hand.
Therefore the increase of the effect proceeding from two causes so working,
must also be parallel to the increase of the quantities arising out of the like
drawing in Mathematikes. But in those, it is evident that the increase is
according to the order of the odd numbers, and therefore it must in our case
be the like: that is, the increase must be in the said proportion of odd
numbers. Now that in those, the increase proceeds so, will be evident, if you
consider the increase of an Equicrure triangle; which because it goes upon a
certain proportion of length and breadth, if you compare the increases of the
whole triangle (that gains on each side) with the increases of the
perpendicular (which gains only in length) you will see that they still
proceed in the foresaid proportion of odd numbers.

Which will be better understood, if we set down the demonstration of it:
let the Equicrure triangle be ABC: and from the point A, draw the line AD
perpendicular to the line BC, and let it be divided into three equal parts
by the lines OF and GH, in the points I, and K. And I say that because the
line AK is tuice as long as the line AI, therefore the trapezium EFHG, is
thrice as big as the triangle AEF: for as AK, is to AI, so is GH to OF. But
the triangle AGH is to the triangle AEF, in a double proportion of the line GH
to the line OF: which being double the proportion of one triangle to the other
must be fourefold: so that substracting the triangle AEF, the trapezium EFHG
remains thrice as big as it. And thus, the whole triangle gets an
increase of three, whiles the perpendicular is increased but one, to make his
length two Which when it comes to three, the trapezium GHCB that contains
the third division of the perpendicular, becomes five times as bigg as the
triangle AEF; for since the line AD is three times as long as the line AI; and
the line BC, is three times as long as OF; it follows, that the triangle ABC
is nine times as bigg as the triangle AEF; but AGH is four times as big as
AEF; therefore substracting it from the whole triangle ABC, it leaves the
trapezium GHCB five times as bigg as the first triangle AEF. Which proposition
is very ingeniously set down by the learned Monsieur Gassendi in his first
Epistle de motu impresso a motore translato, to the same purpose for which we
bring it. Though we do not here make use of his scheme and way of
demonstration; because we had fallen upon this before his book came abroad:
and therefore we only note his to direct the Reader unto it who peradventure
may like his better then ours. Howbeit we do not conceive that he has in his
discourse there, arrived to the true reason of the effect we search into: as
may appear by what we have already delivered.

No motion can increase for ever without coming to a periode.
But we must not imagine, that the velocity of motion will alwayse increase thus
for as long as we can fancy any motion: but when it is arrived unto the utmost
periode that such a mooueable with such causes is capable of then it keeps
constantly the same pace, and goes equally and uniformly at the same rate.
For since the density of the mooueable, and the force of the Agent moving it,
(which two, do cause the motion) have a limited proportion to the resistance of
the medium, how yielding soever it be; it must needs follow, that when the
motion is arrived unto that height which arises out of this proportion, it can
not exceed it, but must continue at that rate, unless some other cause give
yet a greater impulse to the moveable. For velocity consisting in this, that
the moveable cutteth through more of the medium in an equal time; it is
evident, that in the increase of velocity, the resistance of the medium, which
is overcome by it; grows greater and greater, and by little and little gains
upon the foree of the Agent; so that the superproportion of the Agent, grows
still lesser and lesser, as the velocity increases: and therefore, at the
length they must come to be balanced. And then, the velocity can increase no
more.

And the reason of the increase of it, for a while at the beginning, is
because that coming from rest it must pass, through all the intermediate
degrees of velocity before it can attain to the height of it, which requires
time to perform, and therefore falls under the power of our sense to
observe. But because we see it do so for some time, we must not therefore
conclude that the nature of such motion, is still to increase without any
periode or limit; like those lines that perpetually grow nearer, and yet can
never meet: for we see that our reason examining the causes of this velocity,
assures us that in continuance of time and space, it may come to its height,
which it can not exceed.

And there, would be the pitch at which distance weights being let fall,
would give the greatest strokes and make greatest impressions. It is true that
Galileus and Mersenius (two exact experimenters) do think they find this
verity by their experiences. But surely that is impossible to be done; for the
increase of velocity being in a proportion ever diminishing; it must of
necessity come to an insensible increase in proportion before it ends: for
the space which the moveable goes through, is still increased; and the time
wherein it passes through that space, remains still the same little one as
was taken up in passing a less space immediately before; and such little
differences of great spaces passed over in a little time, come soon to be
indiscernable by sense. But reason (which shows us, that if velocity never
ceased from increasing, it would in time arrive to exceed any particular
velocity; and by consequence, the proportion which the moouer has to the
medium; because of the adding still a determinate part to its velocity)
concludes plainly that it is impossible, motion should increase for ever,
without coming to a periode.

Now the impression which falling weights do make, Certain problemes resolved
concerning the proportion of some moving Agents compared to their effects.
is of two kinds; for the body into which impression is made, either can yield
backward, or it can not. If it can yield backward, then the impression made is
a motion: as we see a stroke with a rackett upon a ball, or with a pailemaile
beetle upon a boule, makes it fly from it. But if the stricken body can not
yield backwardes, then it makes it yield on the sides. And this, in diverse
manners: for if the smitten body be dry and brittle, it is subject to break
it, and make the pieces fly round about: but if it be a tough body, it
squeeseth it into a larger form.

But because the effect in any of these wayse is eminently greater then the
force of the Age^t seems to be; it is worth our labor to look into the
causes of it. To which end we may remember how we have already declared that
the force of the velocity is equal to a reciprocal force of weight in the
virtue mouent: wherefore the effect of a blow that a man gives with a hammer,
depends upon the weight of the hammer, upon the velocity of the motion, and
upon the hand, in case the hand accompanies the blow. But if the motion of the
hand cease before (as when we throw a thing) then only the velocity and the
weight of the hammer remain to be considered. Howsoever, let us putt the hand
and weight in one sum which we may equalize by some other virtue or weight.
Then let us consider the way or space, which a weight lying upon the thing is
to go forwards to do the same effect in the same time as the percussion
does. And what excess the line of the blow, has over the line of that way or
space; such an excess we must add of equal weight or force, to the weight we
had already taken. And the weight composed of both, will be a fit Agent to
make the like impression. This Problem was proposed unto me by that worthy
religious man, Father Mersenius: who is not content with advancing learning by
his own industry and labors; but besides, is alwayse (out of his generous
affection to verity) inciting others to contribute to the public stock of it.

He proposed to me likewise this following question, to wit why there is
required a weight of water in double Geometrical proportion, to make a pipe
run twice as fast as it did, or to have twice as much water run out in the
same time? Unto which I answer out of the same ground as before. That because
in running twice as fast, there goes out double water in every part of time;
and again, every part of water goes a double space in the same part of time;
that is to say because double the celerity is drawn into double the water, and
double the water into double the celerity; therefore, the present effect is to
the former effect, as the effect or quadrate of a double line drawn into it
self, is, to the effect or quadrate of half the said line drawn into it
self. And consequently the cause, of the latter effect (which is the weight
then) must be to the cause of the former effect (that is, to the former weight)
in the same proportion; namely as the quadrate of a double line, is to the
quadrate of half that line. And so you see the reason of what he by experience
finds to be true. Though I doubt not but when he shall set out the treatise,
which he has made of this subject; the reader will have better satisfaction.

In the mean while, an experience which Galileo delivers, will confirm this
doctrine. He says that to make the same pendant go twice as fast as it did,
or to make every vndulation of it in half the time it did; you must make the
line at which it hangs, double in Geometrical proportion, to the line at
which it hanged before. Whence it follows that the circle by which it goes,
is likewise in double Geometrical proportion. And this being certain, that
celerity to celerity has the proportion of force, which weight has to weight;
it is evident, that as in one case there must be weight in Geometrical
proportion; so in the other case, where only celerity makes the variance, the
celerity must be in double Geometrical proportion, according as Galileo
finds it by experience.

But to return to our maine intent, there is to be further noted, that if the
subject stricken be of a proportionate cessibility, it seems to dull and
deaden the stroke: whereas, if the thing stricken be hard the stroke seems
to loose no force, but to work a greater effect. Though indeed the truth be,
that in both cases the effects are equal; but diverse according to the natures
of the things that are stricken; for no force that once is in nature, can be
lost; but must have its adequate effect, one way or other.

Let us then first suppose the body stricken to be a hard body of no exceeding
biggnesse: in which case, if the stroke light perpendiculary upon it, it will
carry such a body before it. But if the body be too great, and have its parts
so conjoined, as that they are weaker the^ the stroke; in this case, the
stroke drives one part before it, and so breaks it from the rest. But
lastly, if the parts of the stricken body be so easily cessible as without
difficulty the stroke can divide them, then it enters into such a body
until it has spent its force. So that now making up our account; we see that
an equal effect proceeds from an equal force, in all the three cases;
though in themselves, they be far different. But we are apt to account that
effect greater, which is more considerable unto us, by the profitt or damage it
brings us. And therefore, we usually say, that the blow which shakes a wall,
or beats it down, and kills men with the stones it scatters abroad; has
a greater effect then that which penetrateth far into a mudde wall, and does
little harm: for that innocuousnesse of the effect, makes that although in it
self it be as great as the other, yet it is little observed or considered.

This discourse draws on an other: When a moveable comes to rest, the motion
does decrease according to the rules of increase.
which is to declare how motion cease. And to sum that up in short, we say
that when motion comes unto rest, it decreaseth and passes through all the
degrees of celerity and tardity that are between rest, and the height of that
motion, which so declineth. And that, in the proportion of the odd numbers; as
we declared above that it did increase. The reason is clear: because that
which makes a motion cease, is the resistance it finds: which resistance, is
an action of a moouer that moves some thing against the body which is moved,
or some thing equivalent to such an action: wherefore it must follow the laws
that are common to all motions: of which kind those two are that we have
expressed in this conclusion. Now, that resistance is a countermotion, or
equivalent to one; is plain by this; that any body which is pressed, must
needs press again upon the body that presses it; wherefore the cause that
hinders such a body from yielding, is a force moving that body, against the
body which presses it. The particulars of all which we shall more at large
declare, where we speak of the action and reaction of particular bodies.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. Of Gravity and Leuity; and of Local Motion, commonly
termed Natural.
Those motions are called natural which have constant causes; and those
violent which are contrary to them.
IT is now time to consider that distinction of motions which is so famous in
Aristotle; to wit, that some motions are natural, others violent: and to
determine what may be signified by these terms. For seeing we have said that
no body has a natural intrinsecall inclination unto any place, to which it is
able to move it self; we must needs conclude that the motion of every body
follows the percussion, of extrinsecall Agents. It seems therefore
impossible that any body should have any motion natural to it self. And if
there be none natural, there can be none violent. And so this distinction will
vainsh to nothing. But on the other side, living creatures do manifesty show
natural motions, having natural instruments to perform certain motions:
wherefore such motions must of necessity be natural to them. But these are not
the motions, which we are to speak of; for Aristotle's division is common to
all bodies; or at the least, to all those we converse withal: and
particulary, to those which are called heavy and light: which two terms, pass
through all the bodies we have notice of.

Therefore, proceeding upon our grounds before laid; to wit, that no body
can be moved of it self; we may determine those motions to be natural unto
bodies which have constant causes, or percutients to make them alwayse in such
bodies: and those violent, which are contrary to such natural motions. Which
being supposed, we must search out the causes that so constantly make some
bodies descend toward the center or middle of the earth; and others to rise
and go from the center: by which, the world is subject to those restless
motions that keep all things in perpetual flux, in this changeing sphere of
action and passion.

The first and most general operation of the sun, is the making and raising
of atoms.
Let us then begin with considering what effects the sun (which is a constant
and perpetual cause) works upon inferior bodies, by his being regularly
sometimes present and sometimes absent. Observe, in a pott of water hanging
over a fire, how the heat makes some parts of the water to ascend, and
others to supply the room by descending; so that as long as it boyleth, it is
in a perpetual confused motion up and down. Now having formely concluded that
fire is light, and light is fire; it can not be doubted but that the sun does
serve instead of fire to our globe of earth and water, (which may be fittly
compared to the boiling pott;) and all the day long draws vapors from those
bodies that his beams strike upon. For he shooting his little darts of fire,
in multitudes, and in continued streams, from his own center, against the
Python the earth we live on; they do there overtake one an other, and cause
some degree of heat as far as they sink in. But not being able (by reason
of their great expansion in their long journey) to convert it into their own
nature and set it on fire, (which requires a high degree of condensation of
the beams) they do but pierce and divide it very subtilely, and cut some of
the outward parts of it into extreme little atoms. Unto which they sticking
very close, and being in a manner incorporated with them (by reason of the
moisture that is in the^) they do in their rebound back from the earth carry
them along with them; like a ball that struck against a moist wall, does in its
return from it, bring back some of the mortar sticking upon it. For the
distance of the earth from the sun, is not the utmost periode of these nimble
bodies flight; so that, when by this solid body they are stopped in their
course forwards on, they leap back from it, and carry some little parts of
it with them: some of them, a farther; some of them, a shorter journey;
according as their litlenesse and rarity, make them fit to ascend. As is
manifest by the consent of all authors that write of the regions of the air;
who determine the lower region to reach as far as the reflection of the sun;
and conclude this region to be very hot.

For if we mark how the heat of fire is greatest, when it is incorporated in
some dense body, (as in iron or in seacoale) we shall easily conceive that the
heat of this region proceeds mainely out of the incorporation of light with
those little bodies which stick to it in its reflection. And experience
testifyeth the same, both in our sultry days, which we see are of a gross
temper, and ordinarily go before rain: as also in the hot springes of
extreme cold countries, where the first heates are insufferable; which proceed
out of the resolution of humidity congealed: and in hot winds, (which the
Spaniards call Bochornos from Boca de horno by allusion to the breathing steame
of an oven when it is opened) which do manifestly show that the heat of the
sun is incorporated in the little bodies, which compose the steame of that
wind. And by the principles we have already laid, the same would be evident;
though we had no experience to instruct us; for seeing that the body of fire is
dry, the wett parts (which are easilyest resolved by fire) must needs stick
unto them, The light rebounding from the earth with atoms, causes two
streams in the air; the one ascending the other desce^ding; and both of them
in a perpendicular line.
and accompany them in their return from the earth.

Now whiles these ascend, the air must needs cause others that are of a
grosser complexion to descend as fast, to make room for the former and to fill
the places they left, that there may be no vacuity in nature. And to find what
parts they are and from whence they come, that succeed in the room of light
and atoms glewed together that thus ascend; we may take a hinte from the
maxim of the Optikes, that light reflecting makes equal angles; whence,
supposing the superficies of the earth to be circular, it will follow that a
perpendicular to the center passes just in the middle between the two rays;
the incident and the reflected. Wherefore the air between these two rays,
and such dodies as are in it being equally pressed on both sides; those bodies
which are just in the middle, are nearest and likelyest to succeed immediately
in the room of the light and atoms which ascend from the superficies of the
earth: and their motion to that point, is upon the perpendicular. Hence it is
evident, that the air and all such bodies as descend to supply the place of
light and atoms, which ascend from the earth, do descend perpendicularly
toward the center of the earth.

And again such bodies as by the force of light being cut from the earth or
water, do not ascend in form of light, but do incorporate a hidden light and
heat within them; (and thereby are rarer then these descending bodies) must of
necessity be lifted up by the descent of those denser bodies that go
downewardes, because they (by reason of their density) are moved with a
greater force. And this lifting up, must be in a perpendicular line; because
the others descending on all sides perpendicularly, must needs raise those
that are between them equally from all sides: that is, perpendicularly from
the center of the earth. And thus we see a motion set on foot, of some bodies
continually descending, and others continually ascending: all in perpendicular
lines, excepting those which follow the course of lights reflection.

Again as soon as the declining sun grows weaker or leaves our horizon,
and that his beams vanishing do leave the little horsemen which rode upon them,
to their own temper and nature (from whence they forced them;) they finding
themselves surrounded by a smart descending stream, do tumble down again in
the night, as fast as in the day they were carried up; and crowding into their
former habitations, they exclude those that they find had usurped them in their
absence. And thus, all bodies within reach of the suns power, but especially
our air, are in perpetual motion; the more rarifyed ones ascending, and the
dense ones descending.

A dense body placed in the air between the ascending and descending stream,
must needs descend.
Now the^, because no bodies wheresoever they be (as we have already showed)
have any inclination to move toward a particular place, otherwise the^ as
they are directed and impelled by extrinsecall Age^ts: let us suppose that a
body were placed at liberty in the open air. And then casting whether it
would be moved from the place we suppose it in; and which way it would be
moved; we shall find that it must of necessity happen that it shall descend
and fall down till it meet with some other gross body to stay and support
it. For although of it self it would move no way: yet if we find that any
other body strikes efficaciously enough upon it; we can not doubt but that it
will move that way which the striking body impelleth it. Now it is stricken
upon on both sides (above and below) by the ascending, and the descending
atoms, the rare ones, striking upon the bottom of it, and driving it
vpwardes, and the denser ones, pressing upon the top of it and bearing it
downewardes. But if you compare the impressions that the denser atoms make,
with those that proceed from the rare ones; it is evident that the dense ones
must be the more powerful; and therefore will assuredly determine the motion
of the body in the air, that way they go; which is downewardes.

Nor need we fear, least the litlenesse of the agents, or the feebleness of
their strokes, should not be sufficient to work this effect; since there is
no resistance in the body it self, and the air is continually cut in pieces,
by the sun beams, and by the motions of little bodies; so that the adhesion
unto air of the body to be moved, will be no hinderance to this motion:
especially, considering the perpetual new percussions, and the multitude of
them* and how no force is so little, but that with time and multiplication it
will overcome any resistance.

But if any man desires to look upon, A more particular explication of all
the former doctrine touching gravity.
as it were at one view; the whole chain of this doctrine of gravity: let
him turn the first cast of his eyes upon what we have said of fire when we
explicated the nature of it. To wit; that it begins from a little source;
and by extreme multiplication and rarefaction, it extends it self into a
great sphere. And then he will perceive the reason why light is darted from the
body of the sun with that incredible celerity, wherewith its beams fly to
visit the remotest parts of the world; and how, of necessity, it gives
motion to all circumstant bodies; since it is violently thrust forward by so
extreme a rarefaction; and the further it goes, is still the more rarifyed and
dilated.

Next, let him reflect how infinitely the quickenesse of lights motion, does
prevent the motion of a moist body, such an one as air is: and then he will
plainly see, that the first motion which light is able to give unto the air,
must needs be a swelling of that moist element, perpendicularly round about
the earth; for, the ray descendent, and the ray reflectent, flying with so
great a speed, that the air between them can not take a formal plye any way
before the beams of light be on both sides of it: it follows, that according
to the nature of humide things, it must first only swell: for that is the
beginning of motion in them, when heat enters into them, and works upon
them. And thus he may confidently resolve himself, that the first motion which
light causes in the air, will be a swelling of it between the two rays
toward the middle of them. That is; perpendicularly from the surface of the
earth.

And out of this, he will likewise plainly see, that if there be any other
little dense bodies floating in the air, they must likewise mount a little,
through this swelling and rising of the air. But that mounting will be no more
then the immediate parts of the air themselves do move. Because this motion
is not by way of impulse or stroke that the air gives those denser bodies;
but by way of containing them in it, and carrying them with it, ^o that it
gives them no more celerity, then to make them go with it self, and as parts
of it self.

Then, let him consider, that light or fire, by much beating upon the earth,
divides some little parts of it from others: whereof if any do become so small
and tractable, as not to exceed the strength which the rays have to manage
them; the returning rays, will at their going back, carry away with them or
drive before them, such little atoms as they have made or meet with: and so
fill the air with little bodies cut out of the earth.

After this, let him consider that when light carries up an atome with it,
the light and the atome do stick together, and do make one ascending body; in
such sort as when an empty dish lies upon the water, the air in the dish
makes one descendent body together with the dish it self: so that the density
of the whole body of air and dish (which in this case, are but as one body) is
to be esteemed according to the density of the two parts; one of them being
allayed by the other, as if the whole were throughout of such a proportion of
density, as would arise out of the composition and kneading together the
several densities of those two parts. Now then, when these little compounded
bodies of light and earth, are carried up to a determinate height; the parts
of fire or light, do by little and little break away from them: and thereby, the
bulk of the part which is left, becomes of a different degree of density
(quantity for quantity) from the bulk of the entire atome, when light was part
of it: and consequently it is denser then it was.

Besides, let him consider that when these bodies ascend; they do go from a
narrow room to a large one, that is, from the centerwardes to the
circumference: but when they come down again, they go from a larger part to
a narrower. Whence it follows, that as they descend, they draw closer and
closer together, and by consequence, are subject to meet and to fall in, one
with an other; and thereby, to increase their bulk, and to become more
powerful in density; not only, by the loss of their fire; but also by the
increase of their quantity. And so it is evident, that they are denser, coming
down, then going up.

Lastly, let him consider, that those atoms which went up first, and are
parted from their volatile companions of fire or light, must begin to come
down apace, when other new atoms (which still have their light incorporated
with them) do ascend to where they are, and do go beyond them by reason of
their greater leuity. And as the latter atoms come up with a violence and a
great celerity, so must the first go down with a smart impulse: and by
consequence, being more dense then the air in which they are carried, must of
necessity cut their way through that liquide and rare medium; and go the next
way to supply the defect and room of the atoms which ascend; (that is,
perpendicularly to the earth) and give the like motion to any body they find in
their way, if it be susceptible of such a motion: which it is evident that all
bodies are, unless they be stricken by some contrary impulse. For since that a
bodies being in a place, is nothing else but the continuity of its outside to
the inside of the body that contains it and is its place; it can have no
other repugnance to local motion (which is nothing else but a successiue
changing of place) besides this continuity. Now the nature of density, being
the power of dividing; and every least power, having some force and efficacy,
(as we have showed above) it follows that the stroke of every atome (either
descending, or ascending) will work some thing upon any body (though never so
big) it chances to encounter with, and strike upon in its way, unless there
be as strong an impulse the contrary way, to oppose it. But it being
determined, that the descending atoms are denser then those that ascend; it
follows, that the descending ones will prevail. And consequently, all dense
bodies must necessarily tend downewardes, to the center (which is, to be Heavy)
if some other more dense body do not hinder them.

Out of this discourse, Gravity and leuity do not signify an intrinsecall
inclination to such a motion in the bodies themselves which are termed heavy
and light.
we may conclude that there is no such thing among bodies, as positive gravity
or leuity: but that their course vpwardes or downewardes happens unto them by
the order of nature, which by outward causes gives them an impulse one of
these ways: without which, they would rest quietly wheresoever they are, as
being of themselves indifferent to any motion. But because our words express
our notions, and they are framed according to what appears unto us; when we
observe any body to descend constantly toward our earth, we call it heavy;
and if it move contrariwise, we call it light. But we must take heed of
considering such gravity and leuity as if they were Entities that work such
effects: since upon examination, it appears that these words are but short
expressions of the effects themselves: the causes whereof, the vulgar of
mankind (who impose names to things) do not consider; but leave that work
unto Philosophers to examine; whiles they only observe, what they see done;
and agree upon words to express that. Which words neither will in all
circumstances always agree to the same thing; for as cork does descend in
air and ascend in water; so also will any other body descend if it lights
among others more rare then it self, and will ascend if it lights among
bodies that are more dense then it. And we term bodies light and heavy, only
according to the course, which we usually see them take.

Now proceeding further on; The more de^se a body is, the more swiftly it
descends.
and considering how there are various degrees of density or gravity: it were
irrational to conceive, that all bodies should descend at the same rate, and
keep equal pace with one an other, in their journey downewardes. For as two
knifes whereof one has a keener edge then the other, being pressed with equal
strength into like yielding matter, the sharper will cut deeper then the
other: so, if of two bodies one be more dense then the other; that which is so,
will cut the air more powerfully, and will descend faster then the other: for
in this case, density may be compared to the knifes edge, since in it
consists the power of dividing; as we have heretofore determined. And
therefore, the pressing them downewardes by the descending atoms, being equal
in both (or peradventure greater in the more dense body; as anon we shall have
occasion to touch) and there being no other cause to determine them that way;
the effect of division must be the greater, where the diuider is the more
powerful. Which, the more dense body is; and therefore cutteth more strongly
through the resistance of the air; and consequently, passes more swiftly that
way it is determined to move.

The velocity of bodies descending does not increase in proportion to the
difference that may be between their several densities.
I do not mean, that the velocities of their descent shall be in the same
proportion to one an other, as their densities are: for besides their density,
those other considerations which we have discoursed of above when we examined
the causes of velocity in motion, must likewise be balanced. And out of the
comparison of all them; not out of the consideration of any one alone,
resulteth the differences of their velocities: (and that neither, but in as
much as concerns the consideration of the mooueables: for to make the
calculation exact, the medium must likewise be considered; as by and by we
shall declare) for since the motion depends of all them together; although
there should be difference between the mooueables in regard of one only, and
that the rest were equal; yet the proportion of the difference of their
motions, must not follow the proportion of their difference in that one regard:
because their difference considered single in that regard will have one
proportion; and with the addition of the other considerations (though alike in
both) to their difference in this, they will have an other.

As for example, reckon the density of one mooueable to be double the density
of an other mooueable; so that in that regard it has two degrees of power to
descend, whereas the other has but one: suppose then the other causes of their
descent to be alike in both, and reckon them all three: and then join these
three to the one which is caused by the density in one of the mooueables, as
likewise to the two, which is caused by the density in the other mooueable: and
you will find that thus altogether, their difference of power to descend is no
longer in a double proportion (as it would be, if nothing but their density
were considered) but is in the proportion of five to four.

But after we have considered all that concerns the mooueables, we are then
to cast an eye upon the medium they are to move in; and we shall find the
addition of that, to decrease the proportion of their difference, exceedingly
more; according to the cessibility of the medium. Which if it be air; the
great disproportion of its weight, to the weight of those bodies which men use
to take in making experiences of their descent in that yielding medium; will
cause their difference of velocity in descending, to be hardly perceptible.
Even as the difference of a sharp or dull knife, which is easily perceived in
cutting of flesh or bread, is not to be distinguished in dividing of water or
oil. And likewise in weights, a pound and a scruple will bear down a dram
in no sensible proportion of velocity more then a pound alone would do: and yet
putt a pound in that scale instead of the dram, and then the difference of
the scruple will be very notable. So then, those bodies, whose difference of
descending in water is very sensible (because of the greater proportion of
weight in water, to the bodies that descend in it) will yield no sensible
difference of velocity when they descend in air, by reason of the great
disproportion of weight between air and the bodies that descend in it.

The reason of this will clearly show it self in abstracted proportions.
Thus; suppose air to have one degree of density, and water to have 400: then
let the mooueable A have 410 degrees of density; and the mooueable B have 500.
Now compare their motion to one an other in the several mediums of air and
water. The exuperance of the density of A to water is 10 degrees, but the
exuperace of B, unto the same water, is 100 degrees; so that B must move in
water, swifter then A, in the proportion of 100 to ten; that is, of 10 to
one. Then let us compre the exuperance of the two mooueables over air. A is
409 times more dense then air; but B is 499 times more dense then it. By which
account, the motion of B, must be in that medium swifter then the motion of A,
in the proportion of 499 to 409: that is, about 50, to 41: which (to avoid
fractions) we may account as 10 to 8. But in water they exceed one an other as
10 to one: so that their difference of velocity, must be scarce perceptible in
air in respect of what it is in water.

Out of all which discourse, I only infer in common that a greater velocity
in motion, will follow the greater density of the mooueable; without
determining here their proportions: which I leave unto them, who make that
examination their task: for thus much serves my present turn: wherein I take
a suruay of nature, but in gross. And my chief drift in this particular is
only to open the way for the discovering how bodies that of themselves have no
propension unto any determinate place; do nevertheless move constantly and
perpetually one way; the dense ones descending, and the rare ones ascending:
not by any intrinsecall quality that works upon them; but by the economy of
nature, that has set on foot due and plain causes to produce known effects.

Here we must crave patience of the great soul of Galileo (whose admirable
learning all posterity must reverence) whiles we reprehend in him, More or
less gravity does produce a swifter or a slower descending of a heavy body.
Aristotle's argument to disprove motion in vacuo, is made good.
that which we can not term less then absurd: and yet, he not only
mainetaineth it in several places, but also professes Dial. Po de motu. page
8;. to make it more clear then day. His position is, that more or less
gravity contributeth nothing at all to the faster or slower descending of a
natural body: but that all the effect it gives unto a body, is to make it
descend or not descend in such a medium. Which is against the first and most
known principle that is in bodies: to wit, that more does more; and less
does less; for he allows, that gravity causes a body to descend; and yet
will not allow, that more gravity causes it to descend more.

I wonder that he never marked how in a pair of scales, a superproportion of
ouerweight in one balance, lifted up the other faster then a less proportion
of ouerweight would do. Or that more weight hanged to a jack, made the spitt
turn faster; or to the lines of a clock, made it go faster, and the like.

But his argument whereby he endeavors to prove his position, is yet more
wonderful: for finding in pendants unequal in gravity, that the lighter went
in the same time almost as fast as the heauyer; he gathers from thence, that
the different weights have each of them the same celerity: and that it is the
opposition of the air, which makes the lighter body not reach so far at
each vndulation, as the heauyer does. For reply whereunto; first we must ask
him; whether experience or reason taught him, that the slower going of the
lighter pendant, proceeded only from the medium, and not from want of gravity?
And when he shall have answered (as he needs must) that experience does not
show this; then we must importune him for a good reason: but I do not find that
he brings any at all.

Again; if he admits (which he does in express terms) that a lighter body
can not resist the medium, so much as a heauyer body can; we must ask him,
whether it be not the weight that makes the heauyer body resist more: which
when he has acknowledged that it is; he has therein likewise acknowledged,
that whenever this happens in the descending of a body, the more weight
must make the heauyer body descend faster.

But we can not pass this matter without noting how himself makes good those
arguments of Aristotle, which he seems by no means to esteem of: for since
the gravity does overcome the resistance of the medium in some proportion; it
follows that the proportions between the gravity and the medium, may be
multiplied without end; so as, if he suppose that the gravity of a body do make
it go at a certain rate in imaginary space, (which is his manner of putting
the force of gravity,) then there may be given such a proportion of a heavy
body to the medium, as it shall go in such a medium at the same rate; and
nevertheless, there will be an infinite difference, betwixt the resistance of
the medium compared to that body, and the resistance of the imaginary space
compared to that other body which he supposes to be moved in it at the same
rate: which no man will stick at confessing to be very absurd.

Then turning the scales, because the resistance of the medium does somewhat
hinder gravity, and that with less resistance, the heavy body moves faster;
it must follow, that since there is no proportion, betwixt the medium and
imaginary space; there must neither be any proportion betwixt the time in which
a heavy body shall pass through a certain quantity of the medium, and the
time in which it shall pass through as much imaginary space: wherefore, it
must pass over so much imaginary space in an instant. Which is the argument
that Aristotle is so much laughed at for pressing. And in a word, nothing is
more evident, then that, for this effect which Galileo attributes to gravity,
it is unreasonable to putt a diuisible quality, since the effect is
indivisible. And therefore, as evident it is that in his doctrine such
aquality; as intrinsecall gravity is conceived to be, ought not to be putt:
since every power should be fitted to the effect, or end for which it is putt.

An other argument of Galileo is as bad as this; when he endeavors to prove
that all bodies go of a like velocity, because it happens that a lighter
body in some case, goes faster then a heauyer body in an other case* as for
example, in two pendants, whereof the lighter is in the beginning of its
motion, and the heauyer toward the end of it; or if the lighter hangs at a
longer string, and the heauyer at a shorter; we see that the lighter will go
faster then the heauyer. But this concludes no more, then if a man should
prove that a lighter goes faster then a heauyer, because a greater force can
make it go faster; for it is manifest that in a violent motion, the force
which moves a body in the end of its course, is weaker then that which
moves it in the beginning: and the like is, of the two stringes.

But here it is not amiss to solue a Problem he puts, The reason why at
the inferior quarter of a circle, a body does descend faster by the arch of
that quarter, then by the chord ^f it.
which belongs to our present subject. He finds by experience, that if two
bodies descend at the same time from the same point, and do go to the same
point, the one by the inferior quarter of the cercle; the other, by the chord
to that arch, or by any other lines which are chordes to parts of that arch:
he finds (I say) that the mooueable goes faster by the arch, then by any of
the chordes. And the reason is evident, if we consider that the nearer any
motion does come unto a perpendicular one downewardes, the greater velocity it
must have and that in the arch of such a quadrant, every particular part of it
inclines to the perpendicular of the place where it is, more then the part of
the chord answerable unto it does.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. An answer to objections against the causes of natural
motion, auowed in the former chapter; and a refutation of the contrary opinion.
The first objection answered; why a hollow body descends slower then a
solid one.
But to return to the thridde of our doctrine; there may peradventure be
objected against it, that if the violence of a bodies descent toward the
center, did proceed only from the density of it (which gives it an aptitude,
the better to cut the medium) and from the multitude of little atoms
descending that strike upon it, and press it the way they go; which is
downewardes: then it would not import whether the inner part of that body were
as solid as the outward parts; for it cutteth with only the outward, and is
smitten only upon the outward. And yet experience, shows us the contrary:
for a great bullet of lead, that is solid and lead throughout; descends
faster then if three quarters of the diameter were hollow within; and such a
one falling upon any resisting substance, works a greater effect then a
hollow one. And a ball of brass that has but a thin outside of metal will
swim upon the water, when a massy one sinketh presently. Whereby it
appears, that it is rather some other quality belonging to the very bulk of
the metal in it self; and not these outward causes, that occasion gravity.

But this difficulty is easily overcome, if you consider how subtle those
atoms are which descending downewardes and striking upon a body in their way,
do cause its motion likewise downewardes: for you may remember how we have
showed them to be the subtilest and the minutest divisions that light, the
subtilest and sharpest diuider in nature, can make. It is then easy to
conceive that these extreme subtle bodies do penetrate all others, as light
does glass; and do run through them, as sand does through a small sieue, or
as water through a sponge; so that they strike, not only upon the superficies,
but as well in every most interior part of the whole body; running quite
through it all, by the pores of it. And then, it must needs follow that the
solider it is; and the more parts it has within (as well as without) to be
stricken upon; the faster it must go; and the greater effect it must work in
what it falls upon: whereas if three quarters of the diameter of it within,
should be filled with nothing but with air; the atoms would fly without any
considerable effect through all that space, by reason of the rarity and
cessibility of it.

And that these atoms are thus subtle; is manifest by several effects which
we see in nature. Diverse Authors that write of Egypt, do assure us that though
their houses be built of strong stone; nevertheless, a clodde of earth laid
in the inmost rooms, and shutt up from all appearing communication with air,
will increase its weight so notably, as thereby they can judge the change of
weather, which will shortly ensue. Which can proceed from no other cause, but
from a multitude of little atoms of saltpeter; which floating in the air, do
penetrate through the strongest walls, and all the massy defenses in their
way, and do settle in the clodde of earth as soon as they meet with it;
because it is of a temper fit to entertain and to conserve, and to embody
them. Delights have showed us the way, how to make the spirits or atoms of
snow and saltpeter pass through a glass vessel; which Alchimists hold to be
the most impenetrable of all they can find to work with. In our own bodies;
the aches which feeble parts do feel before change of weather, and the
heaviness of our heads and shoulders, if we remain in the open air
presently after sunnesett; do abundantly testify, that even the grosser of
these atoms (which are the first that fall) do vehemently penetrate our
bodies: so as, sense will make us believe, what reason peradventure could not.

But besides all this, there is yet a more conuincing reason, why the
descending atoms should move the whole density of a body; even though it were
so dense that they could not penetrate it, and get into the bowels of it; but
must be content to strike barely upon the outside of it. For nature has so
ordered the matter, that when dense parts stick close together, and make the
length composed of them to be very stiff* one can not be moved but that all
the rest (which are in that line) must likewise be thereby moved: so that if
all the world weary composed of atoms, close sticking together, the least
motion imaginable, must drive on all that were in a straight line, to the very
end of the world. This you see is evident in reason. And experience confirms
it, when by a little knock given at the end of a long beam, the shaking
(which makes sound) reaches sensibly to the other end. The blind man that
governs his steps by feeling, in defect of eyes, receives aduertisements
of remote things, through a staff which he holds in his hands,
peradventure more particularly then his eyes could have directed him. And the
like is of a deaf man that hears the sound of an instrument, by holding one
end of a stick in his mouth, whiles the other end rests upon the instrument.
And some are of opinion (and they, not of the rank of vulgar Philosophers)
that if a staff were as long as to reach from the sun to us, it would have
the same effect in a moment of time. Although for my part I am hard to believe
that we could receive an advertisement so far, unless the staff were of
such a thickness as being proportionable to the length might keep it from
facile bending: for if it should be very plyant it would do us no service: as
we experience in a thridde, which reaching from our hand to the ground, if it
knock against any thing, makes no sensible impression in our hand.

So that in fine reason, sense and authority do all of them show us, that the
less the atoms should penetrate into a moving body, by reason of the extreme
density of it, the more efficaciously they would work, and the greater
celerity they would cause in its motion. And hence we may give the fullest
solution to the objection above, which was to this effect: that seeing,
division is made only by the superficies or exterior part of the dense body;
and that the virtue whereby a dense body does work, is only its resistance to
division; which makes it apt to divide: it would follow that a hollow boule of
brass or iron should be as heavy as a solid one. For we may answer, that
seeing the atoms must stricke through the body; and that a cessible body does
not receive their strokes so firmly as a stiff one; nor can convey them so
far: if unto a stiff superficies there succeed a yielding inside, the
strokes must of necessity loose much of their force; and consequently, can not
move a body full of air, with so much celerity, or with so much efficacy, as
they may a solid one.

The second objection answered, and the reasons shown, why atoms do
continually overtake the descending dense body.
But then, you may peradventure say, that if these strokes of the descending
atoms upon a dense body, were the cause of its motion downewardes, we must
allow the atoms to move faster then the dense body; that so, they may still
overtake it, and drive it along, and enter into it: whereas, if they should
move slower then it, none of them could come in their turn to give it a
stroke, but it would be past them, and out of their reach before they could
strike it. But it is evident (say you) out of these pretended causes of this
motion, that such atoms can not move so swiftly downewardes, as a great dense
body; since their litlenesse and their rarity, are both of them hindering to
their motion: and therefore, this can not be the cause of that effect which we
call gravity.

To this I reply; that to have the atoms give these blows to a descending
dense body, does not require that their natural and ordinary motion should be
swifter then the descent of such a dense body: but the very descent of it,
occasioneth their striking it, for as it falls and makes it self a way
through them, they divide themselves before it, and swell on the sides and a
little above it, and presently close again behind it and over it as soon as it
is past. Now that closing, to hinder vacuity of space, is a sudden one; and
thereby attaineth great velocity; which would carry the atoms in that degree
of velocity, further then the descending body, if they did not encounter with
it in their way to retarde them: which encounter and retarding, implies such
strokes, upon the dense body, as we suppose to cause this motion. And the like
we see in water; into which letting a stone fall; presently the water that was
divided by the stone and swells on the sides higher, then it was before,
closes upon the back of the descending stone, and follows it so violently,
that for a while after, it leaves a purling hole in the place where the stone
went down; till by the repose of the stone, the water returns likewise to
its quiet; and so, its superficies becomes even.

In the third place, an enquiry occurreth emergent out of this doctrine, of the
cause of bodies moving vpwardes and downewardes. A curious question left
undecided.
Which is; whether there would be any natural motion deep in the earth,
beyond the actiuity of the suns beams? For out of these principles, it
follows that there would not: and consequently, there must be a vast orb in
which there would be no motion of gravity or of leuity: for suppose that the
sun beams might pierce a thousand miles deep into the body of the earth;
yet there would still remain a mass, whose diameter would be near 5000
miles, in which there would be no grauitation nor the contrary motion.

For my part, I shall make no difficulty to grant the inference, as far as
concerns motion caused by our sun: for what inconvenience would follow out
of it? But I will not offer at determining whether there may not be enclosed
within that great sphere of earth, some other fire, (such as the Chymistes
talk of) an Archeus; a Demogorgon; seated in the center, like the heart in
animals; which may raise up vapors, and boil an air out of them, and divide
gross bodies into atoms; and accordingly give them motions, answerable to
ours, but in different lines from ours, according as that fire or sun is
situated: since the farre-searching Author of the Dialogues de Mundo, has left
that speculation undecided, after he had touched upon it in the 12: knott of
his first Dialogue.

Fourthly, The fourth objection answered; why the descent of the same heavy
bodies, is equal in so great inequality of the atoms which cause it.
it may be objected that if such descending atoms, as we have described, were
the cause of a bodies gravity, and descending toward the center; the same
body would at diverse times descend more and less swiftly: for example after
midnight when the atoms begin to descend more slowly; then likewise, the same
body would descend more slowly in a like proportion, and not weigh so much as
it did in the heat of the day. The same may be said of summer and winter: for
in winter time, the atoms seem to be more gross; and consequently, to strike
more strongly upon the bodies they meet with in their way as they descend: yet
on the other side, they seem in the summer to be more numerous, as also to
descend from a greater height; both which circumstances will be cause of a
stronger stroke and more vigourous impulse upon the body they hitt. And the
like may be objected of diverse parts of the world, for in the torride zone it
will always happen as in summer in places of the temperate zone; and in the
polar climes, as in deepest winter: so that no where, there would be any
standard or certainty in the weight of bodies, if it depended upon so mutable a
cause. And it makes to the same effect, that a body which lies under a thick
rock, or any other very dense body, that can not be penetrated by any great
store of atoms; should not be so heavy as it would be in the open and free
air, where the atoms in their complete numbers have their full strokes.

For answer to these and such like instances; we are to note first, that it is
not so much the number, or the violence of the percussion, of the striking
atoms, as the density of the thing stricken which gives the measure to the
descending of a weighty body: and the chief thing which the stroke of the
atoms gives unto a dense body, is a determination of the way which a dense
body is to cut unto it self: therefore, multiplication or lessening of the
atoms, will not make any sensible difference betwixt the weight of one dense
body, where many atoms do strike, and an other body of the same density where
but few do strike; so that, the stroke downewardes of the descending atoms,
be greater then the stroke vpwardes of the ascending atoms; and thereby
determines it to weigh to the centerwardes, and not rise floating vpwardes,
which is all the sensible effect we can perceive.

Next, we may observe, that the first particulars of the objection, do not
reach home to enfeeble our doctrine in this particular, although we admit them
to be in such sort as they are proposed: for they do withal implye such a
perpetual variation of causes, ever favorable to our position, that nothing
can be inferred out of them to repugne against it. As thus: when there are many
atoms descending in the air; the same general cause which makes them be
many, makes them also be light, in proportion to their multitude. And so, when
they are few, they are heavy; likewise, when the atoms are light, the air is
rarifyed and thin; and when they are heavy, the air is thick: and so upon
the whole matter it is evident that we can not make such a precise and exact
judgment of the variety of circumstances, as to be able to determine, when
there is absolutely more cause of weight; and when less. And as we find not
weight enough in either side of these opposite circumstances to turn the
scales in our discourse, so likewise we find the same indifference in
experience it self: for the weights we use, do weigh equally in mysty weather
and in clear: and yet in rigor of discourse, we can not doubt but that in
truth they do not grauitate or weigh so much (though the difference be
imperceptible to sense) when the air is thick and foggy, as when it is pure
and rarifyed: which thickenesse of the medium, when it arriueth to a very
notable degree, as for example to water, makes then a great difference of a
heavy bobies grauitation in it; and accordingly, we see a great difference
between heavy bodies descending in water and in air; though between two
kinds of air, none is to be observed, their difference is so small in respect
of the density of the body that descends in the^. And therefore, seeing that
an assured and certain difference in circumstances makes no sensible
inequality in the effect; we can not expect any from such circumstances, as we
may reasonably doubt whether there be any inequality among the^ or no.

Besides that, if in any of the proposed cases, a heavy body should grauitate
more, and be heauyer one time then an other; yet by weighing it, we could not
discern it; since that the counterpoise (which is to determine its weight)
must likewise be in the same proportion heauyer then it was. And besides
weighing, no other means remains to discover its greater grauitation, but to
compare it to time in its descent: and I believe that in all such distances as
we can try it in, its inequalities will be no whitt less difficult to be
observed that way, then any other.

Lastly, The reason, why the shelter of a thick body does not hinder the
descent of that which is under* ti.
to bend our discourse particularly to that instance of the objection; where it
is conceived that if gravity or descending downewardes of bodies, proceeded
from atoms striking upon them as they move downewardes; it would follow that
a stone or other dense body lying under shelter of a thick, hard, and
impenetrable adamantine rock, would have no impulse downewardes, and
consequently would not weigh there. We may note that no body whatsoever,
compacted by physical causes and agents, can be so dense and imporous, but
that such atoms, as these we speak of, must be in them, and in every part of
them, and every where pass through and through them; as water does through a
seeue or through a sponge: and this universal maxim must extend as far as
the sun, or as any other heat communicating with the sun, does reach and
is found.

The reason whereof, is, because these atoms are no other thing, but such
extreme little bodies as are resolved by heat; out of the maine stock of those
massy bodies upon which the sun and heat do work. Now then, it being
certain, out of what we have heretofore said, that all mixed bodies have their
temper and consistence, and generation from the mingling of fire with the rest
of the Elements that compose them; and from the concoction or digestion which
fire makes in those bodies: it is evident, that no mixed body whatsoever, nor
any sensible part of a mixed body, can be void of pores capable of such atoms,
nor can be without such atoms, passing through those pores; which atoms by
mediation of the air (that likewise has its share in such pores) must have
communication with the rest of the great sea of air, and with the motions that
pass in it. And consequently; in all and in every sensible part, of any such
extreme dense, and pretended impenetrable body, (to the notice whereof we can
arrive) this percussion of atoms must be found; and they will have no
difficulty in running through; nor, by means of it, in striking any other body
lying under the shelter of it; and thus both in, and from, that hard body,
there must be still an uninterrupted continuation of gravity or of descending
toward the center.

Unto which we may add, that the stone or dense body can not lie so close to
the rock that covers it, but that some air must be between, (for if
nothing were between, they would be united, and become one continued body;)
and in that air (which is a creek of the great ocean of air spread over the
world, that is every where bestrewed with moving atoms; and which is
continually fed, like a running stream, with new air that drives on the air
it ouertaketh) there is no doubt but there are descending atoms, as well as in
all the rest of its maine body: and these descending atoms meeting with the
stone, must needs give some stroke upon it; and that stroke (be it never so
little) can not choose but work some effect, in making the stone remove a
little that way they go; and that motion, whereby the space is enlarged,
between the stone and the sheltering rock, must draw in a greater quantity of
air and atoms to strike upon it. And thus, by little and little, the stone
passes through all the degrees of tardity by which a descending body parts
from rest: which is by so much the more speedily done, by how much the body is
more eminent in density. But this difference of time, in regard of the atoms
strokes only; and abstracting from the bodies density; will be insensible to
us; seeing (as we have said) no more is required of them, but to give a
determination downewardes.

The reason why some bodies sink, others swim.
And out of this, we clearly see the reason why the same atoms, striking upon
one body lying upon the water, do make it sink; and upon an other, they do
not. As for example, if you lay upon the superficies of some water, a piece of
iron, and a piece of cork, of equal biggenesse and of the same figure; the
iron will be beaten down to the bottom, and the cork will floate at the
top. The reason whereof is, the different proportions of the comparison of
their densities with the density of water: for (as we have said) the efficacy,
and force of desce^ding, is to be measured by that. So then, the strokes of
the atoms, being more efficacious upon water then upon cork, because the
density of water is greater then the density of cork considering the
abundance of air that is harbored in the large pores of it; it follows
that the atoms will make the water go down more forcibly then they will
cork. But the density of iron exceeding the density of water; the same
strokes will make the iron descend faster then the water; and consequently the
iron must sink in the water, and the cork will swim upon it.

And this same is the cause, why if a piece of cork be held by force at the
bottom of the water; it will rise up to the top of the water, as soon as
the violence is taken away that kept it down: for the atoms strokes having
more force upon the water then upon the cork; they make the water sink and
slide under it; first, a little thin plate of water; and then an other, a
little thicker; and so by degrees more and more, till it has lifted the cork
quite up to the top.

Fi^thly it may be objected, that these atoms do not descend alwayse
perpendicularly, be sometimes sloapingly; and in that case, if their strokes
be the cause of dense bodies moving, The fifth objection answered concerning
the descending of heavy bodies in streams.
they should move sloaping, and not downward. Now that these atoms descend
sometimes sloapingly, is evident, as when (for example) they meet with a
stream of water, or with a strong wind, or even with any other little motion of
the air, such as carries feathers up and down hither and thither; which must
needs waft the atoms in some measure along with them their way; seeing then
that such a gentle motion of the air is able to putt a feather out of its way,
notwithstanding the percussions of the atoms upon it; why shall it not
likewise putt a piece of iron out of its way downewardes, since the iron has
nothing from the atoms but a determination to its way? But much more, why
should not a strong wind, or a current of water, do it; since the atoms
themselves that give the iron its determination, must needs be hurryed along
with them?

To this we answer, that we must consider, how any wind or water which runs
in that sort, is it self originally full of such atoms which continually, and
every where, press into it and cut through it, in pursuing their constant
perpetual course of descending; in such sort, as we have showed in their
running, through any hard rock, or other densest body. And these atoms, do
make the wind or the water primarily tend downewardes; though other accidental
causes impell them secondarily to a sloaping motion. And still, their primary
natural motion will be in truth strongest; though their not having scope to
obey that, but their having enough, to obey the violent motion, makes this
become the more obseruable. Which appears evidently out of this; that if
there be a hole in the bottom of the pipe that conueyeth water sloapingly, be
the pipe never so long, and consequently the sloaping motion never so forcible;
yet the water will run out at that hole to obey its more powerful impulse
to the centerwardes, rather then continue the violent motion, in which it had
arrived to a great degree of celerity.

Which being so, it is easy to conceive that the atoms in the wind or water
which move perpendicularly downewardes, will still continue the irons motion
downewardes, notwithstanding the mediums sloaping motion: since the prevailing
force determines, both the iron, and the medium downewardes; and the iron has
a superproportion of density to cut its way, according as the preualent motion
determines it.

But if the descending atoms, be in part carried along down the stream by
the current of wind or water; yet still the current brings with it, new
atoms into the place of those that are carried away: and these atoms, in
every point of place wheresoever they are, do of themselves tend
perpendicularly downewardes; howbeit they are forced from the complete effect
of their tendance, by the violence of the current: so that in this case they
are moved by a declining motion, compounded of their own natural motion, and
of the forced motion, with which the stream carries them. Now then if a dense
body, do fall into such a current where these different motions give their
several impulses, it will be carried (in such sort as we say of the atoms;
but in an other proportion) not in a perpendicular but in a mixed declining
line, compounded of the several impulses, which the atoms and the current do
give it (in which also it is to be remembered, how the current gives an impulse
downewardes, as well as sloaping; and peradventure the strongest downewardes:)
and the declination will be more or less; according, as the violent impulse
preuayleth more or less against the natural motion.

But this is not all that is to be considered in estimating the declination of
a dense bodies motion when it is sinking in a current of wind or water; you
must remember that the dense body it self, has a particular virtue of its
own (namely its density) by which it receives and prosecuteth more fully its
determination downewardes; and therefore the force of that body in cutting its
way through the medium, is also to be considered in this case, as well as
above, in calculating its declining from the perpendicular; and out of all
these causes will result a middle declination, co^pounded of the motion of the
water or wind both wayse, and of its own motion by the perpendicular line. And
since of these three causes of a dense bodies motion, its own virtue in
prosecuting by its density the determination it requires, is the most
efficacious by much after it has once received a determination from without;
its declination will be but little if it be very dense and heavy. But if it
recede much from density, so as to have, some near proportion to the density
of the medium, the declination will be great. And in a word, according as the
body is heauyer or lighter, the declination will be more or less, in the same
current though not exactly according to the proportion of the diminishing of
its density, as long as there is a superproportion of its density to the
medium: since that such a superproportion (as we have declared heretofore)
makes the mediums operation upon the dense body scarce considerable.

And hence you see why a stone or piece of iron, is not carried out of its way
as well as feather; because the stones motion downewardes, is greater and
stronger, then the motion of a feather downewardes. And by consequence, the
force that can deturne a feather from its course downewardes, is not able to
deturne a stone. And if it be replied, that it may be so ordered that the stone
shall have no motion, before it be in the stream of a river, and
notwithstanding it will still move downewardes; we may answer, that
considering the little decliuity of the bed of such a stream, the strongest
motion of the parts of the stream, must necessarily be downewardes; and
consequently, they will beat the stone downewardes. And if they do not the
like to a feather or other light body; it is because other parts of the
stream, do get under the light body; and beat it vpwardes, which they have
not power enough to do to the stone.

Sixthly, The sixth objection answered: and that all heavy elements do weigh in
their own spheres.
it may be objected, that if Elements do not weigh in their own spheres; then
their gravity and descending must proceed from some other cause and not from
this percussion of the atoms we attribute it to; which percussion we have
determined goes through all bodies whatsoever, and beats upon every sensible
part of them. But that Elements weigh not in their own spheres, appears out
of the experience of a siphon; for though one leg of the siphon, be suncke
never so much deeper into the body of the water, then the other leg reaches
below the superficies of the water: nevertheless, if once the outward leg
become full of water, it will draw it out of the other longer leg: which it
should not do, if the parts of water that are comprised within their whole
bulk, did weigh; seeing that the bulk of water is much greater, in the sunk
leg then in the other: and therefore these should rather draw back the other
water into the cisterne, then be themselves drawn out of it into the air.

To this we answer that it is evident the Elements do weigh in their own
spheres, at least, as far as we can reach to their spheres: for we see that
a ballone stuffed hard with air is heauyer then an empty one. Again more
water would not be heauyer then less if the inward parts of it did not weigh:
and if a hole were dug in the bottom of the sea, the water would not run
into it and fill it, if it did not grauitate over it. Lastly, there are those
who undertake to distinguish in a deep water, the diverse weights which
several parts of it have, as they grow still heauyer and heauyer toward the
bottom: and they are so cunning in this art, that they profess to make
instruments which by their equality of their weight to a determinate part of
the water, shall stand just in that part, and neither rise nor fall higher or
lower: but if it be putt lower, it shall ascend to its exact equally weighing
orb of the water; and if it be putt higher, it shall descend until it comes
to rest precisely in that place. Whence it is evident, that parts of water do
weigh within the bulk, of their maine body; and of the like we have no reason
to doubt, in the other two weighty Elements.

As for the opposition of the siphon, we refer that point to where we shall
have occasion to declare the nature of that engine, of set purpose. And there
we shall show, that it could not succeed in its operation, unless the parts
of water did grauitate in their maine bulk, into which one leg of the siphon
is sunk.

Lastly, The 7th objection answered: and the reason why we do not feel the
course of the air and atoms that beat continually upon us.
it may be objected, that if there were such a course of atoms as we say; and
that their strokes were the cause of so notable an effect, as the gravity of
heavy bodies: we should feel it palpably in our own bodies, which experience
shows us we do not.

To this we answer first: that their is no necessity we should feel this
course of atoms, since by their subtility they penetrate all bodies; and
consequently, do not give such strokes as are sensible. Secondly, if we
consider that dustes, and strawes, and feathers do light upon us without
causing any sense in us; much more we may conceive that atoms (which are
infinitely more subtle and light) can not cause in us any feeling of them.
Thirdly, we see that what is continual with us, and mingled in all things
does not make us take any especial notice of it: and this is the case of the
smiting of atoms. Nevertheless, peradventure we feel them in truth, as often
as we feel hot and cold weather, and in all catarres or other such changes,
which do as it were sink into our body without our perceiving any sensible
cause of them: for no question but these atoms are the immediate causes of all
good and bad qualities in the air. Lastly, when we consider that we can not
long together hold out our arm at length, or our foot from the ground, and
reflect upon such like impotencies of our resisting the gravity of our own
body: we can not doubt, but that in these cases we feel the effect of these
atoms, working upon those parts; although we can not by our sense discern
immediately that these are the causes of it.

How in the same body, gravity may be greater then density, and density then
gravity; though they be the same thing.
But now it is time to draw our Reader out of a difficulty, which may
peradventure have perplexed him in the greatest part of what he has hitherto
gone over. In our inuestigation of the Elements, we took for a principle
thereunto: that gravity, is sometimes more, sometimes less, then the density
of the body in which it is. But in our explication of rarity and density; and
again in our explication of gravity; we seem to putt, that gravity and
density is all one. This thorn I apprehend, may in all this distance, have
putt some to pain: but it was impossible for me to remedy it; because I had
not yet delivered the manner of grauitation. Here then I will do my best, to
assuage their grief, by reconciling these appearing repugnancies.

We are therefore to consider, that density (in it self) does signify a
difficulty to have the parts of its subject in which it is, separated one
from an other; and that gravity (likewise in it self) does signify a quality,
by which a heavy body does descend toward the center; or (which is consequent
thereunto) a force to make an other body descend. Now this power, we have
showed, does belong unto density, so far forth as a dense body being stricken
by an other, does not yield by suffering its parts to be divided; but, with
its whole bulk strikes the next before it, and divides it, if it be more
diuisible then it self is. So that you see, density has the name of density,
in consideration of a passive quality or rather of an impassibility, which it
has; and the same density is called gravity, in respect of an active quality
it has which follows this impassibility. And both of them are estimated by
the different respects which the same body or subject, in which they are, have
unto different bodies that are the terms whereunto it is compared; for the
active quality or gravity of a dense body, is esteemed by its respect to the
body it strikes upon; whereas its density, includes a respect singly to the
body that strikes it.

Now it is no wonder that this change of comparison, works a disparity in the
denominations: and that thereby, the same body, may be conceived to be more or
less impartible, then it is active or heavy. As for example, let us, of a
dense Element, take any one least part, which must of necessity be in its own
nature and kind absolutely impartible: and yet it is evident, that the gravity
of this part must be exceeding little, by reason of the litlenesse of its
quantity; so that thus you see an extremity of the effect of density, joined
together in one body (by the accident of the litlenesse of it) with a contrary
extremity of the effect of gravity, (or rather with the want of it) each of
them within the limits of the same species. In like manner it happens, that
the same body in one circumstance is more weighty; in an other (or rather in
the contrary) is more partible: so water when it is in a payle, because it is
thereby hindered from spreading abroad, has the effect of gravity
predominating in it; but if it be poured out, it has the effect of partibility
more. And thus it happens that merely by the gradation of rarity and
density, one dense body may be apt, out of the general course of natural
causes, to be more diuisible, the^ to be a diuider; though according to the
nature of the degrees considered absolutely in themselves, what is more
powerful to divide, is also more resiste^t and harder to be divided. And this
arriueth in that degree which makes water; for the falling and beating of the
atoms upon water, has the power, both to divide it and to mak^ it descend;
but so, that by making it descend it divides it. And therefore we say that it
has more grautty then density, though it be the very density of it, which is
the cause that makes it partible, by the working of one part upon an other:
for if the atoms did not find the body, so dense as it is, they could not by
their beating upon one part make an other be divided.

So that, a dense body to be more heavy then dense, signifies nothing else,
but that it is in such a degree of density, that some of its own parts, by
their being assisted and set on work by a general cause, (which is the fall
of the atoms) are powerful enough to divide, other adjoining parts of the
same density with them, one from an other: in such sort as we see, that water
poured out of an eawer into a basen where there is already other water, has
the power to divide the water in the basen by the assistance of the celerity
which it gets in descending. And now I hope the reader is fully satisfied
that there is no contradiction in putting Density and Gravity to be the same
thing materially; and that nevertheless the same thing, may be more heavy then
dense, or more dense then heavy, as we took it to our several purposes in the
inuestigation of the Elements. The opinion of grauities being an intrinsecall
inclination of a body to the center, refuted by reason.


Having, thus laid an intelligible ground to discover how these motions that
are general to all bodies, and are natural in chief, are contrived by
nature: we will now endeavor to show that the contrary position is not only
voluntary, but also impossible. Let us therefore suppose that a body has a
quality to move it downewardes. And first we shall ask what downewardes
signifies: for either it signifies toward a fixed point of imaginary space;
or toward a fixed point of the universe; or toward some mooueable point. As
for the first, who would maintain it must have more imagination then judgment,
to think that a natural quality could have an essence determined by a
nothing: because we can frame a conceit of that nothing. As for the second, it
is very uncertain, whether any such point be in nature: for, as for the center
of the earth it is clear that if the earth, be carried about, the center of it
can not be a fixed point. Again, if the center signifies a determinate point
in the earth that is the medium of gravity or of quantity, it is changed as
often as any dust lights unequally upon any one side of the earth, which
would make that side bigger then it was: and I doubt a quality can not have
moral considerations to think that so little does no harm. As for the third
position, likewise it is not intelligible how a quality should change its
inclination or essence, according to the change that should light to make now
one point, now an other, be the center unto which it should tend.

Again, let us consider that a quality has a determinate essence. Then
seeing its power is to move, and to move, signifies to cut the medium it is
moved in; it belongs unto it of its nature, to cut so much of such a medium
in such a time. So that, if no other cause be added but that you take precisely
and in abstracto, that quality, that medium, and that time; this effect will
follow, that so much motion is made. And if this effect should not follow, it
is clear, that the being able to cut so much of such a medium in such a time,
is not the essence of this quality, as it was supposed to be. Dividing then the
time, and the medium, half the motion should de made in half the time, a
quarter of the motion in a quarter of the time, and so without end, as far as
you can divide. But this is demonstratiuely impossible; sithhence it is
demonstrated that a mooueable coming from rest, must of necessity pass through
all degrees of tardity; and therefore by the demonstration cited out of
Galileus, we may take a part in which this gravity can not move its body in a
proportionate part of time, through a proportionate part of the medium.

The same opinion refuted by several experiences.
But because in natural Theorems, experiences are naturally required; let us
see whether nature gives us any testimony of this verity. To that purpose we
may consider a plummet, hanged in a small string from a beam, which being
lifted up gentlely on the one side at the extent of the string, and permitted
to fall merely by the power of gravity, it will ascend very near as high on
the contrary side, as the place it was held in from whence it fell. In this
experiment we may note two things: the first, that if gravity be a quality, it
works against its own nature, in lifting up the plumett, seeing its nature is
only to carry it down. For though it may be answered that it is not the
gravity; but an other quality, called vis impressa which carries it up:
nevertheless it can not be denied, but that gravity is either the immediate or
at least the mediate cause which makes this vis impressa: the effect whereof,
being contrary to the nature of gravity; it is absurd to make gravity the cause
of it: that is, the cause of an essence, whose nature is contrary to its own.
And the same argument, will proceed, though you putt not vis impressa, but
suppose some other thing to be the cause of the plummets remounting, as long as
gravity is said to be a quality: for still gravity must be the cause of an
effect contrary to its own inclination, by setting on foot the immediate
cause to produce it.

The second thing we are to note in this experiment of the plummets ascent is;
that if gravity be a quality, there must be as much resistance to its going
up, as there was force to its coming down. Therefore, there must be twice as
much force to make it ascend, as there was to make it descend: that is to say,
there must be twice as much force, as the natural force of the gravity is: for
there must be once as much, to equalize the resistance of the gravity; and then
an other time as much, to carry it as far through the same medium in the same
time. But it is impossible that any cause should produce an effect greater then
it self.

Again; the gravity must needs be in a determinate degree: and the virtue
that makes the plummett remount (whatsoever it be) may be putt as little as we
please: and consequently, not able to ouersway the gravity alone if it be an
intrinsecall quality and yet the plummet will remount: in which case you putt
an effect, without a cause.

An other experience we may take from the force of sucking, for take the
barrel of a long gunne perfectly bored, and set it upright, with the breech
upon the ground, and take a bullett that is exactly fit for it, but so as it
stick not any where (both the barrel, and it, being perfectly polished;) and
then if you suck at the mouth of the barrel (though never so gently) the
bullett will come up so forcibly, that it will hazard the striking out of your
teeth. Now let us consider, what force were necessary to suck the bullett up,
and how very slowly it would ascend, if in the barrel it had as much
resistance to ascend as in the free air it has inclination to go down. But
if it had a quality of gravity natural to it, it must of necessity have such
resistance: whereas in our experiment we see it comes as easily as the very
air. So that in this example as well as in the other nature teaches us that
gravity is no quality.

And all, or most of the arguments which we have urged against the quality of
gravity in that explication, we have considered it in: have force likewise
against it, although it be said to be an inclination of its subject to move it
self unto unity with the maine stock of its own nature, as diverse witty men
do putt it: for this supposition does but change the intention or end of
gravity: and is but to make it an other kind of intellectual or knowing
Entity, that determines it self to an other end: which is as impossible for a
natural quality to do, as to determine it self to the former ends. And thus
much, the arguments we have proposed, do convince evidently, if they be applied
against this opinion.

THE TWELTH CHAPTER. Of Violent Motion.
The state of the question touching the cause of violent motion.
ANd thus, we have given a short sca^tling, whereby to understand in some
measure, the causes of that motion, which we call natural, by reason it has
its birth from the universal economy of nature here among us; that is from
the general working of the sun, whereby all natural things have their
course: and by reason that the cause of it is at all times, and in all places,
constantly the same. Next unto which the order of discourse leads us to take
a suruay of those forced motions, whose first causes the more apparent they are
the more obscurity they leave us in, to determine by what means they are
continued.

When a tennis ball is stricken by a rackett, or an arrow is shot from a bow,
we plainly see the causes of their motion: namely, the stringes; which first
yielding, and then returning with a greater celerity, do cause the missiues to
speed so fast toward their appointed homes. Experience informs us what
qualities the missiues must be endued withal to move fast and steadily. They
must be so heavy that the air may not break their course; and yet so light,
that they may be within the command of the stroke, which gives them motion;
the striker must be dense, and in its best velocity: the angle which the
missiue is to mount by (if we will have it go to its furthest random) must be
the half of a right one: and lastly, the figure of the missiue must be such,
as may give scope unto the air to bear it up, and yet not hinder its course
by taking too much hold of it. All this we see; but when withal we see that
the moouer, deserteth the moveable as soon as he has given the blow; we are
at a stand, and know not where to seek for that which afterward makes it
fly: for motion being a transient, not a permanent thing; as soon as the
cause cease that begott it, in that very point it must be at an end; and as
long as the motion continues, there must be some permanent cause to make it do
so: so that as soon as the rackett, or bowstring, go back and leave the ball
or arrow; why should not they presently fall straight down to the ground?

That the medium is the only cause, which continues ^^^lent motion.
Aristotle and his followers, have attributed the cause hereof to the air: but
Galileo relisheth not this conception. His arguments against it, are (as I
remember) to this tenor: first; air by reason of its rarity and diuisibility,
seems not apt to conserve motion: next; we see that light things are best
carried by the air; and it has no power over weighty ones: lastly it is
evident that air takes most hold of the broadest superficies; and therefore
an arrow would fly faster broadwayes then longwayes, if this were true.
Nevertheless, since every effect must have a proportionable cause from whence
it immediately flows; and that a body, must have an other body to thrust it
on, as long as it moves; let us examine what bodies do touch a moveable
whilst it is in motion: as the only means to find an issue out of this
difficulty; for, to have recourse unto a quality or impressed force, for
deliverance out of this straight, is a shift that will not serve the turn in
this way of discourse we use. In this Philosophy, no knott admits such a
solution.

If then we enquire what body it is that immediately touches the ball or arrow
whiles it flies; we shall find, that none other does so, but the air and the
atoms in it, after the stringes have given their stroke, and are parted from
the missiue. And although we have Galileos authority, and arguments to
discourage us from believing that the air can work this effect; yet since
there is no other body besides it left for us to consider in this case; let us
at the least examine how the air behaueth it self, after the stroke is
given by the stringes. First then, it is evident, that as soon as the rackett
or bowstring shrinketh back from the missiue, and leaves a space between the
missiue and it (as it is clear, it does, as soon as it has stricken the
resisting body) the air must 'needes clappe in with as much velocity as they
retire, and with some what more; because the missiue goes forward at the same
time, and therefore, the air must hasten to overtake it, least any vacuity
should be left between the string and the arrow. It is certain likewise, that
the air on the sides does also upon the division of it, slide back and help
to fill that space which the departed arrow leaves void. Now this forcible
cloosing of the air at the nocke of the arrow must 'needes give an impulse or
blow upon it: if it seem to be but a little one, you may consider how it is yet
much greater, then what the air and the bodies swimming in it, do at the
first give unto a stone falling from high; and how at the last, those little
atoms that drive a stone in its natural motion, do with their little blows
force it peradventure more violenty and swiftly then any impelling Agent we are
acquainted with, can do. So that the impulse which they make upon the arrow,
pressing violently upon it, after such a vehement concussion, and with a great
velocity, must needs cause a powerful effect in that which of it self is
indifferent to any motion any way.

But unless this motion of the air do continue to beat still upon the arrow,
A further explication of the former doctrine.
it will soon fall to the ground, for want of a cause to drive it forward; and
because the natural motion of the air, (being then the only one) will
determine it downewardes. Let us consider then, how this violent rending of
the air by the blow that the bowstring gives unto the arrow; must needs
disorder the little atoms that swim too and fro in it, and that (being
heauyer then the air) are continually descending downewardes. This disorder,
makes some of the heauyer parts of them, get above others that are lighter
then they; which they not abiding, do press upon those that are next them, and
they upon their fellows: so that there is a great commorion and vndulation
caused in the whole mass of air round about the arrow: which must continue
some time before it can be settled: and it being determined by the motion of
the arrow that way that it slideth, it follows that all this commotion and
vndulation of the air, serves to continue the arrow in its flight. And thus,
faster then any part behind can be settled, new ones before are stirred, till
the resistance of the medium do grow stronger then the impulse of the moouers.

Besides this the arrow pressing upon the air before it, with a greater
velocity then the air (which is a liquide rare body) can admit, to move all
of a piece without breaking: it must of necessity happen that the parts of the
air immediately before the arrow, be driven upon others further of, before
these can be moved to give place unto them; so that in some places the air
becomes condensed, and consequently, in others rarifyed. Which also the wind
that we make in walking, (which will shake a paper pinned loosely, at the wall
of a chamber toward which we walk) and the cooling air caused by fanning
when we are hot, do evidently confirm. So that it can not be doubted, but
that condensation and rarefaction of the air, must necessarily follow the
motion of any solid body: which being admitted it is evident that a great
disorder, and for some remarkable time, must necessarily be in the air; since
it can not brook to continue in more rarity or density then is natural unto
it. Nor can weighty and light parts agree to rest in an equal height or
lowness; which the violence of the arrows motion forces them unto for the
present. Therefore it can not be denied, but that though the arrow slide away,
nevertheless there still remains behind it (by this condensation and
confusion of parts in the air) motion enough to give impulse unto the arrow,
so as to make it continue its motion after the bowstring has left it. That the
air has strength enough to continue violent motion in a moveable. Dial. 1. of
motion page 98.


But here will arise a difficulty: which is, how this clapping in, and
vndulation of the air, should have strength and efficacy enough, to cause the
continuance of so smart a motion, as is an arrows shot, from a bow. To this I
need no other argument for an answer, then to produce Galileos testimony how
great a body, one single man's breath alone, can in due circumstances give a
rapide motion unto: and withal, let us consider how the arrow, and the air
about it are already in a certain degree of velocity; that is to say, the
obstacle that would hinder it, from moving that way (namely, the resistance of
the air) is taken away; and the causes that are to produce it (namely the
determining of the airs, and of the atoms motion that way) are hightened. And
then we may safely conclude that the arrow which of it self is indifferent to
be moved vpwardes or downewardes, or forwards, must needs obey that motion
which is caused in it by the atoms, and the airs pressing upon it; either
according to the impulse of the string; or (when the string begins to
flagge) according to the beatinges that follow the general constitution of
nature; or in a mixed manner according to the proportions that these two hold to
one an other. Which proportions Galileus in his 4th Dialogue of motion, has
attempted to explicate very ingeniously: but having missed in one of his
suppositions; to wit, that forced motion upon an horizontall line, is
throughout uniform; his great labors therein, have taken little effect
toward the advancing the knowledge of nature, as he pretended: for his
conclusions succeed not in experience* as Mersenius assures us after very
exact trials; nor can they in their reasons be fitted to nature.

So that, to conclude this point; I find no difficulty in allowing this motion
of the air strength enough to force the mooueable onwardes, for some time
after the first moouer is severed from it; (and long after, we see no motions
of this nature do endure:) so that we need seek no further cause for the
continuance of it: but may rest satisfied upon the whole matter, that since the
causes and circumstances our reason suggesteth unto us, are after mature and
particular examination proportionable to the effects we see, the doctrine we
deliver must be sound and true.

For the establishing whereof, we need not (considering what we have already
said) spend much time in soluing Galileos arguments against it: An answer to
the first objection; that air is not apt to conserve motion. And how violent
mo^^ comes to cease.
seeing that* out of what we have set down, the answers to them appear
plain enough; for first, we have assigned causes how the air may continue its
motion long enough to give as much impression as is needful unto the arrow,
to make it go on as it does. Which motion is not requisite to be near so
great in the air behind the arrow (that drives it on) as what the arrow
causes in the air before it: for by reason of the density of it, it must
needs make a greater impression in the air it cutteth, then the air, that
causes its motion, would do of it self without the mediation of the arrow.
As, when the force of a hand gives motion unto a knife to cut a loaf of
bread, the knife, by reason of the density and of the figure it has, m^k^th a
greater impression in the loaf, th^n the hand alone would do. And this is the
same that we declared in the natural motion of a heavy thing, downewardes,
unto which we assigned two causes; namely, the beating of the atoms in the
air, falling down in their natural cours^, to determine it the way it is to
go; and the density of the body, that cutting more powerfully then those
atoms can do; gives (together with their help) a greater velocity unto the
mooueable, then the atoms of themselves can give.

Nor does it import that our resolution is against the general nature of rare
and dense bodies, in regard of conseruing motion; as Galileo obiecteth for the
reason why dense bodies do conserve motion longer then rare bodies, is, because
in regard of their dividing virtue, they get in equal times a greater
velocity. Wherefore seeing that velocity is equal unto gravity; it follows
that resistance works not so much upon them as upon rare bodies; and
therefore can not make them cease from motion so easily as it does rare bodies.
This is the general reason for the conservation of motion in dense bodies. But
because in our case, there is a continual cause which conserueth motion in the
air, the air may continue its motion longer then of it self it would do:
not; in the same part of air which Galileus (as it seems) did aim at: but
in diverse parts, in which the mooueable successively is.

Which being concluded, let us see how the forced motion comes to decrease
and to be ended. To which purpose we may observe, that the impression which the
arrow receives from the air that drives it forwards, being weaker then that
which it received at the first from the string, (by reason, that the air is
not so de^se, and therefore ca^ not strike so great a blow) the arrow does not
in this second measure of time, (wherein we consider the impulse given by the
air only) cut so strongly the air before it, nor press so violently upon
it, as in the first measure when the string parting from it did beat it
forwards: for till then, the velocity increases in the arrow, as it does in
the string that carries it along, which proceeds from rest at the singers
loose from it, to its highest degree of velocity; which is, when it arriueth to
the utmost extent of its ierke, where it quitteth the arrow. And therefore, the
air now does not so swiftly, nor so much of it, rebound back from before, and
clappe it self behind the arrow, to fill the space that else would be left
void by the arrows moving forward: and consequently, the blow it gives in
the third measure, to drive the arrow on, can not be so great as the blow was
immediately after the stringes parting from it; which was in the second measure
of time: and therefore, the arrow must needs move slower in the third measure
then it did in the second; as formerly it moved slower in the second (which
was the airs first stroke) then it did in the first, when the string drove it
forwards. And thus, successively in every moment of time, as the causes grow
weaker and weaker by the increase of resistance in the air before, and by the
decrease of force in the subsequent air; so, the motion must be slower and
slower, till it come to pure cessation. An answer to the second objection that
the air has no power over heavy bodies.


As for Galileus second argument; that the air has little power over heavy
things; and therefore he will not allow it to be the cause of continuing
forced motions in dense bodies: I wish he could as well have made experience
what velocity of motion a man's breath might produce in a heavy bullett lying
upon an even, hard, and slippery plain, (for a table would be too short) as he
did, how admirable great a one it produced in pendants hanging in the air:
and, I doubt not but he would have granted it as powerful in causing
horizontall motions, as he found it in the vndulations of his pendantes. Which
nevertheless, do sufficiently convince how great a power air has over heavy
bodies. As likewise the experience of windgunnes assures us that air duly
applied is able to give greater motion unto heavy bodies then unto light ones.
For how can a straw or feather be imagined possibly to fly with half the
violence as a bullett of lead does out of one of those engines? And when a man
sucketh a bullett vpwardes in a perfectly bored barrel of a gunne, which the
bullett fitteth exactly (as we have mentioned before) with what a violence does
it follow the breath and ascend to the mouth of the barrel? I remember to have
seen a man that was vncautious and sucked strongly that had his foreteeth
beaten out by the blow of the bullett ascending.

This experiment (if well looked into) may peradventure make good a great part
of this doctrine we now deliver. For, the air pressing in behind the bullett
at the touch hole, gives it its impulse vpwardes; unto which the density of
the bullett being added, you have the cause of its swiftness, and violence;
(for a bullett of wood or cork, would not ascend so fast and so strongly) and
the sucking away of the air before it, takes away that resistance which
otherwise it would encounter with, by the air lying in the way of it: and its
following the breath with so great ease, shows (as we touched before) that of
it self it is indifferent to any motion, when nothing presses upon it to
determine it a certain way. An answer to the third objection, that an arrow
should fly faster broadwayes then lo^gwayes*


Now to Galileos last argument; that an arrow should fly faster broadwayes,
then longwayes, if the air were cause of its motion: there needs no more to
be said, but that the resistance of the air before, hinders it as much as
the impulse of the air behind helps it on; so that nothing is gained in that
regard; but much is lost, in respect of the figure; which makes the arrow
unapt to cut the air so well when it flies broadwayes, as when it is shot
longwayes: and therefore the air being weakly cut so much of it can not
clappe in behind the arrow and drive it on, against the resistance before,
which is much greater.

Thus far, with due respect, and with acknowledging remembrance of the many
admirable mysteries of natute which that great man has taught the world, we
have taken liberty to dispute against him: because this difficulty seems to
have driven him against his Genius, to believe that in such motions there must
be allowed a quality imprinted into the moved body to cause them: which our
whole scope both in this and in all other occasions where like qualities are
urged, is to prove superfluous and ill grounded in nature; and to be but mere
terms to confound and leave in the dark whosoever is forced to fly unto them.

THE THERTEENTH CHAPTER. Of three sorts of violent motion, Reflection,
Vndulation, and Refraction.
That reflection is a kind of violent motion.
THe motion we have last spoken of, because it is ordinarily either in part or
wholly contrary to gravity (which is accounted the natural motion of most
bodies) uses to be called violent or forced. And thus, you have delivered unto
you the natures and causes, both of natural and of forced motion; yet it
remains that we advertise you of some particular kinds of this forced
motion, which seem to be different from it, but indeed are not. As first, the
motion of reflection: which if we do but consider how forced motion is made; we
shall find that it is nothing else but a forced motion, whose line whereupon it
is made, is as it were snapped in two by the encounter of a hard body. For even
as we see in a spoute of water that is strongly shot against a wall, the water
following drives the precedent parts first to the wall, and afterward
coming themselves to the wall, forces them again an other way from the wall:
right so, the latter parts of the torrent of air, which is caused by the
force that occasioneth the forced motion, drives the former parts, first upon
the resistent body, and afterward again from it. But this is more eminent in
light then in any other body, because light does less rissent gravity; and so
observes the pure course of the stroke, better then any other body; from
which, others do for the most part decline some way by reason of their weight.

Reflection is made at equal angles.
Now the particular law of reflection is, that the line incident, and the line of
reflection must make equal angles, with that line of the resistent superficies
which is in the same superficies with themselves. The demonstration whereof,
that great wit Renatus Des Carts has excellently set down in his book of
Dioptrikes by the example of a ball stricken by a rackett against the earth, or
any resisting body: the substance where of is as follows.

In the Rectangle Parallelogramme AE, let CE be the superficies of the earth:
A, the point from which the rackett HG, strikes the ball by the line AB, to
the point B in the superficies of the earth: and let us consider C, to be on
the left hand, and E on the right. Now we are to show that the ball will
rebound by the line BF, to the point F, in the same time in which it went from
A to B; and so make the angle ABC equal to the angle FBE. For the effecting
whereof, we must abstract, according to the manner of mathematicians, from all
Physical inequalities, and suppose the superficies CE, to be mathematically
plain, and the force of the rackett to continue equally strong in B as it is
in A: for although in truth, neither of these be rigorously so; nevertheless,
because there is no sensible defect in any operation that depends on them, it
is the same to our purpose as if they were mathematically so. We see then that
the rackett HG, does in a certain time drive the ball from A to B; that is to
say, from the left hand to the right, as far as from C to B; and from above
to downewardes, as far as from A to C. We see again, that the superficies
CE, is not contrary unto this motion of the ball, as it goes from the left
hand to the right; for the line CE lies likewise that way: but it is contrary
unto it, as it goes from above downewardes; for in that course the superficies
C E encountereth and puts a periode to the line AC. And therefore the motion
of the ball when it meets with the superficies CE, must be changed from the
line AC, so much as the superficies CE is contrary unto it; that is quite
backwards as far as it depends of that opposition. Therefore, when the ball
is come to B, it must go from thence in the same proportion of left hand to
right hand, and from below vpwardes, as it came before from left hand to right
hand, and from above downewardes, when it came from A to B. And consequently,
it must in equal time have passed an other line from left hand to right hand,
as long as the line CB; and likewise, it must at the same time have passed an
other line from below vpwardes as long as AC: which will of necessity make it
hitt in the point F, at the end of so much more time as it spent in going from
A to B; and so, make the two angles ABC, and FBE equal; as every one knows
that has but saluted Euclide.

The motion which we call vndulation needs no further explication: The causes
and properties of vndulation.
for it is manifest, that since a pendant, when it is removed from its
perpendicular, will restore it self thereunto by the natural force of
gravity, and that in so doing it gains a velocity, (and therefore can not
cease on a sudden,) it must needs be carried, out of the force of that
motion, directly the contrary way: until the force of gravity, ouercoming the
velocity, it must be brought back again to the perpe^dicular: which being
done likewise with velocity, it must send it again toward the place from
which it fell at the first. And in this course of motion it must continue for
a while, every vndulation being weaker then other, until at last it quite
cease, by the course of nature settling the air in its due situatio^
according to the natural causes that work upon it. And in this very manner
also is performed that vndulation which we see in water, when it is stirred
from the natural situation of its sphericall superficies.

Galileo has noted that the time in which the vndulations are made which
follow one an other of their own accord, is the same in every one of them; and
that as much time precisely is take up in a pendants going a very short arch
toward the end of its vibration, as was in its going of the greatest arch at
the beginning of its motion. The reason whereof seems strange to him, and he
thinks it to be an accident natural to the body out of its gravity; and that
this effect conuinceth, it is not the air which moves such bodies. Whereas
in truth, it is clearly the air which causes this effect. Because the air
striving at each end (where it is furthest from the force of the motion) to
quiett it self, gets at every bout somewhat upon the space; and so,
contracteth that into a shorter arch.

But it is a great wonder to me, that Galileo should make a wonder of this
effect; to the reason of which, he has laid so fair a fundation upon an
other occasion; had he but reflected upon it. For in his fourth Dialogue of
motion he has demonstrated that a natural mooueable descending in the quarter
of a circle, from what part soever it begins, spends equal time to come
to the lowest point, as if it came from any other part: so that a penda^t being
brought up to any height by the force of a former motion downewardes, it will
be sure to spend as much time in going down from thence to the perpendicular,
as it did at the first when it was let fall from the greatest height. Now I
subsume, that the pendants ascending, being the effect of the velocity of its
motion gained in descending immediately before* the said velocity must be able
to carry it in the same time to a height, that is proportionate to that hight
unto which the velocity, gained in the first fall did cause the pendant to
mount. As for example: if the pendants first descent, were from A to E, the
second from C to E; because the time of those two, is the same, (as Galileus
has demonstrated) it follows that their velocities gained in descending must
of necessity be in the proportion of the line AE to the line CE: therefore,
their effects also must be proportionable. Let us then putt the line ED in
that proportion to the line CE, which CE has to AE; and then the velocity
gained in CE will carry the pendant up from E to D, in the same time in which
the descent AE did carry it up the other way from E to C: wherefore, seeing
that the times of its descent from A to E, and from C to E are equal*
likewise, the two vibrations from A to C and from C to D will be done in equal
times. But that which made Galileo not see the force of the consequence, was
that he did not acknowledge violent motion to be made in the same proportions,
and for the same reasons which are found in natural motion: Refraction at the
entrance into the reflectent body is toward the perpendicular; at the going
out it is from it; when the second superficios is parallel to the first.
which we have above showed to be so, where we discoursed of that matter.

That motion also which we call Refraction, and is manifest to sense, only in
light; (though peradventure hereafter more diligent searchers of nature, may
likewise find it in such other bodies as are called qualities; as in cold or
heat, etc.) is but a kind of Reflection: for there being certain bodies, in
which the passages are so well ordered with their resistances, that all the
parts of them seem to permit light to pass through them, and yet all parts
of them seem to reflect it; when light passes through such bodies, it finds
at the very entrance of them, such resistances, where it passes, as serve it
for a reflectent body; and yet such a reflectent body, as hinders not the
passage through; but only hinders the passage from being in a straight line
with the line incident. Wherefore the light must needs take a plye as beaten
from those parts toward a line drawn from the illuminant, and falling
perpendicularly upon the resisting superficies; and therefore is termed by
mathematicians, to be refracted or broken toward the Perpendicular. Now at
the very going out again of the light, the second superficies (if it be
parallel to the former) must needs upon a contrary cause, strike it the
contrary way: which is termed from the Perpendicular.

As for example: if the ray AB, lights upon the superficies EBF; and finds
entrance; it is not now the superficies OF, that resists or reflecteth it:
but it is that part of the inside (as we may say) of the pore B, which is
toward F; and is a Physical body; not a Mathematical point. The reflection
therefore must be made, as if the reflectent body were IBK: but it is evident
that if AB, did strike upon IK, it would reflect toward AG. But because we
know not the inclination of the superficies IK, whether it be truly a
perpendicular or no, therefore we can not tell the quantity of the inclination
which this reflection must make; but only we know that it must be toward AG.

But before we wade any deeper into this difficulty, A refutation of Monsieur
Des Carts his explication of refraction.
we can not omit a word of the manner of explicating refraction which Monsieur
Des Carts uses, so witty a one as I am sorry it wants success. He
therefore following the demonstration above given of reflection; supposes the
superficies which a ball lights upon, to be a thin linen cloth, or some
other such matter as will break cleanely by the force of the ball striking
smartly upon it. And because that superficies resists only one way,
therefore he infers that the velocity of the ball is lessened only one way
and not the other: so that the velocity of its motion that way in which it
finds no resistance, must be (after the balls passage through the linen) in
a greater proportion to the velocity which it has the other way where it
finds resistance, then it was before. And therefore the ball will in less
time arrive to its periode on the one side then on the other: and consequently,
it will lean toward that side, unto which the course wherein it finds no
opposition, does carry it.

But how much he is mistaken upon the whole matter, a little figure will show:
let us therefore putt a Rectangle Parallelogramme as before AE, which I double
and make the whole Parallelogramme AL, and draw out the line AB, till it comes
to L. Now we must imagine that CE, is the cloth or passable superficies which
Monsieur Des Carts puts; and BL the line it would go in, if there were no
resistance. Next we must seek the perpendicular, which according to our
explication, is AC: for that, falls from A the illuminant, perpendicularly
upon CE; although, some who defend Monsieur Des Carts, seem to make another
line the perpendicular; against the conception of all those that write of
Optikes. But, not to trouble our selves with terms; the question is, whether
the ball that passes, the cloth, must (after its passage through) deflect from
the line BL, (which it would have kept, had there been no resistance) toward
E; or else deflect from that line toward C. And both experience and reason do
assure us, that it must turn toward C: but Monsieur Des Carts says
toward E.

Which to show how it is contrary unto his own principle; let us conceive the
cloth CE to be of some thickenesse, and so draw the line OP to determine that
thickness. And let us make from B upon AL, an other Parallelogramme like the
Parallelogramme AL, whose diameter shall be BQ. And it must necessarilly follow
that the motion from B to Q, if there were no resistance, were in the same
proportion as from A to B. But the proportion of the motion from A to B, is the
proportion of CB to CA; that is, it goes in the same time faster toward D,
then it does toward M, in the proportion which CB has to CA. By which
account, the resistance it has in the way toward D, must also be greater
then the resistance it has in the way toward M, in the proportion which CB
has to CA; and therefore the more tardity must be in the way to D, and not in
the way to M; and consequently, the declination must be from Ewardes, and to
Mwardes. For where there is most resistance, that way likewise must the tardity
be greatest, and the declination must be from that way: but which way the
thickenesse, to be passed in the same time, is most, that way the resistance is
greatest: and the thickenesse is clearly greater toward E, then toward M;
therefore, the resistance must be greatest toward E; and consequently the
declination from the line BL must be toward M, and not toward E.

But the truth is, that in his doctrine the ball would go in a straight line
as if there were no resistance; unless peradventure toward the contrary side
of the cloth, at which it goes out into the free air: for as the resistance
of the cloth is greater in the way toward D, then in the way toward M,
(because it passes a longer line in the same time, as also it did formerly in
the air) so likewise is the force that moves it that way, greater then the
force which moves it the other. And therefore the same proportions that were
in the motion, before it came to the resisting passage, will remain also in
it: at the least until coming near the side at which it goes out, the
resistance be weakened by the thinnenesse of the resistent there: which because
it must needs happen on the side, that has least thickness, the ball must
consequently, turn the other way, where it finds greatest yielding: and so
at its getting out into the free air, it will bend from the greater
resistance, in such manner as we have said above.

Neither do the examples brought by Monsieur Des Carts, An answer to the
arguments brought in favor of Monsieur Des Carts his opinion.
and others in maintenance of this doctrine any thing avail them: for when a
canon bullett shot into a river, hurts the people on the other side; it is
not caused by refraction, but by reflection, as Monsieur Des Carts himself
acknowledges: and therefore, has no force to prove any thing in refraction;
whose laws are diverse from those of pure reflection.

And the same answer serves against the instance of a muskett bullett shot
at a mark under water; which perpetually lights higher then the mark,
though it be exactly just aimed at. For we knowing that it is the nature of
water, by sinking in one place to rise round about, it must of necessity follow
that the bullett which in entering has pressed down the first parts of the
water, has withal thereby putt others further off in a motion of rising: and
therefore the bullet in its goeing on must meet with some water swelling
vpwardes, and must from it receive a ply that way* which can not fail of
carrying it above the mark it was leuelled at. And so we see this effect
proceeds, from reflection or the bounding of the water, and not from
refraction. Besides that it may justly be suspected, the shooter took his aim
too high, by reason of the marks appearing in the water higher then in truth
it is: unless such false aiming were duly prevented.

Neither is Monsieur Des Carts his excuse to be admitted, when he says that
light goes otherwise, then a ball would do, because that in a glass or in
water, the etheriall substance, which he supposes to run through all bodies
is more efficaciously moved then in air: and that therefore, light must go
faster in the glass then in the air, and so turn on that side of the
straight line which is contrary to the side that the ball takes, because the
ball goes not so swiftly. For, (not to dispute of the verity of this
proposition) the effect he pretends, is impossible: for if the etheriall
substance in the air before the glass, be slowly moved (the motion of which,
he calls light) it is impossible that the etheriall substance in the glass
or in the water should be more smartly moved then it. Well it may be less;
but without all doubt, the impulse of the etheriall substance in the glass can
not be greater then its adequate cause which is the motion of the other parts
that are in the air precedent to the glass.

Again; after it is passed the glass, it should return to be a straight line
with the line that it made in the air precedent to the glass: seeing that the
subsequent air must take off just as much; (and no more) as the glass did
add: the contrary whereof experience shows us.

Thirdly, in this explication, it would always go one way in the air, and an
other way in the glass: whereas all experience testifyeth, that in a glass
conuexe on both sides, it still goes in the air after its going out, to the
same side as it did in the glass; but more. And the like happens in glasses
on both sides concaue. Wherefore it is evident, that it is the superficies of
the glass, that is the worker on both sides; and not the substance of the air
on the one side, and of the glass on the other.

And lastly; his answer does no ways solue our objection, which proves that
the resistance both ways is proportionate to the force that moves, and by
consequence that the thing moved must go straight. As we may imagine would
happen, if a bullett were shot sloaping through a green mudde wall, in which
there were many round sticks, so thin set that the bullett mighr pass with
ease through them; for as long as the bullett touched none of them (which
expresses his case) it would go straight; but if it touched any of them (which
resembles ours, as by and by will appear) it would glance according to the
quality of the touch, and move from the stick in an other line.

Some peradventure may answer for Monsieur Des Carts that this subtle body
which he supposes to run through all things is stiff and no ways pliable.
But that, is so repugnant to the nature of rarity and so many insuperable
inconueniencies do follow out of it; as I can not imagine he will own it: and
therefore I will not spend any time in replying thereunto.

The true cause of refraction of light both at its entrance, and at its going
out from the reflecting body.
We must therefore seek some other cause of the refraction of light which is
made at the entrance of it into a diaphanous body. Which is plainly (as we
said before) because the ray striking against the inside of a body it can not
penetrate, turns by reflection toward that side on which the illuminant
stands: and if it finds clear passage through the whole resistent, it
follows the course it first takes; if not then it is lost by many reflections
too and fro,

And that this doctrine is true, the accidents or Phoenomens evidently declare
unto us; for experience teaches us that upon a plain superficies the
refraction is made toward the perpendicular drawn from the illuminant to the
superficies; as we have said. Now at the going out (if the surfaces be
parallels) we see that the ray turns from that perpendicular; which also is
necessary: for going through a pore bigger then it self, or at the least as
big; and finding it full of air; it must needs be crowded there. But in a
croude, he presses you most, whom you press most upon: so then that side of
the pore which is next to the light as it passes, must press most upon it:
but the angle which is toward the perpendicular, to wit the angle BCI, is
the lesser; and by consequence, the ray is nearer that side of the pore which
is toward I, then the other side of it which is toward H; wherefore it must
take its ply from that side. But that side strikes it from the perpendicular:
and therefore, it must there refract from the perpendicular.

This very same doctrine for the reason of refraction is confirmed by what
happens in crooked superficieses. As if OF, be a Lens or a glass on both
sides conuexe; and CB, the axis of it; AD, the ray falling from the illuminant
A; AB, the perpendicular falling from the same illuminant A: it will be plain
by the former discourse, that the ray AD, must at the entry be refracted
toward AB, as being repulsed from that part of the inside of the pore D,
which is toward F; because that side is most opposed unto the ray. Now the
ray being once turned that way; when at the end of its journey through the
glass, it is come to the other superficies EGF, it makes the lesser angle
toward F; and therefore it must by the rule given above, be refracted again
at its parting from the glass, toward the same perpendicular; and it will
meet some where with the axis CB; all which experience shows us to be true.

And taking a body of concaue surfaces we shall (according to this doctrine of
ours) find the causes of refraction just contrary; and accordingly, experience
likewise shows us, the effects to be so too. And therefore since experience
agrees exactly with our rules, we can not doubt but that the principles upon
which we go, A general rule to know the nature of reflections and refractions
in all sorts of surfaces.
are well laid.

But because crooked surfaces may have many irregularities; it will not be
amiss to give a rule by which all of them may be brought unto a certainety.
And this it is, that reflections from crooked superficieses, are equal to the
reflections that are made from such plain superficieses, as are tangents to the
crooked ones in that point from whence the reflections are made. Which
principal the Masters of Optikes do take out of a Mathematical supposition of
the unity of the reflecting point, in both the surfaces; the crooked and the
plain. But we take it out of the insensibility, of the difference of so little
a part in the two different surfaces, as serves to reflect a ray of light: for
where the difference is insensible in the causes; there likewise the difference
is so little in the effects as sense can not judge of them: which is as much as
is requisite to our purpose. Now seeing that in the Mathematical supposition,
the point where the reflection is made is indifferent to both the surfaces; it
follows that it imports not whether superficies you take to know the
quality of reflection by. This principle then being settled, that the reflection
must follow the nature of the tangent surfaces; and it being proved, that in
plain surfaces it will happen in such sort as we have explicated, it follows
that in any crooked superficies of what figure soever, the same also will
happen.

Now seeing we have formerly declared, that refractions are but a certain kind
of reflections, what we have said here of reflections, may be applied to
refractions.

A body of greater parts and greater pores, makes a greater refraction then
one of lesser parts and lesser pores.
But there remains yet untouched, one affection more of refractions; which,
is, that some diaphanous bodies do in their inward parts reflect more then
others (which is, that which we call refraction) as experience shows us.
Concerning which effect, we are to consider that diaphanous bodies, may in
their composition have two differences: for some are composed of greater parts
and greater pores; others of lesser parts and lesser pores. It is true, there
may be other combinations of pores and parts, yet by these two, the rest may
be esteemed. As, for the first combination, we see that because the pores are
greater, a greater multitude of parts of light may pass together through one
pore; and because the parts are greater, likewise a greater multitude of rays
may reflect from the same part, and may find the same passage quite throughout
the diaphanous body. On the contrary side, in the second combination where both
the pores and the parts of the diaphanous body are little, the light must be
but little that finds the same passage.

Now, that refraction is greater or lesser, happens two ways; for it is,
either when one diaphanous body reflecteth light at more angles then an other,
and by consequence in a greater extent of the superficies; or else, when one
body reflecteth light from the same point of incidence in a shorter line and in
a greater angle, then an other does. In both these ways it is apparent, that a
body composed of greater parts and greater pores, exceeds bodies of the
opposite kind: for by reason that in the first kind, more light may beat
against one part; a body in which that happens, will make an appearance from
a further part of its superficies: whereas in a body of the other sort; the
light that beats against one of the little parts of it, will be so little, as
it will presently vanish. Again, because in the first, the part at the
incidence is greater; the surface from which the reflection is made inwardes,
has more of a plain and straight superficies: and consequently does reflect
at a greater angle, then that, whose superficies has more of inclining.

But we must not pass from this question, A confirmation of the former
doctrine, out of the nature of bodies that refract light.
without looking a little into the nature of those bodies in which refraction is
made: for if they as well as the immediate causes of refraction, do likewise
favor us; it will not a little advance the certainety of our determination. To
this purpose we may call to mind, how experience shows us that great
refractions are made in smoke, and in mistes, and in glasses, and in thick
bodied waters; and Monsieur Des Carts, adds certain oils, and spirits or
strong waters.

Now most of these we see are composed of little consistent bodies, swimming in
an other liquide body. As is plain in smoke and mistes: for the little bubbles
which rise in the water before they get out of it; and that are smoke when
they get into the air; do assure us that smoke is nothing else, but a
company of little round bodies, swimming in the air: and the round consistence
of water upon herbs, leafes, and twigges in a rynde or dew, gives us also to
understand that a mist is likewise a company of little round bodies that
sometimes stand, sometimes floate in the air, as the wind drives them. Our
very eyes bear witness to us, that the thicker sort of waters are full of
little bodies, which is the cause of their not being clear.

As for glass, the blowing of it conuinceth, that the little darts of fire
which pierce it every way, do naturally in the melting of it convert it into
little round hollow bodies, which in their cooling must settle into parts of
the like figure. Then for crystal and other transparent stones which are found
in cold places; it can not be otherwise, but that the nature of cold piercing
into the maine body, and contracting every little part in it self; this
contraction must needs leave vacant pores between part and part. And that
such transparent stones as are made by heat, have the like effect and
property, may be judged out of what we see in brickes and tiles, which are left
full of holes by the operation of the fire. And I have seen in bones that have
layne a long time in the sun, a multitude of sensible little pores close to
one an other, as if they had been formerly stuck all over with subtle sharp
needles as close as they could be thrust in by one other. The Chymicall oils
and spirits which Monsieur Des Carts speaks of, are likely to be of the same
composition; since that such use to be extracted by violent fires: for a
violent fire is made by the conjunction of many rays together; and that must
needs cause great pores in the body it works upon; and the sticking nature
of these spirits, is capable of conseruing them.

Out of all these observations it follows, that the bodies in which greatest
refractions do happen, are compounded (as we have said) of great parts, and
great pores. And therefore, by only taking light to be such a body, as we have
described it to be, where we treated of the nature of it; it is evident, that
the effect which we have expressed, must necessarily follow by way of
reflection: and that refraction is nothing else but a certain kind of reflection.

Which last assertion, is likewise convinced out of this; that the same effects
proceed from reflection as from refraction: for by reflection a thing may be
seen greater then it is; in a different place from the true one where it is:
colors may be made by reflection, as also, gloating light; and fire likewise;
and peradventure all other effects which are caused by refraction, may as well
as these, be performed by reflection. And therefore it is evident, they must be
of the same nature; seeing that children are the resemblances of their parents.

THE FOVRETEENTH CHAPTER. Of the composition, qualities, and generation of
Mixed bodies.
The co^nexion of this chapter with the rest, and the Authors intent in it,
Having now declared the virtues by which fire and earth work upon one an
other, and upon the rest of the elements; which is, by light, and by the
motions we have discoursed of. Our task shall be in this chapter first to
observe what will result out of such action of theirs: and next to search into
the ways and manner of compassing and performing it. Which latter we shall the
more easily attain unto, when we first know the end that their operation
leuelleth at. In this pursuit we shall find that the effect of the Elements
combinations, by means of the motions that happen among them; is a long
pedigree of compounded qualities and bodies: wherein, the first combinations
(like marriages) are the breeders of the next more composed substances: and
they again are the parents of others in greater variety: and so are multiplied
without end; for the further this work proceeds, the more subjects it makes
for new business of the like kind.

To descend in particular unto all these, is impossible. And to look further
then the general heads of them, were superfluous and troublesome in this
discourse; wherein I aim only at showing what sorts of things, in common,
may de done by bodies: that if hereafter, we meet with things of an other
nature and strain, we may be sure, they are not the offspring of bodies and of
quantity; which is, the maine scope of what I have designed here. And to do
this with confidence and certainety, requires of necessity this leisurely and
orderly proceeding that hitherto we have used, and shall continue to the end:
for, walking thus softly, we have always one foot upon the ground; so as the
other may be sure of firm footing before it settle. Whereas, they that for
more have will leap over rugged passages and broken ground; when both their
feet are in the air, can not help themselves, but must light as chance
throws them.

To this purpose then we may consider, that the qualities of bodies in common
are of three sorts: for they are belonging, either to the constitution of a
compounded body, or else, to the operation of it; and the operation of a body,
is of two kinds; the one, upon other bodies, the other, upon sense. The last
of these three sorts of qualities, shall be handled in a peculiar chapter by
themselves. Those of the second sort, whereby they work upon other bodies,
have been partly declared in the former chapters, and will be further
discoursed of in the rest of this first treatise: so as that which remains
for the present, is to fall upon the discourse of such qualities as concur to
the constitution of bodies; with an aim to discover, whether (or no) they may
be effected by the several mixtures of rarity and density, in such sort as is
already declared. To which end, we are to consider in what manner these two
primary differences of bodies may be joined together: and what effects such
conjunction will produce.

As for their conjunction: That there is a least cise of bodies, and that this
least cise is found in fire.
to deliver the nature of it entirely, we must begin from the very root of it,
and consider how the Universe being finite (which Mr. White has demonstrated
in the second knott of his first Dialogue) there can not be an infinite number
of bodies in it: for Geometricians show us how the least quantity that is, may
be repeated so often as would exceed any the greatest determinate quantity
whatsoever. Out of which it follows, that although all the other bodies of
the world were no bigger then the least quantity that can be designed; yet they
being infinite in number, would be greater then the whole Universe that
contains them. And therefore, of necessity there must be some least body, or
rather, some least cise of bodies: which in compounded bodies, is not to be
expected: for, their least parts being compounded, must needs include
compounding parts less then themselves. We must then look for this least
cise of bodies in the Elements; which of all bodies are the simplest. And among
them, we must pitch upon that, wherein is greatest diuisibility, and which
consequently is divided into least parts; that is, fire: so as we may conclude
that among all the bodies in the world, that which of its own nature has an
aptitude to be least, must be fire.

Now, The first conjunction of parts is in bodies of least cise; and it is
made by the force of Quantity.
the least body of fire, be it never so little, is yet diuisible into less.
What is it then that makes it be one? To determine this; we must resort unto
the nature of Quantity: whose formal notion and essence is; To be diuisible,
which signifies, that many may be made, of it; but thar of which many may be
made, is not yet many, out of this very reason; that many may be made of it.
But, what is not many, is one. Therefore what has quantity; is, by mere
having quantity, actually and formally, as well one, as it has the possibility
of being made many. And consequently, the least body of fire, by having
quantity, has those parts which might be many, actually one. And this is the
first conjunction of parts that is to be considered in the composition of
bodies: which though it be not an actual joining of actual parts; yet it is
a formal conjunction of what may be many. The second sort of conjunction is
co^pactednesse in simple Elements, and it proceeds from density.


In the next place we may consider; how seeing the least bodies that are, be of
fire; it must needs follow, that the least parts of the other Elements must
be bigger then they. And consequently, the possible parts of those least
parts of the other Elements must have something to conserve them together,
more then is found in fire. And this, because Elements are purely distinguished
by rarity and density is straight concluded to be density. And thus, we have
found; that as quantity is the cause of the possible parts being one, so
density is the cause of the like parts sticking together: which appears in
the very definition of it, for, to be less diuisible, (which is the notion of
density) speaks a resistance to division, The third conjunction is of parts
of different Elements, and it proceeds from quantity and density together.
or a sticking together.

Now let us examine how two parts of different Elements are joined together,
to make a compound. In this conjunction we find both the effects we have
already touched: for, two such parts must make one; and moreover, they must
have some resistance to diuisibility. The first of these effects we have
already assigned unto the nature of quantity. And it being the formal effect
of quantity; it can not (wheresoever it is found) have any other formal cause
then quantity: and therefore, either the two little parts of different
Elements, do not become one body: or if they do, we must agree that it is by
the nature of quantity, which works as much in heterogeneall parts, as it
does in homogeneall ones. And it must needs do so: because Rarity and De^sity
(which are the proper differencies of Quantity) can not change the common
nature of Quantity, that is their Genus: which by being so to them, must be
univocally in them both. And this effect comes precisely from the pure notion
of the Genus: and consequently, must be seen as well in two parts of
different natures, as in two parts of the same nature: but in parts of the
same nature, which once were two, and afterward become one; there can be no
other reason why they are one, then the very same for which those parts that
were never separated (but that may be separated) are likewise one: and this,
most evidently, is the nature of quantity.

Experience seems to confirm thus much; when pouring water out of a basin,
some of it will remain sticking to the sides, of the metal: for if the
quantity of the basin, and of the water, had not been one and the same by its
own nature; the water (considering the plyablenesse of its parts) would
certainly have commen all away, and have glided from the unevenness of the
basin, by the attractive unity of its whole, and would have preserved the unity
of its quantity within it self, rather then by sticking to the basin, have
suffered division in its own quantity; which we are sure was one, whiles the
water was altogether in the basin: but that, both the basin and the water
making but one quantity; and a division being unavoidable in that one quantity;
it was indifferent, in regard of the quantity considered singly by it self,
where this division should be made, whether in the parts of the basin, or in
the parts of the water: and then, the other circumstances determined it in
that part of the water which was nearest to the joining of it with the basin.

The second effect (which was resistance to diuisibility;) we assigned unto
density. And of that same cause, must also depend the like effect in this case
of the sticking together of the two parts of different Elements, when they are
joined to one an other: for if the two parts, whereof one is dense, the other
is rare, do not exceed the quantity of some other part of one homogeneall rare
Element for the dividing whereof, such a determinate force, and no less can
suffice: then, seeing that the whole composed of these two parts is not so
diuisible as the whole consisting of that one part; the assigned force will not
be able to divide them. Wherefore it is plain, that if the rare part had been
joined to an other rare part in steed of the dense one it is joined unto; it
had been more easily diuidable from that, then now it is from the dense part.
And by consequence it sticks more closely to the dense part, then it would to
an other of its own nature.

Out of what we have said, The reason why liquide bodies do easily join
together; and dry ones difficultly.
a step is made us to understand why soft and liqnid bodies do easily join
and incorporate into one continued body; but hard and dry bodies so difficulty,
as by experience we find to be true. Water with water, or wine either with
other wine or with water, so unites, that it is very hard to part them: but
sand or stones can not be made to stick together without very great force and
industry. The reasons whereof, must necessarily depend of what we have said
above. To wit that two bodies can not touch one an other, without becoming
one: and, that if two bodies of one degree of density do touch, they must
stick together according to the force of that degree of density. Out of which
two, is manifestly inferred, that if two hard things, should come to touch,
they must needs be more difficultly separated then two liquid things. And
consequently, they can not come to touch, without as much difficulty, as that
whereby they are made one.

But to deduce this more particularly; That no two hard bodies can touch one an
other immediately.
let us consider, that all the little surfaces, by which one hard body may be
conceived to touch an other (as for example, when a stone lies upon a stone)
must of necessity be either plane, or concaue, or conuexe. Now if a plane
superficies should be supposed to touch an other plane one coming
perpendicularly to it; it must of necessity be granted to touch it as soon in
the middle as on the sides. Wherefore, if there were any air (as of necessity
there must be) betwixt the two surfaces before they touched; it will follow
that the air which was in the middle, must have fled quite out from between
the two surfaces, as soon as any part of the surfaces do touch; that is, as
soon as the air which was between the utmost edges of the surfaces did fly
out; and by consequence it must have moved in an instant.

But if a plane surface be said to touch a conuexe surface; it touches it
only by a line, (as Mathematicans demonstrate) or only by a point. But, to
touch by a line or a point, is in truth, not to touch by the form or notion of
Quantity, (which requires diuisibility in all that belongs unto it;) and die
consequence among bodies it is not to touch; and so, one such surface does not
touch the other.

Now, for a plain surface to touch a concaue; every man sees is impossible.
Likewise, for two co^uexe surfaces to touch one an other, they must be allowed
to touch either in a line or in a point, which we have showed not to be a
physical touching. And if a conuexe surface should be said to touch a
concaue; they must touch all at once as we said of plane surfaces; and
therefore the same impossibility will arise therein: so that it is evident,
that no two surfaces, moving perpendicularly toward one an other, can come to
touch one an other, if neither of them yields, and changes its hew.

Now then, if it be supposed that they come slidingly one over an other in the
same line; whereby, first the very tippes of the edges come to touch one an
other; and still as you shooue the vpermost on forwards, and that it slideth
over more of the nether surface, it gains to touch more of it. I say that
neither in this case do they touch immediately one an other: for as soon as
the two first parts should meet, if they did touch, and that there were no
air between them; they must presently become one quantity or body, as we have
declared; and must stick firmly together, according to their degree of
density; and consequently, could not be moved on, without still breaking a
su^deratt every impulse, as much of the massy body, as were already made one by
their touching.

And if you should say they did not become one; and yet allow them to touch
immediately one an other without having any air or fluide body between them;
then if you suppose them to move onwardes upon these terms; they would be
changed locally, without any intrinsecall change: which in the book De Mundo
(as we have formerly alleged) is demonstrated to be impossible.

There remains only a third way for two hard surfaces to come together;
which is, that first they should rest sloaping one upon an other, and make an
angle where they meet (as two lines, that cut one an other, do in their point
of their intersection) and so contain as it were a wedge of air between
them, which wedge they should lessen by little and little, through their moving
toward one an other at their most distant edges (whiles the touching edges,
are like immovable centers that the others turn upon) till at length they
shutt out all the air, and close together, like the two legs of a compass.

But neither is it possible that this way they should touch, for after their
first touch by one line (which neither is in effect a touching, as we have
showed) no other parts of them can touch, though still they approach nearer
and nearer, until their whole surfaces do entirely touch at one: and
therefore, the air must in this case leap out in an instant a greater space,
then if the surfaces came perpendicularly to one an other; for here it must fly
from one extremity to the other: whereas, in the former case, it was to go but
from the middle to each side.

And thus it is evident, that no two bodies can arrive to touch one an other,
unless one of them at the least, have a superficies pliable to the
superficies of the other; that is, unless one of them be lost, which is, to be
liquide in some degree. Seeing then, that by touching, bodies do become one;
and that liquidity, is the cause and means whereby bodies arrive to touch; we
may boldly conclude that two liquide bodies do most easily and readily become
one; and next to two such, a liquide and a hard body, are soonest united: but
two hard ones most difficultly.

To proceed then with our reflections upon the composition of bodies, How
mixed bodies ar^ framed in general.
and upon what resulteth out of the joining and mixture of their first
differences Rarity and Density; we see, how if a liquide substance happens to
touch a dry body it sticks easily thereunto. Then consider, that there may be
so small a quantity of such a liquide body, as it may be almost impossible for
any natural agent to divide it further into any less parts; and suppose that
such a liquide part is between two dry parts of a dense body, and sticking to
them both, becomes in the nature of a glue to hold them together: will it not
follow out of what we have said, that these two dense parts will be as hard
to be severed from one an other, as the small liquide part by which they stick
together is to be divided? So that, when the viscous ligaments which in a body
do hold together the dense parts, are so small and subtle, as no force we can
apply unto them can divide them, the adhesion of the parts must needs grow
then inseparable. And therefore, we use to moysten dry bodies, to make them the
more easily be divided; whereas those that are ouermoyst, are of themselves
ready to fall in pieces. The cause of the several degrees of solidity in mixed
bodies.
And thus you see how in general, bodies are framed.

Out of which discourse, we may balance the degrees of solidity in bodies, for
all bodies being composed of humide and dry parts, we may conceive either kind
of those parts, to be bigger or lesser, or to be more rare or more dense. Now
if the dry parts of any body, be extreme little and dense; and the moist parts
that join the dry ones together, be very great and rare; then that body will
be very easy to be dissolved. But if the moist parts which glue together such
extreme little and dense dry parts, be either lesser in bulk or not so rare;
then the body composed of them will be in a stronger degree of consistence. And
if the moist parts which serve for this effect; be in an excess of
littleness and withal dense; then, the body they compose will be in the
highest degree of consistence that nature can frame.

On the other side; if you glue together great dry parts, which are moderately
dense and great, by the admixtion of humide parts that are of the least cise
in bulk, and dense withal; then the consistence will decrease from the height
of it by how much the parts are greater, and the density less. But if unto
dry parts of the greatest cise, and in the greatest remissness of density,
you add humide parts that are both very great and very rare, then the
composed body will prove the most easily dissolueable of all that nature
affords.

The rule whereunto are reduced all the several combinations of Elements in
compounding of mixed bodies.
After this, casting our eyes a little further toward the composition of
particular bodies; we shall find still greater mixtures, the further we go*
for as the first and simplest compounded bodies, are made of the four
Elements; so, others are made of these; and again a third sort of them: and
so, onwardes, according as by motion, the parts of every one are broken in
sunder, and mingled with others. Those of the first order, must be of various
tempers according to the proportions of the Elements, whereof they are
immediately made. As for example, such a proportion of fire to the other three
Elements, will make one kind of simple body, and an other proportion will make
an other kind: and so throughout, by various combinations and proportions among
all the Elements.

In the effecting of which work, it will not be amiss to look a little upon
nature; and observe how she mingleth and tempereth different bodies one with an
other, whereby she begets that great variety of creatures which we see in
the world. But because the degrees of composition are infinite, according to
the increase of number, we will contain our selves within the common notions
of excess in the four primary components, for if we should descend once to
specify any determinate proportions, we should endanger loosing our selves in a
wood of particular natures, which belong not to us at present to examine. Then
taking the four Elements as materials to work upon: let us first consider
how they may be varyed, that differing compositions may result out of their
mixtures. I conceive that all the ways of varying the Elements in this regard,
may be reduced to the several cises of bigness, of the parts of each
Element, that enter into the composition of any body, and to the number of
those parts: for certainly no other can be imagined, unless it were variety
of figure.

But that can not be admitted to belong in any constant manner to those least
particles where of bodies are framed; as though determinate figures were in
every degree of quantity due to the natures of Elements, and therefore, the
Elements would conserve themselves in those figures, as well in their least
atoms, as in massye bulk: for seeing how these little parts are shuffled
together without any order; and that all liquids easily join, and take the
figures which the dense ones give them; and that they again, iustling one an
other, do crush themselves into new shapes, which their mixture with the
liquide ones, makes them yield the more easily unto: it is impossible that the
Elements should have any other natural figure in these their least parts,
then such as chance gives them. But that one part must be bigger then an other
is evident; for the nature of rarity and density gives it: the first of them,
causing diuisibility into little parts, and the latter, hindering it.

Having then settled in what manner the Elements may be varied in the
composition of bodies: Earth and water are the basis of all permanent mixed
bodies.
let us now begin our mixture. In which, our ground to work upon must be
earth and water; for only these two are the basis of permanent bodies, that
suffer our senses to take hold of them, and that submitt themselves to trial:
whereas, if we should make the predominant Element to be air or fire, and
bring in the other two solid ones under their jurisdiction to make up the
mixture, the compound resulting out of them, would be either in continual
consumption, (as ordinary fire is) or else imperceptible to our eyes or touch,
and therefore, not a fit subject for us to discourse of, since the other two
afford us enough to speculate upon. Peradventure our smell migh take some
cognizance of a body so composed, or the effect of it taken in by respiration,
might in time show it self upon our health: but it concerns not us now to
look so far; our design requires more maniable substances.

Of which, What kind of bodies those are where water is the basis, and earth
the predominant Element over the other two.
let water be the first; and with it we will mingle the other three Elements,
in excess over one an other by turns; but still, all of them ouerswayed by a
predominant quantity of water: and then, let us see what kind of bodies will
result out of such proportions. First, if earth prevail above fire and air,
and arrive next in proportion to the water, a body of such a composition, must
needs prove hardly liquide, and not easy to let its parts run a sunder,
by reason of the great proportion of so dense a body as earth that holds it
together. Yet some inclination it will have to fluidnesse, by reason the water
is predominant over all; which also will make it be easily diuisible, and give
very little resistance to any hard thing that shall be applied to make way
through it. In a word, this mixture makes the constitution of mudde, dirt,
honey, butter and such like things where the maine parts are great ones. And
such, are the parts of earth and water in themselves.

Let the next proportion of excess in a watery compound, Of those bodies,
where water being the basis air is the predominant Element.
be of air, which when it preuayleth, it incorporateth it self chiefly with
Earth, for the other Elements would not so well retain it. Now, because its
parts are subtle (by reason of the rarity it has) and sticking, (because of
its humidity) it drives the Earth and water likewise into lesser parts. The
result of such a mixture is, that the parts of a boby compounded by it are
close, catching, flowing slowly, glibbe, and generally it will burn, and be
easily converted into flame.

Of this kind, are those which we call oily or unctuous bodies whose great
parts are easily separated, (that is, they are easily diuisible in bulk,) but
the small ones very hardly. Next the smallness, and well working of the
parts, by means of the airs penetrating every dense one, and sticking close
to every one of them, and consequently, joining them without any unevenness;
causes that there can be no ruggedness in it; and therefore, it is glibbe: in
like manner as we see plaster or starch become smooth when they are well
wrought. Then, the humidity of it causes it to be catcking, and the
shortenesse of every part, makes that where it sticks, it is not easily
parted thence. Now, the rarity of air next unto fire, admits it to be (of
all the other Elements) most easily, brought to the height of fire, by the
operation of fire upon it. And therefore, oils are the proper food of that
Element. And accordingly we see, that if a drop of oil be spilled upon a
sheet of paper, and the paper be set on fire at a corner; as the fire comes
near the oil, the oil will disperse and spread it self upon the paper to a
broader compass then it had; which is, because the heat rarifyeth it; and so,
in oil it self the fire rarifying the air, makes it penetrate the earthy
parts adjoined unto it, more then it did; and so subtiliseth them, till they
be reduced to such a height as they are within the power of fire to communicate
his own nature unto them: and thus, he turns them into fire, and carries
them up in his flame.

What kind of bodies result, where water is the basis and fire the predominant
Element.
But if fire be predominant over earth and air in a watery compound; it makes
the body so proportioned, to be subtle, rare, penetratiue, hot in operation,
light in weight, and subject to burn. Of this kind are all sorts of wines,
and distilled spirits, commonly called strong waters or Aquauites; in latin
Aquae ardentes. These will loose their virtues merely by remaining uncovered
in the air; for fire does not incorporate strongly with water; but, if it find
means, rayseth it self into the air; as we see in the smoke of boiling
water which is nothing else but little bodies of fire, that entering into the
water, do rarify some parts of it; but have no inclination to stay there and
therefore as fast as they can get out, they fly away; but the humide parts of
the water, which they have rarifyed (being of a sticking nature) do join
themselves unto them, and ascend in the air as high as the fiery atoms have
strength to carry them: which when it fails them, that smoke falls down
in a dew, and so becomes water again as it was. All which one may easily
discern in a glass vessel of water set over the fire; in which one may
observe the fire come in at the bottom, and presently swim up to the top
like a little bubble, and immediately rise from thence in smoke: and that, will
at last convert it self into drops and settle upon some solid substance
thereabouts.

Of these fyry spirits, some are so subtle, as of themselves they will vanish,
and leave no residue of a body behind them; and Alchymistes prof^sse to make
them so etheriall and volatile, that being poured out of a glass from some
reasonable height, they shall never reach the ground: but that before they come
thither, they will be so rarifyed by that little motion, as they shall grow
invisible like the air, and dispersing themselves all about in it, they will
fill the chamber with the smell of that body which can no longer be seen.

The last excess in watery bodies, Of those bodies, where water is in excess,
it alone being both the basis, and the predominant Element.
must be of water it self, which is, when so little a proportion of any of the
other is mingled with it, as is hardly perceptible: out of this composition do
arise all those several sorts of juices or liquors, which we commonly call
waters: which by their mixture with the other three Elements, have peculiar
properties beyond simple Elementall water. The general qualities whereof, we
shall not need any further to express, because, by what we have already said
of water in common, they are sufficiently known.

In our next suruay, Of those bodies where Earth alone is the basis, and also
the predominant in excess over the other thre^ Elements.
we will take earth for our ground to work upon, as hitherto we have done
water: which if in any body, it be in the utmost excess of it beyond all the
other three; then, rocks and stones will grow out of it; whose dryenesse ad
hardness may assure us, that Earth swayeth in their composition, with the
least allay that may be. Nor does their lightness (in respect of some other
Earthy compositions) impeach this resolution; for that proceeds from the
greatness and multiplicity of pores; wherewith their dryenesse causes them to
abound and hinders not, but that their real solid parts may be very heavy.

Now if we mingle a considerable proportion of water with earth; Of those
bodies where Earth is the basis, and water the predomin^t Element over the
other two.
so, as to exceed the fire and air, but still inferior to the earth; we shall
produce mettalls: whose great weight, with their ductility and malleability,
plainly tells us, that the smallest of waters gross parts, are the glue
that holds the earthy dense ones together: such weight, belonging to earth,
and that easy changing of parts, being most proper to water. Quickesiluer
(that is the general matter, whereof all the mettalls are immediately
composed) gives us evidence hereof; for fire works upon it with the same
effect as upon water. And the calcination of most of the mettalls, proves that
fire can easily part and consume the glue by which they were closed and held
together: which therefore, must be rather of a watery then of an ayry substance.
Likewise the glibbenesse of Mercury, and of melted mettalls, without catching
or sticking to other substances, gives us to understand that this great temper
of a moist Element with Earth, is water, and not air; and that the watery
parts are comprised, and as it were shutt up within the earthy ones: for air
catches and sticks notably to all things it touches, and will not be
imprisoned; the diuisibity of it being exceeding great, though in never so
short parts.

Now if air mingleth it self with earth, Of those bodies, where earth being
the basis air is the predominant.
and be predominant over water and fire; it makes such an oily and fatt soil,
as husbandmen account their best mould; which receiving a betterment from the
sun and temperate heat, assures us of the concurse of the air: for
wheresoever such heat is, air can not fail of accompanying it, or of being
effected by it: and the richest of such earth, (as port earth and marle) will
with much fire grow more compacted, and stick closer together then it did; as
we see in baking them into pottes or fine brickes. Whereas, if water were the
glue between the dense parts fire would consume it and crumble them a sunder,
as it does in those bodies it calcineth And excess of fire will bring them to
vitrification; which still confirms that air abounds in them; for it is
the nature of air to stick so close where once it is kneaded in, as it can
not be separated without extreme difficulty. And to this purpose, the viscous
holding together of the parts of glass when it is melted, shows evidently
that air abounds in vitrifyed bodies.

Of those bodies, where Earth being the basis, fire is the predominant.
The last mixture we are to meddle with, is of fire with earth, in an ouerruling
proportion over air and water. And this I conceive produces those substances,
which we may term coagulated juices, and which the latins do call Succi
concreti: whose first origin, seems to have been liquors; that have been
afterward dried by the force either of heat, or of cold. Of this nature are
all kind of saltes, niters sulfurs, and diverse sorts of bitumens. All which,
easily bewray the relikes an deffects of fire left in them; some more, some
less, according to their degrees.

All the second qualities of mixed bodies, arise from several combinations of
the first qualities: and are at last resolved into several degrees of rarity
and density.
And thus, we have in general, deduced from their causes, the complexions of
those bodies, whereof the bulk of the world subjected to our use, consists;
and which serve for the production and nourishment of living creatures, both
animal and vegetable. Not so exactly (I confess) nor so particularly, as the
matter in it self, or as a treatise confined to that subject, would require:
yet sufficiently for our intent. In the performance whereof, if more accurate
searchers of nature shall find that we have peradventure been mistaken in the
minute delivering of some particular bodies complexion; their very correction
(I dare boldly say) will justify our principal scope: which is, to show that
all the great variety we see among bodies, arises out of the co^mixtion of the
first qualities and of the Elements: for they will not be able to correct us,
upon any other grounds then those we have laid.

As may easily be perceived, if we cast a summary view upon the qualities of
composed bodies. All which we shall find to spring out of rarity, and density,
and to savor of their origin: for the most manifest qualities of bodies may
be reduced to certain paires opposite to one an other. As namely some are
liquide and flowing, others are consistent; some are soft others hard; some are
fatty, viscous, and smooth; others lean, gritty, and rough; some gross,
othert subtle; some tough, others brittle: and the like. Of which the liquide,
the soft, the fatt and the viscous, are so manifestly derived from rarity, that
we need not take any further pains to trace out their origin: and the like
is of their contraries, from the contrary cause; to wit of those bodies that
are consistent, hard, lean, and gritty, all which do evidently spring from
density. As for smoothness, we have already showed how that proceeds from an
ayry or oily nature; and by consequence, from a certain degree of rarity. And
therefore roughness (the contrary of it) must proceed from a proportionable
degree of density. Toughness, is also a kind of ductility, which we have
reduced to watrynesse, that is, to an other degree of rarity; and consequently
brittlenesse must arise from the contrary degree of density. Lastly,
grossness and subtilenesse do consist in a difficulty or facility to be
divided into small parts, which appears to be nothing else, but a certain
determination of rarity and density. And thus, we see; how the several
complexions of bodies, are reduced to the four Elements that compound them:
and the qualities of those bodies, to the two primary differencies of
quantatiue things by which the Elements are diuersifyed.

And out of this discourse it will be evident, That in the planets and stars,
there is a like variet^ of mixed bodies caused by light as here upon Earth.
that these complexions and qualities, though in diverse degrees, must of
necessity be found wheresoever there is any variation in bodies: for seeing
there can be no variation in bodies, but by rarity and density; and that the
pure degrees of rarity and density, do make heat, cold, moisture, and
dryness, and (in a word) the four Elements; it is evident, that wheresoever
there is variety of bodies, there must be the four Elements; though
peradventure far unlike these mixed bodies which we call Elements. And
again, because these Elements can not consist without motion; and because by
motion they do of necessity, produce mixed bodies, and forge out those
qualities, which we come from explicating; it must by like necessity, follow*
that wheresoever there is any variety of active and passive bodies; there mixed
bodies likewise must reside of the same kinds, and be endewed with qualities
of the like natures, as those we have treated of; though peradventure, such as
are in other places of the world remote from us, may be in a degree far
different from ours.

Since then, it can not be denied, but that there must be notable variety of
active and passive bodies wheresoever there is light: ney^her can it be denied,
but that in all those great bodies from which light is reflected unto us, there
must be a like variety of complexions and of qualities, and of bodies tempered
by them, as we find here in the orb we live in. Which systeme; how d^fferent
it is from that which Aristotle and the most of the school have delivered us,
as well in the euidencies of the proofs for its being so; as in the position
and model of it; I leave unto the prudent readers to consider and judge.

Out of what has been already said, In what manner the Elements do work upon
one an other, in the compositio^ of mixed bodies: and in particular fire which
is the most active.
it is not hard to discover in what manner the composition of bodies is made.
In effecting of which; the maine hinge whereon that motion depends, is fire
or heat: as it likewise is, in all other motions whatsoever. Now because the
composition of a mixed, body proceeds from the action of one simple body or
element upon the others: it will not be amiss to declare by some example how
this work^ passes: for that purpose, let us examine how fire or heat wo^keth
upon his f^llowes.

By what w^ have formerly delivered; it is clear that fire streaming out from
its center, and diffusing it self abroad, so as to fill the circumference of a
larger circle, it must needs follow, that the beams of it are most condensed
and compacted together near the center; and the further they stream from the
center, the more thin and rarifyed they must grow: yet this is with such
moderation, as we can not any where discern that one beam does not touch an
other; and therefore, the distances must be very small. Now let us suppose
that fire happens to be in a viscous and tenacious body; and then consider
what will happen in this case: of one side, the fire spreads it self abroad;
on the other side, the parts of the tenacious body being moist (as we have
formerly determined) their edges on all hands will stick fast to the dry
beams of the fire that pass between them. Then they stretching wider and
wider from one an other must needs draw with them the parts of that tenacious
body which stick unto them; and stertch them into a greater wideness or
largeness then they enjoyed before, from whence it follows, that (seeing
there is no other body near thereaboutes, but they two) either there must be a
vacuity left, or else the tenacious body must hold and fill a greater space
then it did before; and consequently be more rare.

Contrariwise, if any of the other Elements be stronger then fire, the denser
Elements break off, from their continued stream, the little parts of fire,
which were gotten into their greater parts: and sticking on all sides about
them, they do so enclose them that they have no more semblance of fire: and if
afterward by any accident there comes a great compression, they force them
to loose their natural rarity, and to become some other Element. Thus it
fares with fire, both in acting and in suffering. And the same course, we have
in both these regardes expressed of it, passes likewise in the rest of the
Elements to the proportion of their contrarieties.

Hence it follows, that when fire meets with humidity in any body, it
divides and subtiliseth it, and disperseth it gently, and in a kind of equal
manner through the whole body it is in, (if the operation of it be a natural
and a gentle one) and so drives it into other parts, which at the same time
it prepares to receive it by subtilising likewise those parts. And thus
moderate fire, makes humor in very small parts to incorporate it self in an
even or uniform manner with the dry parts it meets withal: which being
done whether the heat does afterward continue, or that cold succeeds in
lieu of it, the effect must of necessity be, that the body thus composed, be
bound up and fastened, more or less according to the proportion of the matter
it is made of, and of the Agents that work upon it, and of the time they
employ about it. This is every day seen, in the ripening of fruits and in
other frequent works, as well of art as of nature, and is so obuious; and
sensible to any reasonable observation that it is needelesse to enlarge my
self much upon this subject. A particular declaration touching the generation
of mettalls.


Only, it will not be amiss, for examples sake, to consider the progress of
it in the composing or augmenting of mettalls, or of earths of diverse sorts:
first heat (as we have said) draws humor out of all the bodies it works
upon: then if the extracted humor be in quantity and the steames of it do
happen to come together in some hollow place fit to assemble them into greater
parts; they are condensed and they fall down in a liquide and running body.
These steames being thus corporifyed, the body, resulting out of them, makes
it self in the earth a channel to run in: and if there be any loose parts
in the channel, they mingle themselves with the running liquor: and though
there be none such, yet in time the liquor it self looseneth the channel all
about, and imbibeth into its own substance the parts it raises. And thus,
all of them compacted together, do roll along till they tumble into some low
place, out of which they can not so easily get to wander further. When they
are thus settled, they do the more easily receive into them, and retain such
heat as is every where to be met withal, because it is diffused more or
less through the earth. This heat, if it be sufficient, digesteth it into a
solid body: the temper of cold likewise concurring in its measure to this
effect. And according to the variety of the substances whereof the first
liquour was made, and which it afterward drew along with it; the body that
resulteth out of them is diuersifyed.

In confirmation of all which, they that deal in mines, tell us they use to
find mettalls oftentimes mingled with stones; as also, coagulated juices with
both; and earths of diverse natures, with all three; and they with it, and one
with an other among themselves. And that sometimes they find the mines not yet
consolidated and digested thoroughly into metal; when by their experience
knowing after how many years they will be ripe, they shutt them up again till
then.

Now if the hollow place wherein the body stayed (which at the first was
liquid and rouling) be not at once filled by it, but it takes up only part
of it; and the same liquor continues afterward to flow thither* then this
body is augmented, and grows bigger and bigger. And although the liquors
should come at several times; yet, they become not therefore two several
bodies, but both liquors do grow into one body; for the wett parts of the
aduentitious liquor, do mollify the sides of the body already baked; and both
of them being of a like temper and cognation, they easily stick and grow
together.

Out of this discourse it follows evidently, that in all sorts of compounded
bodies whatsoever, there must of necessity, be actually comprised sundry parts
of diverse natures: for otherwise, they would be but so many pure degrees of
rarity and density; that is, they would be but so many pure Elements, and each
of them have but one determinate virtue or operation.

THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. Of the dissolution of Mixed bodies.
THus much for composition of bodies. Their dissolution is made three ways:
Why some bodies are brittle, and others tough, or apt to withstand outward
violence, the first instrument to dissolve mixed bodies.
either by fire, or by water, or by some outward violence. We will begin with
examining how this last is done. To which end we may consider* that the unity
of any body consisting in the connection of its parts; it is evident that the
force of motion, if it be exercised upon them, must of necessity separate them,
as we see in breaking, cutting, filing, drawing a sunder, and the like.

All these motions, because they are done by gross bodies, do require great
parts to work upon, and are easily discerned how they work: so that it is
not difficult to find the reason why some hard bodies break easily, and others
with much ado. The first of which are called brittle, the others tough. For if
you mark it, all breaking requires that be^ding hold precede: which on the
one side compresseth the parts of the bended body, and condenseth them into a
lesser room then they possessed before; and on the otherside stretches them
out, and makes them take up more place. This requires some fluide or moveable
substance to be within the body; else, it could not be done; for without such
help, the parts could not remove. Therefore such hard bodies as have most
fluide parts in them, are most flexible, that is are toughest. And those which
have fewest, though they become thereby hardest to have impression made upon
them, yet if the force be able to do it, they rather yield to break then to
bend; and thence, are called brittle.

Out of this we may infer, that some bodies may be so soddainely bent as that
thereby they break asunder; whereas if they were leisurely and gently dealed
withal, they would take what ply one desires. And likewise that there is no
body (be it never so brittle and hard) but that it will bend a little (and
indeed more then one would expect) if it be wrought upon with time and
dexterity; for there is none but contains in it some liquide parts, more or
less: even glass and brick. Upon which occasion I remember, how once in a
great storm of wind, I saw the high slender brick chimnyes of the Kings
house at St James (one winter when (the ourt lay there) bend from the wind
like bows, and sharke exceedingly, and totter. And at other times I have seen
some very high, and pointy spire steeples do the like. And I have been assured
the like of the whole pile of a high castle, standing in a gullett in the
course of the wind; (namely the castle of Wardour) by those who have often
seen it shake notably in a fierce wind.

The reason of all which may be deduced out of what we have said above: for
seeing that the bending of a body, makes the spirits or humors that are within
it, to sally forth; it is clear that if the violence which forces it, be not
so soddaine, nor the motion it receives, be not so quick, but that the
moisture may oose gently out; the body will bend, still more and more, as their
absence glueth it leave. But if the motion that is wrought in it be too quick;
then the spirits not having time allowed them to go leisurely and gently out,
do force their prison, and break out with a violence; and so the body is
snapped into two.

Here peradventure some remembering what we have said in an other place; How
outward violence does work upon the most compacted bodies.
namely, that it is the shortenesse and littleness of the humide parts in a
body, which makes it stick together; and that this shortenesse may be in so
high a degree, as nothing can come between the parts they glue together to
divide them; may ask how a very dense body of such a strain, can be broken or
divided? But the difficulty is not great, for seeing that the humide parts, in
whatsoever degree of shortenesse they be, must necessarily have still some
latitude; it can not be doubted, but there may be some force assigned, greater
then their resistance can be. All the question is, how to apply it to work its
effect upon so close a compacted body, in which peradventure the continuity, of
the humide parts that bind the others together, may be so small, as no other
body whatsoever (no, not fire) can go between them, in such sort as to
separate part from part. At the worst, it can not be doubted but that the
force may be so applied at the outside of that body, as to make the parts of
it press, and fight one against an other, and at the length, by
multiplication of the force, constrain it to yield and suffer division. And
this I conceive to be the condition of gold and of some precious stones: in
which the Elements are united by such little parts, as nothing but a civil
war within themselves (stirred up by some subtle outward enemy, whereby they
are made to tear their own bowels) could bring to pass their destruction.

But this way of dissoluing such bodies, more properly belongs to the next
way of working upon them by fire: yet the same is done when some exterior
violence pressing upon those parts it touches, makes them cu^t a way
between their next neighbors; and so continuing the force, divide the whole
body. As when the chisell, or even the hammer with beating, breaks gold a
sunder: for it is neither the chisell, nor the hammer that does that effect
immediately; but they make those parts they touch, cut the others that they
are forced upon. In such sort as I remember happened to a gentleman that stood
by me (in a sea fight I was in) with a coat of maile upon his body, when a
bullett coming against a bony part in him, made a great wound, and shattered
all the bones near where it struck: The several effects of fire, the second
and chiefest instrument to dissolve all co^pounded bodies.
and yet the coat of maile was whole: it seems the little linkes of the
maile yielding to the bullets force made their way into the flesh and to the
bone.

But now it is time to come to the other two instruments of separation of
bodies; fire and water; and to examine how they dissolve compounds. Of these
two; the way of working of fire, is the easiest and most apparent to be
discerned. We may readily observe how it proceeds, if we but set a piece of
wood on fire; in which it makes little holes as if with bodkins it pierced it.
So that the manner of its operation, in common, being plain, we need but
reflect a little upon the several particular degrees of it. Some bodies it
seems not to touch; as clothes made of Asbestus; which are only purifyed by
it. Others, it melts, but consumes not; as gold. Others it turns into
powder suddenly dissoluing their body; as lead, and such mettalls as are
calcined by pure fire. Others again, it seperateth into a greater number of
differing parts; as into spirits, waters, oils, salts, earth and glass: of
which rank are all vegetables. And lastly, others it conuerteth into pure
fire, as strong waters, or Aquauites (called aquae ardentes) and some pure
oils: for the smoke that is made by their setting on fire, and peradventure
their salt, is so little as is scarce discernable. These are in sum the
divisions which fire makes upon bodies, according to the nature of them, and
to the due application of it unto them: for by the helppe and mediation of
other things, it may peradventure work other effects.

The reason why some bodies are not dissolved by fire.
Now to examine a little in particular, how the same fire, in differing subjects
produces such defferent effects* Limus vt hic durescit, and haec vt cera
liquescit,
Vno eodemque igni;


We will consider the nature of every one of the subjects apart by it self.
First, for the Asbestus: it is clear, that it is of a very dry substance; so
that to look upon it, when it is broken into very little pieces, they seem to
be little bundles of short hairs, the liquidity within, being so little as it
affords the parts neither length nor breadth: and therefore, fire meets
with little there, that it can dilate. But what it can not dilate, it can not
separate; nor carry away any thing of it, but what is accidentally adhere^t
unto the outsides of it. And so it seems only to pass through the pores,
and to clea^se the little thriddes of it: but brings no detriment at all to
the substance of it. In this I speak only of an ordinary fire: for I doubt
not but such a one it might be, The reason why fire molteth gold, but can not
consume it.
as would perfectly calcine it.

The next body we spoke of is gold. This abounds so much in liquidity, that
it sticks to the fire, if duly applied: but its humidity is so well united
to its earthy parts, and is so perfectly incorporated with the^; as it can not
carry away one, without likewise carrying away both: but both, are too heavy a
weight for the little agile parts of fire to remove. Thus, it is able to make
gold swell; as we see in melting it: in which, the gold receives the fire into
its bowels and retains it a long time with it: but at its departure, it
permits the fire to carry nothing away upon its wings: as is apparent, by
the goldes no whitt decay of weight, after never so long fusion. And therefore,
to have fire make any separation in gold; requires the assistance of some
other moist body, that an the one side may stick closely to the gold, when the
fire drives it into it, and on the other side may be capable of dilatation, by
the action of the fire upon it. As in some sort we see in strong waters made of
saltes, which are a proper subject for the fire to dilate, who, by the
assistance of fire, mingling themselves closely with little parts of the gold,
do pull them away from their whole substance, and do force them to bear them
company in their iourny vpwardes, in which, multitudes of little parts of fire,
do concur to press the^ on and haste^ the^: and so, the weight of gold being
at length overcome by these two powerful Agents (whereof one supplyeth, what
the other wants) the whole substance of the metal, is in little atoms
diffused through the whole body of the water. But this is not truly a
dissolution or a separation of the substantial parts of gold, one from an
other: it is only a corrosion, which brings it into a subtle powder, (when
the water and saltes are separated from it) much like what filing (though far
smaller) or grinding of leaf gold upon a porphyre stone, may reduce it into:
for neither the parts of the water, nor of the fire that make themselves a way
into the body of the gold; are small and subtle enough to get between the
parts that compose the essence of it: and therefore, all they can attain
unto, is to divide it only in his quantity or bulk; not in the composition of
its nature.

Yet I intend not to deny, but that this is possible to be arrived unto, either
by pure fire duly applied; or by some other assistance* as peradventure, by
some kind of Mercury: which being of a nearer cognation unto mettalls, then any
other liquor is; may happily have a more powerful ingression into gold, then
any other body whatsoever; and being withal very subject to rarefaction, it
may (after it is entered) so perfectly penetrate the gold, as it may separate
every least part of it, and so reduce it into an absolute calx. But in this
place I explicate no more then what ordinarily passes; leaving the mysteries
of this art to those who profess it.

To go on then with what we have in hand; Why lead is easily, consumed and
calcined by fire.
lead has abundance of water ouermingled with its earth, as appears by its
easy yielding to be bend any w^y, and by its quiet standing bent in the same
position that the force which bowed it leaves it in. And therefore, the
liquide parts of lead, are easily separated from its dry and earthy ones: and
when it is melted, the very shaking of it, causes the gross parts to
descend, and many liquid ones to fly away with the fire: so that, suddenly it
is thus converted into powder. But this powder is gross, in respect of other
mettalls; unless this operation be often reiterated, or the fire more
powerfully applied, then what is just enough to bring the body of the lead into
powder.

The next consideration of bodies that fire works upon; Why and how some
bodies are divided by fire into spirits, waters, oils, saltes, and earth. And
what those parts are.
is of such as it divides into spirits, saltes, oils, waters, or phlegmes,
and earth. Now these are not pure and simple parts of the dissolved body, but
new co^pounded bodies, made of the first by the operation of heat. As smoke is
not pure water, but water and fire together: and therefore becomes not water,
but by cooling, that is, by the fire flying away from it. So likewise those
spirits, salts, oils, and the rest; are but degrees of things, which fire
makes of diverse parts of the dissolved body, by seperating them one from an
other, and incorporating it self with them. And so, they are all of them
compounded of the four Elements; and are further resoluable into them.

Yet I intend not to say that there are not originally in the body before its
dissolution, some loose parts which have the properties of these bodies that
are made by the fire in the dissoluing of it: for seeing that nature works by
the like instruments as art uses; she must needs, in her excesses and
defects, produce like bodies to what art does in dissolution; which operation
of art is but a kind of excess in the progress of nature: but my meaning is,
that in such dissolution, there are more of these parts made by the working of
fire, then were in the body before.

Now because this is the natural and most ordinary dissolution of things;
let us see in particular how it is done: suppose then that fire were in a
convenient manner applied, to a body that has all sorts of parts in it; and
our own discourse will tell us, that the first effect it works will be, that
as the subtle parts of fire do divide, and pass through that body, they will
adhere to the most subtle parts in it; which being most agile, and least
bound, and incorporated to the bowels of the body, and lying (as it were)
loosely scattered in it, the fire will carry them away with it. Th^se will be
the first that are separated from the maine body; which being retained in a
fit receiver, will by the coldenesse of the circumdant air grow outwardly
cool themselves, and become first a dew upon the sides of the glass, and then
still as they grow cooler, condense more and more; till at the length they
fall down congealed into a palpable liquor; which is composed (as you see) of
the hoatest parts of the body, mingled with the fire that carried them out:
and therefore this liquor, is very inflammable, and easily turned into actual
fire; as you see all spirits and Aquae ardentes of vegetables are.

The hot and loose parts being extracted; and the fire continuing and
increasing; those that will follow next are such, as though they be not of
themselves loose; yet are easyest to be made so; and are therefore most
separable. These must be humide; and those little dry parts which are
incorporated with the ouerflowing humide ones in them (for no parts that we
can arrive unto, are of one pure, simple nature; but all are mixed and composed
of the 4 Elements in some proportion) must be held together with such gross
glue, as the fire may easily penetrate and separate them. And then the humide
parts divided into little atoms do stick to the lesser ones of the fire:
which by their multitude of number and velocity of motion, supplying what they
want of them in bulk; do carry them away with them. And thus these
phlegmatic parts fly up with the fire and are afterward congealed into an
insipide water: which if it have any savor, is, because the first ardent
spirits are not totally separated from it; but some few of them remain in it,
and give some little life to the whole body of that otherwise flatt liquor.

Now those parts which the fire separateth next from the remaining body, after
the fiery and watery ones are carried away, must be such as it can work upon;
and therefore must abound in humidity. But since they stir not till the watery
ones are gone, it is evident, that they are composed of many dry parts
strongly incorporated, and very subtilely mixed with the moist ones; and that
both of them are exceeding small, and are so closely and finely knitt together,
that the fire has much ado to get between them and cut the thriddes that
tie them together: and therefore, they require a very great force of fire to
carry them up. Now the composition of these, shows them to be aeriall: and
(together with the fire that is mingled with them) they congeale into that
consistence which we call oil.

Lastly, it can not be otherwise but that the fire, in all this while of
continual application to the body it thus anatomiseth, has hardened and as it
were roasted some parts into such greatness and dryness as they will not fly,
nor can be carried up with any moderate heat. But, great quantity of fire
being mingled with the subtiler parts of his baked earth makes them very
pungent, and acrimonious in taste* so, that they are of the nature of ordinary
salt, and are so called; and by the help of water may easily be separated,
from the more gross parts, which then remain a dead and vselesse earth.

By this discourse it is apparent, that fire has been the instrument which
has wrought all these parts of an entire body into the forms they are in;
for whiles, it carried away the fiery parts it swelled the watery ones: and
whiles it lifted up them it digested the aeriall parts, and whiles it drove up
the oils, it baked the earth and salt. Again, all these retaining for the
most part, the proper nature of the substance from whence they are extracted;
it is evident, that the substance is not dissolved; (for so, the nature of the
whole would be dissolved and quite destroyed, and extinguished in every part)
but that only some parts containing the whole substance, or rather the nature
of the whole substance in them, are separated from other parts that have
likewise the same nature in them.

The third instrument, How water the third i^strume^t to dissolve bodies,
dissolueth calx into salt; and so into Terra damnata.
for the separation and dissolution of bodies, is water. Whose proper matter to
work upon, is salt. And it serves to supply what the fire could not perform,
which is the separation of the salt from the earth in calcined bodies. All the
other parts fire was able to sever. But in these, he has so baked the little
humidity he has left in them with their much earth* as he can not divide them
any further. And so, though he incorporateth him self with them, yet he can
carry nothing away with him. If then pure water be putt upon that chalk, the
subtilest dry parts of it, do easily join to the superuenient moisture; and
sticking close to it do draw it down to them; but because they are the
lighter, it happens to them, as when a man in a boat pulls the land to
him: that, comes not to him; but he remoueth himself and his boat to it: so,
these ascend in the water as they dissolve. And the water, more and more
penetrating them, and by addition of its parts, making the humidity which
gleweth their earthy parts together greater and greater; does make a wider and
wider separation between those little earthy parts. And so imbueth the whole
body of the water with the^; into which* they are dispersed in little atoms.
Those that are of biggest bulk, remain lowest in the water. And in the same
measure as their quantities dissolve into less and less they ascend higher
and higher in the water: till at the length, the water is fully replenished
with them, and they are diffused through the whole body of it: whiles the more
gross and heavy earthy parts (having nothing in them to make a present
combination between them and the water) do fall down to the bottom, and
settle under the water in dust.

In which because earth alone does predominate in a very great excess, we can
expect no other virtue to be in it, but that which is proper to mere earth: to
wit, dryness and weight. Which ordinary Alchymistes look not after: and
therefore call it Terra damnata: but others, find a fixing quality in it, by
which they perform very admirable operations. Now if you power the impregnated
water from the Terra damnata, and then euaporate it; you will find a pure white
substance remaining. Which by its bulk, shows it self to be very earthy;
and by its pricking, and corrosiue taste, will inform you much fire is in it,
and by its easy dissolution in a moist place, that water had a great share in
the production of it. And thus the saltes of bodies are made and extracted.

How water mingled with salt, becomes a most powerful Agent to dissolve other
bodies.
Now as water does dissolve salt, so by the incorporation and virtue of that
corrosiue substance it does more then salt it self can do: for having gotten
acrimony, and more weight by the mixture and dissolution of salt in it, it
makes it self a way into solid bodies, even into metals; as we see in
brass and iron; which are easily rusted by salt dissoluing upon them. And
according as the saltes are stronger, so this corrosiue virtue increases in
them, even so much, as neither silver nor gold, are free from their eating
quality. But they, as well as the rest, are divided into most small parts, and
are made to swim in water, in such sort as we have explicated above, and
whereof every ordinary Alchymist teaches the practice.

But this is not all; salts do help as well to melt hard bodies and mettalls,
as to corrode them: for some fusible salts flowing upon them by the heat of
the fire, and others dissolved by the stream of the metal that incorporateth
with them; as soon as they are in flux, they mingle with the natural juice
of the metal, and penetrate them deeper, then without them the fire could
do, and swell them and make them fit to run. How putrefactio^ is caused.


These are the principal ways of the two last instruments in dissoluing of
bodies; taking each of them by it self. But there remains one more of very
great importance, as well in the works of nature as of art; in which, both the
former are joined and do concure: and that is putrefraction. Whose way of
working is by gentle heat and moisture to wett and pierce the body it works
upon* whereby, it is made to swell: and the hot parts of it, being loosened*
they are at length druncke up and drowned in the moist ones (from whence, by
fire they are easily separated as we have already declared*) and those moist
parts, afterward leaving it, the substance remains dry, and falls in
pieces, for want of the glue that held it together.

THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. An explication of certain Maxims touching the
operations, and qualities af bodies: and whether the Elements be found pure in
any part of the world.
OVt of what we have determined, What is the sphere of actiuity in corporeal
Agents.
concerning the natural actions of bodies, in their making and destroying one
an other; it is easy to understand the right meaning of some terms, and the
true reason of some maxims much used in the schools. As first; when
Philosophers attribute unto all sorts of corporeal Agents, a Sphere of
Actiuity. The sense of that manner of expression, in fire appears plainly,
by what we have already declared of the nature and manner of operation of that
Element.

And in like manner, if we consider how the force of cold consists in a
compression of the body that is made cold, we may preceiue that if in the
cooled body there be any subtle parts which can break forth from the rest,
such compression will make them do so. Especially if the compression be of
little parts of the compressed body within themselves, as well as of the
outward bulk of the whole body round about: for at first the compression of
such causes in the body, where they are, little holes or pores in the places
they are compressed and driven from; which pores, they filled up when they were
dilated at their own natural liberty. But being thus forcibly shrunk up
into less room, afterward, they squeese again out of their croude all such
very loose and subtle parts (residing till then with them) as can find their
way out from among them. And these subtle parts, that thus are delivered from
the colds compression, get first into the pores that we have showed were made
by this compression. But they can not long stay there; for the atoms of
aduenient cold that obsesse the compressed body, do likewise with all their
force, throng into those pores, and soon drive out the subtle guestes they
find there, because they are more in number, bigger in bulk, and more violent
in their course then they. Who therefore must yield unto them the little
channels, and capacities they formerly took up. Out of which they are thrust
with such an impetuosity, that they spinne from them with a vehemence, as
quickesiluer does through leather, when to purify it, or to bring an Amalgame
to a due consistence, it is strained through the sides of it.

Now these shoures or streams of atoms issuing from the compressed body, are
on all sides round about it at exceeding little distances; because the pores,
out of which they are driven, are so likewise. And consequently there they
remain round about besieging it, as though they would return to their
original homes, as soon as the usurping strangers that were too powerful for
the^, will give the^ leave. And according to the multitude of the^, and to the
force with which they are driven out; the compass they take up round about the
co^pressed body, is greater or lesser. Which besieging atoms are not so soon
carried away by any exterior and accidental causes, but they are supplied by
new emanations succeeding them out of the said compressed body.

Now this which we have declared by the example of cold co^pressing a
particular body, happens in all bodies wheresoever they be in the world* for
this being the unavoidable effect of heat and of cold, wheresoever they
reside; (which are the active qualities, by whose means not only fire and
water and the other two Elements; but all other mixed bodies composed of the
Elements, have their actiuity) and they being in all bodies whatsoever (as we
have proved above) it follows evidently, that there is not a body in the
world, but has about it self an orb of emanations of the same nature which
that body is of. Within the compass of which orb, when any other body comes
that receives an immutation by the little atoms whereof that orb is
composed, the aduenient body seems to be affected and as it were replenished
with the qualities of the body from whence they issue. Which is then said to
work upon the body that imbibeth the emanations that flow from it. And because
this orb (regularly speaking) is in the form of a sphere, the passive body is
said to be within the sphere of the others actiuity.

Secondly; when Philosophers pronounce, that No corporeal nature can operari
in distans; that is, that no body can work upon an other remote from it, The
reason why no body can work in distance.
without working first upon the body that lies between them, which must
continue and piece up the operation from the Agent to the patient. The reason
and truth of this maxim is in our Philosophy evident; for we having showed
that action among bodies is performed for the most part, by the emission of
little parts out of one body into an other: as also, that such little parts
can not stream from the body that is their fountain, and settle upon a remote
body, without passing through the interiacent bodies; which must furnish them,
as it were, with channels and pipes to convey them whither they are to go; It
follows manifestly, that the active emissaries of the working body, can never
reach their distant mark, unless they be successively ferryed over the
medium, that lies between them; in which, they must needs leave impressions
of their having been there, and so work upon it in their passage, and leave
in it their qualities and complexions; as a payment for their waftage over.

But peradventure some may contend, An objection answered against the manner of
explicating the former axiom^.
that these invisible serieants and workmen are too feeble and impotent to
perform those visible great effects we daily see. As when fire at the length
burns a board that has been a great while opposed to it, though it touch
not the body of the fire; or when a loadestone draws unto it a great weight
of iron that is distant from it.

Unto whom we shall reply, that if he will not grant these subtle emanations
from the agent body, to be the immediate workers of these effects; he must
allott that efficacy unto the whole corpulency of all the Agent working in
bulk (for besides the whole, and the parts there is no third thing to be
considered in bodies; since they are constituted by quantity;) but the whole,
can not work otherwise then by local motion: which in this case it can not
do, because by the supposition, it is determined to keep its distance from
the passive body, and not to move toward it. Therefore, this is impossible;
whereas the other can appear but difficult at the worst, and therefore must
be admitted, when no better and more intelligible solution can be found.

But withal we must note that it is not our intention to say, but that it may
in some circumstances happen that some particular action or effect may be
wrought in a remote part or body, which shall not be the same in the
intermediate body that lies between the Agent and the patient, and that
conueyeth the Agents working atoms to the others body. As for example when
tinder or Naphtha is by fire made to burn at a yard distance from it, when
the interiacent air is but warmed by that fire. Or when the sun, by means
of a burning glass or of some other reflection, sets some bodies on fire,
and yet only enlighteneth the glass and the air that are in the way. The
reason of which is manifest to be the diverse dispositions of the different
subjects in regard of the Agent: and therefore it is no wonder that diverse
effects should be produced according to those diverse dispositions.

A third position among Philosophers is, Of reaction and first in pure local
motion, that each Age^t must suffer in acting and act^ in suffering.
that all bodies which work upon others, do likewise at the same time, wherein
they work; suffer from those they work upon: and contrariwise that all bodies
which suffer from others, do at the same time work back again upon them.
For the better understanding whereof, let us consider that all action among
bodies is either purely local motion, or else local motion with certain
particularities which give it a particular name. As when we express the local
motion of little atoms of fire, or of earth, or water upon and into other
bodies by the words of heating or cooling; and so of the like. Now if the
action be pure local motion, and consequently the effect produced by that
action* be merely change of place; we must call to mind how two dense bodies
moving one against the other, do each of them bear before them some little
quantity of a rarer body immediately joined unto them: and consequently, these
more rare bodies must be the first to feel the power of the dense bodies and
to receive impressions from their motions; each of them, by the opposite rare
body, which like an huissier goes before to make way for his following master
that obliges him to this service.

Now when these rare^ vshers have struggled a while like the first lightly
armed ranks of two armies in the interiacent field between their maine
battalies, that follow them close at the heels; they must at the length
yield, when they are ouerborne by a greater weight then they can sustain; and
then they recoyle back, as it were to save themselves by getting in among the
files of the dense bodies that drove them on; which not opening to admit them,
and yet they still flying violently from the mastering force that pursues
them; they press so hard upon what at the first pressed them on, as
notwithstanding their density and strength they force them to retire back: for
unless they do so, they are not of the number of those that work upon one an
other.

And this retiring, is either on both sides, or but of one side. If both; then
it is evident how each of them is an Agent, and each of them a sufferer; each
of them ouercoming his opposite in such sort, as himself likewise receives
blows and loss. But if only one of the dense bodies be so shocked as to
recoyle back, then that only suffers in its body, and the other suffers
only in its virtue; that is, in the air or other rare body it sends before
it; which it drives with such a violence, that it mastereth and quelleth the
opposition of the other body, before it can reach to shake the dense body,
before which it runs. Yet that rare body must be pressed and broken into, in
some measure, by the encounter of the other (which though never so weak yet
makes some resistance) but much more when it comes to grapple with the dense
body it self: and so between them, it is wounded and enfeebled, like those
soldiers that first enter a breach in a own; from whence when they have
driven the enemy, they pursue him to the cittadell, and force him from thence
too: and so how maimed soever they prove, they make a free and easy way without
resistance for the whole body of their army to follow them, and take quiett
possession of that which did cost them so much to win.

And thus we see how it may happen that one of these moving bodies does not
suffer so much as to be stayed in its journey; much less, to be driven back.
And yet the other body at the same time work in some measure upon it, by
working upon what is next to it; which recoyling against it must needs make
some impression upon it, since there can be no opposition but must have some
effect. Now this impression or effect, though it be not perceptible by causing
a contrary motion, yet it must needs enfeeble the virtue of the conquering
Agent, and deaden the celerity of its motion. And thus it is evident, that in
all pure local motions of corporeal Agents, every one of them must in some
proportion suffer in acting, and in suffering must act.

And what we have said of this kind of action, The former doctrine applied to
other local motions designed by particular names. And that Suisseths argument
is of no force against this way of doctrine.
may easily be applied to the other where the effect of local motion is
designed by a particular name, as it is in the examples we gave of heating and
cooling. And in that, the proceeding will appear to be the very same as in
this; for if fire does heat water, the water reacteth again, either upon the
fire and cools it, if it be immediate unto it; or else upon the interiacent
air, if it be at a distance from the fire. And so the air is, in some
measure cooled, by the cold atoms that issue from the water, whose compass or
sphere of actiuity being lesser then the fires, they can not cool so far
off, as the others can heat: but where they do arrive, they give their
proportion of cold, in the very midst of the others army of fiery atoms,
notwithstanding their multitude and violence.

According to which doctrine, our countryman Suisseth his argument, that in the
schools is held insoluble, has not so much as any semblance of the least
difficulty: for it is evident that such atoms of fire and of water as we
determine heat and cold to be, may pass and croude by one an other into the
subjects they are sent unto by diverse little streams without hindering one an
other (as we have declared of air and light) and each of them be received in
their own nature and temper by the same subject; though sense can judge only
according to which of them is predominant, and according to the proportion of
its superiority.

Upon which occasion we can not choose but note, how the doctrine of qualities
is not only unable to give account of the ordinary and plain effects of
nature; but also uses to end in clear impossibilities and contradictions if
it be driven far: as this argument of Suisseth shows, and many others of
the like nature.

A fourth position among Philosophers is, Why some notions do admit of
intension and Remission; and others do not.
that some notions do admit the denominations of Intension and Remission, but
that others do not. The reason of which we shall clearly see, if we but
consider how these terms of intension and remission, do but express more or
less, of the thing that is said to be intended or remitted: for the nature of
more and less, does imply a latitude and diuisibility; and therefore can not
agree with the nature of such things as consist in an indivisible being. As
for example to be a whole, or to be an equal, can not be sometimes more,
sometimes less; for they consist in such a rigorous indivisible being, that if
the least part imaginable be wanting it is no longer a whole, and if there be
the least excess between two things, they are no longer equal, but are in
some other proportion then of equality in regard of one an other.

And hence it is that Aristotle teaches us that substance and the species of
Quantity, do not admit of intension and remission; but that Quality does. For
first in substance, we know that the signification of this word is, that which
makes a thing be what it is, as is evident by our giving it for an answer to
the question what a thing is. And therefore, if there were any diuisibility in
substance, it would be in what the thing is; and consequently, every division
following that diuisibility, would make the thing an other what, that is an
other thing. And so the substance that is pretended to be changed by intension
or remission, would not be divided, as is supposed, but would cease to be, and
an other substance would succeed in the room of it. Whereby you see that
every mutation in substance, makes a new thing: and that more and less in
Quiddity can not be pronounced of the same thing.

Likewise in Quantity, it is clear that its Specieses do consist in an
indivisible: for as in numbers, ten lions (for example) or ten Elephants
are no more in regard of multitude then ten fleas or ten moates in the
sun; and if you add or take any thing from ten, it is no more ten, but
some other number: so likewise in continued extension, a spanne, an elle, an
ounce, or any other measure whatsoever, cease to be a spanne and the rest, if
you add to it or diminish from it the least quantity imaginable. And
peradventure, the same is also of figures, as of a sphere, a cube, a circle, a
square, etc. though they be in the rank of Qualities.

But if we consider such qualities as heat, cold, moisture, dryness,
softness, hardness, weight, lightness, and the like* we shall find that they
may be in any body sometimes more, sometimes less, (according as the excess
of any Element or mixture is greater in it, at one time then at an other) and
yet the body in which these qualities are intended or remitted, remain still
with the same denomination. As when dirt continues still soft, though
sometimes it be less soft, other whiles softer; and wax remains figurable,
whether it be melted or congealed; and wood is still hot though it loose or
gain some degree of heat.

But such intension in any subject whatsoever has its determinate limits that
it can not pass; for when more of that quality that we say is intended (that
is, more of the atoms of the active body) is brought into the body that
suffers the intension, then its complexion can brook; it resigneth its
nature to their violence and becomes a new thing; such an one as they are
pleased to make it. As when wood, with extremity of heating (that is, with
bringing into it so many atoms of fire, that the fire is stronger in it then
its own nature) is converted into fire, smoke, water, and ashes; and nothing
remains of the nature of wood.

That in every part of our habitable world; all the four Elements, are found
pure in small atoms; but not in any great bulk.
But before we end this chapter, we may remember how in the close of the fourth
we remitted a question concerning the existence of the Elements; (that is;
whether in any places of the world there were any pure Elements, either in
bulk or in little parts;) as being not ready to resolve it, till we had
declared the manner of working of bodies one upon an other. Here then will be a
fit place to determine that, out of what we have discoursed concerning the
actions, whereby bodies are made and corrupted: for considering the universal
action of fire that runs through all the bodies we have commerce withal, by
reason of the suns influence into them and operation upon them with his light
and beams which reaches far and near; and looking upon the effects which
we have showed do follow thence: it is manifest, there can not be any great
quantity of any body whatsoever, in which fire is not intrinsecally mixed. And
on the other side, we see that where fire is once mixed it is very hard to
separate it totally from thence. Again we see it is impossible that pure fire
should be conserved, without being adjoined to some other body; both because of
its violent nativity, still streaming forth with a great impetuosity; as also,
because it is so easily overcome by any obsident body when it is dilated. And
therefore we may safely conclude that no simple Element can consist in any
great quantity in this course of nature which we live in and take a suruay of.
Neither does it appear to what purpose nature should have placed any such
storehouses of simples, seeing she can make all needful complexions by the
dissolutions of mixed bodies into other mixed bodies sauouring of the nature of
the Elements, without needing their purity to begin upon.

But on the other side, it is as evident that the Elements must remain pure in
every compounded body in such extreme small parts as we use to call atoms:
for if they did not, the variety of bodies would be nothing else, but so many
degrees of rarity and density, or so many pure homogeneall Elements, and not
bodies composed of heterogeneall parts: and consequently, would not be able to
show that variety of parts which we see in bodies, nor could produce the
complicated effects which proceed from them. And accordingly we are sure that
the least parts which our senses can arrive to discover have many varieties in
them: even so much that a whole living creature (whose organicall parts must
needs be of exceeding different natures) may be so little, as unto our eyes to
seem indivisible; we not distinguishing any difference of parts in it without
the help of a multiplying glass: as in the least kind of mites, and in worms
picked out of Childrens hands we daily experience. So as it is evident that no
sensible part can be unmingled. But then again, when we call to mind how we
have showed that the qualities which we find in bodies do result out of the
composition, and mixtion of the Elements, we must needs conclude that they
must of necessity remain in their own essences in the mixed body. And so out
of the whole discourse, determine that they are not there in any visible
quantity, but in those least atoms, that are too subtle for our senses to
discern. Which position we do not understand so Metaphysically as to say that
their substantial forms remain actually in the mixed body; but only, that
their accidental qualities are found in the compound; remitting that other
question unto Metaphysicians (those spiritual Anatomistes) to decide.

THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER. Of Rarefaction and Condensation the two first motions
of particular bodies.
The Authors intent in this and the following chapters.
Our intention in this discourse, concerning the natures and motions of bodies,
aiming no further then at the discovery of what is or may be done by
corporeal Agents; thereby to determine what is the work of immateriall and
spiritual substances; it can not be expected at our hands that we should
deliver here an entire and complete body of natural Philosophy. But only that
we should take so much of it in our way, as is needful to carry us with truth
and evidence to our iourneys end. It belongs not then to us to meddle with
those sublime contemplations which search into the nature of the vast Universe,
and that determine the unity and limitation of it; and that show by what
stringes, and upon what pinnes, and wheels, and hinges, the whole world
moves: and that from thence do ascend unto an awful acknowledgment and humble
admiration of the primary cause; from whence, and of which, both the being of
it, and the beginning of the first motion, and the continuance of all others
does proceed and depend.

Nor in deed would it be to the purpose for anyman to sail in this Ocean, and
to begin a new voyage of navigations upon it: unless he were assured, he had
ballast enough in his ship to make her sink deep into the water and to
carry her steadily through those unruly waves; and that he were furnished with
skill and provision sufficient to go through, without either loosing his course
by steering after a wrong compass, or being forced back again with short
and obscure relations of discoueries: since others that went out before him,
are returned with a large account to such as are able to understand and sum
it up. Which surely our learned countryman, Mr. Thomas White.
and my best and most honored friend, and to whom of all men living I am most
obliged (for to him I owe that little which I know; and what I have, and shall
set down in all this discourse, is but a few sparks kindled by me at his
great fire) has both profoundly, and acutely, and in every regard iudiciously
performed in his Dialogues of the world.

Our task then (in a lower strain; and more proportionate to so weak
shoulders) is to look no further then among those bodies we converse withal.
Of which, having declared by what course and engines nature governs their
common motions, that are found even in the Elements, and from thence are
derived to all bodies composed of them; we intend now to consider such motions
as accompany diverse particular bodies, and are much admired by whosoever
understands not the causes of them.

To begin from the easiest and most connexed with the actions of the
Elements, That bodies may be rarifyed, both by outward and inward heat; and how
this is performed.
the handsell of our labor will light upon the motions of Rarefaction and
Condensation, as they are the passions of mixed bodies. And first for
Rarefaction; we may remember how it proceeds originally from fire, and
depends of heat; as is declared in the former chapter: and wheresoever we
find Rarefaction, we may be confident the body which suffers it, is not
without fire working upon it. From hence we may gather, that when the air
imprisoned in a baloone or bladder, swells against what contains it; and
stretches its case, and seeks to break out; this effect must proceed from
fire or heat (though we see not the fire) working either within the very
bowels of the air; or without, by pressing upon what contains it, and so
making it self a way unto it.

And that this latter way is able to work this effect; may be convinced by the
contrary effect from a contrary cause: for take a bladder stretched out unto
its greatest extent by air shutt up within it; and hang it in a cold place;
and you will see it presently contract it self into a less room; and the
bladder will grow wrinckeled and become too big for the air within it. But
for immediate proof of this position, we see that the addition of a very small
degree of heat, rarifyeth the air in a weather glass, (the air receiving
the impression of heat, sooner then water) and so makes it extend it self
into a greater place; and consequently, it presses upon the water; and forces
it down into a less room then formerly it possessed. And likewise we see
quickesyluer and other liquors, if they be shutt up in glasses close stopped
and set in sufficient heat (and a little is sufficient for this effect) they
will swell and fill their glasses; and at the last break them, rather then
not find a way to give themselves more room; which is then grown too straight
in the glass, by reason of the rarefaction of the liquors by the fire working
upon them.

Now again; that this effect may be wrought by the inward heat, that is
enclosed in the bowels of the substance thus shutt up; both reason, and
experience do assure us: for, they teach us that if a body which is not
extremely compacted, but that by its looseness is easily diuisible into little
parts (such a one as wine, or other spirittfull liquors) be enclosed in a
vessel; the little atoms that perpetually move up and down in every space of
the whole world, making their way through every body, will set on work the
little parts, in the wine for example, to play their game: so that the hot
and light parts (if they be many) not enduring to be compressed and kept in by
the heavy and cold ones, do seek to break out with force; and till they can
free themselves from the dense ones that would imprison them they carry them
along with them, and make them to swell out as well as themselves.

Now if they be kept in by the vessel, so that they have not play enough; they
drive the dense ones (like so many little hammers or wedges) against the sides
of it, and at the length do break it, and so do make themselves way, to a
larger room. But if they have vent; the more fiery hot spirits fly away, and
leave the other grosser parts quiett and at rest. On the other side if the
hot and light parts in a liquor be not many nor very active, and the vessel
be so full that the parts have not free scope to remove and make way for one
an other, there will not follow any great effect in this kind: as we see in
bottled beer or ale, that works little, unless there be some space left
empty, in the bottle. And again; if the vessel be very much too big for the
liquor in it, the fiery parts find room, first to swell up the heavy ones;
and at the length to get out from them, though the vessel be close stopped;
for they have scope enough to floate up and down between the surface of the
liquor, and the roof of the vessel.

And this is the reason that if a little beer or small wine be left long in a
great caske, be it never so close stopped, it will in time grow dead. And then,
if at the opening of the bunge (after the caske has been long unstirred) you
hold a candle close to it, you shall at the instant see a flash of flame
enuironing the ve^t. Which is no other thing, but the subtle spirits that
parting from the beer or wine, have left it dead; and flying abroad as soon
as they are permitted, are set on fire by the flame that they meet with in
their journey, as being more combustible (because more subtle) then that
spirit of wine which is kept in form of liquor: and yet that likewise (though
much grosser) is set on fire by the touch of flame. And this happens not
only to wine, and beer, or ale, but even to water. As daily experience
shows in the east Indian ships, that having been 5. or 6. years at sea,
when they open some of their caskes of Thames water in their return homewardes
(for they keep that water till the last; as being their best and most durable;
and that grows lighter and purer, by the often putrifyinges through violent
motions in storms, every one of which makes new gross and earthy parts fall
down to the bottom, and other volatile ones ascend to the top;) a flame is
seen about their bunges if a candle be near, as we said before of wine.

And to proceed, with confirming this doctrine by further experience; we daily
see that the little parts of heat being agitated and brought into motion in
any body; they enter and pierce into other parts, and incorporate themselves
with them, and set them on fire if they be capable thereof: as we see in wett
hay or flax laid together in great quantity. And if they be not capable of
taking fire, then they carry them with them to the outside; and when they can
transport them no further, part flies away, and other part stays with them:
as we see in new beer or ale, and in must of wine; in which, a substance
usually called the mother, is wrought up to the top.

Which in wine, will at the last be converted into Tartar; when the spirits
that are very volatile, are flowne away; and do leave those parts from whence
they have euaporated, more gross and earthy then the others, where the grosser
and subtiler parts continue still mixed. But in beer or rather in ale; this
mother, which in them we call barme, will continue longer in the same
consistence, and with the same qualities; for the spirits of it are not so fiery
that they must presently leave the body they have incorporated themselves
withal; nor are hot enough to bake it into a hard consistence. And therefore,
bakers make use of it to raise their bread; which neither it will do, unless
it be kept from cold; both which, are evident signs that it works in force
of heat; and consequently, that it continues still a hot and light substance.

And again we see that after wine or beer has wrought once, a violent motion
will make it work anew. As is daily seen in great lightninges and in thunder,
and by much rocking of them; for such motion rarifyeth, and consequently
heateth them: partly by separating the little parts of the liquor, which were
before as glewed together, and therefore lay quietly; but now, by their pulling
asunder, and by the liquors growing thereby more loose then it was, they have
freedom to play up and down: and partly by beating one part against an other;
which breaks and divides them into lesser atoms, and so brings some of
them into the state of fire; which you may remember, is nothing else but a body
brought into such a degree of littleness and rarity of its parts.

And this is the reason why such hard and dry bodies as have an unctuous
substance in them, are by motion either easily set on fire, or at the least,
fire is easily gotten out of them. As happens in flintes, and in diverse other
stones, which yield fire when they are stricken; and if presently after you
smell unto them, you shall perceive an odor of brimstone and of burning which
is a certain sign that the motion did convert into fire the natural
brimstone that was mingled with the flint, and whose denser parts were grown
cold, and so stuck to the stone. And in like manner, the iuywood and diverse
others, as also the Indian canes (which from thence are called firecanes) being
rubbed with some other stick of the same nature; if they be first very dry,
will of themselves set on fire: and the like will happen to coach wheels in
summer if they be ouerheated with motion.

To conclude our discourse of rarefaction, Of the great effects of Rarefaction.
we may look a little into the power and efficacity of it, which is no where
to be seen so clearly as in fire. And as fire is the general cause of
rarefaction, so is it of all bodies, that which is most rarifyed. And therefore
it is no maruayle if its effects be the greatest that are in nature, seeing it
is the proper operation of the most active Element. The wonderful force of it
we daily see in thunder, in gunnes, in granados, and in mines; of which,
continual experience, as well as several historyes wittnesseth little less
then miracles. Leaving them to the remarkes of curious Persons, we will only
look into the way by which so maine effects do proceed from causes that
appear so slender.

It is evident that fire (as we have said before) dilateth it self
spherically; as nature shows us manifestly in bubbles of boiling water, and
of mike, and generally of such substances as are of a viscous composition; for
those bubbles being round, do assure us that the cause which made them, did
equally dilate them from the center unto all parts. Now then remembering the
infinite multiplication which is in fire, we may conceive that when a grain of
gunnepouder is turned thereinto, there are so many little bubbles of a viscous
substance one backing an other with great celerity, as there are parts of fire
more then there were of gunnepouder. And if we make a computation of the number
and of the celerity of these bubbles; we shall find that although every one of
them single do seem to be of an inconsiderable force, yet the whole number of
them together, will exceed the resistance of the body moved or broken by them:
especially, if we note, that when hard substances have not time allowed them to
yield, they break the sooner. And then we shall not so much admire the
extremities we see acted by these means.

Thus having looked into the nature of rarefaction, and traced the progress of
it from the motion of the sun and fire; The first manner of condensation, by
heat.
in the next place we are to examine the nature of condensation. And we shall
oftentimes find it likewise an effect of the same cause otherwise working: for
there being two different ways to dry any wett thing; the one, by taking away
that juice which makes a body liquid; the other, by putting more drought to
the wett body, that it may imbibe the moisture; this latter way does as well as
the former, condense a body: for by the close sticking of wett to dry, the most
part of condensation is effected in compounded bodies.

The first of these ways, does properly and immediately proceed from heat;
for heat entering into a body, incorporateth it self with the moist and
viscous parts it finds there: as purging medicines do with the humors they
work upon* which when the stomach can no longer entertain (by reason of
their unruly motions in wrestling together) they are both eiected grappling
with one an other; and the place of their contention is thus, by the
superuenience of a guest of a contrary nature (that will not stay long there)
purged from the superaboundance of the former ones that annoyed it. Even so the
fire that is greedily drunk up by the watery and viscous parts of a compounded
body; and whose actiuity and restless nature will not endure to be long
emprisoned there, quickly pierces quite through ^he body it enters into, and
after a while streameth out at the opposite side, as fast as it entered on the
side next to it, and carries away with it those glewy parts it is
incorporated with: and by their absence, leaves the body they part from, dryer
then at the first it was.

Which course we may observe in sirupes that are boiled to a consistence, and
in brothes that are consumed unto a gelly: over which, whiles they are making
by the fire under them, you see a great steame; which is, the watery parts that
being incorporated with fire, fly away in smoke. Likewise when the sea water
is condensed into salt, you see it is an effect of the sun or fire that
exhaleth or boyleth away all the palpable moisture. And so when wett clothes
are hanged either in the sun or at the fire, we see a smoke about the
clothes, and heat within them; which being all drawn out from them, they
become dry.

And this deserves a particular note, that although they should be not quite
dry, when you take them from the fire; yet by then they are cool, they will be
dry: for the fire that is in them when they are removed from the maine stock
of fire, flying away carries with it the moisture that was incorporated with
it: and therefore whiles they were hot, that is, whiles the fire was in them,
they must also be moist; because the fire and the moisture were grown to be
one body: and could not become through dry with that measure of fire, (for more
would have dried them, even whiles they where hot) until they were also
grown through cold. And in like manner, sirupes, hydromels, gellies, and the
like, grow much thicker after they are taken off from the fire, then they were
upon the fire, and much of their humidity, flies away with the fire, in their
cooling, whereby they lessen much of their quantity, even after the outward
fire has ceased from working upon them.

Now if the moist parts, that remain after the drying, be by the heat well
incorporated in the dry parts; and so do occasion the dry parts to stick
close together; then that body is condensed, and will (to the proportion of it)
be heauyer in a less bulk; as we see that mettalls are heauyer then stones.

Allthough this effect be in these examples wrought by heat, The second manner
of condensation by cold.
yet generally speaking it is more proper to cold: which is the second way of
drying a moist body. As when in Greeneland, the extreme cold freeseth the
whalefishers beer into ice, so that the stewardes divide it with axes and
wedges, and deliver their portions of drink to their ships company, and their
shallopes gings, in their bare hands: but in the innermost part of the butte,
they find some quantity of very strong liquor, not inferior to moderate spirit
of wine. At the first, before custom had made it familiar unto them, they
wondered that every time they drew at the tappe, when first it came from their
ships to the shore (for the heat of the hold would not let it freese) no
liquor would come, unless they new tapped it with a longer gimlett: but they
thought that pains well recompensed, by finding it in the taste to grow
stronger and stronger; till at the last, their longest gimlets would bring
nothing out; and yet the vessel not a quarter drawn off; which obliged them
then to staue the caske, that so they might make use of the substance that
remained.

The reason of this, is evident: that cold seeking to condense the beer by
mingling its dry and cold parts with it, those that would endure this mixture,
were imbibed and shrunk up by them. But the other rare and hot parts that
were squeesed out by the dense ones which entered to congeale the beer, and
were forced into the middle of the vessel (which was the furthest part for
them to retire unto, from their enuironing enemies) did conserve themselves in
their liquid form, in defyance of the assaulting cold; whiles their fellows,
remaining by their departure more gross and earthy then they were before,
yielded to the conqueror, they could not shift away from, and so were dried and
condensed into ice: which when the mariners thawed, they found it like fair
water, without any spirits in it or comforting heat to the stomach.

This manner of condensation, which we have described in the freesing of beer,
is the way most practiced by nature; I mean, for immediate condensation (for
co^dentsation is secondarily, wheresoever there is rarefaction which we have
determined to be an effect of heat.) And the course of it is: that a multitude
of earthy and dry bodies being driven against any liquor, they easily divide
it, by means of their density, their dryness, and their littleness (all
which in this case do accompany one an other; and are by us determined to be
powerful diuiders;) and when they are gotten into it, they partly suck into
their own pores the wett and diffused parts of the liquide body; and partly
they make them (when themselves are full) stick fast to their dry sides, and
become as a glue to hold themselves strongly together. And thus they dry up the
liquor; and by the natural pressing of gravity they contract it into a lesser
room. No otherwise then when we force much wind or water into a bottle; and by
pressing it more and more, make it lie closer then of its own nature it would
do. Or rather, as when ashes being mingled with water; both those substances do
stick so close to one an other, that they take up less room then they did
each apart.

This is the method of frostes, and of snow, and of ice, both natural and
artificcall; for in natural freesing, ordinarily the north or northeast wind
by its force brings and drives into our liquors, such earthy bodies as it
has gathered from rocks covered with snow; which being mixed with the light
vapors whereof the wind is made, do easily find way into the liquors, and the^
they dry the^ into that consiste^ce which we call ice. Which in token of the
wind it has in it, swimmeth upon the water, and in the vessel where it is
made,, rises higher then the water did whereof it is composed: and ordinarily
it breaks from the sides of the vessel so giving way to more wind to come
in, and freese deeper and thicker.

That ice is not water rarifyed but condensed.
But because Galileus Nel discorso intorno all cose che stanno in su l'acqua
page 4. was of opinion that ice was water rarifyed, and not condensed; we must
not pass over this verity, without maintaining it against the opposition of so
powerful an adversary. His arguments are; first that ice takes up more place,
then the water did of which it was made; which is against the nature of
condensation. Secondly, that quantity for quantity, ice is lighter then water;
whereas things that are more dense, are proportionally more heavy. And lastly,
that ice swimmeth in water, whereas we have often taught, that the more dense
descends in the more rare.

Now to reply to these arguments, we say first, that we would gladly know how
he did to measure the quantity of the ice, with the quantity of the water of
which it was made; and then when he has showed it, and showed withal that ice
holds more place then water; we must tell him that his experiment concludes
nothing against our doctrine, because there is an addition of other bodies
mingled with the water to make ice of it as we touched above; and therefore
that compound may well take up a greater place then the water alone did, and
yet be denser then it; and the water also be denser, then it was.

And that other bodies do come into the water and are mingled with it, is
evident, out of the exceeding coldness of the air, or some very cold wind;
one of which two never misseth to reign whenever the water freeseth: and
both of them do argue great store of little earthy dry bodies abounding in
them, which sweeping over all those that lie in their way and course, must of
necessity be mixed with such as give them admittance; which water does very
easily. And accordingly we see that when in the freesing of water, the ice
grows any thing deep, it either shrinketh about the borders or at the least
lies very loose; so as we can not doubt but that there is a free passage for
more of such subtle bodies to get still to the water, and freese it deeper.

To his second argument, we ask how he knows that ice quantity for quantity,
is lighter then water? For although, of a sponge that is full of water, it be
easy to know what the sponge weighs, and what the water, that was soaked into
it, because we can part the one of them from the other, and keep each apart,
to examine their weights: yet to do the like between ice and water, if ice be
throughout full of air (as of necessity it must be) we believe impossible. And
therefore, it may be lighter in the bulk then water, by reason of the great
pores caused in it, through the shrinking up of the parts of water together
(which pores must then necessarily be filled with air) and yet every part by
it self (in which no air is) be heauyer then so much water.

And by this it appears that his last argument, (grounded upon the swimming
of ice in water) has no more force then if he would prove that an iron or an
earthen dish, were lighter, and consequently more rare, then water; because it
swimmeth upon it; which is an effect of the airs being contained in the belly
of it (as it is in ice) not a sign of the mettalls being more rare then water.

Whereas on the contrary side, the proof is positive and clear for us; for it
can not be denied, but that the mingling of the water with other bodies more
dense then it, must of necessity make the compound and also the water it self
become more dense then it was alone. And accordingly we see, that ice half
thawed (for then, much of the air is driven out, and the water begins to
fill the pores wherein the air resided before) sinketh to the bottom: as an
iron dish with holes in it (whereby the water might get into it) would do. And
besides, we see that water is more diaphanous then ice, and ice more consistent
then water. Therefore I hope we shall be excused, if in this particular we be
of a contrary opinion to this great personage.

How wind, snow, and hail are made; and wind by rain allayed.
But to return unto the thridde of our discourse. The same that passes here
before us; passes also in the sky with snow, hail, rain, and wind. Which
that we may the better understand, let us consider how winds are made: for
they have a maine influence into all the rest. When the sun or by some
particular occurrent, rayseth great multitudes of atoms, from some one place;
and they either by the attraction of the sun, by some other occasion, do take
their course a certain way; this motion of those atoms we call a wind: which
according to the continuance of the matter from whence these atoms rise,
endures a longer or a shorter time, and goes a farther or a shorter way; like
a river, or rather, like those eruptions of waters, which in the Notherne
parts of England they call Gypsies: the which do break out at uncertain
times, and upon uncertain causes, and flow likewise with an uncertain
duration. So these winds, being composed of bodies in a determinate proportion
heauyer then the air, do run their course from their hight to the ground,
where they are supported (as water is by the floor of its channel) whiles
they perform their carrire; that is, until they be wasted, either by the
drawing of the sun, or by their sticking and incorporating into grosser
bodies.

Some of these winds according to the complexion of the body out of which they
are extracted, are dry; as those which come from barren mountains covered with
snow: others are moist; as those that come out of marishy, or watery places:
others, have other qualities; as of heat or cold, of wholesomenesse, or
vnwholesomenesse, and the like; partly from the source, and partly from the
bodies they are mingled with in their way.

Such then being the nature and origin of winds; if a cold one do meet in
the air with that moist body whereof otherwise rain would have been made, it
changes that moist body into snow or into hail; if a dry wind meet with a
wett body it makes it more dry, and so hinders the rain that was likely to
be: but if the wett body overcome the dry wind, it brings the wind down
along with it; as we see when a shoure of rain allayeth a great wind.

And that all this is so, experience will in some particulars instruct us as
well as reason, from whence the rest may be evidently inferred. For we see that
those who in imitation of nature would convert water into ice, do take snow or
ice, and mingle it with some active dry body, that may force the cold parts of
the snow from it; and then they set the water (in some fit vessel) in the
way that those little bodies are to take, which by that means entering into
it, do straight incorporate themselves therewith, and of a soddaine do convert
it into ice. Which process you may easily try, by mingling salt armoniake
with the snow; but much more powerfully, by setting the snow over the fire,
whiles the glass of water to be congealed stands in it after the manner of
an egg in salt. And thus, fire it self, though it be the enemy and destroyer
of all cold, is made the instrument of freesing. And the same reason holds,
in the cooling of wine with snow or ice, when after it has been a competent
time in the snow, they whose charge it is, do use to give the vessel that
contains the wine, three or four turns in the snow; so to mingle through
the whole body of the wine, the cold received first but in the outward parts
of it, and by pressing, to make that without, have a more forcible ingression.

But the whole doctrine of Meteores, is so amply, so ingeniously, and so
exactely performed by that never enough praised Gentleman Monsieur Des Carts
in his Meteorologicall discourses; as I should wrong my self, and my Reader,
if I dwelled any longer upon this subject. And whose Physical discourses, had
they been diuulged before I had entered upon this work, I am persuaded would
have excused the greatest part of my pains in delivering the nature of bodies.

It were a fault to pass from treating of condensation, How parts of the same
or diverse bodies, are joined more strongly together by condensation.
without noting so ordinary an effect of it as is the joining together of
parts of the same body, or of diverse bodies. In which we see for the most part
that the solid bodies which are to be joined together, are first either heated
or moistened, that is, they are rarifyed: and then they are left to cold air,
or to other cold bodies, to thicken and condense (as above; we mentioned of
syrupes and gellies;) and so they are brought to stick firmly together. In
the like manner we see that when two mettalls are heated till they be almost
brought to runninge, and then are pressed together by the hammer, they become
one continued body. The like we see in glass, the like in wax, and in diverse
other things. On the contrary side; when a broken stone is to be pieced
together, the pieces of it must be wetted, and the ciment must be likewise
moistened, and then joining them aptly, and drying them, they stick fast
together. Glue is moistened, that it may by drying afterward, hold pieces of
wood together. And the spectaclemakers have a composition which must be both
heated and moistened, to join unto handles of wood the glasses which they are
to grind. And broken glasses are cimented with cheese and chalk or with
garlike.

All these effects our sense evidently shows us, arise out of conde^sation;
but to our reason it belongs to examine particularly by what steps they are
performed Frst then we know that heat does subtilise the little bodies which
are in the pores of the heated body; and partly also, it opens the pores of
the body it self, if it be of a nature that permits it; as it seems those
bodies are, which by heat are mollifyed or are liquefactible. Again, we know
that moisture is more subtle to enter into small creekes, then dry bodies are;
especially when it is pressed; for then it will be divided into very little
parts, and will fill up every little chinke; and neuerthesse if it be of a
gross and viscous nature, all the parts of it will stick together. Out of
these two properties we have, that since every body has a kind of orb of its
own exhalations, or vapors round about it self (as is before declared,) the
vapors which are about one of the bodies, will more strongly and solidely (that
is in more abundant and greater parts) enter into the pores of the other body
against which it is pressed, when they are opened and dilated: and thus they
becoming common to both bodies, by flowing from the one, and streaming into the
other, and sticking to them both will make them stick to one an other. And
then as they grow cold and dry, these little parts shrink on both sides; and
by their shrinking draw the bodies together; and withal, do leave greater
pores by their being compressed together, then were there, when by heat and
moisture they were dilated; into which pores the circumstant cold parts do
enter, and thereby do as it were wedge in the others; and consequently, do make
them hold firmly together the bodies, which they join.

But if art or nature should apply to this iuncture any liquor or vapor, which
had the nature and power to insinuate it self more efficaciously to one of
these bodies, then the glue which was between them did; of necessity, in this
case, these bodies must fall in pieces. And so it happens in the separation
of mettalls by corrosiue waters; as also in the precipitation of mettalls or of
saltes when they are dissolved in such corrosiue waters, by means of other
mettalls or saltes of a different nature: in both which cases the entrance of
a latter body that penetrateth more strongly, and unites it self to one of
the joined bodies but not to the other, teareth them asunder, and that which
the piercing body rejects, falls into little pieces; and if formerly it
were joined with the liquor, it is then precipitated down from it in a dust.

Vacuites can not be the reason, why water impregnated to the full with one
kind of salt, will notwithstanding receive more of an other.
Out of which discourse we may resolve the question of that learned and
ingenious man Petrus Gassendus; who, by experience found, that water
impregnated to fulness with ordinary salt, would yet receive a quantity of
other salt; and when it would imbibe no more of that, would nevertheless take
into it a proportion of a third; and so of several kinds of saltes one after
an other: which effect, he attributed to vacuites or porous spaces of diverse
figures, that he conceived to be in the water; whereof, some were fit for the
figure of one salt, and some, for the figure of an other. Very ingeniously; yet
if I miss not my mark, most assuredly he has missed his.

For first, how could he attribute diverse sorts of vacuites to water, without
giving it diverse figures? And this would be against his own discourse, by
which, every body should have one determinate natural figure.

Secondly; I would ask him; if he measured his water after every salting? And
if he did, whether he did not find the quantity greater, then before that salt
was dissolved in it? Which if he did (as without doubt he must) then he might
safely conclude, that his saltes were not received in vacuities; but that the
very substance of the water gave them place, and so increased by the receiving
of them.

Thirdly, seeing that in his doctrine, every substance has a particular
figure; we must allow a strange multitude of different shapes of vacuities to
be naturally in water; if we will have every different substance wherewith it
may be impregnated (by making decoctions, extractions, solutions, and the like)
to find a fit vacuity in the water to lodge it self in. What a difforme net
with a strange variety of mashes would this be? And indeed how extremely
incapable must it be of the quantity of every various kind of vacuity that you
will find must be in it; if in every solution of one particular substance, you
calculate the proportion between it and the water that dissolueth it, and then
multiply it according to the number of several kinds of substances that may
be dissolved in water? By this proceeding, you will find the vacuities to
exceed infinitely the whole body of the water; even so much that it could not
afford subtle thriddes enough to hold it self together.

Fourthly, if this doctrine were true it would never happen that one body or
salt should precipitate down to the bottom of the water, by the solution of
an other in it, which every Alchymist knows, never fails in due
circumstances: for seeing that the body which precipitateth, and the other
which remains dissolved in the water, are of different figures, and therefore
do require different vacuities, they might both of them have kept their places
in the water, without thrusting one an other out of it.

Lastly, this doctrine gives no account why one part of salt is separated from
an other by being putt in the water, and why the parts are there kept so
separated, which is the whole effect of that motion which we call dissolution.

The true reason therefore of this effect, The true reason of the former effect.
is (as I conceive) that one salt makes the water apt to receive an other; for
the lighter salt being incorporated with the water, makes the water more
proper to stick unto an heauyer, and by dividing the small parts of it to
bear them up, that otherwise would have sunk in it. The truth and reason of
which will appear more plain, if at every joint, we observe the particular
steps of every saltes solution. As soon as you putt the first salt into the
water, it falls down presently to the bottom of it; and as the water does
by its humidity pierce by degrees the little joints of this salt, so the small
parts of it are by little and little separated from one an other, and united
to parts of water. And so infusing more and more salt, this progress will
continue, until every part of water is incorporated with some part of salt:
and then, the water can no longer work of it self but in conjunction to the
salt with which it is united. After which, if more salt of the same kind be
putt into the water; that water so impregnated, will not be able to divide it;
because it has not any so subtle parts left, as are able to enter between
the joints of a salt so closely compacted: but may be compared to that salt,
as a thing of equal dryness with it; and therefore is unapt to moysten and to
pierce it.

But if you putt unto this compound of salt and water, an other kind of salt
that is of a stronger and a dryer nature then the former, and whose parts are
more grossly united; then the first salt dissolved in the water, will be able
to get in betwixt the joints of the grosser salt, and will divide it into
little parts; and will incorporate his already composed parts of salt and
water, into a decompound of two saltes and water; until all his parts be anew
impregnated with the second grosser salt; as before, the pure water was with
the first subtiler salt. And so it will proceed on, if proportionate bodies be
joined, until the dissoluing composition do grow into a thick body.

Unto which discourse we may add, that when the water is so fully impregnated
with the first salt, as it will receive no more, remaining in the temper it is
in; yet if it be heated, it will then afresh dissolve more of the same kind.
Which shows, that the reason of its giving over to dissolve, is for want of
having the water divided into parts little enough to stick unto more salt:
which, as in this case the fire does; so peradventure in the other, the
acrimoniousnesse of the salt does it.

The reason why bodies of the same nature do join more easily together then
others.
And this is sufficient to give curious wits occasion by making further
experiments, to search out the truth of this matter. Only we may note what
happens in most of the experiencies we have mentioned; to wit that things
of the same nature do join better and more easily then others that are more
estranged from one an other. Which is very agreeable to reason; seeing that if
nature do intend to have things consist long together, she must fit them for
such consistence.

Which seems to proceed out of their agreement in four qualities: first, in
weight for bobies of diverse degrees in weight, if they be at liberty, do seek
diverse places; and consequently, substances of like weight, must of necessity
find one an other out, and crowd together; as we have showed, it is the natute
of heat to make them do: now it is apparent that things of one nature, must
in equal parts have the same or a near proportion of weight, seeing that in
their composition, they must have the same proportion of Elements.

The second reason of the consistence of bodies together, that are of the same
nature is, the agreement of their liquid parts, in the same degree of rarity
and density: for as it is the nature of quantity in common to make all parts
be one quantity; so it is the nature of the degrees of quantity, when two
parts do meet that are of the same degree, to make them one in that degree of
quantity; which is, to make them stick together in that degree of sticking,
which the degree of density that is common to them both, makes of its own
nature. Whereas, parts of different densities, can not have this reason of
sticking: though, peradventure they may upon some other ground, have some more
efficacious one. And in this manner, the like humide parts of two bodies,
becoming one, the holes or receptacles in which those humide parts are
contained must also needs be united.

The third reason is the agreeable proportion, which their several figures
have in respect of one an other: for if any humidity be extracted out of a
mixed body, especially, by the virtue of fire; it must have left pores of such
figures, as the humidity that is drawn out of them* is apt to be cut into
(for every humide body not being absolutely humide, but having certain dry
parts mixed with it, is more apt for one kind of figure and greatness, then
for an other;) and by consequence, whenever that humidity shall meet again
with the body it was severed from; it will easily run through and into it
all, and will fill exactly the cauities and pores it possessed before.

The last quality, in which bodies that are to consist long together, do agree,
is the biggnesse of the humide and dry parts of the same body: for if the
humide parts be too big for the dry ones, it is clear that the dry ones
must needs hang loosely together by them; because their glue is in too great
a quantity. But if the humide parts be too little for the dry ones, then of
necessity some portion of every little dry part must be unfurnished of glue, by
means whereof to stick unto his fellow: and so the sticking parts not being
conveniently proportioned to one an other, their adhesion can not be so solid
as if each of them were exactly fitted to his fellow.

THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. Of an other motion belonging to particular bodies,
called Attraction; and of certain operations, termed Magical.
Having thus ended the two motions of rarefaction and of condensation; What
Attractio^ is, and from whence it proceeds.
the next that offer themselves, are the local motions which some bodies have
unto others. These are sometimes performed by a plain force in the body
toward which the motion is: and other whiles, by a hidden cause, which is not
so easily discerned. The first, is chiefly that which is ordinarily said to be
done by the force of nature to hinder Vacuum, and is much practiced by nature;
as in drawing our breath, in sucking, and in many other natural operations,
which are imitated by art in making of pumpes; siphons, and such other
instruments; and in that admirable experiment of taking up a heavy marble stone
merely by an other lying flatt and smoothly upon it, without any other
connection of the two stones together; as also by that sport of boys, when they
spread a thin moystned leather upon a smooth broad stone, and press it all
over close to it, and then by pulling of a string fastened at the middle of
the leather, they draw up likewise the heavy stone. In all which, the first
cause of the motion, proceeds from that body toward which the motion is
made. And therefore, is properly called Attraction.

For the better understanding and declaring of which, let us suppose two
marble stones, very broad and exceeding smoothly polished, to be laid one flatt
upon the other: and let there be a ring fastened at the back part of the
uppermost stone; and exactly in the middle of it. Then, by that ring, pull it
up perpendicularly and steadily, and the undermost will follow sticking fast to
the ouermost; and though they were not very perfectly polished, yet the
nethermost would follow for a while, if the ring be suddenly plucked up; but
then it will soon fall down again. Now this plainly shows that the cause
of their sticking so strongly together, when both the stones are very well
polished, is for that nothing can well enter between them to part them; and so,
it is reduced to the shortness of the air that is betwixt them: which not
being capable of so great an expansion, nor admitting to be divided thickewayes
so much as is necessary to fill the first growing distance, between the two
stones till new air finds a course thither, (that so, the swelling of the
one, may hinder vacuity, till the other come in to the rescue;) the two stones
must needs stick together to certain limits; which limits will depend of the
proportion that is between the weight, and the continuity of the nethermost
stone.

The true sense of the Maxim, that Nature abhors from vacuity.
And when we have examined this, we shall understand in what sense it is meaned
that Nature abhors from Vacuity, and what means she uses to avoid it.
For, to putt it as an enemy that nature fights against; or to discourse of
effects that would follow from it, in case it were admitted, is a great
mistake, and a lost labor; seeing it is nothing; and therefore, can do
nothing: but is merely a form of expression to declare in short nothing else
but that it is a contradiction, or implication in terms, and an impossibility
in nature, for vacuity to have, or to be supposed to have a Being.

Thus then, since in our case, after we have cast all about, we can pitch upon
nothing to be considered, but that the two stones do touch one an other, and
that they are weighty; we must apply our selves only to reflect upon the
effects proceeding from these two causes, their contiguity and their
heaviness; and we shall find that as the one of them, namely the weight
hinders the undermost from following the uppermost, so, contiguity obliges
it unto that course; and according as the one ouercometh the other, so will
this action be continued or interrupted.

Now that contiguity of substances do make one follow an other, is evident by
what our Masters in Metaphysickes teach us; when they show that without this
effect no motion at all could be made in the world, nor no reason could be
given, for those motions we daily see. For since the nature of quantity is
such, that whenever there is nothing between two parts of it, they must
needs touch and adhere and join to one an other, (for how should they be kept
asunder when there is nothing between them to part them?) if you pull one part
away, either some new substance must come to de close unto that which remoueth;
or else the other which was formerly close to it, must still be close to it,
and so follow it: for if nothing do come between, it is still close to it. Thus
then, it being necessary that something must be joined close to every thing;
vacuity, (which is nothing) is excluded from having any being in nature.

And when we say that one body must follow an other to avoid vacuity; the
meaning is, that under the necessity of a contradiction they must follow one an
other, and that they can not do otherwise. For it would be a contradiction to
say that nothing were between two things and yet that they are not joined
close to one an other. And therefore if you should say it, you would in other
words say, they are close together, and they are not close together. In like
manner, to say that vacuity is any where, is a pure contradiction; for vacuity
being nothing, has no Being at all: and yet by those words it is said to be
in such a place; so that they affirm it to be and not to be, at the same time.

But now let us examine if there be no means to avoid this contradiction and
vacuity, The true reas^ of attraction.
other then by the adhesion, and following of one body upon the motion of an
other, that is closely joined to it and every where contiguous. For sense is
not easily quieted with such Metaphysicall contemplations, that seem to
repugne against her dictamens; and therefore for her satisfaction we can do no
less then give her leave to range about, and cast all ways in hope of finding
some one that may better content her: which when she finds that she can not,
she will the less repine to yield her assent to the rigourous sequeles and
proofs of reason.

In this difficulty then, after turning on every side, I for my part can
discern no pretense of probability, in any other means then in pulling down
the lower stone by one corner; that so there may be a gaping between the two
stones, to let in air by little and little. And in this case you may say that
by the interuention of air, vacuity is hindered, and yett the lower stone is
left at liberty to follow its own natural inclination, and be governed by
its weight. But indeed, if you consider the matter well; you will find that the
doing this, requires a much greater force, then to have the lower stone follow
the upper: for it can not gape in a straight line, to let in air; since in
that position, it must open at the bottom where the angle is made, at the same
time that it opens at the mouth: and then air requiring time to pass from
the edges to the bottom, it must in the mean while fall into the
contradiction of vacuity. So that if it should open to let in air; the stone,
to compass that effect, must bend, in such sort as wood does when a wedge is
putt into it to cleave it.

Judge then what force it must be that should make hard marble of a great
thickness bend like a wand; and whether it would not rather break and slide
off, then do so: you will allow that a much less, will raise up the lower
stone together with the uppermost. It must then of necessity fall out, that it
will follow it, if it be moved perpendicularly vpwardes. And the like effect
will be though, it should be raised at oblique angles, so that the lowermost
edge do rest all the way upon some thing that may hinder the inferior stone
from sliding aside from the uppermost.

Water may be brought by the force of attraction to what height soever.
And this is the very case of all those other experiments of art and nature,
which we have mentioned above: for the reason holds as well in water and in
liquide things; as in solid bodies; until the weight of the liquide body
ouercometh the continuity of it: for then, the thridde breaks, and it will
ascend no higher.

Which height, Galileo tells us from the workmen in the Arsenall of Venice,
is near 40. foot; if the water be drawn up in a close pipe, in which the
advantage of the sides helps the ascent. But others say that the invention is
enlarged, and that water may be drawn to what height one pleases. Howsoever,
the force which nature applies to maintain the continuity of quantity, can
have no limitt, seeing it is grounded upon contradiction. And therefore Galileo
was much mistaken, when he throught to make an instrument whereby to discover
the limits of this force.

We may then conclude that the breaking of the water must depend from the
strength of other causes. As for example when the gravity is so great by
increasing the bulk of the water, that it will either overcome the strength of
the pipe, or else make the sucker of the pumpe rather yield way to air, then
draw up so great a weight: for which defects, if remedies be found, the art may
surely be enlarged without end.

The doctrine touching the attraction of water in siphons.
This is particular in a siphon; that when, that arm of it which hangs out of
the water is lower then the superficies of the water; then, it will run of it
self; after it is once set on running by sucking. The reason whereof is,
because the weight which is in water pendant, is greater then the weight of the
ascending water; and thereby supplyeth the want of a continual sucker. But if
the nose of that arm that hangs out of the water, be but even with the
water; then the water will stand still in both pipes, or arms of the siphon,
after they are filled with sucking. But if by the running out of the water, the
outward pipe do grow shorter then to reach as low as the superficies of the
water in the fountain from whence it runs; in this case, the water in each
arm of the siphon, will run back into the fountain.

Withal, it is to be noted, that though the arm which is out of the water be
never so long, yet if it reach not lower then the superficies of the fountain;
the over quantity and weight of the water there, more then in the other arm,
helps it nothing to make it run out. Which is, because the decliuity of the
other arm, ouerrecompenceth this ouerweight. Not that the weight in the
shorter pipe, has so much force as the weight in the longer pipe: but because
it has more force then the greater weight does exercise there in its running;
for the greatest part of its force, tends an other way then to the end of the
pipe; to wit, perpendicularly toward the center. And so is hindered from
effect, by the great sloaping or little decliuity of the pipe upon which it
leans.

But some considering how the water that is in the longer arm of the siphon is
more in quantity then the water that is in the other arm of it whereat it
runs out, That the siphon does not prove, water to weigh in its own orb.
do admire why the greater quantity of water does not draw back the less into
the cisterne, but suffers it self to be lifted up, and drayned away as if it
run steeply downewardes. And they imagine, that hence may be deduced, that
the parts of water in the cisterne do not weigh as long as they are within
the orb of their own body.

Unto when we answer; that they should consider how that to have the greater
quantity of water, which is in the longer arm of the siphon (which arm is
immersed in the water of the cisterne) to draw back into the cisterne the
water which is in the other arm of the siphon that hangs out in the air; it
must, both raise as much of the water of the cisterne as its own bulk is,
above the level which at present the whole bulk of water has; and withal
it must at the same time pull up the water which is in the other arm. Now it
is manifest, that these two quantities of water together, are heauyer then the
water in the sunk arm of the siphon; since one of them single, is equal unto
it. And by consequence, the more water in the sunk arm, can not weigh back
the less water in the hanging arm; since that, to do that, it must at the
same time weigh up over and above, as much more in the cisterne as it self
weighs.

But turning the argument; I say, that if once the arm of the siphon that is
in the air, be supposed to draw any water, be it never so little, out of the
cisterne (whether occasioned by sucking or by whatsoever other means) it
follows that as much water as is drawn up, above the level of the whole
bulk in the cisterne, must needs press into the suncken arm from the next
adjacent parts, (that is, from the bottom) to supply its emptying; and as
much must of it self press down from above (according to its natural
course, when nothing violenteth it) to rest in the place, that the ascending
water (which is lower then it) leaves at liberty for it to take possession
of. And then it can not be doubted; but that, this descending water, having all
its weight in pressing down, applied to drive up the rising water in the sunk
arm of the siphon; and the water in the other arm of the siphon without,
having all its weight in running out applied at the same time to draw up the
same water in the sunk arm; this single resistant must yield to their double
and mastering force. And consequently, the water in the arm of the siphon that
is in the air, must needs draw the water that is in the other immersed arm
as long as the end of its pipe reaches lower then the level of the water in
the cisterne; for so long it appears by what we have said, it must needs be
more weighty; since part of the rising water in the sunk arm of the siphon,
is counterpoysed by as much descending water in the cisterne.

And thus it is evident, that out of this experiment it can not be inferred
that parts of water do not weigh within the orb of their own whole: but
only, that two equal parts of water in their own orb (namely that which
rises in the sunken arm, and that which presses down from the whole bulk
in the cisterne) are of equal weight and do balance one an othet. So that
never so little odds between the two counterpoysing parcells of water which
are in the air must needs make the water run out at that end of the
siphon, where the ouerweight of water is.

Concerning attraction caused by fire.
The attraction whose cause next to this is most manifest, is that which is made
by the force of heat or of fire; for we see that fire, ever draws air unto
it; so notably, that if in a close room there be a good fire, a man that
stands at the door or at the window (especially without) shall hear such a
noise that he will think there is a great wind within the chamber. The reason
of this attraction is, that fire rarifying the air which is next unto it; and
withal spending it self perpetually, causes the air and his own body
mingled together, to fly up through the chimney or by some other passage.
Whence it follows of necessity that the next body must succeed into the place
of the body that is flowne away. This next body generally is air, whose
mobility and fluidity beyond all other bodies, makes it of all others the
fittest to be drawn; and the more of it that is drawn the more must needs
follow. Now if there be floating in this air any other atoms subject to the
current which the air takes; they must also come with it to the fire, and by
it, must be rarifyed, and be exported out of that little orb.

Hence it is, that men (with very good reason) do hold that fire ayreth a
chamber, as we term it, that is, purifyeth it; both because it purifyeth it as
wind does by drawing a current of air into it that sweepeth through it, or by
making it purify it self by motion, as a stream of water does by running; as
also, because those vapors which approach the fire, are burned and dissolved.
So that the air being noisome and unwholesome by reason of its grossness,
proceeding from its standing unmoved (like a stagnation of dead water, in a
marish place) the fire takes away that cause of annoyance.

By this very rule we learn that other hot things, Concerning attractio^
made by virtue of hot bodies, amulets etc.
which participate the nature of fire, must likewise (in other respects) have a
resemblance in this quality. And accordingly we see that hot loafes in a
bakers shop newly drawn out of the oven, are accounted to draw unto them any
infection which is in the air. The like we say of onyons, and other strong
breathing substances; which by their smell show much heat in them. In like
manner it is conceived that pigeons, and rabets, and catts easily take
infection, by reason of their extraordinary warmth which they have in
themselves.

And this is confirmed by the practice of Physicians, who use to lay warm
pigeons newly killed to the feet, wristes, or heads of sick persons; and
young puppies to their stomakes, and sometimes certain hot gummes to their
nauels; to draw out such vapors or humors as infest the body: for the same
reason they hang amuletes of arsenike, sublimate, dried toades or spiders,
about their patients necks, to draw unto them venomous qualities from their
bodies. Hence also it is, that if a man be stricken by a viper or a scorpion,
they use to break the body of the beast it self that stung him (if they can
get it) upon the wound: but if that beast be crawled out of their finding,
they do the like by some other venomous creature; as I have seen a bruised
toad laid to the biting of a viper. And they manifestly perceive the applied
body, to swell with the poison sucked out from the wound, and the patient to be
relieved and have less poison; in the same manner as by cupping glasses, the
poison is likewise drawn out from the wound: so that you may see, the reason
of both, is the very same; or at the least very like one an other. Only, we
are to note, that the proper body of the beast out of which the venom was
driven into the wound, is more efficacious then any other to suck it out.

And the like is to be observed in all other kinds, that such vapors as are to
be drawn, do come better and incorporate faster in bodies of like nature, then
in those which have only the common conditions of heat and dryness; the one
of which serves to attract; the other to fasten and incorporate into it self
the moisture which the first draws unto it. So we see that water soaketh into
a dry body, whence it was extracted, almost inseparably, and is hidden in it;
as when it raineth first after hot weather, the ground is presently dried
after the shoure. Likewise we see that in most ciments, The natural reason
given for diverse operations, esteemed by some to be magical.
you must mingle a dust of the nature of the things which are to be cimented,
if you will have them bind strongly.

Out of this discourse, we may yield a reason for those magical operations,
which some attribute to the Devils assistance; peradventure because man's
wickedness has been more ingenious then his good will; and so has found
more means to hurt then to help; nay when he has arrived some way to help,
those very helps have undergone the same calumny; because of the likeness
which their operations have to the others. Without doubt very unjustly, if
there be truth in the effects. For where have we any such good suggestions of
the enemy of mankind proposed unto us, that we may with reason believe he would
duly, settledly, and constantly concur to the help and service of all those
he so much hates, as he must needs do if he be the Author of such effects? Or
is it not a wrong to almighty God, and to his careful instruments; rather to
impute unto the Devil the aids which to some may seem supernatural, then
unto them of whom we may justly believe and expect such good officies and
assistances? I mean, those operations, both good and bad, which ordinarily are
called Magneticall, though peradventure wrongfully, as not having that property
which denominateth the loadestone.

One thing I may assure, that if the reports be true, they have the perfect
imitation of nature in them. As for example; that the weapons salve, or the
sympathetike powder does require in the using it, to be conserved in an equal
and moderate temper: and that the weapon which made the wound, or the cloth
upon which the blood remains that issued from it, be orderly and frequently
dressed; or else the wounded person will not be cured: likewise the steame or
spirits, which at the giving of the wound did enter into the pores of the
weapon, must not be driven out of it, (which will be done by fire; and so when
it is heated by holding over coals, you may see a moisture sweat out of the
blade at the opposite side to the fire, as far as it entered into the
wounded persons body; which being once all sweated out, you shall see no more
the like steame upon the sword) neither must the blood be washed out of the
bloody cloth; for in these cases, the powder, or salve, will work nothing.
Likewise, if there be any excess either of heat or of cold in keeping the
medicated weapon or cloth; the patient feels that, as he would do, if the
like excess were in any remedy that were applied to the wound it self:
likewise if the medicated weapon or bloody cloth, be kept too close, no effect
follows: likewise, the natures of the things used in these cures are of
themselves sovereign for healing the like griefs though peradventure too
violent if they were applied in body without much attenuation.

And truly if we will deny all effects of this kind, we must in a manner
renounce all humane faith: men of all sorts and qualities (and many of them
such in my own knowledge, as I can not question their prudence in observing,
or their sincerity in relating) having very frequently made experience of such
medicines, and all affirming after one fashion to have found the same effects.
Add to these, the multitude of other like effects, appearing or conceited to
appear in other things. In some countries it is a familiar disease with kine
to have a swelling in the soales of their feet: and the ordinary cure is, to
cut a turfe upon which they have trodden with their sore foot, and to hang it
upon a hedge; and as that dries away, so will their sore amend. In other
parts they observe, that if milk newly come from the cow, do in the boiling
run over into the fire; and that this do happen often, and near together to
the same cowes milk; that cow will have her vdder sore and inflamed: and the
prevention is to cast salt immediately into the fire upon the milk. The herb
Persicaria if it be well rubbed upon wartes, and then be laid in some fit
place to putrify, causes the wartes to wear away as it rotteth: some say the
like of fresh beef. Many examples also there are of hurting living creatures
by the like means; which I set not down for fear of doing more harm by the
evil inclination of some persons into whose hands they may fall; then profitt
by their knowing them, unto whom I intend this work.

But to make these operations of nature, not incredible; let us remember how
we have determined that every body whatsoever, does yield some steame, or vent
a kind of vapor from it self; and consider, how they must needs do so most
of all, that are hot and moist, as blood and milk are, and as all wounds and
sores generally are. We see that the foot of a hare or dear leaves such an
impression where the beast has passed, as a dog can discern it a long time
after: and a fox breaths out so strong a vapor, that the hunters themselves
can wind it a great way of, and a good while after he is parted from the place.
Now joining this, to the experiences we have already allowed of, concerning the
attraction of heat; we may conclude that if any of these vapors do light
upon a solid warm body, which has the nature of a source unto them, they
will naturally congregate and incorporate there; and if those vapors be joined
with any medicatiue quality or body, they will apply that medicament better
then any surgeon can apply it. Then, if the steame of blood and spirits, do
carry with it from the weapon or cloth, the balsamike qualities of the salve or
powder, and with them do settle upon the wound; what can follow but a bettering
in it? Likewise, if the steame of the corruption that is upon the clodde, do
carry the drying quality of the wind which sweepeth over it when it hangs
high in the air, unto the sore part of the cowes foot; why is it not possible
that it should dry the corruption there, as well as it dries it upon the
hedge? And if the steame of burned milk ca^ hurt by carrying fire to the
dugge; why should not salt cast upon it, be a preservative against it? Or
rather, why should not salt hinder the fire from being carried thither? Since
the nature of salt, always hinders and suppresseth the actiuity of fire: as
we see by experience when we throw salt into the fire below, to hinder the
flaming of soute in the top of a chimney: which presently cease, when new
fire from beneath does not continue it. And thus we might proceed in sundry
other effects, to declare the reason and the possibility of them; were we
certain of the truth of them: therefore we remitt this whole question, to the
authority of the testimonies.

THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER. Of three other motions belonging to particular bodies
Filtration, Restitution, and Electricall attraction.
What is Filtration; and how it is effected.
AFter these, let us cast our eye upon an other motion, very familiar among
Alchymistes; which they call Filtration. It is effected by putting one end of a
tongue, or labell of flannen, or of cotton, or of flax, into a vessel of
water, and letting the other end hang over the brimme of it. And it will by
little and little draw all the water out of that vessel (so that the end which
hangs out be lower then the superficies of the water) and will make it all
come over into any lower vessel you will reserve it in.

The end of this operation is, when any water is mingled with gross and muddy
parts (not dissolved in the water) to separate the pure and light ones from
the impure. By which we are taught that the lighter parts of the water, are
those which most easily do catch. And if we will examine in particular, how it
is likely this business passes; we may conceive that the body or linguet by
which ^h^ water ascends, being a dry one, some lighter parts of the water,
whose chance it is to be near the clymbing body of flax, do begin to stick
fast unto it: and then, they require nothing near so great force, nor so much
pressing, to make them clymbe up along the flax, as they would do to make them
mount in the pure air. As you may see, if you hold a stick in running water,
sheluing against the stream: the water will run up along the stick, much
higher then it could be forced up in the open air without any support, though
the Agent were much stronger then the current of the stream. And a ball will
upon a rebound, run much higher up a sheluing board, then it would if nothing
touched it. And I have been told that if an eggeshell filled with dew be set
at ^he foot of a hollow stick, the sun will draw it to the top of the
sheluing stick, whereas without a proppe, it will not stir it.

With much more reason then, we may conceive that water finding as it were
little steps in the cotton to facilitate its journey vpwardes, must ascend
more easily then those other things do, so as it once receive any impulse to
drive it vpwardes: for the gravity both of that water which is upon the cotton,
as also, of so many of the confining parts of water as can reach the cotton;
is exceedingly allayed, either by sticking unto the cotton, and so weighing in
one bulk with that dry body; or else, by not tending down straight to the
center, but resting as it were upon a steep plain (according to what we said
of the arm of a siphon that hangs very sloaping out of the water, and
therefore draws not after it a less proportion of water in the other arm
that is more in a direct line to the center:) by which means the water, as
soon as it begins to clymbe, comes to stand in a kind of cone; nether
breaking from the water below, (its bulk, being big enough to reach unto it)
nor yet falling down unto it.

But our chief labor must be, What causes the water in filtration to ascend.
to find a cause that may make the water begin to ascend. To which purpose,
consider how water, of its own nature, compresseth it self together, to
exclude any other body lighter then it is. Now in respect of the whole mass of
the water, those parts which stick to the cotton, are to be accounted much
lighter then water; not, because in their own nature they are so; but for the
circumstances which accompany them, and do give them a greater disposition to
receive a motion vpwardes then much lighter bodies, whiles they are destitute
of such helps. Wherefore, as the bulk of water weighing and striving
downewardes; it follows that if there were any air mingled with it, it
would, to possess a lesser place, drive out the air: so here in this case,
the water that is at the foot of the ladder of cotton, ready to clymbe with a
very small impulse, may be after some sort compared (in respect of the water)
to air by reason of the lightness of it: and consequently, is forced up by
the compressing of the rest of the water round about it. Which no faster
gets up, but other parts at the foot of the ladder do follow the first,
and drive them still vpwardes along the towe; and new ones drive the second,
and others the third, and so forth. So that with ease they clymbe up to the
top of the filter, still driving one an other forwards, as you may do a fine
towel through a muskett barrel: which though it be too limber to be thrust
straight through; yet cramming still new parts into it at the length you will
drive the first quite through.

And thus, when these parts of water are got up to the top of the vessel
on which the filter hangs, and over it on the other side by sticking still to
the towe, and by their natural gravity, against which nothing presses on this
side the labell; they fall down again by little and little, and by drops
break again into water in the vessel set to receive them.

But now if you ask why, it will not drop unless the end of the labell that
hangs, Why the filter will not drop unless the labell hang lower then the
water.
be lower then the water. I conceive it is because the water which is all along
upon the flannen, is one continued body hanging together, as it were a thridde
of wyre; and is subject to like accidents as such a continued body is. Now
suppose you lay a wyre upon the edge of the basin, which the filter rests
upon; and so make that edge the center to balance it upon: if the end that is
outermost be heauyest, it will weigh down the other; otherwise, not. So fares
it with this thridde of water: if the end of it that hangs out of the pott,
that is to be filtred be longer, and consequently heauyer, then that which
rises; it must needs raise the other vpwardes, and fall it self downewardes.
Now the raising of the other, implies lifting more water from the cisterne,
and the sliding of it self further downewardes, is the cause of its converting
into drops. So that the water in the cisterne serves like the flax upon a
distaffe, and is spunne into a thridde of water, still as it comes to the
flannen by the drawing it up, occasioned by the ouerweight of the thridde on
the other side of the center.

Which to express better by a similitude in a solid body: I remember I have
oftentimes seen in a Mercers shop, a great heap of massy goldlace lie upon
their stall; and a little way above it a round smooth pin of wood, over which
they use to hale their lace when they wind it into bottomes. Now over this
pin, I have putt one end of the lace; and as long as it hung no lower the^
the board upon which the rest of the lace did lie, it stirred not; for as the
weight of the loose end carried it one way, so the weight of the other side
where the whole was, drew it the other way, and in this manner kept it in
equilibrity. But as soon as I drew on the ha^ging end to be heauyer the^ the
clymbing side (for no more weighs the^ is in the air, that which lies upon
the board, having an other ce^ter) then it began to roll to the ground; and
still drew up new parts of that which lay upon the board, until all was
tumbled down upon the floor. In the same manner it happens to the water; in
which, the thridde of it upon the filter is to be compared fittly unto that
part of the lace which hung upon the pin; and the whole quantity in the
cisterne, is like the bulk of lace upon the shoppeboard; for as fast as the
filter draws it up, it is converted into a thridde like that which is already
upon the filter: in like manner as the wheel conuerteth the flax into yarne,
as fast as it draws it out from the distaffe.

Of the motion of Restitution: and why some bodies stand bent, others not.
Our next consideration, will very aptly fall upon the motion of those things,
which being bent, do leap with violence to their former figure: whereas others
return but a little; and others do stand in that ply, wherein the bending of
them has set them. For finding the reason of which effects, our first
reflection may be to note, that a superficies which is more long then broad,
contains a less floor then that whose sides are equal, or nearer being
equal: and that of those surfaces whose lines and angles are all equal, that
which has most sides and angles, contains still the greater floor. Whence
it is that Mathematicians conclude a circle to be the most capacious of all
figures: and what they say of lines in respect of a superficies; the same, with
proportion they say of surfaces in respect of the body contained. And
accordingly we see by consequence, that in the making a bag of a long napkin,
if the napkin be sowed together longwise, it holds a great deal less then
if it be sowed together broadwise.

By this we see plainly, that if any body which is in a thick and short
figure, be forced into a thinner (which by becoming thinner, must likewise
become either longer or broader; for what it loses one way it must get an
other) then that superfieies must needs be stretched* which in our case, is a
Physical outside, or material part of a solid body, not a Mathematical
consideration of an indivisible Entity. We see also that this change of figures
happens in the bending of all those bodies; whereof we are now enquiring the
reason why some of them restore themselves to their original figures, and
others stand as they are bent.

Then to begin with the latter sort, we find that they are of a moist nature;
as among mettalls, lead, and tin, and among other bodies, those which we
account soft. And we may determine that this effect proceeds, partly from the
humidity of the body that stands bent; and partly from a dryness peculiar to
it that comprehends and fixes the humidity of it. For by the first, they are
rendered capable of being driven into any figure, which nature or art desires:
and by the second, they are preserved from having their gravity putt them out
of what figure they have once received.

But because these two conditions, are common to all solid bodies, we may
conclude, that if no other circumstance concurred, the effect arising out of
them would likewise be common to all such: and therefore, where we find it
otherwise, we must seek further for a cause of that transgression. As for
example, if you bend the bodies of young trees, or the branches of others, they
will return to their due figure. It is true, they will sometime lean toward
that way they have been bent: as may be seen, even in great trees after
violent tempests; and generally the heads of trees, and the ears of corn,
and the grown hedgerowes, will all bend one way in some countries, where some
one wind has a maine predominance and reigns most continually, as near the
seashore upon the western coast of England (where the southwest wind blows
constantly the greatest part of the year) may be observed: but this effect
proceeding from a particular and extraordinary cause, concerns not our matter
in hand.

We are to examine the reason of the motion of Restitution, which we generally
see in young trees, and branches of others, as we said before. In such, we see
that the earthy part which makes them stiff (or rather, stark) abounds
more in them then in the others that stand as they are bent: at the least in
proportion to their natures; but I conceive this is not the cause of the effect
we enquire about; but that it is a subtle spirit which has a great proportion
of fire in it. For as in rarefaction, we found that fire, which was either
within or without the body to be rarifyed, did cause the rarefaction, either by
entering into it, or by working within it: so seeing here the question is, for
a body to go out of a lesser superficies into a greater (which is the
progress of rarefaction; and happens in the motion of restitution;) the
work must needs be done by the force of heat. And because, this effect
proceeds evidently, out of the nature of the thing in which it is wrought,
and not from any outward cause, we may conclude it has its origin from a
heat that is within the thing it self or else that was in it, and may be
pressed to the outward parts of it, and would sink into it again.

As for example, when a young tree is bended; both every man's conceit is, and
the nature of the thing makes us believe, that the force which brings the
tree back again to its figure, comes from the inner side that is bent; which
is compressed together, as being shrunk into a circular figure from a straight
one: for when solid bodies that were plain on both sides, are bent so as on
each side to make a portion of a circle, the conuexe superficies will be longer
then it was before, when it was plain, but the concaue will be shorter. And
therefore we may conceive that the spirits which are in the contracted part,
(being there squeezed into less room, then their nature well brooketh) do
work themselves into a greater space; or else, that the spirits which are
crushed out of the conuexe side by the extension of it, but do remain
besieging it, and do strive to get in again, (in such manner as we have
declared when we spoke of attraction, wherein we showed how the emitted spirits
of any body will move to their own source, and settle again in it, if they be
within a convenient compass;) and accordingly do bring back the extended
parts to their former situation; or rather that both these causes do in their
kinds concur to drive the tree into its natural figure.

Why some bodies return only in part to their natural figure; others entirely.
But as we see when a stick is broken, it is very hard to replace all the
splinters, every one in its proper situation; so it must of necessity fall out
in this bending, that certain insensible parts both inward and outward are
thereby displaced, and can hardly be perfectly reioynted. Whence it follows
that as you see the splinters of a half broken stick, meeting with one an
other do hold the stick somewhat crooked; so these invisible parts do the
like in such bodies as after bending stand a little that way. But because they
are very little ones, the tree or the branch that has been never so much
bended, may (so nothing be broken in it) be set straight again by pains,
without any notable detriment of its strength. And thus you see the reason of
some bodies returning in part to their natural figure, after the force leaves
them that did bend them.

Out of which you may proceed to those bodies that restore themselves entirely:
whereof steel is the most eminent. And of it, we know that there is a fiery
spirit in it, which may be extracted out of it, not only by the long operations
of calcining, digesting and distilling it; but even by gross heating it, and
then extinguishing it in wine and other convenient liquors, as Physicians use
to do. Which is also confirmed by the burning of steel dust in the flame of a
candle, before it has been thus wrought upon, which afterward it will not
do: whereby we are taught that originally there are store of spirits in steel,
till they are sucked out. Being then assured, that in steel there is such
abundance of spirits; and knowing that it is the nature of spirits to give a
quick motion; and seeing that duller spirits in trees do make this motion of
Restitution; we need seek no further, what it is that does it in steel, or
in any other things that have the like nature: which through the multitude of
spirits that abound in them (especially steel) do return back with so strong
a ierke, that their whole body will tremble a great while after, by the force
of its own motion.

By what is said, Concerning the nature of those bodies which do shrink and
stretch.
the nature of those bodies which do shrink and stretch, may easily be
understood: for they are generally composed of stringy parts, unto which, if
humidity happen to arrive, they grow thereby thicker and shorter. As we see
that drops of water getting into a new roape of a well, or into a new cable,
will swell it much thicker, and by consequence, make it shorter. Galileus
notes such wetting to be of so great efficacy, that it will shrink a new
cable, and shorten it notably; notwithstanding, the violence of a tempest and
the weight and ierkes of a laden ship, do strain it what is possible for
them to stretch it. Of this nature, leather seems to be, and parchment, and
diverse other things, which if they be proportionably moystned, (and no
exterior force be applied to extend them) will shrink up; but if they be
ouerwetted, they will become flaccide. Again, if they be soddainely dried,
they will shriuell up; but if they be fairly dried after moderate wetting,
they will extend themselves again to their first length.

The way having been opened by what we have discoursed, How great and
wonderful effects, proceed from small, plain, and simple principles.
before we came to the motion of Restitution, toward the discovery of the
manner how heavy bodies may be forced vpwardes contrary to their natural
motion, by very small means in outward appearance; let us now examine (upon
the same grounds) if like motions to this of water, may not be done in some
other bodies in a subtiler manner. In which, more or less, needs not trouble
us; since we know, that neither quantity, nor the operations of it, do consist
in an indivisible, or are limited to determined periodes they may not pass. It
is enough for us to find a ground for the possibility of the operation: and
then the perfecting of it and the reducing it to such a height as at the first
might seem impossible and incredibile, we may leave to the economy of wise
nature. He that learneth to read, write, or to play on the lute, is in the
beginning, ready to loose heart at every step; when he considers with what
labor, difficulty and slownesse, he joins the letters, spelleth syllabes,
forms characters, fitteth and breaks his fingers (as though they were upon
the rack) to stop the right frettes and to touch the right stringes. And yet
you see how strange a dexterity is gained in all these by industry and
practice; and a readiness beyond what we could imagine possible, if we saw not
daily the effects.

If then we can but arrive to decypher the first characters of the hidden
Alphabet we are now taking in hand, and can but spellingly read the first
syllabes of it; we need not doubt, but that the wise Author of nature in the
masterpiece of the creature (which was to express the excellency of the
workman) would with excellent cunning and art dispose all circumstances so
aptly, as to speak readily a complete language rising from those Elements; and
that should have as large an extent in practice and expression, beyond those
first principles, which we like children only lispe out; as the vast
discourses of wisest and most learned men, are beyond the spellinges of
infantes: and yet those discourses spring from the same root, as the others
spellinges do, and are but a raising of them to a greater height; as the
admired music of the best player of a lute or harp, that ever was, is derived
from the harsh twanges of course bowestringes, which are composed together, and
refined, till at length they arrive to that wonderful perfection. And so
without scruple, we may in the business we are next falling upon, conclude
that the admirable and almost miraculous effects we see, are but the eleuating
to a wonderful height those very actions and motions which we shall produce as
causes and principles of them.

Concerning Electricall attraction, and the causes of it.
Letr us then suppose, that there is a solid hard body, of an unctuous nature;
whose parts are so subtle and fiery, that with a little agitation they are
much rarifyed, and do breath out in steames, (though they be too subtle for
our eyes to discern) like unto the steame that issues from sweating men or
horses, or like the steame that flies from a candle when it is putt out: but
that these steames, as soon as they come into the cold air, are by that cold
soddainely condensed again; and by being condensed, do shorten themselves, and
by little and little do retire, till they settle themselves upon the body from
whence they sprung: in such manner as you may observe, the little tender horns
of snailes use to shrink back if any thing touch them, till they settle in
little lumpes upon their heads. If I say these stringes of bituminous vapor
should in their way outwardes meet with any light and spungie body, they would
pierce into it, and settle in it; and if it were of a competent biggenesse for
them to wield, they would carry it with them which way soever they go; so that
if they shrink back again to the fountain from whence they came, they must
needs carry back with them the light spungy body they have fixed their darts
in.

Consider then, that how much heat rarifyeth, so much cold co^denseth: and
therefore such parts as by agitatio^ were spu^ne out into a subtle thridde of
an inch long for example, as they cool, do grow bigger and bigger, and
consequently shorter and shorter, till at length, they gather themselves back
into their maine body; and there they settle again in cold bitumen as they
were at the first; and the light body that they stick unto, is drawn back
with them, and consequently sticks to the superficies of the bitumen. As if
something were tied at one end of a lutestring extended to its utmost
capacity, and the other end were fastened to some pin; as the string
shrinketh up, so that which is tied at it, must needs move nearer and nearer
the pin: which artifice of nature iugglers do imitate, when by means of an
unseen hair, they draw light bodies to them. Now if all this operation be
done, without your seeing the little thriddes which cause it; the matter
appears wonderful and strange. But when you consider this progress that we
have set down, you will judge it possible.

And this seems to be the case of those bodies which we call Electricall; as
yellow amber, iett, and the like. All which, are of a bituminous unctuous
nature, as appears by their easy combustibility and smell, when they are
burned. And if some do not so apparently show this unctuous nature, it is
because either they are too hard, or else they have a high degree of aqueous
humidiry joined with their vnctuosity: and in them the operation will be duller
in that proportion; for as we see that unctuous substances are more odoriferous
then others, and do send their steames further off, and more efficaciously; so
we can not doubt but that such bodies as consist in a moist nature do
accordingly send forth their emanations in a feebler proportion. Yet that
proportion will not be so feeble, but that they may have an Electricall effect,
as well as the more efficacious Electricall bodies, which may be perceptible,
if exact experience be made by an instrument like the mariners needle; as our
learned countryman Doctor Gilbert teaches.

But that in those eminent agents, the spirits, whereby they attract, are
unctuous, is plain, because the fire consumes them; and so if the agents be
ouerheated they can not work; but moderate heat even of fire increases their
operation. Again, they are clogged by mysty air, or by wetting: and likewise,
are pierced through and cut asunder by spirit of wine or aquae ardentes; but
oil does not hurt them. Likewise, they yield more spirits in the sun then in
the shade; and they continue longer, when the air is cleared by North or by
Eastern winds. They require to be polished, either because the rubbing which
polisheth them, does take off from their surfaces the former emanations, which
returning back do stick upon them, and so do hinder the passage of those that
are within; or else, because their outsides may be foul; or lastly, because
the pores may be dilated by that smoothing. Now that hardness and solidity is
required; does argue that these spirits must be quick ones, that they may
return smartly, and not be lost through their languishing in the air.
Likewise, that all bodies which are not either exceeding rare, or else set on
fire, may be drawn by these unctuous thriddes; concludes that the quality by
which they do it, is a common one that has no particular contrarieties; such a
one as we see is in grease or in pitch to stick to any thing; from which, in
like manner nothing is exempted but fire and air. And lastly, that they work
most efficaciously, when they are heated by rubbing, rather then by fire;
shows that their spirits are excitated by motion, and are thereby made to
fly abroad; in such manner as we see in pomanders, and in other perfumes,
which must be heated if you will have them communicate their sent: and alike
effect as in them, agitation does in iett, yellow amber, and such other
Electricall bodies; for if upon rubbing them, you putt them presently to your
nose, you will discern a strong bituminous smell in them; all which
circumstances do show that this Electricall virtue, consists in a certain
degree of rarity or density of the bodies unctuous emanations.

Now if these refined and viscous thriddes of iett or amber, do in their
streaming abroad meet with a piece of straw, or of hay, or of a dried leaf,
or some such light and spungy body; it is no maruayle if they glue themselves
unto it like birdlime; and that in their shrinking back (by being condensed
again and repulsed, through the coldness of the air) they carry it along
with them to their entire body. Which they that only see the effect, and can
not penetrate into a possibility of a natural cause thereof, are much troubled
withal.

And this seems unto me to bear a fairer semblance of truth, then what
Cabeus delivers for cause of Electricall attractions. Cabeus his opinion
refuted concerning the cause of Electricall mot^ons.
Whose speculation herein, though I can not allow for solid, yet I must for
ingenious. And certainly even errors are to be commended, when they are witty
ones, and do proceed from a casting further about, then the beaten tracke of
verbal learning, or rather terms which explicate not the nature of the thing
in question. He says that the coming of strawes and such other light bodies
unto amber, iett, and the like, proceeds from a wind raised by the forcible
breaking out of subtle emanations from the Electricall bodies into the air,
which brings those light bodies along with it to the Electricall ones.

But this discourse can not hold: for first, it is not the nature of unctuous
emanations (Generally speaking) to cause smart motions singly of themselves.
Secondly, although they should raise a wind, I do not comprehend how this wind
should drive bodies directly back to the source that raised it; but rather any
other way; and so consequently, should drive the light bodies it meets with
in its way, rather from, then toward the Electricall body. Thirdly, if there
should be such a wind raised, and it should bring light bodies to the
Electricall ones; yet it could not make them stick thereunto, which we see
they do, turn them which way you will, as though they were glewed together.

Neither do his experiences convince any thing; for what he says that the
light bodies are sometimes brought to the Electricall body with such a
violence, that they rebound back from it, and then return again to it,
makes rather against him: for if wind were the cause of their motion, they
would not return again, after they had leaped back from the Electricall
body; no more then we can imagine that the wind it self does.

The like is of his other experience, when he observed that some little grains
of sawdust hanging at an Electricall body, the furthermost of them not only
fell of, but seemed to be driven away forcibly: for they did not fall directly
down, but sidewayes; and besides did fly away with a violence and smartnesse
that argued some strong impulse. The reason whereof might be, that new
emanations might smite them, which not sticking and fastening upon them,
whereby to draw them nearer, must needs push them further: or it might be that
the emanations unto which they were glewed, shrinking back unto their maine
body, the latter grains were shouldered of by others that already besieged the
superficies; and then the emanations retiring swiftly the grains must break
of with a force: or else, we may conceive it was the force of the air that
bore them up a little, which made an appearance of their being driven away; as
we see feathers and other light things descend not straight down.

THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER. Of the Loadstones generation; and its particular
motions.
THere is yet remaining, The extreme heat of the sun under the zodiac,
draws a stream of air from each Pole into the torride zone.
the great mystery of the Loadstone to discourse of. Which all Authors, both
ancient and modern, have agreed upon as an undeniable example and evidence,
of the shortenesse of man's reach in comprehending, and of the impossibility of
his reason in penetrating into, and explicating such secrets, as nature has a
mind to hide from us. Wherefore our reader (I am sure) will not in this subject
expect clear satisfaction or plain demonstrations, at our hands: but will
iugde we have fairly acquitted our selves, if what we say be any whitt
plausible.

Therefore, to use our best endeauours to content him; let us reflect upon the
disposition of parts of this habitable globe, whereof we are tenants for
lives. And we shall find that the sun by his constant course under the
zodiake, heateth a great part of it vnmeasurably more then he does the rest.
And consequently, that this zodiake being in the midst between two (as it
were) ends, which we call the Poles, these poles must necessarily be extremely
cold, in respect of the torride zone; for so we call that part of the earth
which lies under the zodiake.

Now looking into the consequence of this; we find that the sun, or the
suns heat which reflecteth from the earth in the torride zone, must rarify
the air extremely, and according to the nature of all heat and fire, must
needs carry away from thence, many parts of the air and of the earth
sticking to that heat, in such sort as we have formerly declared.

Whence it follows, that other air must necessarily come from the regions
toward both the poles, to supply what is carried away from the middle, as is
the course in other fires, and as we have explicated above: especially
considering, that the air which comes from the polewardes, is heauyer then
the air of the torride zone; Chap. 18.. 7.
and therefore, must naturally press to be still nearer the earth; and so, as
it were shouldereth up the air of the torride zone toward the circumference,
by rouling into its place: and this, in great quantities; and consequently, the
polar air must draw a great train after it.

Which if we consider the great extent of the torride zone, we shall easily
persuade our selves, that it must reach on each side, to the very pole: for
taking from Archimedes, that the sphericall superficies of a portion of a
spher^, is to the superficies of the whole sphere, according as the part of the
axis of that sphere comprised within the said portion, is to the whole axis:
and considering that (in our case) the part of the axis comprised within the
torride zone, is to the whole axis of the earth, in about the proportion of 4.
to 10; it must of necessity follow that a fire or great heat reigning in so
vast an extent, will draw air very powerfully from the rest of the world.

Neither let any man apprehend that this course of the suns eleuating so
great quantities of atoms in the torride zone, should hinder the course of
gravity there: for first the medium is much rarer in the torride zone then in
other parts of the earth; and therefore the force of the descending atoms,
needs not to be so great there as in other places, to make bodies descend
there as fast as they do else where. Secondly, there being a perpetual supply
of fresh air from the polar parts, streaming continually into the torride
zone; it must of necessity happen that in the air there come atoms to the
torride zone, of that grossness that they can not soddainely be so much
rarifyed as the subtiler parts of air that are there: and therefore, the more
those subtiler parts are rarifyed, and thereby happen to be carried up, the
stronger and the thicker the heauyer atoms must descend. And thus this
concurse of air from the polar parts, mainetayneth gravity under the zodiake;
where otherwise all would be turned into fire, and so have no gravity.

The atoms of these two streams coming together are apt to incorporate with
one an other.
Now, who co^sidereth the two hemispheres which by the equator are divided;
will find that they are not altogether of equal complexions; but that our
hemisphere, in which the Northpole is comprised, is much dryer then the other,
by reason of the greater co^tinent of land in this, and the vaster tract of sea
in the other; and therefore the supply which comes from the diverse
hemispheres, must needs be of different natures; that which comes from
toward the Southpole, being compared to that which comes from toward the
North, as the more wett to the more dry. Yet of how different co^plexions
soever they be, you see they are the emanations of one and the same body. Not
unlike unto what nature has instituted in the rank of animals: among whom,
the male and the female are so distinguished by heat and cold, moisture and
drought; that nevertheless all belongs, but to one nature; and that, in
degrees though manifestly different, yet so near together that the body of one
is in a manner the same thing, as the body of the other. Even so, the
complexions of the two hemispheres are in such sort different in the same
qualities, that nevertheless they are of the same nature* and are unequal
parts of the same body which we call the earth. Now Alchymistes assure us,
that if two extractions of one body do meet together they will incorporate one
with the other; especially, if there be some little difference in the
complexion of the extractions.

Whence it follows that these two streams of air, By the meeting and
mingling together of these streams at the Equator, diverse riuolets of atoms
of each Pole, are continuat^d from one Pole to the other.
making up one continuate flood of various currents, from one end of the world
to the other; each stream that comes to the equator from its own Pole, by
the extraction of the sun, and that is still supplied with new matter flowing
from its own pole to the equator, before the sun can sufficiently rarify
and lift up the atoms that came first perpendicularly under its beams (as it
uses to happen in the effects of Physical causes, which can not be rigorously
aiusted, but must have some latitude; in which, nature inclines ever rather to
abundance then to defect,) will pass, even to the other pole, by the conduct
of his fellow, in case he be by some occasion driven back homewardes.

For as we see in a boule or paile full of water, or rather in a pipe, through
which the water runs along; if there be a little hole at the bottom or
side of it, the water will wriggle and change its course to creep out at that
pipe; especially if there be a little spigott, or quill at the outside of the
hole, that by the narrow length of it helps in some sort (as it were) to
suck it. So if any of the files of the army or flould of atoms sucked from
one of the Poles to the equator, do there find any gappes, or chinkes, or
lanes of retiring files in the front of the other poles batalia of atoms, they
will press in there: in such manner as we have above declared that water does
by the help of a labell of cotton* and as is exemplyfied in all the
attractions of venime by venomous bodies whereof we have given many examples
above: and they will go along with them the course they go. For as when a
thick short gilded ingott of silver is drawn out into a long subtle wyre;
the wyre continuing still perfectly gilded all over, does manifestly show that
the outside and the inside of the ingott, do strangely meet together, and
intermixe in the drawing out: so this little stream which (like an eddy
current) runs back from the equator toward its own Pole, will continue
to the end still tincted with the mixture of the other Poles atoms, it was
incorporated with at its coming to the equator.

Now that some little riuolets of air and atoms should run back to their
own Pole, contrary to the course of their maine stream will be easily enough
to conceive; if we but consider that at certain times of the year winds do
blow more violently and strongly from some determinate part or Rombe of the
world, then they do at other times and from other parts. As for example* our
East India Mariners tell us of the famous Mon^ones they find in those parts;
which are strong winds that reign constantly six months of the year from
one polewardes, and the other six months, from the other pole, and begin
precisely about the suns entering into such a sign or degree of the zodiake,
and continue till about its entrance into the opposite degree. And in our
parts of the world certain smart Easterly or Northeasterly winds do reign
about the end of March and beginning of April; when it seems that some
snowes are melted by the spring heates of the sun. And other winds have
their courses in other seasons, upon other causes. All which do evidently
convince, that the course of the air, and of vapors from the poles to the
equator, can not be so regular and uniform, but that many impediments and
crosses, do light in the way, to make breaches in it; and thereby to force it
in some places to an opposite course. In such sort as we see happens in eddy
waters, and in the course of a tide, wherein the stream running swiftly in the
middle, beats the edges of the water to the shore, and thereby makes it
run back at the shore. And hence we may conclude, that although the maine
course of air and atoms (for example from north to south, in our hemisphere)
can never fail of going on toward the equator, constantly at the same
rate, in gross; neuerthlesse, in several particular little parts of it (and
especially at the edges of those streams that are driven on faster then the
rest, by an extraordinary and accidental violent cause) it is variously
interrupted, and sometimes entirely stopped, and other times even driven back
to the northwardes.

And if peradventure any man should think that this will not fall out, because
each stream seems to be always coming from his own Pole to the equator,
and therefore will oppose and drive back any bodies that with less force
should strive to swim against it; or if they stick unto them, will carry
them back to the equator. We answer, that we must not conceive that the
whole air in body does every where equally encroach from the polewardes upon
the torride zone; but, as it were in certain brooks or riuolets, according as
the contingency of all causes putt together does make it fall out.

Now then out of what we have said it will follow; that since all the air in
this our hemisphere is as it were strewed over and sowed with abundance of
northern atoms, and that some brooks of them are in station, others in a
motion of retrogradation back to their own north pole; the southern atoms
(which coming upon them at the equator do not only press in among them,
wheresoever they can find admittance, but do also go on fowardes to the north
pole in several files by themselves, being driven that way by the same
accidental causes, which make the others retire back) seizing in their way
upon the northern ones in such manner as we described in filtration; and
thereby creeping along by them wheresoever they find them standing still, and
going along with them, wheresoever they find them going back; must of
necessity find passage in great quantities toward, and even to the north
pole; though some parts of them will ever and anon be checked in this their
journey, by the maine current preuayling over some accidental one, and so be
carried back again to the equator, whose line they had crossed.

And this effect can not choose but be more or less according to the seasons
of the year: for when the sun is in the Tropike of Capricorn, the southern
atoms will flow in much more abundance, and with far greater speed, into
the torride zone, then the northern atoms can; by reason of the suns
approximation to the south, and his distance from the north pole; since he
works faintest, where he is furthest off: and therefore from the north no
more emanations or atoms will be drawn, but such as are most subtilised, and
duly prepared for that course. And since only these selected bands do now
march toward the equator, their files must needs be thinner, then when the
suns being in the equator or Tropike of Cancer wakeneth and mustereth up all
their forces. And consequently, the quiett parts of air between their files
(in which like atoms are also scattered) are the greater: whereby the
aduenient southern atoms have the larger filter to clymbe up by. And the like
happens in the other hemisphere, when the sun is in the Tropike of Cancer;
as who will bestow the pains to compare them, will presently see.

Now then let us consider what these two streams thus incorporated must of
necessity do in the surface or upper parts of the earth. Of these atoms
incorporated with some fit matter in the bowels of the earth, is made a stone.
First it is evident they must needs penetrate a pretty depth into the earth;
for so freesing persuadeth us, and much more, the subtle penetration of diverse
more spiritual bodies, of which we have sufficiently discoursed above. Now
let us conceive that these steames, do find a body of a convenient density to
incorporate themselves in, in the way of density, as we see that fire does in
iron, and in other dense bodies: and this not for an hour or two as happens
in fire; but for years: as I have been told that in the extreme cold hills
in the Peake in Darbyshire happens to the dry atoms of cold, which are
permanently incorporated in water by long continual freesing and so make a
kind of crystal.

In this case, certainly it must come to pass that this body will become in a
manner wholly of the nature of these steames: which because they are drawn from
the Poles that abound in cold and dryness, (for others that have not these
qualities, do not contribute to the intended effect) the body is aptest to
become a stone: This stone works by emanations, joined with agreeing streams
that meet them in the air; and in fine it is a loadestone.
for so we see that cold and drought, turns the superficial parts of the
earth into stones and rocks; and accordingly, wheresoever cold and dry winds
reign powerfully, all such countries are mainely rocky.

Now then let us suppose, this stone to be taken out of the earth and hanged
in the air, or set conveniently upon some little pin, or otherwise putt in
liberty, so as a small impulse may easily turn it any way: it will in this
case certainly follow that the end of the stone which in the earth lay
toward the north pole, will now in the air convert it self in the same
manner toward the same point; and the other end which lay toward the south,
turn by consequence to the south. I speak of these countries which lie
between the equator and the North; in which it can not choose but that the
stream going from the north to the equator, must be stronger then the
opposite one.

Now to explicate, how this is done; suppose the stone hanged east and west
freely in the air; the stream which is drawn from the north pole of the
earth rangeth along by it in its course to the equator; and finding in the
stone the south steame, (which is grown innate to it) very strong, it must
needs incorporate it self with it; and most, by those parts of the steame in
the stone which are strongest: which are they that come directly from the North
of the stone; by which I mean that part of the stone that lay northward in the
earth, and that still looks to the north pole of the earth now it is in the
air. And therefore the great flood of atoms coming from the north pole of the
earth will incorporate it self most strongly, by the north end of the stone
with the little flood of southern atoms it finds in the stone: for that end
serves for the coming out of the southern atoms, and sends them abroad; as
the south end does the northern steame, since the steames do come in at one
end, and do go out at the opposite end.

From hence we may gather, that this stone will join and cleave to its
attractiue, whenever it happens to be within the sphere of its actiuity.
Besides if by some accident it should happen that the atoms or steames which
are drawn by the sun from the Polewardes to the equator, should come
stronger from some part of the earth, which is on the side hand of the Pole,
then from the very Pole it self; in this case the stone will turn from the
Pole toward that side. Lastly, whatsoever this stone will do toward the
Pole of the earth; the very same a lesser stone of the same kind will do
toward a greater. And if there be any kind of other substance that has
participation of the nature of this stone, such a substance will behave it
self toward this stone, in the same manner, as such a stone behaueth it
self toward the earth: all the Phenomens whereof, may be the more plainly
observed, if the stone be cut into the form of the earth.

And thus, we have found a perfect delineation of the loadestone from its
causes: for there is no man so ignorant of the nature of a loadestone, but he
knows that the properties of it are to tend toward the North; to vary
sometimes; to join with an other loadestone; to draw iron unto it; and such
like, whose causes you see delivered.

But to come to experimental proofs and observations upon the loadestone by
which it will appear, that these causes are well esteemed and applied, A
method for making experiences upon any subject.
we must be beholding to that admirable searcher of the nature of the
loadestone Doctor Gilbert; by means of whom and of Doctor Haruey, our Nation
may claim even in this latter age as deserved a crown for solid
Philosophical learning as for many ages together it has done formerly for
acute and subtle speculations in Divinity. But before I fall to particulars, I
think it worth warning my Reader, how this great man arrived to discover so
much of Magneticall Philosophy; that he likewise, if he be desirous to search
into nature, may by imitation advance his thoughts and knowledge that way.

In short then, all the knowledge he got of this subject, was by forming a
little loadestone into the shape of the earth. By which means he compassed a
wonderful design, which was, to make the whole globe of the earth maniable:
for he found the properties of the whole earth, in that little body; which he
therefore called a Tertella, or little earth; and which he could manage and
try experiences upon, at his will. And in like manner, any man that has an
aim to advance much in natural sciencies, must endeavor to draw the matter
he enquireth of, into some small model, or into some kind of manageable
method; which he may turn and wind as he pleases. And then let him be sure,
if he has a competent understanding, that he will not miss of his mark.

But to our intent; the first thing we are to prove is, that the loadestone is
generated in such sort as we have described: The Loadestones generation by
atoms flowing from both Poles, is confirmed by experiments observed in the
stone it self.
for proof whereof, the first ground we will lay, shall be to consider how in
diverse other effects it is manifest, that the differences of being exposed to
the north or to the south, do cause very great variety in the same thing: as
hereafter, we shall have occasion to touch, in the barks and grains of trees,
and the like. Next, we find by experience, that this virtue of the loadestone
is received into other bodies that resemble its nature, by heatinges and
coolinges: for so it passes in iron bars, which being thoroughly heated* and
then laid to cool north and south, are thereby imbued with a Magnetike
virtue; heat opening their bodies, and disposing them to suck in, such atoms
as are convenient to their nature, that flow unto them whiles they are cooling.
So that we can not boubt, but that convenient matter fermenting in its warm
bed under the earth, becomes a loadestone by the like sucking in of affluent
streams of a like complexion to the former.

And it fares in like manner with those fiery instruments (as fireforkes,
tongues, shouels, and the like) which do stand constantly vpwardes and
downewardes; for they, by being often heated and cooled again, do gain a very
strong verticity, or turning to the Pole: and indeed, they can not stand
vpwardes and downewardes so little a while, but that they will in that short
space gain a manifest verticity; and change it at every turning. Now since
the force and vigor of this verticity, is in the end that stands
downewardes; it is evident that this effect proceeds out of an influence
received from the earth.

And because in a loadestone (made into a globe, or considered so, to the end
you may reckon hemispheres in it, as in the great earth) either hemisphere
gives unto a needle touched upon it, not only the virtue of that hemisphere
where it is touched, but likewise the virtue of the contrary hemisphere; we may
boldly conclude that the virtue which a loadestone is impregnated with in the
womb or bed of the earth, where it is formed and grows, proceeds as well
from the contrary hemisphere of the earth, as from that wherein it lies; in
such sort, as we have above described. And as we feel oftentimes in our own
bodies, that some cold we catch remains in us a long while after the taking
it, and that sometimes it seems even to change the nature of some part of our
body into which it is chiefly entered, and has taken particular possession
of; so that whenever new atoms of the like nature, do again range about in
the circumstant air, that part so deeply affected with the former ones of
kin to these, does in a particular manner seem to rissent them, and to
attract them to it, and to have its guestes within it (as it were) wakened and
roused up by the strokes of the aduenient ones that knock at their doors.
Even so (but much more strongly, by reason of the longer time and less
hindrances) we may conceive that the two virtues or atoms proceeding from the
two different hemispheres, do constitute a certain permanent and constant
nature in the stone that imbideth them: which then, we call a loadestone; and
is exceeding sensible (as we shall hereafter declare) of the aduenience to it
of new atoms, alike in nature and complexion to those that it is impregnated
with.

And this virtue, consisting in a kind of softer and tenderer substance then
the rest of the stone, becomes thereby subject to be consumed by fire. From
whence we may gather the reason why a loadestone never recouereth its magnetike
virtue, after it has once lost it; though iron does: for the humidity of iron,
is inseparable from its substance; but the humidity of a loadestone which
makes it capable of this effect, may be quite consumed by fire; and so the
stone be left too dry, for ever being capable of imbibing any new influence
from the earth, unless it be by a kind of new making it.

Experiments to prove that the loadestone works by emanations meeting with
agreeing streams.
In the next place we are to prove that the loadestone does work in that manner
as we have showed, for which end let us consider how the atoms, that are
drawn from each Pole and hemisphere of the earth to the equator, making up
their course by a manuduction of one an other, the hindermost can not choose
but still follow on after the foremost. And as it happens in filtration by a
cotton cloth; if some one part of the cotton, have its disposition to the
ascent of the water, more perfect and ready then the other parts have; the
water will assuredly ascend faster in that part, then in any of the rest: so,
if the atoms do find a greater disposition for their passage, in any one part
of the medium they range through, then in an other, they will certainly, not
fail of taking that way, in greater abundance, and with more vigor and
strength, then any other.

But it is evident, that when they meet with such a stone as we have
described, the helps by which they advance in their journey, are notably
increased by the flood of atoms which they meet coming out of that stone;
which being of the nature of their opposite pole, they seize greedily upon
them, and thereby do pluck themselves faster on: like a ferryman that draws
on his boat the swiftlyer, the more vigourously he tuggeth and pulls at the
rope that lies thwart the river for him to hale himself over by. And
therefore we can not doubt but that this flood of atoms streaming from the
pole of the earth, must needs pass through that stone with more speed and
vigor then they can do any other way.

And as we see in the running of water; that if it meets with any lower
cranies then the wide channel it streameth in; it will turn out of its
straight way, to glide along there where it finds an easier and more decliue
bed to tumble in: so these atoms will infallibly deturne themselves from their
direct course, to pass through such a stone as far as their greater
conueniency leads them.

And what we have said of these atoms which from the Poles do range through
the vast sea of air to the equator; is likewise to be applied unto those
atoms which issue out of the stone: so that we may conclude, that if they
meet with any help which may convey them on with more speed and vigor, then
whiles they stream directly forwards; they will likewise deturne them selves
from directly forwards, to take that course. And if the stone it self be
hanged so nicely, that a less force is able to turn it about then is
requisite to turn aw^y out of its course the continued stream of atoms which
issues from the stone: in this case, the stone it self must needs turn
toward that stream which clymbing and filtring it self along the stones
stream, draws it out of its course; in such sort as the nose of a
weathercocke butteth it self into the wind. Now then; it being known, that
the strongest stream comes directly, from the north in the great earth, and
that the souththerne stream of the Terrella or loadestone proportioned duly
by nature to incorporate with the north stream of the earth, issues out of
the north end of the stone; it follows plainly that when a loadestone is
situated at liberty, its north end must necessarily turn toward the north
pole of the world.

And it will likewise follow, that whenever such a stone meets with an
other of the same nature and kind; they must comport themselves to one an other
in like sort: that is, if both of them be free and equal, they must turn
themselves to, or from, one an other* according as they are situated in respect
of one an other. So that if their axes be parallele, and the south pole of the
one, and the north of the other do look the same way; then they will send
proportionate, and agreeing streams to one an other from their whole bodies,
that will readily mingle and incorporate with one an other, without turning out
of their way or seeking any shorter course or changing their respects to one
another.

But if the poles of the same denomination do look the same way, and the
loadestone do not lie in such sort as to have their axes parallele, but that
they incline to one an other: then they will work themselves about, until
they grow by their opposite poles into a straight line; for the same reason as
we have showed of a loadestone turning to the pole of the earth.

But if only one of the loadestones be free and the other be fixed, and that
they lie inclined, as in the former case; then, the free stone will work
himself until his pole be opposite to that part of the fixed stone from
whence the stream which agrees with him, issues strongest: for that stream
is to the free loadestone, as the northern stream of the earth, is to a
loadestone compared unto the earth. But withal, we must take notice that in
this our discourse, we abstract from other accidents; and particularly from the
influence of the earthes streams into the loadestones: which will cause great
variety in these cases, if they lie not due north and south, when they begin
to work.

And as loadestones and other magnetike bodies, do thus of necessity turn to
one an other when they are both free; and if one of them be fastened, the other
turns to it; so likewise, if they be free to progressiue motion, they must by
a like necessity and for the same reason, come together and join themselves to
one an other. And if only one of them be free, that must remove it self to the
other: for, the same virtue that makes them turn, (which is, the strength of
the steame) will likewise (in due circumstances) make them come together; by
reason that the steames which clymbe up one an other by the way of filtration,
and do thereby turn the bodies of the stones upon their centers when they are
only free to turn, must likewise, draw the whole bodies of the stones entirely
out of their places, and make them join, when such a total motion of the body
is an effect that requires no more force, then the force of conueying
vigorously the streams of both the Magnetike bodies into one an other; that
is, when there is no such impediment standing in the way of the Magnetike
bodies motion, but that the celerity of the atoms motion, mingling with one an
other, is able to overcome it: for then, it must needs do so; and the
magnetike body by natural coherence unto the steame of atoms in which it is
inuolued, follows the course of the steame: in such sort as in the example we
have heretofore upon an other occasion given of an eggeshell filled with deaw;
the sunnebeames converting the deaw into smoke, and raising up that smoke or
steame, the eggeshell is likewise raised up for company with the steame that
issues from it.

And for the same reason it is, that the loadestone draws iron: for iron
being of a nature apt to receive and harbor the steames of a loadestone; it
becomes a weak loadestone; and works toward a loadestone, in such sort as
a weaker loadestone would do: and so moves, toward a loadestone by the
means we have now described. And that this conformity between iron and the
loadestone, is the true reason of the loadestones drawing of iron, is clear
out of this; that a loadestone will take up a greater weight of pure iron, then
it will of impure or drossy iron; or of iron and some other metal joined
together: and that it will draw further through a slender long iron, then in
the free open air: all which, are manifest signs, that iron cooperateth with
the force, which the loadestone grafteth in it. And the reason why iron comes
to a loadestone more efficaciously then an other loadestone does, is, because
loadestones generally are more impure then iron is (as being a kind of oore or
mine of iron) and have other extraneous and heterogeneall natures mixed with
them: whereas iron receives the loadestones operation in its whole substance.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. Positions drawn out of the former doctrine,
and confirmed by experimental proofs.
THe first position is, The operations of the loadestone are wrought by bodies
and not by qualities.
that the working of the loadestone, being throughout according to the tenor
of the operation of bodies, may be done by bodies, and consequently is not done
by occult or secret qualities. Which is evident out of this, that a greater
loadestone has more effect then a lesser: and that if you cut away part of a
loadestone, part of his virtue is likewise taken from him: and if the parts be
joined again, the whole becomes as strong as it was before.

Again; if a loadestone touch a longer iron, it gives it less force then if
it touch a shorter iron: nay, the virtue in any part, is sensibly lesser,
according as it is further from the touched part. Again; the longer an iron is
in touching, the greater virtue it gets, and the more constant. And both an
iron and a loadestone may loose their virtue, by long lying out of their due
order and situation, either to the earth or to an other loadestone.

Besides, if a loadestone do touch a long iron in the middle of it, he
diffuseth his virtue equally toward both ends; and if it be a round plate,
he diffuseth his virtue equally to all sides.

And lastly, the virtue of a loadestone, as also of an iron touched, is lost by
burning it in the fire. All which symptoms agreeing exactly with the rules of
bodies, do make it undeniable that the virtue of the loadestone is a real and
solid body.

Objections against the former positio^ answered.
Against this position, Cabeus obiecteth that little atoms would not be able to
penetrate all sorts of bodies; as we see the virtue of the loadestone does.
And urges, that although they should be allowed to do so, yet they could not
be imagined to penetrate thick and solid bodies so soddainely, as they would
do thin ones; and would certainly show then some sign of facility or
difficulty of passing, in the interposition and in the taking away of bodies
putt between the loadestone and the body it works upon. Secondly he
obiecteth that atoms being little bodies, they can not move in an instant; as
the working of the loadestone seems to do. And lastly; that the loadestone,
by such abundance of continual euaporations, would quickly be consumed.

To the first, we answer; that atoms whose nature it is to pierce iron, can
not reasonably be suspected of inability to penetrate any other body: and that
atoms can penetrate iron, is evident in the melting of it by fire. And indeed
this objection comes now too late, after we have so largely declared the
diuisibility of quantity, and the subtility of nature in reducing all things
into extreme small parts: for this difficulty has no other auow, then the
tardity of our imaginations in subtilising sufficiently the quantitatiue parts
that issue out of the loadestone.

As for any tardity that may be expected by the interposition of a thick or
dense body; there is no appearance of such, since we see light pass through
thick glasses without giving any sign of meeting with the least opposition in
its passage, (as we have above declared at large:) and magneticall emanations
have the advantage of light in this, that they are not obliged to straight
lines, as light is.

Lastly, as for loadestones spending of themselves by still venting their
emanations; odoriferous bodies furnish us with a full answer to that
objection: for they do continue many years palpably spending of themselves,
and yet keep their odor in vigor; whereas a loadestone, if it be laid in a
wrong position will not continue half so long. The reason of the duration of
both which, makes the matter manifest and takes away all difficulty: which
is, that as in a root of a vegetable, there is a power to change the aduenient
juice into its nature; so is there in such like things as these, a power to
change the ambient air into their own substance: as evident experience
shows in the Hermetike salt, (as some modern writers call it) which is found
to be rapayred, and increased in its weight, by lying in the air; and the like
happens to saltpeter. And in our present subject, experience informs us,
that a loadestone will grow stronger by lying in due position either to the
earth, or to a stronger loadestone, whereby it may be better impregnated, and
as it were feed it self with the emanatio^s issuing out of them into it.

The loadestone is imbued with his virtue from an other body.
Our next position is, that this virtue comes to a magnetike body, from an
other body; as the nature of bodies is, to require a being moved, that they may
move. And this is evident in iron; which by the touch, or by standing in due
position near the loadestone gains the power of the loadestone. Again, if a
smith in beating his iron into a rod, do observe to lay it north and south;
it gets a direction to the north, by the very beating of it. Likewise if an
iron rod be made red hot in the fire, and be kept there a good while
together, and when it is taken out, be laid to cool just north and south; it
will acquire the same direction toward the north. And this is true, not only
of iron, but also of all other sorts of bodies whatsoever that endure such
ignition: particularly, of pottearthes, which if they be molded in a long
form, and when they are taken out of the kilne be laid (as we said of the
iron) to cool north and south, will have the same effect wrought in them. And
iron, though it has not been heated; but only has continued long unmoved in
the same situation of north and south, in a building; yet it will have the same
effect. So as it can not be denied, but that this virtue comes unto iron from
other bodies: whereof one must be a secret influe^ce from the north. And this
is confirmed, by a loadestones loosing its virtue (as we said before) by lying
a long time unduly disposed, either toward the earth, or toward a stronger
loadestone; whereby instead of the former, it gains a new virtue according to
that situation.

And this happens, not only in the virtue which is resident and permanent in
a loadestone or a touched iron; but likewise, in the actual motion or
operation of them. As may be experienced; first, in this, that the same
loadestone or touched iro^ in the south hemisphere of the world has its
operation strongest at that end of it which tends to the north; and in the
north hemisphere, at the end which te^deth to the south: each pole
communicating a vigor proportionable to its own strength in the climate where
it is received. Secondly, in this, that an iron joined to a loadestone, or
within the sphere of the loadestones working, will take up an other piece of
iron greater then the loadestone of it self can hold; and as soon as the
holding iron is removed out of the sphere of the loadestones actiuity, it
presently lets fall the iron it formerly held up: and this is so true; that
a lesser loadestone may be placed in such sort within the sphere of a greater
loadestones operation, as to take away a piece of iron from the greater
loadestone; and this, in virtue of the same greater loadestone from which it
plucketh it: for, but remove the lesser out of the sphere of the greater; and
then it can no longer do it. So that it is evident, that in these cases, the
very actual operation of the lesser loadestone or of the iron; proceeds from
the actual influence of the greater loadestone upon and into them. And hence
we may understand, that whenever a Magnetike body does work, it has an
excitation from without, which does make it issue out and send its streams
abroad; in such sort as it is the nature of all bodies to do; and as we have
given examples of the like done by heat, when we discoursed of Rarefaction.

But to explicate this point more clearly by entering more particularly into
it; if a magnetike body lies north and south, it is easy and obuious to
conceive that the streams coming from north and south of the world, and
passing through the stone must needs excitate the virtue which is in it, and
carry a stream of it along with them that way, they go. But if it lies East
and West, then the steames of north and south of the earth, streaming along by
the two Poles of the stone, are sucked in by them much more weakly: yet
nevertheless sufficiently to give an excitation to the innate steames which
are in the body of the stone, to make them move on in their ordinary course.

The virtue of the loadestone is a double, and not one simple virtue.
The third position is, that the virtue of the loadestone is a double and not
one simple virtue. Which is manifest in an iron touched by a loadestone, for if
you touch it only with one pole of the stone, it will not be so strong and full
of the magnetike virtue, as if you touch one end of it with one pole, and the
other end of it with the other pole of the stone. Again; if you touch both
ends of an iron, with the same pole of the stone, the iron gains its virtue
at that end which was last touched; and changes its virtue from end to end,
as often as it is rubbed at contrary ends. Again; one end of the loadestone
or of iron touched, will have more force on the one side of the equator, and
the other end on the other side of it. Again; the variation on the one side of
the equator, and the variation on the other side of it, have different laws
according to the different ends of the loadestone, or of the needle, which
looks to those Poles.

Wherefore, it is evident, that there is a double virtue in the loadestone, the
one more powerful at the one end of it; the other more powerful at the
other end. Yet these two virtues are found in every sensible part of the stone:
for cutting it at either end, the virtue at the contrary end is also
diminished. And the whole loadestone that is left, has both the same virtues,
in proportion to its biggnesse. Besides cut the loadestone how you will, still
the two poles remain in that line, which lay under the meridian when it was in
the earth. And the like is of the touched iron whose virtue still lies along
the line, The vettue of the loadestone works more strongly in the poles of
it, then in any other part.
which goes straight (according to the line of the axis) from the point where
it was touched, and at the opposite end, constituteth the contrary pole.

The fourth position is, that though the virtue of the loadestone be in the
whole body; nevertheless, its virtue is more seen in the poles then in any
other parts. For by experience it is found that a loadestone of equal bulk,
works better and more efficaciously if it be in a long form; then if it be
in any other. The loadestone sends forth its emanations spherically.

Which are of two kinds: and each kind is strongest in that hemisphere,
through whose polary parts they issue out.


And from the middle line betwixt the two poles, there comes no virtue, if an
iron be touched there: but any part toward the pole; the nearer it is to the
pole, the greater virtue it imparteth. Lastly; the declination teaches us the
same; which is so much the stronger by how much it is nearer the pole.

The fifth position is, that in the loadestone there are emanations which do
issue not only at the poles and about them, but also spherically, round about
the whole body, and in an orb from all parts of the superficies of it; in
such sort as happens in all other bodies whatsoever. And that these
sphericall emanations, are of two kinds; proportionable to the two polar
emanations. And that the greatest force of each sort of them is in that
hemisphere where the pole is, at which they make their chief issue.

The reason of the first part of this position is, because no particular body
can be exempt from the laws of all bodies: and we have above declared that
every physical body must of necessity have an orb of fluours, or a sphere of
actiuity about it. The reason of the second part is, that seeing these fluours
do proceed out of the very substance and nature of the loadestone, they can not
choose but be found of both sorts, in every part how little soever it be,
where the nature of the loadestone resideth. The reason of the third part is,
that because the polar emanations do tend wholly toward the poles (each of
them to their proper pole) it follows that in every hemisphere both those
which come from the contrary hemisphere, and those which are bred in the
hemisphere they go out at, are all assembled in that hemisphere: and
therefore, of necessity it must be stronger in that kind of fluours, then the
opposite end is. All which appears true in experience: for if a long iron
touches any part of that hemisphere of a loadestone which tends to the
north; it gains at that end a virtue of tending likewise to the north: and
the same will be if an iron but hang close over it. And this may be confirmed
by a like experience, of an iron bar in respect of the earth which ha^ging
downewardes in any part of our hemisphere, is imbued with the like inclination
of drawing toward the north. Putting two loadestones within the sphere of one
an other, every part of one loadestone, does not agree with every part of the
other loadestone.


The sixth position is, that although every part of one loadestone do in it
self agree with every part of an other loadestone (that is, if each of these
parts were divided from their wholes, and each of them made a whole by it
self, they might be so joined together as they would agree) nevertheless,
when the parts are in their two wholes, they do not all of them agree
together: but of two loadestones, only the poles of the one do agree with the
whole body of the other; that is, each pole with any part of the contrary
hemisphere of the other loadestone.

The reason of this is, because the fluours which issue out of the stones, are
in certain different degrees in several parts of the entire loadestones;
whereby it happens that one loadestone can work by a determinate part of it
self most powerfully upon the other, if some determinate part of that other do
lie next unto it; and not so well, if any other part lies toward it. And
accordingly experience shows that if you putt the pole of a loadestone
toward the middle of a needle that is touched at the point, the middle part
of the neddle will turn away, Concerning the declination and other respects of
a needle, toward the loadestone is touches.
and the end of it will convert it self to the pole of the loadestone.

The seventh position is, that if a touched needle and a loadestone do come
together, and touch one an other in their agreeing parts (whatsoever parts of
them those be) the line of the needles length will bend toward the pole of
the stone (excepting, if they touch by the equator of the stone, and the
middle of the needle:) yet not so that if you draw out the line of the needles
length, it will go through the pole of the stone; unless they touch by the end
of the one, and the pole of the other. But if they touch by the equator of the
one and the middle of the other; then the needle will lie parallele to the axis
of the stone.

And the reason of this is manifest, for in that case the two poles being
equidistant to the needle they draw it equally; and by consequence the needle
must remain parallele to the axis of the stone. Nor does it import that the
inequality of the two poles of the stone is materially or quantitatiuely
greater then the inequality of the two poles of the needle; out of which it may
at the first sight seem to follow, that the stronger pole of the stone should
draw the weaker pole of the needle nearer unto it self; then the weaker pole
of the stone can be able to draw the stronger pole of the needle: and by
consequence that the needle should not lie parallele to the axis of the stone,
but should incline somewhat to the stronger pole of it. For after you have well
considered the matter, you will find that the strength of the pole of the
stone, can not work according to its material greatness, but is confined to
work only according to the susceptibility of the needle: the which, being a
slender and thin body, can not receive so much as a thicker body may.
Wherefore, seeing that the strongest pole of the stone gives most strength to
that pole of the needle, which lies furthest from it; it may well happen that
this superiority of strength in the pole of the needle that is applied to the
weaker pole of the stone, may counterpoise the excess of the stronger pole of
the stone, over its opposite weaker pole; though not in greatness and
quantity, yet in respect of the virtue which is communicable to the poles of
the needle; whereby its comportment to the poles of the stone, is determined.
And indeed the needles lying parallele to the axis of the stone when the middle
of it sticks to the equator of the stone, conuinceth that upon the whole
matter, there is no excess in the efficacious working of either of the stones
poles: but that their excess over one an other in regard of themselves, is
balanced by the needles receiving it.

But if the needle happens to touch the loadestone in some part nearer one
pole then the other; in this case it is manifest that the force of the stone is
greater on the one side of the needles touch, then on the other side; because
there is a greater quantity of the stone on the one side of the needle then on
the other: and by consequence the needle will incline that way which the
greater force draws it; so far forth as the other part does not hinder it.
Now we know that if the greater part were divided from the rest, and so were an
entire loadestone by it self (that is, if the loadestone were cut of where
the needle touches it) then the needle would join it self to the pole, that
is to the end, of that part: and by consequence, would be tending to it, in
such sort as a thing that is sucked tends toward the sucker against the
motion or force which comes from the lesser part: and on the other side the
lesser part of the stone which is on the other side of the point which the
needle touches, must hinder this inclination of the needle according to the
proportion of its strength; and so it follows that the needle will hang by
its end, not directly set to the end of the greater part, but as much
inclining toward it as the lesser part does not hinder by striving to pull it
the other way. Out of which we gather the true cause of the needles
declination, to wit the proportion of working of the two unequal parts of
the stone, between which it touches and is joined to the stone.

And we likewise discover their error who judge that the part which draws
iron is the next pole unto the iron. The virtue of the loadestone goes from
end to end in lines almost parallele to the axis.
For it is rather the contrary pole which attracteth; or to speak more
properly it is the whole body of the stone as streaming in lines almost
parallele to the axis, from the furthermost end, to the other end which is next
to the iron: and (in our case) it is that part of the stone which begins
from the contrary pole and reaches to the needle. For besides the light which
this discourse gave us, experience assures us that a loadestone, whose poles
lie broad ways, not long ways the stone, is more imperfect, and draws more
weakly then if the poles lay longwayes; which would not be if the fluours did
stream from all parts of the stone directly to the pole: for then, howsoever
the stone were cast the whole virtue of it would be in the poles. Moreover, if
a needle were drawn freely, upon the same meridian from one pole to the other;
as soon as it were passed the equator it would leap soddainely at the very
first remove off of the equator, where it is parallele with the axis of the
loadestone, from being so parallele, to make an angle with the axis greater
then a half right one, to the end that it might look upon the pole which is
supposed to be the only attractiue that draws the needle: which great change,
wrought all at once, nature never causes nor admits, but in all actions or
motions, uses to pass through all the mediums whenever it goes from one
extreme to an other. Besides; there would be no variation of the needles aspect
toward the north end of the stone: for if every part did send its virtue
immediately to the poles, it were impossible that any other part whatsoever
should be stronger then the polar part, seeing that the polar part, had the
virtue even of that particular part, and of all the other parts of the stone
besides, joined in it self.

This therefore is evident; that the virtue of the loadestone goes from end to
end in parallele lines; unless it be in such stones as have their polar parts
narrower then the rest of the body of the stone: for in them, the stream will
tend with some little declination toward the pole, as it were by way of
refraction; because without the stone, the fluours from the pole of the earth
do coarct themselves, and so do thicken their stream, to croude into the stone
as soon as they are sensible of any emanations from it, that being (as we have
said before) their readyest way to pass along: and within the stone, the
stream does the like to meet the aduenient stream where it is strongest and
thickest; which is, at that narrow part of the stones end, which is most
prominent out.

The virtue of the loadestone is not perfectly sphericall though the stone be
such.
And by this discourse we discover likewise an other error of them, that
imagine the loadestone has a sphere of actiuity round about it, equal on all
sides; that is, perfectly sphericall, if the stone be sphericall. Which
clearly is a mistaken speculation: for nature having so ordered all her agents
that where the strength is greatest, there the action must (generally speaking)
extend it self furthest off; and it being acknowledged that the loadestone
has greatest strength in its poles and least in the equator; it must of
necessity follow, that it works further by its poles then by its equator.
And consequently, it is impossible that its sphere of actiuity should be
perfectly sphericall.

Nor does Cabeus his experience move us to conceive the loadestone has a
greater strength to retain an iron laid upon it by its equator, then by its
poles: for to justify his assertion, he should have tried it in an iron wyre
that were so short, as the poles could not have any notable operation upon the
ends of it; since otherwise, the force of retayning it, will be attributed to
the poles (according to what we have above delivered) and not to the equator.

The intention of nature in all the operations of the loadestone, is to make an
union betwixt the attractiue and attracted bodies.
The eighth position is; that the intention of nature in all the operations of
the loadestone, is to make an union betwixt the attractiue and the attracted
bodies. Which is evident out of the sticking of them together: as also out of
the violence wherewith iron comes to a loadestone; which when it is drawn by
a powerful one, is so great, that through the force of the blow hitting the
stone, it will rebound back again, and then fall again to the stone: and in
like manner a needle upon a pin, if a loadestone be set near it, turns
with so great a force toward the pole of the stone, that it goes beyond it,
and coming back again, the celerity wherewith it moves makes it retire it
self too far on the other side; and so by many vndulations, at the last it
comes to rest directly opposite to the pole. Likewise, by the declination; by
means of which, the iron to the stone, or the stone to the earth, approaches
in such a disposition as is most convenient to join the due ends together.
And lastly, out of the flying away of the contrary ends from one an other:
which clearly is to no other purpose, but that the due ends may come
together. And in general; there is no doubt but ones going to an other, is
instituted by the order of nature for their coming together, and for their
being together, which is but a perseverance of their coming together.

The maine globe of the earth is not a loadestone.
The nineth position is, that the nature of a loadestone does not sink deeply
into the maine body of the earth, as to have the substance of its whole body,
be magneticall; but only remains near the surface of it. And this is evident
by the inequality in virtue of the two ends; for if this magnetike virtue were
the nature of the whole body, both ends would be equally strong. Nor would the
disposition of one of the ends, be different from the disposition of the
other. Again, there could be no variation of the tending toward the north:
for the bulk of the whole body would have a strength so eminently greater,
then the prominences and disparities of hills or seas; as the varieties of these
would be absolutely insensible. Again; if the motion of the loadestone came
from the body of the earth, it would be perpetually from the center, and not
from the poles; and so, there could be no declination, more in one part of the
earth, then in an other. Nor would the loadestone tend from north to south, but
from the center to the circumference; or rather from the circumference to the
center.

And so we may learn the difference between the loadestone and the earth in
their attractiue operations; to wit, that the earth does not receive its
influence from an other body, nor does its magnetike virtue depend of an other
magnetike agent, that impresseth it into it: which nevertheless, is the most
remarkable condition of a loadestone. Again the strongest virtue of the
loadestone, is from pole to pole: but the strongest virtue of the earth, is
from the center vpwardes, as appears by fireforkes gaining a much greater
magnetike strength in a short time, then a loadestone in a longer. Neither can
it be thence objected, that the loadestone should therefore receive the earthes
influences more strongly from the centerwardes, then from the poles of the
earth, (which by its operation, and what we have discoursed of it, is certain
it does not;) since the beds where loadestones lie and are formed be toward
the bottom of that part or bark of the earth which is imbued with magnetike
virtue. Again, this virtue which we see in a loadestone, is substantial to
it; whereas the like virtue is but accidental to the earth, by means of the
suns drawing the northern and souththerne exhalations to the equator.

The last positio^ is, The loadestone is generated in all parts or climats of
the earth.
that the loadestone must be found over all the earth, and in every country.
And so we see it is: both because iron mines are found (in some measure) almost
in all countries: and because, at the least other sorts of earth (as we have
declared of pottearths) can not be wanting in any large extent of country;
which when they are baked and cooled in due positions, have this effect of the
loadestone, and are of the nature of it. And Docteur Gilbert shows, that the
loadestone is nothing else but the oore of steel or of perfectest iron; and
that it is to be found of all colors, and fashions, and almost of all
consistences.

So that we may easily conceive, The conformity betwixt the two motions of
magnetike things, and of heavy things.
that the emanations of the loadestone being every where, as well as the causes
of gravity; the two motions of magnetike things and of weighty things, do
both of them derive their origin from the same source; I mean, from the very
same emanations coming from the earth; which by a diverse ordination of nature,
do make this effect in the loadestone, and that other in weighty things. And
who knows but that a like sucking to this which we have showed in magnetike
things, passes also in the motion of gravity? In a would; gravity bears a
fair testimony in the behalf of the magnetike fo^ce; and the loadestones
working, returns no mean verdict for the causes of gravity, according to
what we have delivered of them.

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. A solution of certain Problemes concerning the
loadestone, and as hort sum of the whole doctrine touching it.
OVt of what is said upon this subject, we may proceed to the solution of
certain questions or problemes, Which is the North, and which the South Pole
of a loadestone.
which are or may be made in this matter. And first, of that which Doctor
Gilbert disputes against all former writers of the loadestone; to wit which
is the North, and which the South pole of a stone? Which seems unto me, to be
only a question of the name: for if by the name of north and south, we
vnders^a^d that end of the stone which has that virtue that the north or south
pole of the earth have* then it is certain, that the end of the stone which
looks to the south pole of the earth, is to be called the north pole of the
loadestone; and conrrariwise, that which looks to the north, is to be called
the south pole of it. But if by the names of north and south pole of the stone,
you mean those ends of it, that lie and point to the north and to the south
poles of the earth; then you must reckon their poles contrariwise to the former
account. So that the terms being once defined, there will remain no further
controuersye about this point.

Doctor Gilbert seems also to have an other controversy with all writers; to
wit whether any bodies besides magneticall ones, be attractiue? Whether any
bodies besides magnetike ones be attractiue.
Which he seems to deny; all others to affirm. But this also being fairly
putt, will peradventure prove no controversy: for the question is either in
common, of attraction; or else in particular, of such an attraction as is made
by the loadestone. Of the first part, there can be no doubt; as we have
declared above; and as is manifest betwixt gold and quickesiluer, when a man
holding gold in his mouth, it draws unto it the quickesiluer that is in his
body. But for the attractiue to draw a body unto it self, not wholly, but one
determinate part of the body drawn, unto one determine part of the drawer; is
an attraction which for my part I can not exemplify in any other bodies but
magneticall ones.

A third question is, Whether an iron placed ^erpe^dicularly toward the earth
does get a magneticall virtue of pointing toward the north, or toward the
south in that end that lies downewardes.
whether an iron that stands long time unmoved in a window, or any other part
of a building, perpendicularly to the earth, does contract a magneticall virtue
of drawing or pointing toward the north in that end which looks
downewardes. For Cabeus (who wrote since Gilbert) affirms it out of
experience: but either his experiment or his expression was defective. For
assuredly if the iron stands so, in the northern hemisphere, it will turn
to the north; and if in the southern hemisphere; it will turn to the south:
for seeing the virtue of the loadestone proceeds from the earth, and that the
earth has different tempers toward the north, and toward the south pole
(as has been already declared) the virtue which comes out of the earth in
the northern hemisphere, will give unto the end of the iron next it an
inclination to the north pole; and the earth of the southern hemisphere will
yield the contrary disposition unto the end which is nearest it.

The next question is, why a loadestone seems to love iron better then it
does an other loadestone? Why loadestones affect iron better then one an other.
The answer is, because iron is indifferent in all its parts to receive the
impression of a loadestone; whereas an other loadestone receives it only in a
determinate part: and therefore a loadestone draws iron more easily then it
can an other loadestone; because it finds repugnance in the parts of an
other loadestone, unless it be exactly situated in a right position. Besides,
iron seems to be compared to a loadestone, like as a more humide body to a
dryer of the same nature; and the difference of male and female sexes in
animals do manifestly show the great appetence of conjunction between moisture
and dryness, when they belong to bodies of the same species.

An other question, Gilberts reason refuted touching a capped loadestone, that
takes up more iron then one not capped; and an iron impregnated that in some
case draws more strongly then the stone it self.
is that great one; why a loadestone capped with steel, takes up more iron
then it would do if it were without that capping? An other conclusion like unto
this, is that if by a loadestone you take up an iron, and by that iron a second
iron, and then you pull away the second iron; the first iron (in some position)
will leave the loadestone to stick unto the second iron, as long as the second
iron is within the sphere of the loadestones actiuity; but if you remove the
second out of that sphere, then the first iron remaining within it, though the
other be out of it, will leave the second, and leap back to the loadestone.
To the same purpose, is this other conclusion; that the greater the iron is,
which is entirely within the compass of the loadestones virtue, the more
strongly the loadestone will be moved unto it; and the more forcibly it will
stick to it.

The reasons of all these three, we must give at once; for they hang all upon
one string. And in my conceit neither Gilbert nor Galileo have hitt upon the
right. As for Gilbert; he thinks that in iron there is originally the virtue
of the loadestone; but that it is as it were a sleep until by the touch of
the loadestone it be awaked and set on work: and therefore the virtue of both
joined together, is greater then the virtue of the loadestone alone.

But if this were the reason, the virtue of the iron would be greater in every
regard, and not only in sticking or in taking up: whereas himself confesses,
that a capped stone draws no further, then a naked stone, nor hardly so
far. Besides, it would continue its virtue out of the sphere of actiuity of
the loadestone, which it does not. Again; seeing that if you compare them
severally, the virtue of the loadestone is greater, then the virtue of the
iron; why should not the middle iron stick closer to the stone then to the
further iron which must of necessity have less virtue?

Galileus his opinion touching the former effects, refuted.
Galileo yields the cause of this effect, that when an iron touches an iron,
there are more parts which touch one an other, then when a loadestone touches
the iron: both because the loadestone, has generally much impurity in it, and
therefore diverse parts of it have no virtue; whereas iron, by being melted
has all its parts pure: and secondly, because iron can be smoothed and
polisked more then a loadestone can be: and therefore its superficies touches
in a manner with all its parts; whereas diverse parts of the stones
superficies can not touch, by reason of its ruggedness.

And he confirms his opinion by experience: for if you putt the head of a
needle to a barestone, and the point of it to an iron; and then pluck away the
iron; the needle will leave the iron, and stick to the stone: but if you turn
the needle the other way, it will leave the stone and stick to the iron. Out
of which he infers that it is the multitude of parts, which causes the
close and strong sticking. And it seems he found the same in the capping of
his loadestones: for he used flatt irons for that purpose; which by their whole
plane did take up other irons: whereas Gilbert capped his with co^uexe irons;
which not applying themselves to other iron, so strongly or with so many parts
as Galileos did, would not by much take up so great weightes as his.

Nevertheless, it seems not to me that his answer is sufficient, or that
his reasons convince; for we are to consider that the virtue which he puts
in the iron must (according to his own supposition) proceed from the
loadestone: and then, what imports it, whether the superficies of the iron
which touches an other iron, be so exactly plain or no? Or that the parts of
it be more solid then the parts of the stone? For all this conduces nothing
to make the virtue greater then it was: since no more virtue can go from one
iron to the other, then goes from the loadestone to the first iron: and if
this virtue can not tie the first iron to the loadestone; it can not proceed
out of this virtue that the second iron be tied to the first. Again; if a
paper be putt betwixt the cappe and an other iron, it does not hinder the
magneticall virtue from passing through it to the iron; but the virtue of
taking up more weight then the naked stone was able to do, is thereby rendered
quite vselesse. Therefore it is evident, that this virtue must be putt in
something else, and not in the application of the magneticall virtue.

And to examine his reasons particularly, it may very well fall out that
whatsoever the cause be, the point of a needle may be too little to make an
exact experience in; and therefore a new doctrine ought not lightly be grounded
upon what appears in the application of that. And likewise, the greatness of
the surfaces of the two irons, may be a condition helpefull to the cause
whatsoever it be: for greater and lesser, are the common conditions of all
bodies, and therefore do avail all kinds of corporeal causes; so that, no
one cause can be affirmed more then an other, merely out of this that great
does more, and little does less.

To come then to our own solution: The Authors solution to the former
questions.
I have considered, how fi^^ has in a manner the same effect in iron, as the
virtue of the loadestone has by means of the cappe: for I find that fire
coming through iron red glowing hot, will burn more strongly, then if it
should come immediately through the air; as also we see that in pittecoale the
fire is stronger then in charcoale. And nevertheless, the fire will heat
further if it come immediately from the source of it, then if it come through a
red iron that burns more violently where it touches; and likewise charcoale
will heat further then pittcoale, that near hand burns more fiercely. In the
same manner, the loadestone will draw further without a cappe then with one;
but with a cappe it sticks faster then without one. Whence I see that it is
not purely the virtue of the loadestone; but the virtue of it being in iron;
which causes this effect.

Now this modification, may proceed either from the multitude of parts which
come out of the loadestone, and are as it were stopped in the iron; and so the
sphere of their actiuity becomes shorter but stronger: or else from some
quality of the iron joined to the influence of the loadestone. The first
seems not to give a good account of the effect; for why should a little paper
take it away, seeing we are sure that it stops not the passage of the
loadestones influence? Again; the influence of the loadestone, seems in its
motion to be of the nature of light, which goes in an insensible time as far
as it can reach: and therefore, were it multiplied in the iron, it would reach
further then without it; and from it, the virtue of the loadestone would
begin a new sphere of actiuity. Therefore, we more willingly cleave to the
latter part of our determination.

And there upon enquiring what quality there is in iron, whence this effect may
follow; we find that it is distinguished from a loadestone, as a metal is
from a stone. Now we know that mettalls have generally more humidity then
stones; and we have discoursed above, that humidity is the cause of sticking*
especially when it is little and dense. These qualities must needs be in the
humidity of iron: which of all mettalls is the most terrestrial: and such
humidity as is able to stick to the influence of the loadestone, as it passes
through, the body of the iron, must be exceeding subtle and small; and it
seems necessary that such humidity should stick to the influence of the
loadestone, when it meets with it, considering that the influence is of it
self dry and that the nature of iron is akinne to the loadestone: wherefore,
the humidity of the one, and the drought of the other, will not fail of
incorporating together. Now then, if two irons, well polished and plain, be
united by such a glue as resulteth out of this composition, there is a manifest
appearance of much reason for them to stick strongly together. This is
confirmed by the nature of iron in very cold countries and very cold weather:
for the very humidity of the air in times of frost, will make upon iron,
sooner then upon other things, such a sticking glue as will pull off the
skin of a man's hand that touches it hard.

And by this discourse, you will perceive that Galileos arguments do confirm
our opinion as well as his own; and that according to our doctrine, all
circumstances must fall out just as they do in his experiences. And the reason
is clear why the interposition of an other body, hinders the strong sticking
of iron to the cappe of the loadestone; for it makes the mediation between
them greater, which we have showed to be the general reason why things are
easily parted.

Let us then proceed to the resolution of the other cases proposed. The second
is already resolved: for if this glue be made of the influence of the
loadestone, it can not have force further then the loadestone it self has:
and so far, it must have more force, then the bare influence of the
loadestone. Or rather the humidity of two irons makes the glue of a fitter
temper to hold, then that which is between a dry loadestone and iron; and the
glue enters better when both sides are moist, then when only one is so.

The reason why in the former case, a lesser loadestone does draw the
interiacent iro^ from the greater.
But this resolution though it be in part good, yet it does not euacuate the
whole difficulty, since the same case happens between a stronger and a
weaker loadestone, as between a loadestone and iron: for the weaker
loadestone, whilst it is, within the sphere of actiuity of the greater
loadestone, draws away an iron set betwixt them as well as a second iron
does. For the reason therefore of the little loadestones drawing away the iron,
we may consider that the greater loadestone has two effects upon the iron,
which is betwixt it and a lesser loadestone, and a third effect upon the little
loadestone it self. The first is that it impregnateth the iron, and gives it
a permanent virtue by which it works like a weak loadestone. The second is,
that as it makes the iron work toward the lesser loadestone by its
permanent virtue; so also it accompanyeth the steame that goes from the iron
toward the little loadestone with its own steame, which goes the same way:
so that both these steames do in company clymbe up the steame of the little
loadestone which meets them; and that steame clymbeth up the enlarged one of
both theirs together. The third effect which the greater loadestone works, is
that it makes the steame of the little loadestone become stronger by
augmenting its innate virtue in some degree.

Now then, the going of the iron to either of the loadestones, must follow the
greater and quicker conjunction of the two meeting steames, and not the
greatness of one alone. So that if the conjunction of the two steames between
the iron and the little loadestone be greater and quicker then the conjunction
of the two steames which meet between the greater loadestone and the iron, the
iron must stick to the lesser loadestone. And this must happen more often then
otherwise: for the steame which goes from the iron to the greater loadestone
will for the most part be less then the steame which goes from the lesser
loadestone to the iron. And though the other steame be never so great yet it
can not draw more then according to the proportion of its Antagonists coming
from the iron. Wherefore seeing the two steames betwixt the iron and the little
loadestone, are more proportionable to one an other, and the steame coming out
of the little loadestone is notably greater, then the steame going from the
iron to the greater loadestone; the conjunction must be made for the most part
to the little loadestone. And if this discourse does not hold in the former
part of the Problem betwixt a second iron and a loadestone, it is supplied by
the former reason which we gave for that particular purpose.

The third case depends also of this solution* for the bigger an iron is, so
many more parts it has to suck up the influence of the loadestone; and
consequently, does it thereby the more greedily: and therefore the loadestone
must be carried to it more violently, and when they are joined, Why the
variation of a touched needle from the north, is greater, the nearer you go to
the Pole.
stick more strongly.

The sixth question is, why the variations of the needle from the true north, in
the northern hemisphere, are greater, the nearer you go to the Pole, and
lesser the nearer you approach to the Equator. The reason whereof is plain in
our doctrine; for, considering that the magnetike virtue of the earth,
streameth from the north toward the equator; it follows of necessity, that
if there be two streams of magnetike fluours issuing from the north, one of
them, precisely from the pole, and the other from a part of the earth near the
pole; and that the stream coming from the point by side the pole, be but a
little the stronger of the two; there will appear very little differencies in
their several operations, after they have had a long space to mingle their
emanations together; which thereby do join, and grow as it were into one
stream. Whereas the nearer you come to the pole, the more you will find them
severed, and each of them working by its own virtue. And very near the point
which causes the variation, each stream works singly by it self; and
therefore here, the point of variation must be master, and will carry the
needle strongly unto his course from the due north, if his stream be never so
little more efficacious then the other.

Again; a line drawn from a point of the earth wide of the pole, to a point
of the meridian near the equator, makes a less angle, then a line drawn
from the same point of the earth to a point of the same meridian nearer the
pole: wherefore, the variation being esteemed by the quantities of the said
angles, it must needs be greater near the pole, then near the equator,
though the cause be the same.

Which a little figure will presently explicate. Let the point A, be the pole;
and the line AB, the meridian; and the point B, the intersection of it, with a
parallele near the equator; and the point C, the intersection of the meridian
with the Tropike; and D, a point in the earth near the pole, unto which in the
said intersection the needle tends, in steed of looking directly to the pole,
whereby it makes variation from due north. I say then, thar the variation of a
needle near the equator in the point B, looking upon the point D; can not be
so great and sensible, as the variation of a needle in the Tropike C, looking
upon the same point; since the angle DBA, which is made by the variation of the
first, is less then the angle DCA, which is made by the variation of the
latter needle, nearer the pole.

But because it may happen, that in the parts near the equator, the
variation may proceed from some piece of land, not much more northerly then
where the needle is; but that bears rather easterly or westerly from it; and
yet Gilberts assertion goes universally, when he says the variations in
southern regions are less, then in northern ones: we must examine what may
be the reason thereof. And presently the generation of the loadestone shows
it plainly: for seeing the nature of the loadestone proceeds out of this,
that the sun works more upon the torride zone, then upon the poles; and
that his too strong operation, is contrary to the loadestone, as being of the
nature of fire; it follows evidently that the lands of the torride zone can
not be so magneticall (generally speaking) as the polar lands are; and by
consequence that a lesser land near the pole, will have a greater effect, then
a larger continent near the equator: and likewise a land further off toward
the pole, will work more strongly then a nearer land which lies toward the
equator. Whether in the same part of the world a touched needle may at one
time vary more from the north, and at an other time less.


The seventh question is, whether in the same part of the world a touched
needle may at one time vary more from the true north point, and at an other
time less? In which Gilbert was resolute for the negative part: but our latter
Mathematiciens are of an other mind. Three experiences were made near London
in three diverse years. The two first, 42 years distant from one an other; and
the third 12 years distant from the second. And by them it is found that in
the space of 54 years, he loadestone has at London diminished his variation
from the north, the quantity of 7 degrees and more. But so that in the latter
years the diminution has sensibly gone faster then in the former.

These observations peradventure are but little credited by strangers; but we
who know the worth of the men that made them, can not mistrust any notable
error in them: for they were very able mathematicians, and they made their
observations with very great exactness; and there were several iuditious
witnesses at the making of them; as may be seen in Mr. Gillebrand his print
concerning this subject. And diverse other particular persons do confirm the
same* whose creditt, though each single might peradventure be slighted, yet all
in body make a great accession.

We must therefore cast about to find what may be the cause of an effect so
paradoxe to the rest of the doctrine of the loadestone: for seeing that no one
place, can stand otherwise to the north of the earth at one time then at an
other; how is it possible that the needle should receive any new variation,
since all variation proceeds out of the inequality of the earth? But when we
consider that this effect proceeds not out of the maine body of the earth;
but only out of the bark of it; and that its bark, may have diverse tempers
not as yet discovered unto us; and that out of the variety of these tempers,
the influence of the earthy parts may be diverse in respect of one certain
place; it is not impossible but that such variation may be; especially in
England: which Island lying open to the north, by a great and vast ocean; may
receive more particularly then other places, the special influences and
variation of the weather, that happen in those northeasterne countries from
whence this influence comes unto us. If therefore there should be any course
of weather, whose periode were a hundred years (for example) or more or less,
and so might easily pass unmarked; this variation might grow out of such a
course.

But in so obscure a thing, we have already hazarded to guess too much. And
upon the whole matter of the loadestone, it serves our turn, if we have
proved (as we conceive we have done fully) that its motions which appear so
admirable, do not proceed from an occult quality; but that the causes of them
may be reduced unto local motion; and that all they may be performed by such
corporeal instruments and means (though peradventure more intricately
disposed) as all other effects are among bodies. Whose ordering and disposing
and particular progress, there is no reason to despair of finding out; would
but men carefully apply themselves to that work, upon solid principles and
with diligent experiences.

But because this matter has been very long, The whole doctrine of the
loadestone summed up in short.
and scatteringly diffused in many several branches; peradventure it will not
be displeasing to the Reader to see the whole nature of the loadestone summed
up in short. Let him then cast his eyes upon one effect of it, that is very
easy to be tried and is acknowledged by all writers; though we have not as yet
mentioned it. And it is, that a knife drawn from the pole of a loadestone
toward the equator, if you hold the point toward the pole, it gains a
respect to one of the poles: but contrawise, if the point of the knife be held
toward the equator, and be thrust the same way it was drawn before (that
is, toward the equator) it gains a respect toward the contrary pole.

It is evident out of this experience, that the virtue of the loadestone is
communicated by way of streams; and that in it, there are two contrary
streams: for otherwise the motion of the knife this w^y or that way, could not
change the efficacity of the same parts of the loadestone. It is likewise
evident, that these contrary streams, do come from the conrrary ends of the
loadestone. As also, that the virtues, of them both, are in every part of the
stone. Likewise that one loadestone, must of necessity turn certain parts of
it self, to certain parts of an other loadestone; nay that it must go and
join to it, according to the laws of attraction which we have above
delivered: and consequently that they must turn their disagreeing parts away
from one an other; and so, one loadestone seem to fly from an other, if they
be so applied that their disagreeing parts be kept still next to one an other:
for in this case, the disagreeing and the agreeing parts of the same
loadestone, being in the same straight line; one loadestone seeking to draw his
agreeing part near to that part of the other loadestone which agrees with
him, must of necessity turn away his disagreeing parts to give way unto his
agreeing part to approach nearer.

And thus you see that the flying from one an other of two ends of two
loadestones, which are both of the same denomination (as for example the two
south ends, or the two north ends) does not proceed from a pretended
antipathy between those two ends, but from the attraction of the agreeing
ends.

Furthermore, the earth, having to a loadestone the nature of a loadestone; it
follows that a loadestone must necessarily turn it self to the poles of the
earth by the same laws. And consequently, must tend to the north, must vary
from the north, must incline toward the center, and must be affected with all
such accidents as we have deduced of the loadestone.

And lastly; seeing that iron is to a loadestone, a fit matter for it to
impresse its nature in, and easily retains that magnetike virtue; the same
effects that follow betwee^ two loadestones, must necessarily follow between a
loadestone, and a piece of iron fittly proportionated in their degrees:
excepting some little particularities, which proceed out of the naturalnesse of
the magnetike virtue to a loadestone, more then to iron.

And thus you see the nature of the loadestone summed up in gross; the
particular joints and causes whereof, you may find treated at large in the
maine discourse. Wherein we have governed our selves chiefly by the
experiences that are recorded by Gilbert and Cabeus; to whom, we remitt our
reader for a more ample declaration of particulars.

THE THREE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. A description of the two sorts of living
creatures; Plants, and Animals: and how they are framed in common to perform
vital motion.
HItherto we have endeavored to follow by a continual thridde, The connection
of the following Chapters with the precedent ones.
all such effects as we have met with among bodies, and to trace the^ in all
their windinges, and to drive them up to their very root and original source:
for the nature of our subject having been yet very common, has not exceeded
the compass and power of our search and enquiry, to descend unto the chief
circumstances and particulars belonging unto it. And indeed, many of the
conueyances whereby the operations we have discoursed of, are performed, be so
secret and abstruse, as they that look into them with less heedefullnesse and
judgment then such a matter requires, are too apt to impute them to mysterious
causes above the reach of humane nature to comprehe^d, and to calumniate them
of being wrought by occult and specifike qualities; whereof no more reason
could be given, then if the effects were infused by Angelical hands without
assistance of inferior bodies: which uses to be the last refuge of ignorant
men, who not knowing what to say, and yet presuming to say something, do fall
often upon such expressio^s, as neither themselves nor their hearers
understand; and that if they be well scanned, do imply contradictions Therefore
we deemed it a kind of necessity to strain ourselves to prosecute most of such
effects, even to their notionall connexions with rarity and density. And the
rather because it has not been our luck yet to meet with any that has had
the like design, or has done any considerable matter to ease our pains.
Which can not but make the readers journey somewhat tedious unto him to follow
all our stepps, by reason of the ruggedness, and vntrodenesse of the paths we
have walked in.

But now the effects we shall hence forward meedle withal, do grow so
particular, and do swarm into such a vast multitude of several little
joints, and wreathy labyrinthes of nature, as were impossible in so summary a
treatise, as we intend, to deliver the causes of every one of them exactly;
which would require, both large discourses and abundance of experiences to
acquitt our selves as we ought of such a task. Nor is there a like need of
doing it as formerly, for as much as concerns our design; since the causes
of them are palpably material, and the admirable artifice of them, consists
only in the Daedalean and wunderfull ingenious ordering and ranging them one
with an other.

We shall therefore entreat our Reader from this time forwards to expect only
the common sequel of those particular effects, out of the principles already
laid. And when some shall occur, that may peradventure seem at the first
sight to be enacted immediately by a virtue spiritual, and that proceeds
indiuisibly, in a different strain from the ordinary processes which we see in
bodies and in bodily things (that is by the virtues of rarity and density,
working by local motion) we hope he will be satisfied at our hands, if we
lay down a method, and trace out a course, whereby such events and operations
may follow out of the principles we have laid. Though peradventure we shall
not absolutely convince that every effect is done just as we set it down in
every particular, and that it may not as well be done by some other disposing
of parts, under the same general scope: for it is enough for our turn if we
show that such effects may be performed by corporeal agents, working as other
bodies do; without confining ourselves to an exactness in every link of the
long chain that must be wound up in the performance of them.

Concerning several co^positions of mixed bodies.
To come then to the matter; the next thing we are to employ ourselves about,
now that we have explicated the natures of those motions by means whereof
bodies are made and destroyed; and in which they are to be considered chiefly
as passive, whiles some exterior agent working upon them causes such
alterations in them, and brings them to such pass as we see in the changes
that are daily wrought among substances; is, to take a suruay of those motions
which some bodies have, wherein they seem to be not so much patients as
agents; and do contain with in themselves the principle of their own motion;
and have no relation to any outward object, more then to stir up that
principle of motion, and set it on work: which when it is once in act, has
as it were within the limits of its own kingdom, and severed from commerce
with all other bodies whatsoever, many other subalterne motions over which it
presideth.

To which purpose we may consider that among the compounded bodies whose
natures we have explicated; there are some, in whom the parts of different
complexions are so small and so well mingled together, that they make a
compound, which to our sense seems to be all of it quite through, of one
homogeneous nature; and howsoever it be divided, each part retains the entire
and co^plete nature of the whole. Others again there are, in which it is easy
to discern that the whole is made up of several great parts of very
differing natures and te^pers.

And of these, there are two kinds: the one, of such, as their differing
parts seem to have no relation to one an other, or correspondence together to
perform any particular work, in which all of them are necessary; but rather
they seem to be made what they are, by chance and by accident; and if one part
be severed from an other, each is an entire thing by it self, of the same
nature as it was in the whole; and no harmony is destroyed by such division. As
may be observed in some bodies dug out of mines, in which one may see lu^pes
of metal, oore, stone, and glass, and such different substances, in their
several distinct situations, perfectly compacted into one continuate body;
which if you divide, the glass remains what it was before, the Emerald is
still an Emerald, the silver is good silver, and the like of the other
subs^a^ces: the causes of which, may be easily deduced out of what we have
formerly said. But there are other bodies in which this manifest and notable
difference of parts, carries with it such a subordinatio^ of one of them unto
an other; as we can not doubt but that nature made such engines (if so I may
call them) by design; and intended that this variety should be in one thing;
whose unity and being what it is, should depend of the harmony of the several
differing parts, and should be destroyed by their separation. As we see in
living creatures; whose particular parts and members being once severed there
is no longer a living creature to be found among them.

Now of this kind of bodies, Two sorts of living creatures.
there are two sorts. The first is of those that seem to be one continuate
substance, wherein we may observe one and the same constant progress
throughout, from the lowest unto the highest part of it; so that, the operation
of one part is not at all different from that of an other: but the whole body
seems to be the course and through fare of one constant action, varying it
self in diverse occasions, and occurrences, according to the disposition of the
subject.

The bodies of the second sort, have their parts so notably separated one from
the other; and each of them have such a peculiar motion proper unto them, that
one might conceive they were eue^y one of them a complete distinct total thing
by it self, and that all of them were artificially tied together; were it not,
that the subordination of these parts to one an other is so great, and the
correspondence between them so strict, (the one not being able to subsist
without the other, from whom he deriueth what is needful for him; and again
being so useful unto that other and having its action and motion so fitting
and necessary for it, as without it that other can not be;) as plainly
conuinceth that the compound of all these senerall parts must needs be one
individual thing.

I remember that when I travailed in spain, I saw there two engines that in
some sort do express the natures of these two kinds of bodies. An engine to
express the first sort of living creatures.
The one at Toledo, the other at Segouia: both of them set on work by the
current of the river, in which the foundation of their machine was laid. That
at Toledo, was to force up water a great hieght from the river Tagus to the
Alcazar (the King his palace) that stands upon a high steep hill or rock,
almost perpendicular over the river. In the bottom, there was an indented
wheel, which turning round with the stream, gave motion at the same time to
the whole engine: which consisted of a multitude of little troughes or square
ladles set one over an other, in two parallele rows over against one an
other, from the bottom to the top, and upon two several divided frames of
timber. These troughes were closed at one end with a trauerse board to retain
the water from running out there; which end being bigger then the rest of the
trough, made it somewhat like a ladle: and the rest of it, seemed to be the
handle with a channel in it, the little end of which channel or trough was
open to let the water pass freely away. And these troughes were fastened by
an axeltree in the middle of them, to the frame of timber that went from the
bottom up to the top: so that they could upon that center move at liberty
either the shutt end downewardes, or the open end; like the beam of a balance.

Now at a certain position of the root wheel (if so I may call it) all one
side of the machine sunk down a little lower toward the water, and the
other was raised a little higher. Which motion was changed, as soon as the
ground wheel had ended the remnant of his revolution: for then, the side that
was lowest before, sprung up, and the other sunk down. And thus, the two
sides of the machine, were like two legs that by turns trod the water; as
in the vintage, men press grapes in a watte. Now the troughes that were
fastened to the timber which descended, turned that part of them downewardes
which was like a box shutt to hold the water: and consequently, the open end
was up in the air, like the arm of the balance unto which the lightest scale
is fastened: and in the mean time, the troughes upon the asce^ding timber,
were moved by a contrary motion; keeping their box ends aloft, and letting
the open ends incline downewardes: so that if any water were in them, it would
let it run out; whereas the others retained any that came into them.

When you have made an image of this machine in your fantasy, consider what
will follow out of its motion. You will perceive that when one leg sinketh
down toward the water, that trough which is next to the superficies of it,
putting down his box end, and dipping it a little in the water; must needs
bring up as much as it can retain, when that leg ascends: which when it is
at its height, the trough moves upon his own center; and the box end, which
was lowest, becomes now highest, and so the water runs out of it. Now the
other leg descending at the same time; it falls out that the trough on its
side, which would be a step above that which has the water in it, if they
stood in equilibrity, becomes now a step lower then it: and is so placed,
that the water which runs out of that which is aloft, falls into the head
or box of it; which no sooner has received it, but that leg on which it is
fastened, springs up, and the other descends: so that the water of the
second leg, runs now into the box of the first leg, that is next above
that which first laded the water out of the river. And thus, the troughes of
the two legs deliver their water by turns from one side to the other; and
at every remove, it gets a step vpwardes, till it comes to the top;
whiles at every ascent and descent of the whole side, the lowest ladle or
trough takes new water from the river; which ladefull follows immediately in
its ascent, that which was taken up the time before. And thus, in a little
while, all the troughes from the bottom to the top are full; unless there
happen to be some failing in some ladle: and in that case the water breaks
out there; and all the ladles above that, are dry.

The other engine, An other engine by which may be expressed the second sort of
living creatures.
or rather multitude of several engines, to perform sundry different
operations, all conducing to one work (whereas, that of Toledo, is but one
tenor of motion, from the first to the last;) is in the minte at Segouia.
Which is so artificially made, that one part of it, distendeth an ingott of
silver or gold into that breadth and thickness as is requisite to make coin
of. Which being done, it delivers the plate it has wrought, unto an other
that printeth the figure of the coin upon it. And from thence it is turned
over to an other that cutteth it according to the print, into due shape and
weight. And lastly, the several pieces fall into a reserve, in an other room;
where the officer, whose charge it is, finds treasure ready coined; without
any thing there, to inform him of the several different motions that the
silver or the gold passed before they came to that state. But if he go on the
other side of the wall, into the room where the other machines stand and are
at work, he will then discern that every one of them, which considered by it
self might seem a distinct complete engine, is but a serving part of the
whole; whose office is, to make money: and that for this work, any one of them
separated from the rest, cease to be the part of a minte, and the whole is
maimed and destroyed.

Now let us apply the consideration of these different kinds of engines, The
two former engines and some other comparisons applied to express the two
several sorts of living creatures.
to the natures of the bodies we treat of. Which I doubt not, would fit much
better, were they lively and exactly described. But it is so long since I saw
them, and I was then so very young, that I retain but a confufed and clowdy
remembrance of them: especially of the minte at Segouia, in the which there
are many more particulars then I have touched; as conueniency for refining the
oore or metal; and then casting it into ingots; and driving them into rods;
and such like: unto all which, there is little help of hands requisite, more
then to apply the matter duly at the first. But what I have said of them, is
enough to illustrate what I aim at: and though I should err in the
particulars, it is no great matter; for I intend not to deliver the history of
them: but only out of the remembrance of such note full and artificial
Masterpeeces, to frame a model in their fancies that shall read this, of
something like them; whereby they may with more ease, make a right conception
of what we are handling.

Thus then all sorts of plants, both great and small, may be compared to our
first engine of the waterworke at Toledo, for in them, all the motion we can
discern, is of one part transmitting unto the next to it, the juice which it
received from that immediately before it: so that it has one constant course
from the root (which sucketh it from the earth) unto the top of the highest
sprigge: in which, if it should be intercepted and stopped by any mayming of
the bark (the channel it ascends by) it would there break out and turn
into drops, or gum, or some such other substance as the nature of the plant
requires: and all that part of it unto which none of this juice can ascend
would dry and wither and grow dead.

But sensible living creatures, we may fittly compare to the second machine of
the minte at Segouia. For in them, though every part and member, be as it were
a complete thing of it self, yet every one, requires to be directed and putt
on in its motion by an other; and they must all of them (though of very
different natures and kinds of motion) conspire together to effect any thing
that may be, for the use and service of the whole. And thus we find in them
perfectly the nature of a mouer and a moveable; each of them moving differently
from one an other, and framing to themselves their own motions, in such sort
as is most agreeable to their nature, when that part which sets them on
work has stirred them up.

And now because these parts (the mouers, and the moved) are parts of one
whole; we call the entire thing Automatum or se mouens; or a living creature.
Which also may be fittly compared to a ioyner, or a painter, or other
crafte^man, that had his tools so exactly fitted about him, as when he had
occasion to do any thing in his trade, his tool for that action were already
in the fittest positio^ for it, to be made use of; so as without removing
himself from the place where he might sit environed with his tools, he
might, by only pulling of some little chordes, either apply the matter to any
remote tool, or any of his tools to the matter he would work upon, according
as he finds the one or the other more convenient for performance of the
action he intends.

Whereas in the other, there is no variety of motions; but one and the same,
goes quite through the body from one end of it to the other. And the passage
of the moisture through it, from one part to an other next (which is all the
motion it has) is in a manner but like the rising of water in a stille, which
by heat is made to creep up by the sides of the glass; and from thence
runs through the nose of the limb^ke, and falls into the receiver. So
that, if we will say that a plant lives, or that the whole moves it self,
and every part moves other; it is to be understood in a far more imperfect
manner, then when we speak of an animal: and the same words are attributed
to both, in a kind of aequiuocall sense. But by the way I must note, that under
the title of plants I include not zoophytes or plantanimals: that is such
creatures as though they go not from place to place, and so cause a local
motion of their whole substance, yet in their parts, they have a distinct and
articulate motion.

But to leave comparisons, How plants are framed.
and come to the proper nature of the things: let us frame a conception, that
not far under the superficies of the earth, there were gathered together
diverse parts of little mixed bodies, which in the whole sum were yet but
little: and that this little mass had some excess of fire in it, such as we
see in wett hay, or in must of wine, or in woort of beer: and that withal
the drought of it were in so high a degree, as this heat should not find
means (being too much compressed) to play his game: and that, lying there in
the bosom of the earth, it should after some little time receive its expected
and desired drink through the benevolence of the heaven; by which it being
moystened, and thereby made more pliable, and tender and easy to be wrought
upon, the little parts of fire should break loose; and they finding this
moisture a fit subject to work upon, should drive it into all the parts of
the little mass, and digesting it there should make the mass swell. Which
action, taking up long time for performance of it, in respect of the small
increase of bulk made in the mass by the swelling of it; could not be
hindered by the pressing of the earth, though lying never so weightily upon it:
according to the maxim we have above delivered, that any little force, be it
never so little; is able to overcome any great resistance, be it never so
powerful; if the force do multiply the time it works in, sufficiently to
equalife the proportions of the agent and the resistant. This increase of bulk
and swelling of the little mass, will of its own nature be toward all sides,
by reason of the fire and heat that occasioneth it (whose motion is on every
side, from the center to the circumference:) but it will be most efficacious
vpwardes, toward the air, because the resistance is least that way; both by
reason of the little thickness of the earth over it; as also by reason that the
upper part of the earth lies very loose and is exceeding porous, through the
continual operation of the sun and falling of rain upon it. It can not
choose therefore but mount to the air; and the same cause that makes it do
so, presses at the same time the lower parts of the mass, downewardes. But
what ascends to the air, must be of the hoater and more moist parts of the
fermenting mass; and what goes downewardes must be of his harder and dryer
parts proportionate to the contrary motions of fire and of earth, which
predominate in these two kinds of parts. Now this that is pushed vpwardes,
coming above ground, and being there exposed to sun and wind, contracteth
thereby a hard and rough skin on its outside; but within is more tender; in
this sort it defends it self from outward injuries of weather whiles it
mounteth: and by thrusting other parts down into the earth, it holds it
self steadfast, that although the wind may shake it, yet it can not overthrow
it. The greater this plant grows, the more juice is daily accrewed unto it,
and the heat is increased; and consequently, the greater abundance of humors
is continually sent up. Which when it begins to clogge at the top, new
humor pressing vpwardes, forces a breach in the skin; and so a new piece,
like the maine stem, is thrust out and begins on the sides, which we call
a branch. Thus is our pla^t amplifyed, till nature not being able still to
breed such strong issues, falls to works of less labor, and pusheth forth
the most elaborate part of the plants juice into more tender substances: but
especially, at the ends of the branches; where, abundant humor, but at the
first, not well concocted, grows into the shape of a button; and more and
better concocted humor succeding, it grows softer and softer (the sun
drawing the subtilest parts outwardes) excepting what the coldness of the
air and the roughness of the wind do harden into an outward skin. So then
the next parts to the skin, are tender; but the very middle of this button
must be hard and dry, by reason that the sun from without, and the natural
heat within, drawing and driving out the moisture and extending it from the
center, must needs leave the more earthy parts much shru^cke up and hardened
by their euaporating out from them: which hardening, being an effect of fire
within and without, that baketh this hard substance, incorporateth much of it
self with it, as we have formerly declared in the making of salt by force of
fire. This button, thus dilated, and brought to this pass, we call the fruit
of the plant: whose harder part, encloseth oftentimes, an other not so hard as
dry. The reason whereof is because the outward hardenesse permits no
moisture to soake in any abundance through it; and then, that which is
enclosed in it, must needs be much dried; though not so much, but that it
still retains the common nature of the plant. This drought, makes these
inner parts to be like a kind of dult; or at the least, such as may be easily
dried into dust, when they are bruised out of the husk that encloseth them. And
in every parcel of this dust, the nature of the whole resideth; as it were
contracted into a small quantity; for the juice which was first in the button,
and had passed from the root through the manifold varieties of the diverse
parts of the plant, and had suffered much concoction, partly from the sun
and partly from the inward heat imprisoned in that harder part of the fruit;
is by these passages, strainings, and concoctions, become at the length to be
like a tincture extracted out of the whole plant; and is at the last dried up
into a kind of magistery. This we call the seed: which is, of a fit nature,
by being buried in the earth and dissolved with humor, to renew and
reciprocate the operation we have thus described. And thus, you have the
formation of a Plant.

But a sensiue creature, being compared to a plant, as a plant is to a mixed
body; How sensitive creatures are formed.
you can not but conceive that he must be compounded as it were of many
plants, in like sort as a plant is of many mixed bodies. But so, that all the
plants which concur to make one animal, are of one kind of nature and
cognation: and besides; the matter, of which such diversity is to be made, must
of necessity be more humid and figurable, then that of an ordinary plant: and
the artificer which works and mouldeth it, must be more active. Wherefore we
must suppose that the mass, of which an animal is to be made, must be actually
liquid: and the fire that works upon it, must be so powerful that of its
own nature, it may be able to convert this liquide matter into such breathes
and steames, as we see do use to rise from water, when the sun or fire
works upon it. Yet if the mass were altogether as liquide as water, it would
vanish away by heat boiling it, and be dried up: therefore it must be of such
a convenient temper, that although in some of its parts it be fluide and apt
to run; yet by others it must be held together; as we see that unctuous
things for the most part are; which will swell by heat, but not fly away.

So then if we imagine a great heat to be imprisoned in such a liquour; and
that it seeks by boiling, to break out; but that the solidenesse and
viscousnesse of the substance will not permit it to euaporate: it can not
choose but comport it self in some such sort as we see butter or oil in a
frying pan over the fire, when it rises in bubbles: but much more
efficaciously; for their body is not strong enough to keep in the heat; and
therefore those bubbles fall again; whereas if it were, those bubbles would
rise higher and higher, and stretch themselves longer and longer (as when the
soape boylers do boil a strong unctuous lie into soape;) and every one of them
would be as it were a little brook, whereof the channel would be the enclosing
substance; and the inward smoke that extends it, might be compared to the
water of it: as when a glass is blown out by fire and air into a long figure.

Now we may remember, how we have said, where we treated of the production and
resolution of mixed bodies, that there are two sorts of liquide substantial
parts, which by the operation of fire are sent out of the body it works
upon; the watery, and the oily parts. For though there appear some times some
very subtle and aethereall parts of a third kind (which are the aquae
ardentes, or burning spirits;) yet in such a close distilling of circulation as
this is, they are not severed by themselves, but do accompagny the rest; and
especially the watery parts: which are of a nature, that the rising Ethereall
spirits easily mingle with, and extend themselves in it; whereby the water
becomes more efficacious, and the spirits less fugitive.

Of these liquide parts which the fire sends away, the watery ones are the
first, as being the easiest to be raised: the oily parts, rise more
difficultly; and therefore do come last. And in the same manner it happens in
this emission of brooks, the watery and oily steames will each of them fly
into different reserues; and if there arrive unto them, abundance of their
own quality, each of them must make a substance of its own nature by settling
in a convenient place, and by due concoction. Which substance after it is made
and confirmed, if more humidity and heat do press it, will again break forth
into other little channels. But when the watery and oily parts are boiled away,
there remain yet behind other more solid and fixed parts, and more strongly
incorporated with fire then either of these: which yet can not dry up into a
fiery salt, because a continual accessio^ of humor keeps them always
flowing: and so they become like a couldron of boiling fire. Which must
propagate it self as wide as either of the others; since the actiuity of it
must needs be greater then theirs (as being the source of motion unto them)
and that there wants not humidity for it to extend it self by.

And thus you see three roots of three diverse plants, all in the same plant,
proceeding by natural resolution from one primitive source. Whereof that which
is most watery, is fittest to fabricate the body and common outside of the
triformed plant; since water is the most figurable principle that is in nature,
and the most susceptible of multiplication; and by its cold is easyest to be
hardened, and therefore fittest to resist the injuries of enemy bodies that may
infest it. The oily parts, are fittest for the continuance and solidity of the
plant: for we see that viscosity and oylinesse, hold together the parts where
they abound; and they are slowly wasted by fire, but do conserve and are an
aliment to the fire that consumes them. The parts of the third kind, are
fittest for the conservation of heat: which though in them it be too violent;
yet it is necessary for working upon other parts, and for mainetaining a due
temper in them.

And thus we have armed our plant with three sorts of rivers or brooks to
run through him, with as many different streams; the one of a gentle
balsamike oil; an other, of streaming fire; and the third of a connaturall and
cooler water to irrigate and temper him. The streams of water, (as we have
said) must run through the whole fabrike of this triformed plant: and because
it is not a simple water, but warm in a good degree, and as it were a middle
substance betwixt water and air (by reason of the ardent volatile spirit that
is with it) it is of a fit nature to swell as air does; and yet withal to
resist violence in a convenient degree, as water does. Therefore, if from its
source, nature sends abundance into any one part; that part must swell and
grow thicker and shorter; and so, must be contracted that way which nature has
ordered it. Whence we perceive a means, by which nature may draw any part of
the outward fabrike, which way soever she is pleased by set instruments for
such an effect. But when there is no motion, or but little in these pipes, the
standing stream that is in a very little, though long channel, must needs be
troubled in its whole body, if any one part of it be pressed upon, so as to
receive thereby any impression: and therefore, whatsoever is done upon it,
though at the very furthest end of it; makes a commotion and sends an
impression up to its very source. Which appearing by our former discourse to be
the origin of particular and occasional motions; it is obuious to conceive
how it is apt to be moved and wrought by such an impression to set on foot
the beginning of any motion; which by natures providence is convenient for the
plant, when such an impression is made upon it.

And thus you see this plant has the virtue both of sense or feeling; that is,
of being moved and affected by externe objects, lightly striking upon it; as
also, of moving it self, to or from such an object; according as nature shall
have ordained. Which in sum is; that this plant is a sensitive creature,
composed of three sources; the heart, the brain, and the liver: whose
offspringes are the arteries, the nerves, and the veins; which are filled with
vital spirits, with animal spirits, and with blood: and by these, the animal
is heated, nourished, and made partaker of sense and motion.

Now referring the particular motions of living creatures, to an other time: we
may observe that both kinds of them, as well vegetables as animals do agree in
the nature of sustaining themselves in the three common actions of generation,
nutrition, and augmentation; which are the beginning, the progress, and the
conseruing of life. Unto which three we may add the not so much action as
passion of death; and of sickness or decay, which is the way to death.

THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. A more particular suruay of the generation of
Animals; in which is discovered what part of the animal is first generated.
TO begin then with examining how living creatures are ingendered: The
opinion that the seed contains formally every part of the parent.
our maine question shall be; whether they be framed entirely at once; or
successively, one part after an other? And if this later way; which part first?
Upon the discussion of which, all that concerns generation will be
explicated, as much as concerns our purpose in hand. To deduce this from its
origin: we may remember how our Masters tell us, that when any living creature
is passed the heat of its augmentation or growing; the superfluous nourishment
settleth it self in some appointed place of the body to serve for the
production of some other. Now it is evident that this superfluity comes from
all parts of the body, and may be said to contain in it, after some sort, the
perfection of the whole living creature. Be it how it will, it is manifest that
the living creature is made, of this superfluous moisture of the parent: which
according to the opinion of some, being compounded of several parts derived
from the several limbs of the parent; those parts when they come to be
fermented in convenient heat and moisture, do take their posture, and
situation, according to the posture and disposition of parts that the living
creature had, from whence they issued: and then they growing daily greater and
solider, (the effects of moisture and of heat;) do at the length become such
a creature as that was, from whence they had their origin.

Which, an accident that I remember, seems much to confirm. It was of a catt
that had its tail cut of when it was very young: which catt happening
afterward to have young ones, half the kittlinges proved without tails, and
the other half had them in an ordinary manner; as if nature could supply but
on the partners side, not on both. And an other particular that I saw when I
was at Argiers, makes to this purpose, which was, of a woman that having two
thumbes upon the left hand; four daugthers that she had, did all resemble her
in the same accident, and so did a little child, a girl of her eldest
daugthers; but none of her sons. Whiles I was there I had a particular
curiosity to see them all: and though it be not easily permitted unto
Christians to speak familiarly with Mohammedan women; yet the condition I was
in there, and the ciuility of the Bassha, gave me the opportunity of full view
and discourse with them: and the old woman told me, that her mother and
Grandmother had been in the same manner. But for them, it rests upon her
creditt: the others I saw my self.

The former opinion rejected.
But the opinion which these accidents seem to support; though at the first
view it seems smoothly to satisfy our inquiry, and fairly to compass the
making of a living creature: yet looking further into it, we shall find it fall
exceeding short of its promising; and meet with such difficulties, as it can
not overcome. For first, let us cast about how this compound of several
parts, that serves for the generation of a new living creature, can be
gathered from every part and member of the parent; so to carry with it in little
the complete nature of it. The meaning hereof must be, that this superfluous
aliment, either passes through all and every little part and particle of the
parents body, and in its passage receives something from them: or else, that
it receives only from all similar and great parts.

The former seems impossible, for how can one imagine that such juice should
circulate the whole body of an animal, and visit every atome of it, and retire
to the reserve where it is kept for generation; and no part of it remain
absolutely hehind, sticking to the flesh or bones that it bedeaweth; but that
still some part returns back from every part of the animal? Besides;
consider how those parts that are most remote from the channels which convey
this juice; when they are fuller of nourishment then they need, the juice
which ouerfloweth from them, comes to the next part, and settling there and
serving it for its due nourishment, drives back into the channel, that which
was betwixt the channel and it self: so that here, there is no return at
all from some of the remote pattes; and much of that juice which is rejected,
never went far from the channel it self. We may therefore safely conclude,
that it is impossible, every little part of the whole body should remitt
something impregnated and imbued with the nature of it.

But then you may peradventure say that every similar part does. If so I would
ask, how it is possible that by fermentation only, every part should regularly
go to a determinate place, to make that kind of animal; in which, every
similar part is diffused to so great an extent? How should the nature of flesh,
here become broad, there round, and take just the figure of the part it is to
cover? How should a bone, here be hollow, there be blady, and in an other part
take the form of a ribbe, and those many figures which we see of bones? And
the like we might ask of every other similar part, as of the veins and the
rest. Again; seeing it must of necessity happen, that at one time more is
remitted from one part then from an other; how comes it to pass, that in the
collection the due proportion of nature is so punctually observed? Shall we say
that this is done by some cunning artificer whose work it is to set all these
parts in their due posture; which Aristotele attributes to the seed of the
Male? But this is impossible; for all this diversity of work, is to be done
at one time, and in the same occasions: which can no more be effected by one
agent, then multiplicity can immediately proceed from unity.

But besides that there can be no Agent to dispose of the part^s when they are
gathered; it is evident that a sensitive creature may be made without any such
gathering of parts beforehand from an other of the same kind: for else how
could vermin breed out of living bodies, or out of corruption? How could ratts
come to fill ships, into which never any were brought? How could froggs be
engendered in the air? Eeles of deewy turfes, or of mudde? Toades of duckes?
Fish, of hernes? And the like. To the same purpose; when one species or kind of
animal is changed into an other; as when a catarpiller or a silkeworme becomes
a fly; it is manifest that there can be no such precedent collection of parts.

And therefore, The Authors opinion of this question.
there is no remedy; but we must seek out some other means and course of
generation, the^ this. Unto which we may be ledd, by considering how a living
creature is nourished and augmented: for why should not the parts be made in
generation of a matter like to that which makes the^ in nutritio^? If they be
augme^ted by one kind of juice that after several changes, turns at the
length into flesh and bone; and into every sort of mixed body or similar part,
whereof the sensitive creature is compounded; and that joins it self to what
it finds already made, why should not the same juice, with the same progress
of heat and moisture, and other due temperame^ts; be converted at the first
into flesh and bone though none be formerly there to join it self unto?

Let us then conclude that the juice which serves for nourishment of the
animal, being more then is requisite for that service; the superfluous part of
it, is drained from the rest, and is reserved in a place fit for it: where by
little and little through digestion, it gains strength and vigor and spirits
to it self, and becomes an homogeneall body, such as other simple compoundes
are; which by other degrees of heat and moisture, is changed into an other
kind of substance: and that again; by other temperaments, into an other. And
thus; by the course of nature, and by passing successively many degrees of
temper, and by receiving a total change in every one of them; at the length
an animal is made of such juice as afterward serves to nourish him. Their
opinion refuted, who hold that every thing contains formally all things.


But to bring this to pass a shorter way, and with greater facility; some have
been of opimon, that all similar things of whatsoever substance, are
vndiscernably mixed in every thing that is: and that to the making of any body
out of any thing; there is no more required but to gather together those parts
which are of that kind, and to separate, and cast away from them, all those
which are of a nature differing from them.

But this speculation will appear a very ayry and needelesse one, if we
consider into how many several substances the same species of a thing may be
immediately changed; or rather, how many several substances may be increased
immediately from several equal indiuiduals of the same thing; and then take
an account how much of each individual is gone into each substance which it
has so increased. For if we sum up the quantities that in the several
substances are thereby increased; we shall find that they do very much exceed
the whole quantity of any one of the indiuiduals; which should not be if the
supposition were true; for every individual shonld be but one total made up
of the several different similar parts, which increase the several
substances, that extract out of them what is of their own nature.

This will be better understood by an example: suppose that a man, a horse, a
cow, a sheep, and 500 more several species of living creatures, should make
a meal of lettuce: to avoid all perplexity in conceiving the argument, let
us allow that every one did eat a pound; and let us conceive an other pound
of this herb to be burned; as much to be putrifyed under a Cabage root; and
the like under 500 plants more of diverse species. Then cast how much of every
pound of lettuce is turned into the substances that are made of them, or that
are increased by them; as, how much ashes, one pound has made; how much water
has been distilled out of an other pound; how much a man has been increased
by a third; how much a horse by a fourth; how much earth by the putrefaction of
a fifth pound, how much a cabage has been increased by a sixth: and so go
over all the pounds that have been turned into substances of different
specieses (which may be multiplied as much as you please.) And when you have
summed up all these several quantities, you will find them far to exceed the
quantity of one pound: which it would not do, if every pound of lettuce were
made up of several different similar parts actually in it, that are extracted
by different substances of the natures of those parts; and that no substance
could be increased by it, unless parts of its nature were originally in the
lettuce.

On the other side, The Authors opinion concerning the generation of Animals
declared, and confirmed.
if we but cast our eye back upon the principles we have laid where we
discourse of the composition of bodies, we shall discern how this work of
changing one thing into an other; either in nutrition, in augmentation, or in
generation; will appear not only possible, but easy to be effected. For out of
them, it is made evident how the several varieties of solid and liquide
bodies; all differences of natural qualities, all consistences, and whatsoever
else belongs to similar bodies; resulteth out of the pure and single mixture
of rarity and density; so that to make all such varieties as are necessary,
there is no need of mingling, or of seperating any other kinds of parts: but
only an art or power to mingle in due manner, plain rare and dense bodies one
with an other. Which very action and none other (but with excellent method and
order, such as becomes the great Architect that has designed it) is performed
in the generation of a living creature: which is made of a substance, at the
first, far unlike what it afterward grows to be.

If we look upon this change in gross, and consider but the two extremes (to
wit, the first substance, of which a living creature is made; and it self in
its full perfection) I confess, it may well seem incredible how so excellent
a creature can derive its origin from so mean a principle, and so far
remote and differing from what it grows to be. But if we examine it in
retayle, and go along anatomising it in every step and degree that it
changes by; we shall find, that every immediate change is ^o near, and so
palpably to be made by the concurrent causes of the matter prepared; as we must
conclude, it can not possibly become any other thing then just what it does
become.

Take a bean, or any other seed, and putt it into the earth, and let water
fall upon it; can it then choose but that the bean must swell? The bean
swelling, can it choose but break the skin? The skin broken can it choose
(by reason of the heat that is in it) but push out more matter, and do that
action which we may call germinating? Can these germes choose but pierce the
earth in small stringes, as they are able to make their way? Can these stringes
choose but be hardened, by the compression of the earth, and by their own
nature, they being the heauyest parts of the fermented bean? And can all this
be any thing else but a root? Afterward the heat that is in the root,
mingling it self with more moisture, and according to its nature, springing
vpwardes; will it not follow necessarily, that a tender green substance twhich
we call a budd, or leaf) must appear a little above the earth; since
(endernesse, greenenesse, and ascent, are the effects of those two principles,
heat and moisture? And must not this green substance change from what it was
at the first, by the sun and air working upon it, as it grows higher;
till at the length it hardens into a stalk? All this while, the heat in
the root sublimeth up more moisture, which makes the stalk at the first
grow rank and increase in length. But when the more volatile part of that
warm juice, is sufficiently depured and sublimed, will it not attempt to
thrust it self out beyond the stalk with much vigor and smartnesse? And as
soon as it meets with the cold air in its eruption, will it not be stopped
and thickened? And new parts flocking still from the root, must they not
clogge that issue, and grow into a button, which will be a budd? This budde
being hardened at the sides, by the same causes which hardened the stalk, and
all the while the inward heat still streaming up, and not enduring to be long
enclosed, (especially when by its being stopped, it multiplyeth it self) will
it not follow necessarily that the tender budde must cleave, and give way to
that spiritual juice; which being purer then the rest (through its great
sublimation) shows it self in a purer and nobler substance then any that is
yet made; and so becomes a flower? From hence, if we proceed as we have
begun, and do weigh all circumstances; we shall see evidently, that an other
substance must needs succeed the flower, which must be hollow and contain a
fruit in it: and that this fruit must grow bigger and harder. And so, to the
last periode of the generation of new beans.

Thus by drawing the thridde carefully along through your fingers, and staying
at every knott to examine how it is tied; you see that this difficult
progress of the generation of living creatures, is obuious enough to be
comprehended; and that the steps of it are possible to be set down; if one
would but take the pains and afford the time that is necessary (less then
that Philosopher, who for so many years gave himself wholly up to the single
observing of the nature of bees) to note diligently all the circumstances in
every change of it. In every one of which the thing that was, becomes
absolutely a new thing; and is endewed with new properties and qualities
different from those it had before, as Physicians from their certain
experience, do assure us. And yet every change is such, as in the ordinary and
general course of nature (wherein nothing is to be considered, but the
necessary effects following out of such Agents working upon such patients, in
such circumstances) it is impossible that any other thing should be made of the
precedent, but that which is immediately, subsequent unto it.

Now if all this orderly succession of mutations be necessarily made in a
bean, by force of sundry circumstances and external accidents; why may it not
be conceived that the like is also done in sensible creatures; but in a more
perfect manner, they being perfecter substances? Surely the progress we have
set down is much more reasonable, then to conceive that in the meal of the
bean, are contained in little, several similar substances; as, of a root, of
a leaf, a stalk, a flower, a codde, fruit, and the rest; and that every one
of these, being from the first still the same that they shall be afterward,
do but suck in, more moisture from the earth, to swell and enlarge themselves
in quantity. Or, that in the seed of the male, there is already in act, the
substance of flesh, of bone, of sinews, of veins, and the rest of those
several similar parts which are found in the body of an animal; and that
they are but extended to their due magnitude, by the humidity drawn from the
mother, without receiving any substantial mutation from what they were
originally in the seed.

Let us then confidently conclude, that all generation is made of a fitting,
but remote, homogeneall compounded substance: upon which, outward Agents
working in the due course of nature, do change it into an other substance,
quite different from the first, and do make it less homogeneall then the first
was. And other circumstances and agents, do change this second into a third;
that third, into a fourth; and so onwardes, by successiue mutations (that
still make every new thing become less homogeneall, then the former was,
according to the nature of heat, mingling more and more different bodies
together) until that substance be produced, which we consider in the periode
of all these mutations.

And this, is evident out of many experiences: as for example in trees; the
bark which is opposed to the north wind, is harder and thicker then the
contrary side which is opposed to the south, and a great difference will
appear in the grain of the wood; even so much, that skillful people, will by
feeling and seeing a round piece of the wood after the tree is felled, tell you
in what situation it grew, and which way each side of that piece looked. And
Josephus Acosta writes of a tree in America, that on the one side being
situated toward great hills, and on the other being exposed to the hot
sun; the one half of it flourishes at one time of the year, and the other
half at the opposite season. And some such like may be the cause of the
strange effects we sometimes see of trees, flourishing or bearing leafes at an
unseasonable time of the year; as in particular, in the famous oak in the
Newforest; and in some others in our Island: in which peradventure the soil
they grow in, may do the same effect, as the winds and sun did in the tree
that Acosta makes mention of. For we daily see how some soyles are so
powerful over some kind of corn, that they will change the very nature of it;
so that, you shall reap oats or rye, after you have sown wheat there.

Which shows evidently that since the outward circumstances can make the
parts or the whole of any substance, become different from what they were at
the first; generation is not made by aggregation of like parts to presupposed
like ones: nor by a specificall worker within; but by the compounding of a
seminary matter, with the juice which accreweth to it from without, and with
the steames of circumstant bodies; which by an ordinary course of nature, are
regularly imbibed in it by degrees; and which at every degree, do change it
into a different thing, such an one as is capable to result out of the present
compound, That one substance is changed into an other.
(as we have said before) until it arrive to its full perfection.

Which yet is not the utmost periode of natures changes; for from that; for
example, from corn or an animal, it carries it on (still changing it) to be
meal or a cadauer: from thence to be bread or durte: after that to be blood or
grass. And so, still turning about her wheel (which suffers nothing to
remain long in the state it is in) she changes all substances from one into
an other. And by reiterated reuolutions, makes in time every thing of every
thing: as when of mudde she makes tadpoles, and frogs, of them; and
afterward, mudde again of the frogs: or when she runs a like progress;
from earth to worms; and from them, to flies; and the like: so changing one
animal into such an other; as in the next precedent step, the matter in those
circumstances is capable of being changed into; or rather (to say better) must
necessarily be changed into.

To confirm this by experience; I have been assured, by one who was very
exact in noting such things; that he once observed in Spain, in the spring
season, how a stick lying in a moist place, grew in tract of time to be most
of it a rotten durty matter; and that at the durty end of the stick, there
began a rude head to be formed of it by little and little; and after a while some
little legs began to discover themselves near this unpolished head, which
daily grew more and more distinctly shaped. And then, for a pretty while (for
it was in a place where he had the conueniencye, to observe daily the progress
of it, and no body came near to stir it in the whole course of it) he could
discern where it ceased to be a body of a living creature, and where it began
to be dead stiche or dirt; all in one continuate quantity or body. But every
day the body grew longer and longer, and more legs appeared, till at the
length, when he saw the animal almost finished, and near seperating it self
from the rest of the stick, he stayed then by it, and saw it creep away in a
catarpillar, leaving the stick and dirt, as much wanting of its first length,
as the worms body took up. Peradventure the greatest part of such creatures
makes their way by such steps into the world. But to be able to observe
their progress thus distinctly as this Gentleman did, happens not frequently.

Concerning the hatching of chickens, and the generation of other Animals.
Therefore, to satisfy our selves herein it were well we made our remarkes in
some creatures that might be continually in our power to observe in them the
course of nature every day and hour. Sir Ihon Heydon, the Lieutenant of his
Majesty's ordinance (that generous and knowing Gentleman; and consummate
soldier both in theory and practice) was the first that instructed me how to
do this, by means of a furnace so made as to imitate the warmeth of a sitting
hen. In which you may lay several eggs to hatch; and by breaking them at
several ages you may distinctly observe every hourly mutation in them, if you
please. The first will be, that on one side you shall find a great resplendent
clearness in the white. After a while, a little spott of red matter like bload,
will appear in the midst of that clearness fastened to the yolke: which
will have a motion of opening and shutting; so as sometimes you will see it,
and straight again it will vanish from your sight; and indeed at the first
it is so little, that you can not see it, but by the motion of it; for at every
pulse, as it opens, you may see it, and immediately again, it shuts in
such sort, as it is not to be discerned. From this red specke, after a while
there will stream out, a number of little (almost imperceptible) red veins.
At the end of some of which, in time there will be gathered together, a knotte
of matter which by little and little, will take the form of a head; and you will
ere long begin to discern eyes and a beak in it. All this while the first
red spott of blood, grows bigger and solider: till at the length, it
becomes a fleshy substance; and by its figure, may easily be discerned to be
the heart: which as yet has no other enclosure but the substance of the egg.
But by little and little the rest of the body of an animal is framed out of those
red veins which stream out all about from the heart. And in process of time,
that body incloseth the heart within it by the chest, which grows over on
both sides, and in the end meets, and closes it self fast together. After
which this little creature soon fills the shell, by converting into several
parts of itself all the substance of the egg. And then growing weary of so
straight an habitation, it breaks prison, and comes out, a perfectly formed
chicken.

In like manner: in other creatures; which in latin are called Viuipara
(because their young ones are quick in their mothers womb) we have, by the
relation of that learned and exact searcher into nature, Doctor Haruey: that
the seed of the male after his accoupling with the female, does not remain in
her womb in any sensible bulk: but (as it seems) euaporateth and
incorporateth it self, either into the body of the womb, or rather into some
more interior part, as into the seminary vessels. Which being a solid
substance, much resembling the nature of the females seed, is likely to suck
up, by the mediation of the females seed, the male seed incorporated with it,
and by incorporation, turned (as it were) into a vapor: in such sort as we
have formerly explicated how the body of a scorpion or viper, draws the
poison out of a wound. And after a certain time (Doctor Haruey noted the space
of six weeks or two months in does or hindes) these seeds distill again
into the womb; and by little and little do clarify in the midst, and a little
red specke appears in the center of the bright clearness: as we said before
of the egg.

But we should be too blame to leave our Reader without clearing that
difficulty, From whence it happens that the deficiences, or excrescences of
the parents body are often seen in their children.
which can not, choose but have sprung up in his thoughts, by occasion of the
relations we made at the entrance into this point concerning the catte whose
kittlinges were half with tails, and half without: and the woman's daughters
at Argires, that had as well as their mother excrescences upon their left
thumbes, imitating an other lesser thumb: and the like effects whensouer they
happen, which they do frequently enough.

Let him therefore remember, how we have determined that generation is made of
the blood, which being dispersed into all the parts of the body to irrigate
every one of them; and to convey fitting spirits into them from their source or
shop where they are forged; so much of it as is superaboundant to the
nourishing of those parts is sent back again to the heart to recover the
warmeth and spirits it has lost by so long a journey. By which perpetual
course of a continued circulation, it is evident that the blood in running thus
through all the parts of the body must needs receive some particular
concoction or impression from every one of them. And by consequence, if there
be any specificall virtue in one part which is not in an other, then the blood
returning from thence must be endewed with the virtue of that part. And the
purest part of this blood, being extracted like a quintessence out of the whole
mass, is reserved in convenient receptacles or vessels till there be use of
it: and is the matter or seed, of which a new animal is to be made; in whom,
will appear the effect of all the specificall virtues drawn by the blood in
its iterated courses, by its circular motion, through all the several parts
of the parents body.

Whence it follows, that if any part be wanting in the body whereof this
seed is made, or be superaboundant in it; whose virtue is not in the rest of
the body, or whose superaboundance is not allayed by the rest of the body; the
virtue of that part, can not be in the blood, or will be too strong in the
blood, and by consequence, it can not be at all, or it will be, too much in the
seed. And the effect proceeding from the seed, that is, the young animal will
come into the world sauouring of that origin; unless the mothers seed, do
supply or temper, what the fathers was defective or superaboundant in; or
contrariwise the fathers do correct the errors of the mothers. The difference
between the Authors opinion, and the former one.


But peradventure the Reader will tell us, that such a specificall virtue can
not be gotten by concoction of the blood, or by any pretended impression in it;
unless some little particles of the nourished part do remain in the blood, and
return back with it according to that maxim of Geber: Quod non ingreditur,
non immutat; no body can change an other, unless it enter into it, and mixing
it self with it do become one with it. And that so in effect, by this
explication we fall back into the opinion which we rejected.

To this I answer, that the difference is very great between that opinion and
ours; as will appear evidently, if you observe the two following assertions of
theirs. First, they affirm that a living creature is made merely by the
assembling together of similar parts, which were hidden in those bodies from
whence they are extracted in generation: whereas we say that blood coming to a
part to irrigate it, is by its passage through it, and some little stay in it,
and by its frequent returns thither, at the length transmuted into the nature
of that part: and thereby the specificall virtues of every part, do grow
greater, and are more diffused and extended.

Secondly, they say that the embroyn is actually formed in the seed, though in
such little parts as it can not be discerned, until each part have enlarged
and increased it self, by drawing unto it from the circumstant bodies more
substance of their own nature. But we say, that there is one homogeneall
substance; made of the blood, which has been in all parts of the body; and
this is the seed: which contains not in it, any figure of the animal from
which it is refined, or of the animal into which it has a capacity to be
turned (by the addition of other substances) though it have in it the virtues
of all the parts it has often run through.

By which term of specifike virtues, I hope we have said enough in sundry
places of this discourse to keep men from conceiving that we do mean any such
inconceivable quality, as modern Philosophers too frequently talk of, when
they know not what they say or think, nor can give any account of. But that it
is such degrees and such numbers, of rare and dense parts mingled together, as
constitute a mixed body of such a temper and nature: which degrees and
proportions of rare and dense parts and their mixture together, and in
corporating into one homogeneall substance, is the effect resulting from the
operations of the exterior agent, that cutteth, imbibeth, kneadeth, and
boyleth it to such a temper: which exterior agent in this case, is each
several part of the animals body, that this juice or blood runs through;
and that has a particular temper belonging to it, resulting out of such a
proportion of rate and dense parts, as we have even now spoken of; and can no
more be withheld from communicating its temper to the blood that first soaketh
into it, and soon after drayneth away again from it (according as other
succeeding parts of blood drive it on;) then a mineral channel can choose,
but communicate its virtue unto a stream of water that runs through it, and
is continually grating of some of the substance of the mineral earth, and
dissoluing it into it self.

But to go on with our intended discourse. That the heart is imbued with the
general specifike virtues of the whole body; whereby is confirmed the doctrine
of the two former paragraphes.
The seed, thus imbued with the specificall virtues of all the several parts
of the parents body, meeting in a fit receptacle the other partners seed; and
being there duly concocted, becomes first a heart: which heart in this tender
beginning of a new animal contains the several virtues of all the parts
that afterward will grow out of it, and be in the future animal; in the same
manner as the heart of a complete animal contains in it the specifike virtues
of all the several parts of its own body, by reason of the bloudes
continual resorting to it in a circle from all par^es of its body, and its
being nourished by that juice to supply the continual consumption which the
extreme heat of it must needs continually occasion in its own substance;
whereby the heart becomes in a manner the compendium or abridgement of the
whole animal.

Now this heart in the growing Embryon, being of the nature of fire* as on the
one side it streameth out its hot parts; so on the other, it sucketh oil or
fuel to nourish it self out of the adjacent moist parts* which matter
aggregated unto it, being sent abroad together with the other hot parts that
steame from it; both of them together, do stay and settle as soon as they are
out of the reach of that violent heat that would not permit them to thicken
or to rest. And there they grow into such a substance as is capable to be made
of such a mixture, and are linked to the heart by some of those stringes that
steame out from it (for those steames do likewise harden, as we showed more
particularly when we discoursed of the tender stalks of plants) and in a
word, this becomes some other part of the animal. Which thus increases by
order, one part being made after an other, until the whole living creature be
completely framed.

So that now you see; how mainely their opinion differs from ours; since they
say that there is actually in the seed, a complete living creature: for what
else is a living creature, but bones in such parts, nerves in such others,
blood and humors contained in such and such places, all, as in a living
creature? All which they say. But we make the seed to be nothing else, but one
mixed body, of one homogeneall nature throughout; consisting of such a
multiplicity of rare and dense parts; so balanced and proportioned, in number
and in magnitude of those parts; which are euenly shuffled, and alike mingled
in every little parcel of the whole substance: in such sort, that the operation
of nature upon this seed, may in a long time and with a dew process, bring
out such figures, situation, and qualities, (as fluidity, consistence,
dryness, and the like) which by much mixtion and consequent alteration, may in
the end become such as constitute a living creature of such a kind. And thus it
appears, that although other substances, and liquours, and steames are from
time to time mingled with the seed, and then with the heart, and afterward
with the other parts, as they grow on and increase; yet the maine virtue of
the ensuing animal, is first in the seed and afterward in the heart.

Whence the reason is evident, why both defects and excrescences, do pass
sometimes from the parents to the children; to wit, when nothing supplyeth the
defect or corrects the exorbitancy. Rather after this which we have said, the
difficulty will appear greater, in that such accidents are not always
hereditary from the parents; but happen only now and then, some rare times. But
the same grounds we have laid will likewise solue this objection; for seeing
that the heart of the animal, from whence the seed receives its proper nature
(as we have declared) is impregnated with the specifike virtue of each several
part of the body; it can not be doubted but that the heart will supply for any
defect happened in any part, after it has been imbued with that virtue, and is
grown to a firmness, and vigorous consistence with that virtue molded, and
deeply imbibed into the very substance of it. And although the heart should be
tincted from its first origin with an vndew virtue from some part (as it
seems to have been in the mother of those daugthers that had two thumbes upon
one hand:) yet it is not necessary that all the offspring of that parent should
be formed after that model; for the other partners seed may be more
efficacious, and predominate in the geniture, over the faulty seed of the
other parent; and then it will supply for, and correct, the others deuiation
from the general rule of nature. Which seems to be the case of that woman's
male children; for in them, the fathers seed being strongest, all their
fingers imitated the regularity of their fathers: whereas the daughters (whose
sex implies that the fathers seed was less active) carried upon some of
theirs, the resemblance of their mothers irregularity.

And in confirmation of this doctrine, we daily see that the children of
parents, who have any of their noble parts much and long distempered, whereby
there must be a great distemper in the blood (which is made and concocted by
their assistance) do seldom fail of having strong inclinations to the
distempers and diseases that either of their parents were violently subject
unto. Scarce any father or mother dies of the consumption of the lunges, but
their children inherit that disease in some measure: the like is of the stone;
the like of the gowte; the like of diseases of the brain, and of sundry
others; when they infested the parents with any notable eminency. For the blood
coming continually to the heart from such ill affected parts by its circulation
through the whole body must needs in process of time alter, and change the
temper of the heart: and then; both the heart gives a tainted impression to the
blood that must be boiled into seed; and the parts themselves do communicate
their debilities, and distempers unto it: so that it is no wonder, if the seed
do partake of such depraved qualities; since it is a maxim among Physicians,
that subsequent concoctions, can never amend or repair the faults of the
precedent ones.

Having waded thus far into this matter; and all experience agreeing that the
whole animal is not formed at once: That the heart is the first part generated
in a living creature.
I conceive there can be no great difficulty in determining what part of it is
first generated: which we have already said to be the heart; but peradventure
the reader may expect some more particular and immediate proof of it. It is
evident that all the motions and changes, which we have observed in the egg
and in the Do, do proceed from heat: and it is as certain that heat is
greatest in the center of it; from whence it disperseth it self to less and
less. It must then necessarily follow, that the part in which heat does most
abound; and which is the interior fountain of it, from whence (as from a
stock of their own) all the other parts derive theirs; must be formed first
and the others successively after it, according as they partake more or less,
of this heat; which is the Architect that mouldeth and frames them all.
Undoubtedly this can be none other, but the heart: whose motion and manner of
working, evidently appears in the twinkling of the first red spotte (which
is the first change) in the egg, and in the first matter of other living
creatures. Yet I do not intend to say, that the heart is perfectly framed, and
completely made up, with all its parts and instruments, before any other part
be begun to be made: but only the most virtuous part; and as it were the
marrow of it; which serves as a shop or a hot forge, to mould spirits in:
from whence they are dispersed abroad to form and nourish other parts that
stand in need of them to that effect.

The shootings or little red stringes that stream out from it, must surely be
arteries; through which, the blood issuing from the heart, and there made and
imbued with the nature of the seed, does run; till encountering with fit
matter, it engrosseth it self into brain, liver, lights etc. From the brain
cheifely grows the marrow, and by consequent the bones containing it, (which
seem to be originally, but the outward part of the marrow, baked and hardened
into a strong cruste by the great heat that is kept in:) as also the sinnewes;
which are the next principal bodies of strength, after the bones. The marrow
being very hot, dries the bones; and yet with its actual moisture, it
humecteth and nourishes them too, in some sort. The spirits that are sent from
the brain, do the like to the sinews. And lastly; the arteries and veins by
their blood to cherish and bedew the flesh. And thus, the whole living creature
is begun, framed, and made up.

THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER* How a Plant or Animal comes to that figure it
has.
That the figure of an Animal is produced by ordinary seco^^ causes, as well
as any other corporeal effect.
But before we go any further, and search into the operations of this animal,
a wonderful effect calls our consideration unto it: which is how a plant or
animal, comes by the figure it has, both in the whole and in every part of
it? Aristotle after he had beaten his thoughts as far as he could upon this
question, pronunced that this effect could not possibly be wrought by the
virtue of the first qualites; but that it sprung from a more divine origin.
And most of the contemplators of nature since him, do seem to agree that no
cause can be rendered of it; but that it is to be referred merely to the
specificall nature of the thing. Neither do we intend to derogate from either
of these causes; since that both divine providence is eminently shown in
contriuing all circumstances necessary for this work; and likewise the first
temperament that is in the seed, must needs be the principal immediate cause
of this admirable effect.

This latter then being supposed* our labor and endeavor will be, to unfold
(as far as so weak and dim eyes can reach) the excellency and exactness
of Gods providence, which can not be enough adored, when it is reflected upon,
and marked in the apt laying of adequate causes to produce such a figure out of
such a mixture first laid. From them so artificially ranged, we shall see this
miracle of nature to proceed; and not from an immediate working of God or
nature without convenient and ordinary instruments to mediate and effect this
configuration, through the force and virtue of their own particular natures.
Such a necessity to interest the chief workman at every turn, in particular
effects, would argue him of want of skill and providence, in the first laying
of the foundations of his designed machine: he were an improuident clockemaker,
that should have cast his work so, as when it were wound up and going, it
would require the masters hand at every hour to make the hammer strike upon
the bell. Let us not then too familiarly, and irreuerently engage the Almighty
Architect his immediate handy work in every particular effect of nature; Tali
non est dignus vindice nodus.

But let us take principles within our own kenning; That the several figures
of bodies proceed from a defect in one of the three dimensions, caused by the
concurra^ce of accidental causes.
and consider how a body has of its own nature three dimensions, (as
Mathematicians use to demonstrate:) and that the variety which we see of
figures in bodies, proceeds out of the defect of some of these dimensions in
proportion to the rest. As for example; that a thing be in the form of a
square tablette; is, for that the cause which gave it length and breadth, could
not also give it thickenesse in the same proportion: for had it been able to
give profundity as well as the other two, it had made a cube instead of a
tablette. In like manner, the form of a lamine, or very long square is
occasioned by some accident which hinders the cause from giving breadth and
thickenesse proportionable to the length. And so, other figures are made, by
reason that their causes are somewayes bound to give more of some dimension to
one part then to an other.

As for example; when water falls out of the sky, it has all the little
corners or extancies of its body grated of by the air as it rouleth and
tumbleth down in it; so that it becomes round; and continues in that form,
until that settling upon some flatt body, as grass or a leaf, it receives a
little plainness, to the proportion of its weight mastering the continuity of
it. And therefore, if the drop be great upon that plain body, it seems to
be half a sphere, or some less portion of one: but if it be a little drop
then the flatt part of it (which is that next unto the grass) is very little
and indiscernable* because it has not weight enough to press it much and
spread it broad upon the grass; and so the whole, seems in a manner to be a
sphere: but if the externe causes had pressed upon this drop, only broadwayes
and thickewayes (as when a turner makes a round pillar of a square one) then
it would have proved a cylinder, nothing working upon it to grate off any of
its length, but only the corners of the breadth and thickenesse of it.

And thus you see, how the fundamental figures (upon which all the rest are
grounded) are contrived by nature; not by the work of any particular Agent
that immediately imprinteth a determinate figure into a particular body, as
though it wrought it there at once, according to a foreconceiued design or
intelligent aim of producing such a figure in such a body: but by the
concurrence of several accidental causes, that do all of them join in
bringing the body they file and work upon, into such a shape.

Only we had like to have forgotten the reason and cause of the concaue figure
in some parts of plants: which in the ordinary course of nature we shall find
to grow from hence; that a round outside being filled with some liquor which
makes it grow higher and higher, it happens that the succeeding causes do
contract this liquor, and do harden the outside: and then, of necessity there
must be a hollow cylinder remaining in lieu of the juice which before did fill
it. As we see every day in corn, and in reeds, and in canes, and in the
stalks of many herbs: which whilst they are tender and in their first
grows, are full of juice; and become afterward hollow and dry.

The former doctrine is confirmed by several instances.
But because this discourse, may peradventure seem too much in common: it will
not be amiss to apply it to some particulars that seem^ very strange. And
first, let us examine how the rocking of concrete juices (which seems to be
such an admirable mystery of nature) is performed. Alume falls down in
lumpes, saltpeter in long ycickles, and common salt in squares; and this, not
once, or sometimes now and then; but always constantly in the same order.

The reason of these effects will easily be reduced out of what we have said*
for if all three be dissolved in the same water, alume being the grossest
falls first and fastest: and being of an unctuous nature, the first part
which falls does not harden, till the second comes to it; whereby this
second sticks to the first and crusheth it down; and this is served in the
same manner by the third; and so goes on, one part squeezing an other, till
what is undermost grow hard enough to resist the weight of new falling parts;
or rather till no more do fall, but the liquor they were dissolved in, is
delivered of them all; and then they harden in that figure they were compressed
into.

As for salt, which descends in the second place: that swimmeth first upon
the water; and there, gets its figure; which must be equally long and broad,
because the water is indifferent to those two positions; but its thickenesse is
not equal to its other two dimensions, by reason that before it can attain to
that thickness, it grows too heavy to swim any longer; and after it is
increased to a certain bulk, the weight of it carries it down to the
bottom of the water, and consequently it can increase no more: for it
increases by the joining of little parts unto it as it swimmeth on the top
of the water.

The saltpeter falls last: which being more difficult to be figured then the
other two, because it is more dry then either of them (as consisting chiefly
of earthy and of fyry parts,) is not equally increased, neither in all three,
nor in two dimensions, but has its length exceeding both its breadth and
thickness: and its lightness, makes it fall last, because it requires least
water to sustain it.

To give the causes of the figures of diverse mixtes, and particularly of some
precious stones, (which seem to be cast by nature in exactest mouldes) would
oblige us to enter into the particular manner of their generation: which were
exceeding hard, if not impossible, for us to do, by reason that Authors have
not left us the circumstances upon which we might ground our judgment
concerning them, so particularly described as were necessary; nor our selves
have met with the commodity of making such experiences, and of searching so
into their beds as were requisite, to determine solidely the reasons of them.
And indeed I conceive that oftentimes the relations which others have recorded
of their generation, would rather misseleade then assist us: since it is very
familiar in many men, to magnify the exactenesse of nature in framing effects
they fansye to themselves, when to make their wonder appear more just; they
will not fail to set of their story, with all aduantageous circumstances, and
help out what wants a little or comes but near the mark.

But to come closer to our purpose; that is, to the figures of living things;
The same doctrine applied to Plants.
we see that roots in the earth, are all of them figured almost in the same
fashion: for the heat residing in the midst of them, pusheth every way, and
thereupon, some of them do become round, but others more long then round,
according to the temper of the ground, or to the season of the year, or to the
weather that happens: and this, not only in diverse kinds of roots, but eue^
in several of the same kind. That part of the plant which mounteth vpwardes,
is for the most part round and long; the cause whereof is evident, for the
juice which is in the middle of it working vpwardes (because the hardness of
the bark will not let it out at the sides) and coming in more and more
abundance (for the reasons we have above delivered) increases that part
equally every way but vpwardes; and therefore, it must be equally thick and
broad, and consequently round: but the length will exceed either of the other
dimensions; because the juice is driven up with a greater force and in more
quantity then it is to the sides. Yet the broadnesse and thickenesse are not so
exactly uniform, but that they exceed a little more at the bottom then at
the top; which is occasioned partly by the contracting of the juice into a
narrower circuit the further it is from the source; and partly by reason of
the branches; which shooting forth, do convey away a great part of the juice
from the maine stock.

Now if we consider the matter well; The same doctrine declared in leafes of
trees.
we shall find, that what is done in the whole tree the very same is likewise
done in every little leaf of it; for a leaf consists of little branches
shooting out from one greater branch, which is in the middle: and again, other
lesser branches are derived from those second branches: and so still lesser and
lesser, till they weaue themselves into a close work, as thick as that which
we see women use to fill up with silk or crewell, when in tenteworke they
embroader leafes or flowers upon canneuas: and this again; is covered and as
it were glewed over, by the humor which sticking to these little thriddes,
stops up every little vacuity, and by the air is hardened into such a skin
as we see a leaf consists of.

And thus it appears how an account may be given of the figure of the leafes,
as well as of the figure of the maine body of the whole tree: the little
branches of the leaf, being proportionate in figure to the branches of the
tree it self (so that each leaf seems to be the tree in little;) and the
figure of the leaf depending of the course of these little branches, so that if
the greatest branch of the tree be much longer then the others, the leaf will
be a long one: but if the lesser branches spread broadwayes; the leaf will
likewise be a broad one; so far, as even to be notched at the outsides,
round about it, in great or little notches, according to the proportion of the
trees branches. These leafes, when they first break out, are foulded inwardes,
in such sort as the smallness and roundnesse of the passage in the wood
through which they issue, constrayneth them to be; where nevertheless the
dryness of their parts, keep them asunder; so that one leaf does not
incorporate it self with an other: but as soon as they feel the heat of the
sun (after they are broken out into liberty) their tender branches by little
and little grow more straight; the concaue parts of them drawing more toward
the sun, because he extracteth and sucketh their moisture from their hinder
parts into their former, that are more exposed to his beams; and thereby the
hinder parts are contracted and grow shorter, and those before grow longer.
Which if it be in excess, makes the leaf become crooked the contrary way; as
we see in diverse flowers, and in sundry leafes during the summers heat:
wittenesse, the yuy, roses full blown, tulipes, and all flowers in form of
bells; and indeed all kinds of flowers whatsoever; when the sun has
wrought upon them to that degree we speak of, and that their joining to their
stalk, and the next parts thereunto, allow them scope to obey the impulse of
those outward causes. And when any do vary from this rule; we shall as plainly
see other manifest causes producing those different effects, as now we do these
working in this manner.

As for fruits though we see that when they grow at liberty upon the tree,
they seem to have a particular figure alloted them by nature: yet in truth, it
is the ordered series of natural causes and not an intrinsecall formatiue
virtue which breeds this effect, as is evident by the great power which art
has to change their figures at pleasure; whereof you may see examples enough
in Campanella; and every curious gardner can furnish you with store. The same
applied to the bodies of Animals.


Out of these, and such like principles a man that would make it his study with
less trouble or tediousness, then that patient contemplator of one of natures
little works (the Bees) whom we mentioned a while agone, might without all
doubt trace the causes in the growing of an Embryon, till he discovered the
reason of every bones figure; of every notable hole or passage that is in them;
of the ligaments by which they are tied together; of the membranes that cover
them; and of all the other parts of the body. How, out of a first mass, that
was soft, and had no such parts distinguishable in it, every one of the^ came
to be formed, by contracting that mass in one place, by dilating it in an
other, by moystening it in a third, by drying it here, hardening it there; Vt
his exordia primis,
Omnia, and ipse tener hominis concreuerit orbis.
till in the end this admirable machine and frame of man's body, was composed
and fashioned up by such little and almost insensible steps and degrees. Which
when it is looked upon in bulk, and entirely formed, seems impossible to
have been made, and to have sprung merely out of these principle, without an
Intelligence immediately working and moulding it at every turn, from the
beginning to the end.

But withal, In what sense the Author does admit of Vis formatrix.
we can not choose but break out into an extasye of admiration and hymns of
praise (as great Galen did upon the like occasion) when we reverently consider
the infinite wisdom; and deep farrelooking providence of the allseeing
Creator and orderer of the world, in so punctually adapting such a multitude
and swarm of causes to produce by so long a progress so wonderful an effect:
in the whole course of which, if any one, the very least of them all, went
never so little awry, the whole fabrike would be discomposed and changed from
the nature it is designed unto.

Out of our short suruay of which (answerable to our weak talents, and slender
experience) I persuade my self it appears evident enough, that to effect
this work of generation, there needs not be supposed a forming virtue or Vis
formatrix of an unknown power and operation, as those that consider things
soddainely and but in gross, do use to putt. Yet, in discourse, for
conueniency and shortenesse of expression we shall not quite banish that term
from all commerce with us; so that what we mean by it, be rightly understood;
which is, the complexe, assemblement, or chain of all the causes, that
concur to produce this effect; as they are set on foot, to this end by the
great Architect and Moderator of them, God almighty, whose instrument nature
is: that is, the same thing, or rather the same things so ordered as we have
declared, but expressed and comprised under an other name.

THE SIX AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. How motion begins in living creatures. And
of the motion of the heart; circulation of the blood; Nutrition; Augmentation;
and corruption or death.
Fromwhence does proceed the primary motion and growth in Plants.
But we must not take our leave of this subject, until we have examined, how
motion begins in living things; as well plants as sensitive creatures. We
can readily pitch upon the part we are to make our observations in, for
retriuing the origin of this primary motion: for having concluded that the
roots of plants, and the hearts of animals are the parts of them, which are
first made, and from which the forming virtue is derived to all the rest, it
were unreasonable to seek for their first motion any where else.

But in what manner, and by what means, does it begin there? For roots, the
difficulty is not great; for the moisture of the earth, pressing upon the
seed, and soaking into it; the hot parts of it which were imprisoned in cold
and dry ones, are thereby stirred up and set on work: then they mingling
themselves with that moisture, do ferment and distend the whole seed; till
making it open, and break the skin more juice comes in: which incorporating
it self with the heat, those hot and now moist parts will not be contained
in so narrow a room as at the first; but struggling to get out on all sides,
and striving to enlarge themselves; they thrust forth little parts: which, if
they stay in the earth, do grow white and make the root: but those which
asce^d, and make their way into the air, being less compressed, and more full
of heat and moisture, do turn green: and as fast as they grow up, new
moisture coming to the root, is sent up through the pores of it: and this
fails not, until the heat of the root it self does fail. For it being
the nature of heat to rarify and eleuate, there must of necessity be caused in
the earth a kind of sucking in of moisture into the root from the next parts
unto it to fill those capacities which the dilating heat has made that else
would be empty, and to supply the rooms of those which the heat continually
sends vpwardes: for the moisture of the root, has a continuity with that in
the earth, and therefore, they adhere together (as in a pumpe; or rather, as in
filtration) and do follow one an other when any of them are in motion, and
still the next must needs come in, and fill the room, where it finds an
empty space immediate to it. The, like of which happens to the air when we
breath; for our lunges being like a bladder; when we open them the air must
needs come in, to fill that capacity which else would be empty: and when we
shutt them again; as in a pair of bellows we putt it out.

This may suffice, Monsieur des Carts his opinion touching the motion of the
heart.
concerning the primary motion of roots: but in that of the heart; we shall
find the matter not altogether so plain Monsieur des Carts following herein
the steps of the learned and ingenious Haruey, who has invented and teaches
that curious and excellent doctrine of the circulation of the blood; (as
indeed, what secret of nature can be hidden from so sharp a wit, when he
applies himself to penetrate into the bottom of it:) explicateth the matter
much after this sort. That the heart, within, in the substance of it, is like a
hollow cauerne; in whose bottom, were an hot stone; on which should drop as
much liquour as the fiery stone could blow into smoke; and this smoke or
steame, should be more then the cave could contain; wherefore it must break
out; which to do, it presses on all sides to get an issue or door to let it
out: it finds of two sorts; but only, one kind of them, will serve it for
this purpose; for the one sort of these doors, opens inwardes, the other,
outwardes: which is the cause that the more it strives to get out, the faster
it shuts the doors of the first kind; but by the same means, it beats
back the other doors; and so gets out.

Now when it is gone quite out of this cauerne; and consequently leaves it to
its natural disposition; whereas before it violently stretched it out; and by
doing so kept close the doors that open inwardes: then all the parts of it
begin to slacken; and those doors give way unto new liquour to drop in
anew; which the heat in the bottom of the heart, rarifyeth again into smoke
as before. And thus he conceiueth the motion of the heart to be made: taking the
substance of it to be (as I may say) like unto limber leather, which upon the
filling of it with blood and steame, opens and dilateth it self; and at the
going of it out, it shrinketh together like a bladder.

But I doubt, The former opinion rejected.
this explication will not go through the difficulty, for first both Galen and
Doctor Haruey do show, that as soon as the blood is come into the heart, it
contracteth it self: which agrees not with Monsieur des Carts his
supposition; for in his doctrine, there appears no cause why it should
contract it self when it is full: but contrariwise, it should go on dilating
it self, until enough of the blood which droppeth into the heart, were
converted into steame, to force the doors open* that so, it may gain an issue
thence, and a passage into the body.

Next; Monsieur des Carts supposes that the substance of the heart is like a
bladder, which has no motion of it self; but opens and shuts, according
as what is within it, stretches it out, or permits it to shrink and fall
together again. Whereas, Doctor Haruey proves that when it is full, it
compresseth it self by a quick and strong motion, to expel that which is in
it: and that when it is empty, it returns to its natural dilatation, figure
and situation, by the ceasing of that agents working, which caused its motion.
Whereby it appears to be of such a fibrous substance, as has a proper motion
of its own.

Thirdly; I see not how this motion can be proportional: for the heart must
needs open and be dilated, much faster then it can be shutt and shrink
together; there being no cause putt to shutt it and to bring it to its utmost
periode of shrinking; other then the going out of the vapor, whereby it
becomes empty: which vapor not being forced by any thing but by its own
inclination; it may peradventure, at the first when there is abundance of it,
swell and stretch the heart forcibly out; but after the first impulse and breach
of some part of it out of the cauerne that enclosed it; there is nothing to
drive out the rest, which must therefore steame very leisurely out.

Fourthly; what should hinder the blood from coming in, before the heart be
quite empty and shrunk to its lowest pitch? For as soon as the vapor
yeildeth within, new blood may fall in from without; and so keep the heart
continually dilated, without ever suffering it to be perfectly and completely
shutt.

Fifthly; the heart of a viper laid upon a plate in a warm place will beat 24
hours; and much longer, if it be carefully taken out of its body, and the
weather be warm and moist: and it is clear, that this is without succession
of blood to cause the pulses of it. L^kewise, the severed members of living
creatures, will stir for some time after they are parted from their bodies:
and in them, we can suspect no such cause of motion.

Sixthly; in Monsieur des Carts his opinion, the heart should be hardest when
it is fullest; and the eruption of the steame out of it, should be strongest
at the beginning: whereas experience shows, that it is softest when it is
at the point of being full; and hardest when it is at the point of being
empty; and the motion strongest, toward the end.

Seventhly; in Monsieur des Carts his way, there is no agent or force strong
enough to make blood gush out of the heart: for if it be the steame only that
opens the doors, nothing but it will go out; and the blood will still
remain behind, since it lies lower then the steame, and further from the
issue that lets it out: but Doctor Haruey finds by experience (and
teaches how to make this experience) that when a wound is made in the heart,
blood will gush out by spurtes at every shooting of the heart.

And lastly; if Monsieur des Carts his supposition were true, the arteries
would receive nothing but steames; whereas it is evident that the chief filler
of them is blood.

The Authors opinion concerning the motion of the heart.
Therefore we must enquire after an other cause of this primary motion of a
sensitive creature, in the beatings of its heart. Wherein, we shall not be
obliged to look far; for seeing we find this motion and these pulsations, in
the heart when it is separated from the body: we may boldly and safely
conclude, that it must of necessity be caused by something that is within the
heart it self. And what can that be else, but heat or spirits imprisoned in a
tough viscous blood; which it can not so presently break through to get out;
and yet can stir within it, and lift it up?

The like of which motion may be observed, in the heauing up, and sinking down
again of loose moulde thrown into a pit, into which much ordure has been
emptied. The same cause, of heat in the earth* makes mountains and sands to
be cast up in the very sea: so, in frying, when the pan is full of meat, the
bubbles rise and fall at the edges: treacle, and such strong compounded
substances; whiles they ferment, do lift themselves up, and sink down again,
after the same manner as the vipers heart does: as also do the bubbles of barme,
and must of wine: and short ends of lute stringes baked in a iuicy pie, will
at the opening of it move in such sort, as they who are ignorant of the feate
will think there are magots in it: and a hot loaf, in which quicke-syluer is
enclosed, will not only move thus* but will also leap about, and skippe from
one place to an other, like the head or limb of an animal (very full of
spirits) newly cut off from its whole body.

And that this is the true cause of the hearts motion, appears evidently.
First, because this virtue of moving, is in every part of the heart; as you will
plainly see if you cut into several pieces a heart, that conserueth its
motion long after it is out of the animals belly* for every piece will move; as
Doctor Haruey assures us by experience, and I my self have often seen, upon
occasion of making the great antidote, in which vipers hearts is a principal
ingredient. Secondly the same is seen in the auricles and the rest of the
heart; whose motions are several; though so near together, that they can
hardly be distinguished. Thirdly; Doctor Haruey seems to affirm that the
blood which is in the ears of the heart, has such a motion of it self,
precedent to the motion of the ears it is in: and that this virtue remains
in it for a little space after the ears are dead. Fourthly; in touching a heart
which had newly left moving, with his fingar wetted with warm spittle, it
began to move again, as testifying that heat and moisture, made this motion.
Fifthly; if you touch the vipers heart over with vinegar, with spirit of wine,
with sharp white wine, or with any piercing liquour; it presently dies: for
the acuteness of such substances, pierces through the viscous blood, and
makes way for the heat to get out.

But this first mouer of an animal, must have something from without to stir
it up; else, the heat would lie in it, as if it were dead; and in time would
become absolutely so. In eggs, you see this exterior mouer, is the warmeth of
the hen hatching the^. And in Embryo^s; it is the warmeth of the mothers
womb. But when in either of them, the heart is co^pletely formed, and is
enclosed in the breast; much heat is likewise enclosed there, in all the parts
near about the heart; partly made by the heart it self; and partly caused by
the outward heat, which helped also to make that in the heart: and then
although the warmeth of the hen or of the mothers womb, do forsake the heart;
yet this stirs up the native h^^te within the heart and keeps it in motion,
and makes it feed still upon now fuel, as fast as that which it works
upon decays.

The motion of the heart depends originally of its fibers irrigated by blood.
But to express more particularly how this motion is effected; we are to note,
that the heart has in the ventricles of it, three sorts of fibers: the first
go long ways or are straight ones, on the sides of the ventricles from the
thick basis of the heart, toward the little tippe or cone of it: the second,
go cross or roundwayes about the ventricles within the heart: and the third,
are transuersall or thwart ones. Next we are to remember, that the heart is
fixed to the body by its base; and hangs loose at the cone. Now then, the
fibers being of the nature of such things as will swell and grow thicker by
being moistened, and consequently shrink up in length and grow shorter, in
proportion to their swelling thicker (as you may observe in a loosewrought
hempen roape) it must of necessity follow, that when the blood falls into the
heart (which is of a kind of spungye substance) the fibers being therewith
moystened, they will presently swell in roundnesse and shrink in length.

Next we are to note, that there is a double motion in the heart: the one of
opening, which is called, Diastole; the other, of shutting, which is termed
Systole. And although Doctor Haruey seems to allow the opening of the heart to
be no motion; but rather a relenting from motion; nevertheless (me thinks)
it is manifest, that it is not only a co^plete motion, but in a manner the
greater motion of the two, though indeed the less sensible; because it is
performed by little and little; for in it the heart is drawn by violence from its
natural positio^; which must be (as it is of all heavy things) that by which
it approaches most to the ce^ter of gravity; and such a position we see it
gains by the shutting of it.

Now to declare how both these motions are effected, we are to consider how at
the end of the systole the heart is voyded and cleansed of all the blood that
was in it; whence it follows, that the weight of the blood which is in the
auricles, pressing upon the Valuulas or doors that open inwardes, makes its
way by little and little into the ventricles of the heart where it must
necessarily swell the fibers; and they being swelled must needs draw the heart
into a roundish and capacious figure; which the more it is done, the more blood
comes in; and with greater violence. The following effect of which must be,
that the weight of the blood joined to the weight of the heart it self, and
particularly of the conus or tippe (which is more solid and heavy in
proportion to its quantity, then the rest of the heart) must necessarily set
the heart into the natural motion of descending according to its gravity: the
which consequently, is performed by a lively ierke, whereby it comes to pass
that the tippe of our heart, does as it were spring up toward our breast: and
the blood is spurted out by other Voluulae (that open outwardes) which are
aptly disposed to be opened upon such a motion, and do convey it to the
arteries.

In the course of which motion, we may note how the figure of our heart
contributeth to its springing up toward our breast; for the line of distance
which is between the basis and the tippe being longer on that side which is
toward the back, then on the other which is toward the breast,; it must
happen that when the heart shuts and straighteneth it self, and thereby
extends it self to its length, the tippe will butte out forewardes toward
the breast.

Against this doctrine of the motion, An objection answered against the former
doctrine.
and of the systole and diastole of the heart, it may be objected, that beasts
hearts do not hang like a man's heart, straight downewardes; but rather
horizontally, and therefore this motion of gravity can not have place in them:
nevertheless, we are sure they beat, and do open and shutt, regularly.
Besides, if there were no other cause but this of gravity for the motion of a
man's heart, it would follow that one who were set upon his head or hung by his
heels, could not have the motion of his heart: which, posture nevertheless, we
see men remain in for a pretty while, without any extreme prejudice.

But these difficulties are easily answered; for whether beasts hearts do lie
directly horizontally, or whether, the basis be fastened some what higher then
the tippe reaches, and so makes their heart hang inclining downewardes; still
the motion of gravity has its effect in them. As we may perceive in the heart
of a viper lying upon a plate, and in any other thing that of it self swells
up, and straight again sinketh down: in which we can not doubt, but that the
gravity fighting against the heat, makes the elevated parts to fall, as the
heat makes them rise.

And as for the latter; it is evident that men can not stay long in that
posture without violent accidents; and in any little while we see that the blood
comes into their face and other parts which naturally are situated higher;
but by this position become lower then the heart: and much time is not required,
to have them quite disordered and suffocated; the blood passing through the
heart with too much quickenesse, and not receiving due concoction there; and
falling thence in too great abundance into places that can not with
conueniency entertayne it.

But you will insist, and ask, whether in that posture the heart does move or
no, and how? And to speak by guess in a thing I have not yet made experiences
enough to be thoroughly informed in; I conceive without any great scrupule that
it does move. And that it happens thus; that the heart hanging somewhat loose,
must needs tu^ble over, and the tippe of it lean downewardes some way or
other; and so lie in part like the heart of a beast; though not so conveniently
accommodated: and then the heat which makes the viscous blood that is in the
substance of the heart to ferment will not fail of raising it up: whereupon,
the weight of that side of the heart, that is lifted up, will presently press
it down again. And thus, by the alternatiue operations of these causes, the
heart will be made to open, and shutt it self, as much as is necessary for
admitting and thrusting out, that little and disorderly coming blood, which
makes its course through it, for that little space wherein the man continues
in that position.

The circulatio^ of the blood, and other effects that follow the motion of the
heart.
Now from these effects wrought in the heart by the moystening of the fibers; two
other effects do proceed: the one is, that the blood is pushed out of every
corner of the heart with an impetuousnesse or velocity. The other is, that by
this motion the spirits, which are in the ventricles of the heart, and in the
blood that is even then heated there, are more and deeper pressed into the
substance of the heart; so that you see, the heart imbibeth fresh vigor, and is
strengthened with new spirits, whiles it seems to reject that which should
strengthen it.

Again, two other effects follow this violent eiection of the blood out of the
heart. The one is, that for the present, the heart is entirely cleansed of all
remainders of blood none being permitted to fall back to annoy it. The other
is, that the heart finding it self dry; the fibers do relent presently into
their natural positio^ and extensio^, and the valuulae that open inwardes,
fall flatt to the sides of the ventricles, and consequently, new blood droppeth
in. So that in conclusion, we see, the motion of the heart, depends originally
of its fibers irrigated by the blood: and not from the force of the vapor as
Monsieur des Carts supposes.

This motion of the heart, drives the blood (which is warmed and spiritualised,
by being boiled in this furnace) through due passages into the arteries, which
from the^ runs into the veins, and is a maine cause of making and
nourishing other parts; as the liver, the lu^gs, the brains, and whatsoever
else depends of those veins and arteries through which the blood goes.
Which being ever freshly heated, and receiving the tincture of the hearts nature
by passing through the heart; wheresoever it stays and curdleth, it grows
into a substance of a nature conformable to the heart, though every one of such
substances, be of exceeding different conditions in themselves, the very
grossest excrements, not being excluded from some participation of that nature.

But if you desire to follow the blood all along every step, in its progress
from the heart round about the body, till it return back again to its center,
Doctor Haruey who most acutely teaches this doctrine, must be your guide. He
will show you how it issues from the heart by the arteries; from whence it
goes on warming the flesh, until it arrive some of the extremities of the
body: and by then it is grown so cool (by long absence from the fountain of
its heat; and by euaporating its own stock of spirits, without any new
supply) that it has need of being warmed a new; it finds it self returned
back again to the heart, and is there heated again, which return is made by
the veins, as its going forwards, is performed only by the arteries.

And were it not for this continual circulation of the blood and this new
heating it in its proper cauldron, the heart; it could not be avoided, but that
the extreme parts of the body would soon grow cold and dye. For flesh, being
of it self of a cold nature (as is apparent in dead flesh) and being kept
warm, merely by the blood that bedeweth it; and the blood likewise being of a
nature that soon grows cold, and congealeath, unless it be preserved in due
temper by actual heat working upon it: how can we imagine that they two
singly, without any other assistance, should keep one an other warm
(especially in those parts, that are far distant from the heart) by only
being together? Surely, we must allow the blood, (which is a substance fit for
motion) to have recourse back to the heart, (where only it can be supplied with
new heat and spirits) and from thence be driven out again by its pulses or
strokes; which are his shuttinges. And as fast as it flies out, (like a
reeking thick steame, which rises from perfumed water falling upon a heated
pan) that which is next before it, must fly yet further on, to make way for
it; and new arteriall blould still issuing forth at every pulse, it must still
drive on what issued thence the last precedent pulse, and that part must press
on what is next before it. And thus it fares with the whole mass of blould;
which having no other course, but in the body, it must at length run round,
and by new vessels (which are the veins) return back unto the place from
whence it issued first: and by that time it comes thither, it is grown cool
and thick, and needs a vigorous restoration of spirits and a new rarifying;
that then, it may warm the flesh, it passes again through: without which it
would soddainely grow stone cold; as is manifest, if by tying or cutting the
arteries, you intercept the blould, which is to nourish any part: for then that
part, grows presently cold and benumbed.

But referring the particulars of this doctrine unto Doctor Haruey (who has
both invented and perfected it) our task in hand calls upon us to declare in
common the residue of motions that all living creatures agree in. Of Nutrition.
How generation is performed, we have determined in the past discourse. Our
next consideration then ought to be of Nutrition and Augmentation. Between
which there is very little difference in the nature of their action; and the
difference of their names is grounded more upon the different result in the
periode of them, then upon the thing it self: as will by and by appear. Thus
then is the progress of this matter: as soon as a living creature is formed,
it endeavors straight to augment it self; and employeth it self only about
that; the parts of it being yet too young and tender* to perform the other
functions which nature hath^ produced them for. That is to say; the living
creature, at its first production, is in such a state and condition as it is
able to do nothing else, but (by means of the great heat that is in it) to
turn into its own substance the abundance of moisture that ouerfloweth it.

They who are curious in this matter, do tell us that the performance of this
work consists in five actions; which they call, Attraction, Adhesion,
Concoction, Assimilation and Unition. The nature of attraction, we have already
declared when we explicated, how the heart and the root sends juice into the
other parts of the animal or plant: for they abounding in themselves with
inward heat, and besides that, much other circumstant heat working likewise
upon them; it can not be otherwise, but that they must needs suck and draw
into them, the moisture that is about them.

As for adhesion, the nature of that is likewise explicated, when we showed,
how such parts as are moist, but especially aereall or oily ones (such as are
made by the operation of a soft and continual heat) are catching and do
easily stick unto any body they happen to touch: and how a little part of
moisture between two dry parts, joins them together. Upon which occasion,
it is to be noted that parts of the same kind do join best together: and
therefore the powder of glass is used to cime^t broken glass with all (as we
have touched some where above:) and the powder of marble to ciment marble with;
and so of other bodies: in like manner, Alchymistes find no better expedient to
extract a small proportion of silver mixed with a great one of gold, then to
putt more silver to it; nor any more effectual way to get out the heart, or
tincture, or spirits of any thing they distill or make an extract of, then to
infuse its own phlegm upon it, and to water it with that. Now whether the
reason of this be, that continuity, because it is an unity, must be firmest
between parts that are most conformable to one an other, and consequently, are
most one among th^mselues; or whether it be for some other hidden cause,
belongs not to this place to discourse: but in fine so it is. And the
adhesion is strongest of such parts as are most conformable to that which
needs increase and nourishment; and that is made up by the other three
actions.

Of which, concoction is nothing else but a thickening of that juice which
already sticks to any part of the animals body, by the good digestion that
heat makes in it. And assimilation, is the effect of concoction: for this
juice being used in the same manner, as the first juice was, that made the
part, whereunto this is to be joined; it can not choose but become like unto it
in substance. And then, there being no other substance between, it is of it
self united unto it without any further help. Of Augmentation.


Hitherto, this action belongs to nutrition. But if on the one side, the
heat and spirituality of the blood; and on the otherside the due temper and
disposition of the part be such, as the blood is greedily sucked into the part,
which thereby swells to make room for it, and will not let it go away, but
turns it into a like substance as it self is; and in greater quantity then
what is consumed and decays continually by transpiration: then this action is
called likewise augmentation Which Galen explicateth by a sport the boys of
Ionia used; who were accustomed to fill a bladder with wind; and when they
could force no more into it, they would rub the bladder, and after rubbing of
it, they found it capable of receiving new breath: and so they would proceed
on, until their bladder were as full as by use they knew it could be made. Now
(says he) nature does the like, by filling our flesh, and other parts with
blood; that is to say, it stretches the fibers: but she has over and above a
power which the boys had not; namely to make the fibers as strong after they
are stretched to their utmost extension, as they were before they were
extended: whence it happens that she can extend them again, as well as at
the first; and this without end, as far as concerns that part.

The reason whereof is, because she extends them by means of a liquour which
is of the same nature, as that whereof they were made at the first: and from
thence it follows, that by concoction that liquour settleth in the parts of
the fibers which have most need; and so makes those parts as great in the
length they are extended unto, as they were in their shortness, before they
were drawn out. Whereby the whole part of the animal, wherein this happens,
grows greater: and the like being done in every part, as well as in any one
single one, the whole animal becomes bigger; and is in such sort augmented.

Out of all which discourse, Of death and sickness.
we may collect that in the essential composition of living creatures, there
may peradventure be a physical possibility for them to continue always
without decay; and so, become immortal, even in their bodies, if all hurtful
accidents coming from without might be prevented. For seeing that a man,
besides the increase which he makes of himself, can also impart unto his
children a virtue, by which they are able to do the like, and to give again
unto theirs as much as they received from their fathers: it is clear, that
what makes him dye, is no more the want of any radical power in him, to
increase or nourish himself; then in fire, it is the want of power to burn,
which makes it go out. But it must be some accidental want, which Galen
attributes chiefly to the dryness of our bones, and sinews etc. as you may
in him see more at large; for dryness, with density, allows not easy
admittance unto moisture: and therefore, it causes the heat which is in the
dry body, either to euaporate or to be extinguished: and want of heat, is
that, from whence the failing of life proceeds: which he thinks can not be
prevented by any art or industry.

And herein, God has expressed his great mercy and goodness toward us: for
seeing that by the corruption of our own nature, we are so immersed in flesh
and blood as we should for ever delight to wallow in their mire without raising
our thoughts at any time above that low and brutall condition: he has engaged
us by a happy necessity, to think of and to provide for a nobler and far
more excellent state of living that will never change or end.

In pursuance of which inevitable ordinance; man (as if he were grown weary
and out of love with this life; and scorned any term in his farm here, since
he can not purchase the fee simple of it) hasteneth on his death by his unwary
and rash use of meats, which poison his blood: and then, his infected blood
passing through his whole body, must needs in like manner, taynt it all at
once. For the redress of which mischief, the assistance of Physike is made
use of: and that, passing likewise the same way purifyeth the blood, and
recouereth the corruption occasioned by the peccant humor; or other whiles
gathering it together, it thrusts and carries out that evil guest by the
passages contrived by nature to bisburden the body of unprofitable or hurtful
superfluities.

THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. Of the motions of sense; and of the sensible
qualities in general; and in particular of those which belong to Touch, Taste,
and Smelling.
The co^nexion of the subsequent chapters with the precedent.
Having thus brought on the course of nature as high as living creatures (whole
chief specieses or division, is those that have sense) and having declared the
operations which are common to the whole tribe of them, which includes both
plants and animals: it is now time we take a particular view of those, whose
action, and passion, is the reason why that chief portion of life is termed
sensitive; I mean the senses, and the qualities, by which the outward world
comes into the living creature, through his senses. Which when we shall have
gone through, we shall scarcely have left any qualities among bodies, to plead
for a spiritual manner of being or working; that is, for a self entity, and
instantaneous operation: which kind of things and properties, vulgar
Philosophy is very earnest to attribute unto ou^ senses: with what reason, and
upon what ground let us now consider.

Of the senses and sensible qualities in general. And of the end for which
they serve.
These qualities are reduced to five several heads; answerable to so many
different ways, whereby we receive notice of the bodies that are without us.
And accordingly, they constitute a like number of different senses: of every
one of which, we will discourse particularly, when we have examined the natures
of the qualities that effect them. But now, all the consideration we shall need
to have of them, is only this; that it is manifest the organes in us by which
sensible qualities do work upon us, are corporeal, and are made of the like
ingredients as the rest of our body is: and therefore, must of necessity be
liable to suffer evil and to receive good (in such sort as all other bodies
do) from those active qualities which make and mar all things within the
limits of nature. By which terms of Evil and Good; I mean, those effects
that are ^uerse or conformable to the particular nature of any thing: and
thereby do tend to the preservation or destruction, of that Individual.

Now we receiving from our senses, the knowledge that we have of things
without us; do give names unto them according to the passions and affections,
which those things cause in our senses: which being the same in all mankind
(as long as they are considered in common, and that their effects are looked
upon in gross) all the world agrees in one notion and in one name of the same
thing; for every man living is affected by it, just as his neighbor is, and as
all men else in the world are. As for example; heat or cold works the same
feeling in every man composed of flesh and blood; and therefore, whosoever
should be asked of them, would return the same answer, that they cause such
and such effects in his sense, pleasing or displeasing to him, according to
their degrees, and as they tend to the good or evil of his whole body.

But if we descend to particulars, we shall find, that several men of
differing constitutions, do frame different notions of the same things,
according as they are conformable or disagreeing to their natures: and
accordingly they give them different names. As when the same liquor is sweet
to some men's taste; which to an others appears bitter: one man takes that
for a purfume; which to an other, is an offensive smell: in the Turkesh bathes;
(where there are many degrees of heat in diverse rooms, through all which the
same person uses to pass, and to stay a while in every one of them, both at
his entrance and going out, to season his body by degrees, for the contrary
excess he his going unto) that seems chilly cold at his return; which
appeared melting hot at his going in; as I my self have often made
experience in those countries: beauty and loveliness will shine to one man, in
the same face, that will give auersion to an other. All which proclaymeth, that
the sensible qualities of bodies, are not any positive real thing, consisting
in an indivisible, and distinct from the body it self; but are merely the
very body, as it affects our senses: which to discover how they do it, must
be our labor here.

Let us therefore begin, with considering the difference, that is between
sensible and insensible creatures. These latter, do lie exposed the mercy of
all outward agents that from time to time (by the continual motion which all
things are in) do come within distance of working upon them: and they have no
power to remove themselves from what is auerse to their nature; nor to approach
nearer unto what comfort it. But the others having within themselves a
principle of motion (as we have already declared) whenever such effects are
wrought upon them, as upon the others; they are able, upon their own account
and by their own action, to remove themselves from what begins to annoy
them, and to come nearer unto what they find a beginning of good by.

These impressions, are made upon those parts of us, which we call the organes
of our senses; and by them, do give us seasonable aduertissements and
knowledges whereby we may govern and order to the best advantage, our little
charge of a body, according to the tune or warninges of change in the great
circumstant body of the world, as far as it may concern ours. Which how it
is done, and by what steps it proceeds, shall be in the following discourse
laid open.

Of this great machine that enuironneth us, we who are but a small parcel, are
not immediately concerned in every part of it. It imports not us, for the
conservation of our body, to have knowledge of other parts then such as are
within the distance of working upon us: those only within whose sphere of
actiuity we are planted, can offend or advantage us: and of them; some are
near us; others, further from us. Those that are next unto us; we discern
(according as they are qualifyed) either by our touch, or by our taste, or by
our smelling; which three senses, do manifestly appear to consist in a mere
gradation of more or less gross; and their operations are leuelled to the
three Elements that press upon us; earth, water, and air. By our other two
senses (our hearing and our seeing) we have notice of things further off: and
the agents which work upon them, are of a more refined nature.

Of the sense of touching: and that both it and its qualities are bodies.
But we must treat of them all in particular: and that which we will begin
with, shall be the touch, as being the grossest of them, and that which
conuerseth with none, but the most material and massye objects. We see it
deals with heavy consistent bodies; and judges of them by conjunction unto
them, and by immediate reception of something from them. And according to the
diverse impressions they make in it; it distinguishes them by diverse names;
which (as we said of the qualities of mixed bodies) are generally reduced to
certain payres; as hot and cold, wett and dry, soft and hard, smooth and
rough, thick and thin, and some others of the like nature; which were
needelesse to enumerate, since we pretend not to deliver the science of them,
but only to show that they and their actions, are all corporeal.

And this is sufficiently evident, by mere repeating but their very names; for
it is plain, by what we have already said; that they are nothing else but
certain affections of quantity, arising out of different degrees of rarity and
density compounded together. And it is manifest by experience, that our sense
receives the very same impressions from them, which an other body does; for
our body, or our sense will be heated by fire; and will also be burned by it,
if the heat be too great, as well as wood: it will be constipated by cold
water, moystened by humide things, and dried by dry bodies, in the same manner
as any other body whatsoever; likewise, it may in such sort as they, be wounded
and have its continuity broken by hard things; be pleased and polished, by
those that are soft and smooth; be pressed by those that are thick and heavy;
and be rubbed by those that are rugged etc.

So that those masters, who will teach us that the impressions upon sense are
made by spiritual or spiritelike things or qualities; which they call
intentionall specieses, must labor at two works: the one to make it appear
that there are in nature such things as they would persuade us; the other to
prove that these material actions we speak of are not able to perform those
effects, for which the senses are given unto living creatures. And until they
have done that, I conceive we should be much too blame to admit such things,
as we neither have ground for in reason, nor can understand what they are. And
therefore, we must resolve to rest in this belief, which experience breeds
in us: that these bodies work upon our senses no other ways then by a
corporeal operation; and that such a one is sufficient for all the effects we
see proceed from them: as in the process of this discourse we shall more
amply declare.

The element immediately next to earth in grossness, Of the taste and its
qualities: that they are bodies.
is water. And in it is the exercise of our taste, our mouth being perpetually
wett within: by means of which moisture, our tongue receives into it, some
little parts of the substance which we chewe in our teeth, and which passes
over it. You may observe how, if we take any herb or fruit; and having
chopped or beaten it small, we the^ putt it into a wooden dish of water and do
squeese it a little; the juice, communicating and mingling it self with; the
water, infecteth it with the taste of it self, and remaining a while in the
bowl sinketh by little and little into the very pores of the wood: as is
manifest, by its retaining a long time after, the taste and smell of that herb.
In like manner, nature has taught us, by chewing our meat, and by turning it
into our mouths and pressing it a little (that we may the more easily swallow
it) to imbue our spittle with such little parts as easily diffuse themselves in
water. And then our spittle being continuate to the moisture, which is within
our tongue, (in such sort as we declared of the moisture of the earth, that
soaketh into the root of a plant) and particularly in the sinews of it; must
of necessity affect those little sensible stringes with the qualities which
these petty bodies, mixed every where with the moisture, are themselves imbued
withal.

And if you ask what motions or qualities these be: Physicians (unto whom it
belongs most particularly to look into them) will tell you, that some dilate
the tongue more, and some less; as if some of these little bodies had an
aereall, and others a watery disposition: and these two, they express by the
names of sweet and fatty. That some, do contract and draw the tongue together;
as choaky and rough things do most; and next to them, crabby and immature
sharpness. That some do corrode and pierce the tongue; as salt and sour
things. That bitter things do search the outside of it, as if they swept it:
and that other things, do as it were prick it; as spices and hot drinks.
Now all these are sensible material things; which admit to be explicated
clearly, by the varieties of rarity and density concurring to their
compositions: and are so proportionable to such material instruments as we can
not doubt but that they may be thoroughly declared by our former principles.

The next element above water, That the smell and its qualities are real
bodies.
is air; which our nosethrilles, being our instrument to suck in, we can not
doubt but what affects a man by his nose, must come unto him in breath or
air. And as humidity receives grosser and weightier parts; so those which
are more subtle and light, do rise up into the air: and these we know attain
unto this lightness, by the commixtion of fire, which is hot and dry. And
therefore, we can not doubt, but that the nature of smell is more or less
tending to heat and drought: which is the cause that their commixtion with the
brain, proves comfortable unto it; because of its own disposition it is
usually subject to be too moist and too cold.

Whether there be any immediate instrument of this sense, to receive the
passion or effect, which by it, other bodies make upon us; or whether the sense
it self, be nothing but a passage of these exhalations and little bodies unto
the brain, fittly accommodated to discern, what is good, or hurtful for it,
and accordingly to move the body to admit or reject them; imports not us at
present to determine: let Physicians and Anatomistes resolve that question;
whiles it suffices us to understand, that the operations of bodies by odours
upon our sense, are performed by real and solid parts of the whole
substance; which are truly material, though very little, bodies; and not by
imaginary qualities.

Of the conformity betwixt the two senses of smelling and tasting.
And those bodies, when they proceed out of the same things that yield also
tastiue particles, (although without such material violence, and in a more
subtle manner) must of necessity have in them the same nature, which those
have that affect the taste; and they must both of them, affect a man much
alike, by his taste and by his smell: and so, are very proportionate to one an
other; excepting in those properties which require more cold or liquidity, then
can well stand with the nature of a smell. And accordingly, the very names
which men have imposed, to express the affections of both do many times agree:
as savor, which is common both to the smell and to the taste; and sweet
likewise: the strongest of which, we see oftentimes do make themselves known,
as well by the one as by the other sense: and either of them in excess, will
turn a man's stomach. And the Physicians that write of these senses find them
very conformable: and therefore it happens that the loosing of one of them,
is the loss also of the other.

And experience teaches us in all beasts, that the smell is given unto living
creatures, to know what meats are good for them, and what are not. And
accordingly, we see them still smell for the most part, at any unknown meat
before they touch it; which seldom fails of informing them rightly: nature
having provided this remedy against the gluttony, which could not choose but
follow the convenient disposition and temper of their parts and humors;
through which they often swallow their meat greedily and soddainely without
expecting to try it first by their taste. Besides that many meats are so
strong, that their very tasting them after their usual manner, would poison or
at the least greatly annoy them: and therefore nature has provided this
sense to prevent their taste; which being far more subtle then their taste;
the small atoms by which it is performed, are not so very noxious to the
health of the animal, as the other grosser atoms are.

And doubtlessely, the like use men would make of this sense, The reason why
the sense of smelling is not so perfect in man as in beasts: with a wonderful
history of a man who could wind a sent as well a^ any beast.
had they not on the one side better means then it to know the qualities of
meats: and therefore, this is not much reflected upon. And on the other side,
were they not continually stuffed and clogged with gross vapors of steamy
meats, which are daily reeking from the table and their stomakes; and permit
not purer atoms of bodies, to be discerned; which require clear and
vninfected organes to take notice of them. As we see it fare with dogs; who
have not so true and sensible noses, when they are high fed, and lie in the
kitchen amiddest the steames of meat; as when they are kept in their kennell,
with a more spare diett fit for hunting.

One full example, this age affords us in this kind, of a man whose extremity
of fear, wrought upon him to give us this experiment. He was borne in some
village of the country of Liege: and therefore among strangers, he is known by
the name of John of Liege. I have been informed of this story by several
(whom I dare confidently believe) that have had it from his own mouth; and
have questioned him with great curiosity, particularly about it.

When he was a little boy, there being wars in the country (as that State is
seldom without molestations from abroad, when they have no distempers at
home, which is an inseperable effect of a countries situation upon the
frontiers of powerful neigbouring Princes that are at variance) the village
of whence he was, had notice of some unruly scattered troops that were coming
to pillage them: which made all the people of the village fly hastily with what
they could carry with them, to hide themselves in the woods: which were
spacious enough to afford them shelter, for they joined upon the forest of
Ardenne. There they lay, till some of their scoutes brought them word, that the
soldiers of whom they were in such apprehension, had fired their town and
quitted it. Then all of them returned home, excepting this boy; who, it
seems, being of a very timorous nature, had images of fear so strong in his
fancy; that first, he ran further into the wood then any of the rest; and
afterward apprehended that every body he saw through the thickets, and every
voice he heard was the soldiers: and so hidd himself from his parents, that
were in much distress seeking him all about, and calling his name as loud as
they could. When they had spent a day or tw^ in vain, they returned home
without him, and he lived many years in the woods, feeding upon roots, and
wild fruits, and maste.

He said that after he had been some time in this wild habitation, he could by
the smell judge of the taste of any thing that was to be eaten: and that he
could at a great distance wind by his nose, where wholesome fruits or roots
did grow. In this state he continued (still shunning men with as great fear as
when he first ran away; so strong the impression was, and so little could his
little reason master it) until in a very sharp winter, that many beasts of
the forest perished for want of food; necessity brought him to so much
confidence, that leaving the wild places of the forest, remote from all peoples
dwellinges, he would in the eueninges steal among cattle that were fothered;
especially the swine, and among them, gleane that which served to sustain
wretchedly his miserable life. He could not do this so cunningly, but that
returning often to it, he was upon a time espied: and they who saw a beast of
so strange a shape (for such they took him to be; he being naked and all over
grown with hair) believing him to be a satyr, or some such prodigious
creature as the recounters of rare accidents tell us of; laid wait to
apprehend him. But he that winded them as far off, as any beast could do,
still avoided them, till at the length, they laid snares for him; and took
the wind so aduantagiously of him, that they caught him: and then, soon
perceived he was a man* though he had quite forgotten the use of all language:
but by his gestures and cries, he expressed the greatest affrightednesse that
might be. Which afterward, he said (when he had learned anew to speak) was
because he thought, those were the soldiers he had hidden himself to avoid,
when he first betook himself to the wood; and were always lively in his
fancy, through his fears continually reducing them thither.

This man within a little while after he came to good keeping and full feeding,
quite lost that acuteness of smelling which formerly governed him in his
taste; and grew to be in that particular as other ordinary men were. But at
his first living with other people, a woman that had compassion of him to see a
man so near like a beast; and that had no language to call for what he wished
or needed to have; took particular care of him; and was always very
sollicitous to see him furnished with what he wanted: which made him so apply
himself unto her in all his occurrents, that whenever he stood in need of
ought, if she were out of the way, and were gone abroad into the fields, or to
any other village near by, he would hunt her out presently by his sent, in
such sort as with us those dogs use to do which are taught to draw dry foot.
I imagine he his yet alive to tell a better story of himself then I have done;
and to confirm what I have here said of him: for I have from them who saw him
but few years agone, that he was an able strong man, and likely to last yet a
good while longer.

And of an other man, I can speak assuredly my self, who being of a very
temperate or rather spare diett, could likewise perfectly discern by his smell
the qualities of whatsoever was afterward to pass the examination of his
taste, even to his bread and beer. Wherefore to conclude it is evident both by
reason, and by experience, that the objects of our touch, our taste, and our
smell, are material and corporeal things, derived from the division of
quantity, into more rare and more dense parts; and may with ease, be resolved
into their heads and springes sufficiently to content any iuditious and
rational man. Who if he be curious to have further satisfaction in this
particular (as far as concerns odours and savors) may look over what
Ioannes Brauus (that iuditious, though unpolished Physician of Salamanca) has
written thereof.

THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. Of the sense of hearing, and of the sensible
quality sound.
But to proceed with the rest of the senses: because nature saw that some
things came soddainely upon a living creature; Of the sense of hearing: and
that sound is purely motion.
which might do it hurt, if they were not perceived a far off: and that other
things were placed at distance from it, which would greatly help it, if it
could come near unto them; she found a means to give us two senses more, for
the discovery of remote things. The one principally and particularly to descry
their motion. The other to mark their bulk and situation.

And so to begin with the former of these; we must needs acknowledge (after
due examination of the matter) that the thing which we call sound* is purely
motion. And if it be objected that many motions are made without any
discernable sound. We shall not make difficulty to grant it; considering that
many motions dye, before they come to touch the ear; or else are so weak,
that they are drowned by other stronger motions, which round about besiege our
ears in such manner, that notice is not taken of these: for so it fares in
what depends merely of quantity, especially, concerning our senses, that not
every thing of the kind, but a determinate quantity or multitude of parts of
it, makes an object sensible.

But to come close to the point; we see that sound, for the most part, is made
in the air; and that to produce it, there is required a quick and smart
motion of that Element, which, of all the rest, is the most moveable. And in
motion, velocity or quickenesse, is proportionate to density in magnitude (as
we have at large declared.) Which makes quantity become perceptible in bulk,
as this does in motion. And as the one consists in a greater proportion of
substance to the same quantity; so the other does in the passage of more parts
of the medium in the same time.

Of diverse arts belonging to the sense of hearing: all which confirm that
sound is nothing but motion.
And in the moderating of this, such of the liberal arts are employed, which
belong to the cultiuating man's voice; as Rhetorike, meetering, and singing. It
is admirable how finely Galileo has delivered us the consonances of music
toward the end of his first Dialogue of motion; from the 95 page forward on:
and how he has showed that matter clearly unto the sight (so making the eye,
as well as the ear judge of it) in motions of the water, in pendants hanging
loose in the air, and in permanent notes or races made upon letton. To the
moderation of the same, many other mechanical arts are applied; as the trade
of bellfounders; and of all makers of musical instruments by wind, or by
water, or by strings.

Neither can I slip over without mentioning the two curious arts of Ecchoing
and of whispering. The first of which, teaches to iterate voices several
times; and is frequently putt in practice by those that are delighted with
rarities in their gardens. And the other, shows how to gather into a narrow
room the motions of the air, that are diffused in a great extent; whereby,
one that shall putt his ear to that place, where all the several motions do
meet, shall hear what is spoken so low, as no body between him, and the
speaker, can discern any sound at all. Of which kind, there are very fine
curiosities in some churches of England: and my self have seen, in an upper
room of a capacious round tower vaulted ouerhead, the walls so contrived (by
chance, I believe) that two men standing at the utmost opposite points of the
Diameter of it, could talk very currently and clearly with one an other; and
yet none that stood in the middle could hear a syllable. And if he turned his
face to the wall and spoke against that (though never so softly) the others
ear, at the opposite point, would discern every word. Which puts me in
mind of a note made by one that was no friend to auricular confession; upon his
occasion of his being with me in a church that had been of a Monastery; where,
in one corner of it, one might sit and hear almost all that was whispered
through the whole extent of the church: who would not be persuaded but that it
was on purpose contrived so by the suttlety of the friars; to the end that the
Prior or some one of them, might sit there and hear whatsoever the several
Penitents accused themselves of to their Ghostly fathers; so to make advantage
by this artifice, of what the confessors durst not of themselves immediately
reveal.

He allowed better of the use in Rome of making voices rebound from the top
of the cupula of st: Peter's in the Vatican, down to the floor of the church;
when on great days they make a quire of music go up to the very highest*
part of the arch: which is into the lantern, from whence whiles they sing, the
people below just under it, are surprised with the smart sound of thaeir
voices, as though they stood close by them, and yet can see no body from whom
those notes should p^oceede. And in the same cupula, if two men stand upon the
large cornish or board, which circleth the bottom of it, they may observe the
like effect, as that which I spoke of above in the round tower.

In the like manner they that are called ventriloqui, do persuade ignorant
people that the Devil speaks from within them deep in their belly) by their
sucking their breath inwardes in a certain manner whiles they speak: whence
it follows that their voice seems to come, not from them, but from somewhat
else hidden within them; if (at the least) you perceive it comes out of them:
but if you do not, then it seems to come from a good way off.

To this art belongs the making of sarabatanes, or trunkes, to help the
hearing; and of Echo glasses, that multiply soundes, as burning glasses, do
light. All which arts, and the rules of them, do follow the laws of motion;
and every effect of them is to be demonstrated by the principles and
proportions of motion: and therefore, we can not with reason imagine them to be
any thing else.

We see likewise, that great noises, The same is confirmed by the effects
caused by great noises.
not only offend the hearing, but even shake houses and towers. I have been
told by inhabitants of Dover; that when the Arch Duke Albertus made his great
battery against Calais (which for the time was a very furious one; for he
endeavored all he could to take the town before it could be relieved) the
very houses were shaken, and the glass windows were shiuered, with the report
of his artillery. And I have been told by one that was in Seuill, when the
gunnepouder house of that town (which was some two miles distant from the
place where he lived) was blown up, that it made the wodden shutters of the
windows in his house, beat and clappe against the walls with great
violence, and did splitte the very walls of a fair church that standing next
it (though at a good distance) had no other building between to shelter it
from the impetuosity of the airs soddaine violent motion.

And after a fight I once had with some galleasses and Galliones in the road
of Scanderone (which was a very hot one for the time, and a scarce credible
number of pieces of ordinance were shot from my fleet) the English Consul of
that place coming afterward aboard my ship, told me that the report of our
gunnes, had, during all the time of the fight, shaken the drinking glasses that
stood upon shelues in his house; and had splitte the paper windows all about;
and had spoiled and cracked all the eggs that his pigeons were then sitting
upon: which loss, he lamented exceedingly; for they were of that kind, which
commonly is called Carriers, and serve them daily in their commerce between
that place and Aleppo.

And I have often observed at sea, in smooth water, that the ordinance shot
of in a ship some miles distant, would violently shake the glass windows in
an other. And I have perceived this effect in my own, more then once, at the
report of a single gunne from a ship so far off, that we could not descry
her. I remember how one time, upon such an occasion, we altered our course and
steared with the sound, or rather with the motion at the first, observing upon
which point of the compass the shaking appeared (for as yet we heard nothing;
though soon after with much attention and silence we could discern a dull
clumsy noise: and such a motion grows at the end of it so faint that if any
strong resisting body check it in its course, it is presently deaded, and will
afterward shake nothing beyond that body: and therefore it is perceptible
only at the outside of the ship, if some light and very moveable body do
hang loosely on that side it comes, to receive the impression of it; as this
did at the gallery windows of my cabin upon the poope, which were of light
moscouia glass or talk:) and by then we had run somewhat more then a watch,
with all the sails abroad we could make, and in a fair loome gale, we found
our salues near enough to part the fray of two ships, that in a little while
longer fighting would have sunk one an other.

That solid bodies may conueye the motion of the air or sound to the organe
of hearing.
But besides the motions of the air (which receives them easily, by reason of
the fluidity of it) we see that even solid bodies do participate of it. As if
you knock never so lightly at one end of the longest beam you can find, it
will be distinctly hard at the other end: the trampling of men and horses in a
quiet might, will be heard some miles off, if one lay their ear to the ground;
and more sensibly if one make a little hole in the earth, and putt ones ear
into the mouth of it; but most of all if one set a drum smooth upon the
ground, and lay ones ear to the upper edge of it; for the lower membrane of
the drum, is shaked by the motion of the earth, and then multiplyeth that
sound by the hollow figure of the drum in the conueying it to the upper
membrane, upon which your ear leans. Not much unlike the tympane or drum
of the ear; which being shaked by outward motion, causes a second motion on
the inside of it correspondent to this first; and this having a free passage to
the brain, strikes it immediately and so informs it how things move
without: which is all the mystery of hearing.

Where the motion is interrupted there is no sound.
If any thing do break or stop this motion* before it shake our ear, it is
not heard. And accordingly we see that the sound of belles or artillery is
heard much further if it have the conduct of waters, then through the pure
air: because in such bodies the great continuity of them makes that one part
can not shake alone, and upon their superficies, there is no notable
vneuenesse, nor no dense thing in the way to check the motion (as in the air,
hills, buildinges, trees and such like:) so that the same shaking goes a
great way. And to confirm that this is the true reason, I have several times
observed, that standing by a rivers side, I have heard the sound of a ring of
belles, much more distinctly and loud, then if I went some distance from the
water, though nearer to the steeple from whence the sound came.

And it is not only the motion of the air, that makes sound in our ears:
That not only the motion of the air but all other motions coming to our ears
make sounds.
but any motion that has access to them in such a manner as to shake the
quiuering membranous tympane within them, will represent unto us those motions
which are without, and so make such a sound there as if it were conveyed only
by the air. Which is plainly seen, when a man lying a good way under water,
shall there hear the same soundes, as are made above in the air: but in a
more clumsie manner; according as the water, by being thicker, and more
corpulent is more unwieldy in its motions. And this I have tried often; staying
under water as long as the necessity of breathing would permit me. Which
shows that the air being smartly moved, moves the water also, by means of
its continuity with it; and that liquid element, being fluide and getting into
the ear, makes vibrations upon the drum of it like unto those of air.

But all this is nothing in respect of what I might in some sort say, How one
sense may supply the want of an other.
and yet speak truth. Which is that I have seen one, who could discern
soundes with his eyes. It is admirable, how one sense will oftentimes supply
the want of an other: whereof I have seen an other strange example in a
different strain from this; of a man that by his grosser senses had his want
of sight wonderfully made up. He was so thoroughly blind, that his eyes could
not inform him when the sun shined; for all the crystalline humor was out
in both his eyes: yet his other senses instructed him, so efficaciously in what
was their office to have done; as what he wanted in them, seemed to be
ouerpayed in other abilities. To say that he would play at cards and tables
as well as most men; is rather a commendation of his memory and fansye, then of
any of his outward senses. But that he should play well at boules and
shouelbord, and other games of aim, which in other men do require clear
sight, and an exact level of the hand, according to the qualities of the earth
or table, and to the situation and distance of the place he was to throw at,
seems to exceed possibility: and yet he did all this.

He would walk in a chamber or long alley in a garden (after he had been a
while used to them) as straight, and turn as just at the ends, as any seeing
man could do. He would go up and down every where so confidently, and demean
himself at table so regularly, as strangers have sitten by him several
meals, and have seen him walk about the house, without ever observing any
want of seeing in him: which he endeavored what he could to hide, hy wearing
his hatt low upon his brows. He would, at the first abord of a stranger, as
soon as he spoke to him, frame a right apprehension of his stature, bulk and
manner of making. And which is more, when he taught his scholars to declame
(for he was schoolmaster to my sons, and lived in my house) or to represent
some of Senecas Tragedies, or the like, he would by their voice know their
gesture, and the situation they putt their bodies in: so that he would be able,
as soon as they spoke, to judge whether they stood or sat, or in what posture
they were; which made them demean themselves as decently, before him whiles
they spoke, as if he had seen them perfectly.

Though all this be very strange, yet me thinks his discerning of light is
beyond it all. He would feel in his body, and chiefly in his brain (as he
has often told me) a certain effect by which he did know when the sun was
up; and would discern exactly a clear from a cloudy day. This I have known
him frequently do without missing, when for trial sake he has been lodged in
a close chamber, whereunto the clear light or sun could not arrive to give
him any notice by its actual warmeth; nor any body could come to him, to give
him private warninges of the changes of the weather.

Of one who could discern sou^ds of words with his eyes.
But this is not the relation I intended, when I mentioned one that could hear
by his eyes; (if that expression may be permitted me) I then reflected upon a
noble man of great quality that I knew in Spain, the younger brother of the
Constable of Castile. But the reflection of his seeing of words, called into my
remembrance the other that felt light: in whom I have often remarked so many
strange passages, with amazement and delight; that I have adventured upon the
Readers patience to record some of them, conceiving they may be of some use in
our course of doctrine. But the spanish lord, was borne deaf; so deaf, that
if a gunne were shot off close by his ear, he could not hear it: and
consequently, he was dumb; for not being able to hear the sound of words; he
could neither imitate nor understand them. The loveliness of his face and
especially the exceeding life and spiritefulnesse of his eyes, and the
comeliness of his person and whole composure of his body throughout, were
pregnant signs of a well tempered mind within. And therefore all that knew
him, lamented much the want of means to cultiuate it, and to imbue it with the
notions which it seemed to be capable of in regard of its self; had it not
been so crossed by this unhappy accident. Which to remedy Physicians and
Chirurgions had long employed their skill; but all in vain. At the last,
there was a priest who undertook the teaching him to understand others when
they spoke, and to speak himself that others might understand him. What at
the first he was laughed at for; made him after some years be looked upon as
if he had wrought a miracle. In a word; after strange patience, constancy and
pains; he brought the young Lord to speak as distinctly as any man whosoever;
and to understand so perfectly what others said that he would not loose a word
in a whole days conversation.

They who have a curiosity to see by what steps the master proceeded in
teaching him, may satisfy it by a book which he himself has writ in Spanish
upon that subject, to instruct others how to teach deaf and dumb persons to
speak. Which when he shall have looked heedefully over; and shall have
considered what a great distance there is between the simplicity and
nakedness of his first principles; and the strange readiness and vast extent
of speech resulting in process of time out of them; he will forbear
pronuncing an impossibility in their pedigree, whiles he wondereth at the
numerous effects resulting in bodies out of rarity and density, ingeniously
mingled together by an all knowing Architect, for the production of various
qualities among mixtes, of strange motions in particular bodies, and of
admirable operations of life and sense among vegetables and animals. All which,
are so many several words of the mystical language, which the great master
has taught his otherwise dumb scholars (the creatures) to proclayme his
infinite art, wisdom, perfections, and excellency in.

The priest who by his book and art, occasioned this discourse, I am told is
still alive, and in the service of the Prince of Carignan, where he continues
(with some that have need of his pains) the same employment as he did with
the Constables Brother: with whom I have often discoursed, whiles I waited upon
the Prince of Wales (now our gracious Sovereign) in Spain. And I doubt not
but his majesty remembers all I have said of him and much more: for his
majesty was very curious to observe and enquire into the utmost of it. It is
true, one great misbecomingnesse he was apt to fall into, whiles he spoke:
which was an uncertainty in the tone of his voice; for not hearing the sound he
made when he spoke, he could not steedily govern the pitch of his voice; but
it would be sometimes higher sometimes lower; though for the most part, what he
delivered together, he ended in the same key as he begun it. But when he had
once suffered the passages of his voice to close, at the opening them again,
chance, or the measure of his earnestness to speak or to reply, gave him his
tone: which he was not capable of moderating by such an artifice, as is
recorded Caius Gracchus used, when passion, in his orations to the people,
drove out his voice with too great a vehemence or shrillenesse.

He could discern in an other, whether he spoke shrill or low: and he would
repeat after any body, any hard word whatsoever. Which the Prince tried often;
not only in English, but by making some Welchmen that served his Highness,
speak words of their language. Which he so perfectly ecchoed, that I confess
I wondered more at that, then at all the rest. And his Master himself would
acknowledge, that the rules of his art, reached not to produce that effect with
any certainety. And therefore concluded, this in him must spring from other
rules he had framed unto himself, out of his own attentive observation:
which, the advantage that nature had justly given him in the sharpness of his
other senses, to supply the want of this; endowed him with an ability and
sagacity to do, beyond any other man that had his hearing. He expressed it
(surely) in a high measure, by his so exact imitation of the welsh
pronunciation: for that tongue (like the Hebrew) employeth much the gutturall
letters: and the motions of that part which frames them, can not be seen nor
judged by the eye, otherwise then by the effect they may happily make by
consent in the other parts of the mouth, exposed to view: for the knowledge he
had of what they said, sprung from his observing the motions they made; so that
he could converse currently in the light, though they he talked with, whispered
never so softly. And I have seen him at the distance of a large chambers
breadth, say words after one, that I standing close by the speaker could not
hear a syllable of. But if he were in the dark, or if one turned his face out
of his sight, he was capable of nothing one said.

Diverse reasons to prove sound to be nothing else but a motion of some real
body.
But it is time that we return to our theme, from whence my blind
schoolmaster, and this deaf Prince (whose defects were ouerpayed an other
way) have carried us with so long a digression. Which yet will not be
altogether vselesse (no more then the former, of the wild man of Liege) if we
make due reflections upon them: for when we shall consider, that odors may be
tasted; that the relish of meats may be smelled; that magnitude and figure may
be heard; that light may be felt; and that soundes may be seen; (all which is
true in some sense) we may by this cha^ging the offices of the senses, and by
looking into the causes thereof; come to discern that these effects are not
wrought by the interuention of ayery qualities; but by real and material
applications of bodies to bodies; which in different manners do make the same
results within us.

But when I suffered my pen to be steered by my fancy, that pleased it
self, and rioted in the remembrance of these two notable persons: I was
speaking, how the strong continuity of the parts of a thing that is moved,
draws on the motion, and consequently the sound, much further then where that
which is moved suffers breaches, or the rarity of it occasioneth that one
part may be moved without an other; for to the proportion of the shaking, the
noise continues. As we see in tre^bling belles, that humme a great while
longer then others, after the clapper has stricken them: and the very sound,
seems to quiver and shake in our ears, proportionable to the shaking of the
bell. And in a lute as long as a string that has been stricken, shakes
sensibly to our eye; so long, and to the same measure, the sound shakes in our
ear. Which is nothing else but an vndulation of the air, caused by the smart
and thick vibrations of the cord, and multiplied in the belly of the
instrument (which is the reason that the concaue figure is affected in most)
and so, when it breaks out of the instrument in greater quantity, then the
string immediately did shake; it causes, the same vndulations in the whole
body of air round about. And that, striking the drum of the ear, gives
notice there in what tenor the string moves: whose vibrations if one stop
by laying his fingar upon it, the Sound is instantly at an end, for then there
is no cause on foot, that continues the motion of the air: which, without a
continuation of the impulse; returns speedily to quiett; through the
resistance made unto it, by other parts of it that are further off.

Out of all which, it is plain, that motion alone is able to effect, and to
give account of all things whatsoever that are attributed to sound; and that
sound and motion, do go hand in hand together; and that whatsoever is said of
the one, is likewise true of the other. Wherefore it can not be denied but that
hearing is nothing else but the due perception of motion: and that motion and
sound are in themselves one and the same thing, though expressed by different
names, and comprised in our understanding under different notions. Which
proposition seems to be ^et further convinced, by the ordinary experience of
perceiving music by mediation of a stick: for how should a de^fe man be
capable of music by holding a stick in his tee^h, whose other end lies upon
the vyall or virginals, were it not that the proportional shaking of the
stick (working a like dancing in the man's head) did make a like motion in his
brain, without passing through his ear? and consequently, without being
otherwise sound, then as bare motion is sound.

Or if any man will still persist in having sound be some other thing then as
we say; and that it affects the sense otherwise then purely by motion: he
must nevertheless acknowledge, that whatsoever it be, it has neither cause
nor effect, nor breeding, nor dying, that we either know or can imagine: and
then, if he will let Reason sway, he will conclude it unreasonable to say or
suspect so ill grounded a surmise, against so clear and solid proofs: which
our ears themselves do not a little confirm; their whole figure and nature
tending to the perfect receiving, conseruing, and multiplying the motions of
air which happen without a man: as who is curious, may plainly see in the
Anatomistes books and discourses.

THE NINE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER. Of Sight; and Colors.
THere is yet left, That Colors are nothing but light mingled with darkness;
or the disposition off a bodies superficies apt to reflect light so mingled.
the object of our sight, which we call color, to take a survey of; for as for
light, we have at large displayed the nature and properties of it: from which
whether color be different or no, will be the question we shall next discuss:
for those who are cunning in Optikes; will, by refractions and by reflections
make all sorts of colors out of pure light: as we see in Rainebowes, in those
triangular glasses, or prismes which some do call fools Paradises, and in
other inventions for this purpose. Wherefore, in brief, to show what color
is, let us lay for a ground, that light is of all other things in the worl^,
the greatest and the most powerful agent upon our eye; either by it self, or
by what comes in with it: and that, where light is not, darkness is; then
consider, that light being diversely to be cast, but especially, through or from
a transparent body, into which it sinketh in part, and in part it does not: and
you will conclude, that it can not choose but come out from such a body, in
diverse sorts mingled with darkness: which if it be in a sensible quantity,
does accordingly make diverse appearances: and those appearances must of
necessity have diverse hues, representing the colors which are middle colors
between white and black; since white is the color of light; and darkness
seems black. Thus, those colors are engendered, which are called apparent
ones. And they appear sometimes but in some one position; as in the raynebow;
which changes place as the looker on does: but at other times, they may be
seen from any part; as those which light makes by a double refraction through
a triangular glass.

And that this is rightly delivered, may be gathered out of the conditions
requisite to their production: for that crystal, or water, or any refracting
body, does not admit light in all its parts, is evident, by reason of the
reflection that it makes, which is exceeding great: and not only from the
superficies, but even from the middle of the body within: as you may see
plainly, if you putt it in a dark place, and enlighten but one part of it:
for then, you may perceive, as it were, a current of light pass quite through
the body, although your eye be not opposite to the passage: so that, manifestly
it reflecteth to your eye, from all the inward parts which it lights upon.

Now a more oblique reflection or refraction does more disperse the light, and
admits more priuations of light in its parts, then a less oblique one: as
Galileo has demonstrated in the first Dialogue of his systeme. Wherefore, a
less oblique reflection or refraction, may receive that in quality of light,
which a more oblique one makes appear mingled with darkness; and
consequently, the same thing will appear color in one, which shows it self
plain light in the other; for the greater the inclination of an angle is, the
greater also is the dispersion of the light.

And as colors are made in this sort, by the medium through which light
passes, so if we conceive the superficies from which the light reflecteth, to
be diversely ordered in respect of reflection; it must of necessity follow that
it will have a diverse luster and sight: as we see by experience in the necks
of pigeons, and in certain positions of our eye, in which the light passing
through our eye brows, makes an appearance as though we saw diverse colors
streaming from a candle we look upon. And accordingly we may observe how some
things, or rather most, do appear of a color more inclining to white, when
they are irradiated with a great light, then when they stand in a lesser. And
we see painters heighten their colors, and make them appear lighter by
placing deep shadows by them: even so much, that they will make objects
appear nearer and further of, merely by their mixtion of their colors.
Because, objects, the nearer they are, the more strongly and lively they
reflect light, and therefore, appear the clearer, as the others do more dusky.

Therefore, Concerning the disposition of those bodies which produce white or
black colors.
if we putt the superficies of one body to have a better disposition for the
reflection of light, then an other has; we can not but conceive, that such
difference in the superficies, must needs begett variety of permanent colors
in the bodies. And according as the superficies of the same body, is better, or
worse disposed to reflection of light, by polishing, or by compressure together,
or the like: so, the same body, remaining the same in substance, will show it
self of a different color. And it being evident that white (which is the
chiefest color) does reflect most light: and as evident, that black
reflecteth least light, so that it reflecteth shadows in lieu of colors (as
the O^sidian stone among the Romans does witness.) And it being likewise
evident, that to be dense and hard, and of small parts, is the disposition of
the object which is most apt to reflect light: we can not doubt, but that white
is that disposition of the superficies. That is to say, it is the superficies
of a body consisting of dense, of hard, and of small parts; and on the
contrary side, that black is the disposition of the superficies, which is most
soft and full of greatest pores; for when light meets with such a
superficies, it gets easily into it; and is there, as it were absorpt and
hidden in caves, and comes not out again to reflect toward our eye.

This doctrine of ours of the gene^ation of colors, The former doctrine
confirmed by Aristot^les authority, reason, and experience.
agrees exactly with Aristotle's principles, and follows evidently out of his
definitions of light, and of colors And for summing up the general sentiments
of mankind in making his Logical definitions, I think no body will deny his
being the greatest Master that ever was He defines light to be actus Diaphani:
which we may thus explicate. It is that thing, which makes a body that has an
aptitude or capacity of being seen quite through it in every interior part of
it, to be actually seen quite through, according to that capacity of it. And
he defines color to be, The term or ending of a diaphanous body: the meaning
whereof is: that color is a thing which mak^th a diaphanous body to reach no
further; or that color is the cause why a body is no further diaphanous, then
until where it begins; or that color, is the reason, why we can see no
further then to such a degree, through or into such a body.

Which definition fitteth most exactly with the thing it gives us the nature
of. For it is evident, that when we see a body, the body we see, hinders us
from seeing any other, that is in a straight line beyond it. And therefore it
can not be denied, but that color terminateth, and ends the diaphaneity of a
body, by making it self be seen. And all men do agree in conceiving this, to
be the nature of color; and that it is a certain disposition of a body,
whereby that body comes to be seen. On the other side, nothing is more
evident, then that to have us see a body, light must reach from that body to
our eye. Then adding unto this what Aristotle teaches concerning the
production of seeing: which he says is made by the action of the seen body
upon our sense: it follows that the object must work upon our sense, either
by light; or at the least with light; for light rebounding from the object
round about by straight lines, some part of it must needs come from the object
to our eye. Therefore, by how much an object sends more light unto our eye,
by so much, that object works more upon it.

Now seeing that diverse objects do send light in diverse manners to our eye,
according to the diverse natures of those objects in regard of hardenesse,
density, and litlenesse of parts: we must agree that such bodies do work
diuersely, and do make different motions or impressio^s upon our eye: and
consequently, the passion of our eye from such objects must be diverse. But
there is no other diversity of passion in the eye from the object in regard of
seeing, but that the object appear diverse to us in point of color. Therefore
we must conclude, that diverse bodies (I mean diverse or different, in that kind
we here talk of) must necessarily seem to be of diverse colors, merely by
the sending of light unto our eye in diverse fashions. Nay, the very same object
must appear of different colors, whenever it happens that it reflecteth
light differently to us. As we see in cloth, if it be gathered together in
fouldes, the bottomes of those fouldes show to be of one kind of color, and
the tops of them, or where the cloth is stretched out to the full percussion
of light, it appears to be of an other much brighter color. And accordingly
painters are feign to use almost opposite colors to express them. In like
manner if you look upon two pieces of the same cloth, or plush, whose grains
lie contrawise to one an other, they will likewise appear to be of different
colors. Both which accidents, and many others like unto them in begetting
various representations of colors; do all of them arise out of lights being
more or less reflected from one part then from an other.

How the diversity of colors do follow out of various degrees of rarity and
density.
Thus then you see, how color is nothing else, but the disposition of a bodies
superficies, as it is more or less apt to reflect light; sithence the
reflection of light is made from the superficies of the seen body, and the
variety of its reflection begets variety of colors. But a superficies is
more or less apt to reflect light, according to the degrees of its being more
or less penetrable by the force of light striking upon it; for those rays of
light that gain no entrance into a body they are darted upon, must of
necessity fly back again from it. But if light does get entrance and
penetrate into the body* it either passes quite through it; or else it is
swallowed up and lost in that body. The former, constituteth a diaphanous body;
as we have already determined. And the semblance which the latter will have in
regard of color, we have also showed must be black.

But let us proceed a little further. We know that two things render a body
penetrable, or easy to admit an other body into it. Holes, (such as we call
pores) and softness or humidity; so that dryenesse, hardness, and
compactednesse, must be the properties which render a body impenetrable. And
accordingly we see, that if a diaphanous body (which suffers light to run
through it) be much compressed beyond what it was; as when water is compressed
into ice; it becomes more visible, that is, it reflecteth more light: and
consequently, it becomes more white; for white is that, which reflecteth most
light.

On the contrary side, softness, vnctuousnesse, and viscousnesse, increases
blackness: as you may experience in oyling or in greasing of wood; which
before was but brown; for thereby it becomes more black; by reason that the
unctuous parts added unto the other, do more easily then they single, admit
into them the light that strikes upon them; and when it is gotten in, it is so
entangled there (as though the wings of it were birdlimed over) that it can
not fly out again. And thus it is evident, how the origin of all colors in
bodies, is plainly deduced out of the various degrees of rarity and density,
variously mixed and compounded. Why some bodies are Diaphanous others opacous.


Likewise, out of this discourse, the reason is obuious why some bodies, are
diaphanous, and others are opacous: for sithence it falls out in the
constitution of bodies, that one is composed of greater parts then an other:
it must needs happen that light be more hindered in passing through a body
composed of bigger parts, then an other whose parts are less. Neither does
it import that the pores be supposed as great as the parts, for be they never
so large, the corners of the thick parts they belong unto, must needs break
the course of what will not bow, but goes all in straight lines; more then if
the parts and pores were both lesser; since, for so subtle a piercer as
light, no pores can be too little to give it entrance. It is true such great
ones would better admit a liquid body into them, such a one as water or air;
but the reason of that is, because they will bow and take any plye, to creep
into those cauities, if they be large enough, which light will not do.

Therefore it is clear, that freedom of passage can happen unto light, only
there, where there is an extreme great multitude of pores and parts in a very
little quantity or bulk of body (which pores and parts must consequently be
extreme little ones) for, by reason of their multitude, there must be great
variety in their situation: from whence it will happen that many lines must be
all of pores quite through; and many others all of parts; although the most,
will be mixed of both pores and parts. And so we see that although the light
do pass quite through in many places, yet it reflecteth from more, not only in
the superficies but in the very body it self of the diaphanous substance. But
in an other substance of great parts, and pores there can be but few whole
lines of pores, by which the light may pass from the object to make it be
seen; and consequently it must be opacous; which is the contrary of Diaphanous
that admits many rays of light, to pass through it from the object to the
eye, whereby it is seen, though the Diaphanous hard body, do interuene
between them.

The former doctrine of colors confirmed by the generation of white and
Black in bodies.
Now if we consider the generation of these two colors (white and black) in
bodies; we shall find that likewise to justify and second our doctrine: for
white things are generally cold and dry; and therefore, are by nature ordained
to be receptacles, and conseruers of heat, and of moisture; as Physicians do
note. Contrariwise, black, as also green, (which is near of kin to black)
are growing colors, and are the dye of heat incorporated in abundance of
wett: as we see in smoke, in pittecoale, in garden ground, and in chymicall
putrefactions: all which are black; as also in young herbs; which are
generally green as long as they are young and growing. The other colors,
keeping their standing betwixt these, are generated by the mixture of them; and
according as they partake more or less of either of them, are nearer or
further off from it.

So that after all this discourse, we may conclude in short; that the color of
a body, is nothing else, but the power which that body has of reflecting light
unto the eye, in a certain order and position: and consequently, is nothing
else but the very superficies of it, with its asperity, or smoothness; with
its pores, or inequalities; with its hardenesse, or softness; and such like.
The rules and limits whereof, if they were duly observed and ordered, the
whole nature and science of colors, would easily be known and be described.
But out of this little which we have delivered of this subject, it may be
rightly inferred that real colors do proceed from Rarity and Density (as even
now we touched) and have their head and spring there: and are not strange
qualities in the air: but are tractable bodies on the earth, as all others
are, which as yet we have found and have meddled with all: and are indeed, the
very bodies themselves, causing such effects upon our eye by reflecting of
light, which we express by the names of colors.

THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER. Of luminous or apparente Colors.
Apparitions of colors through a prisme or tria^gular glass are of two
sorts.
AS for the luminous colors, whose natures art has made more maniable by us,
then those which are called real colors, and are permanent in bodies: their
generation is clearly to be seen in the Prisme or triangular glass we
formely mentioned. The considering of which, will confirm our doctrine, that
even the colors of bodies, are but various mixtures of light and shadows,
diversely reflected to our eyes. For the right understanding of them, we are to
note, that this glass makes apparitions of colors in two sorts: the one,
when looking through it, there appear various colors in the objects you look
upon (different from their real ones) according to the position you hold the
glass in when you look upon them. The other sort is, when the beams of light
that pass through the glass, are as it were tincted in their passage, and are
cast by the glass upon some solid object, and do appear there in such and
such colors, which do continue still the same, in what position soever you
stand to look upon them; either before, or behind, or on any side of the
glass.

Secondly, The several parts of the object make several angles at their
entrance into the prisme.
we are to note that these colors are generally made by refraction (though
sometimes it may happen otherwise, as above we have mentioned.) To discover the
reason of the first sort of colors, that appear by refraction when one
looks through the glass: let us suppose two several bodies, the one
black, the other white, lying close by one an other, and in the same
horizontall parallele; but so, that the black be further from us then the
white; then, if we hold the Prisme through which we are to see these two
oppositely colored bodies somewhat above them; and that side of it at which
the colored bodies must enter into the glass to come to our eye, parallele
unto those bodies; it is evident, that the black will come into the prisme by
lesser angles the^ the white: I mean that in the line of distance from that
face of the glass at which the colors do come in, a longer line or part of
black will subtend an angle, no bigger then a lesser line or part of white
does subtend.

Thirdly, The reason why some times the same object appears throwgh the
prisme in two places: and in one place more lively, in the other place more
dimmes.
we are to note, that from the same point of the object, there come various
beams of light to that whole superficies of the glass; so that it may, and
sometimes does happen, that from the same part of the object, beams may be
reflected to the eye, from several parts of that superficies of the glass
at which they enter. And whenever this happens, the object must
necessarily be seen in diverse parts: that is, the picture of it will at the
same time appear to the eye in diverse places. And particularly, we may
plainly observe two pictures, one a lively and strong one; the other a faint
and dim one. Of which the dim one will appear nearer us, then the lively
one: and is caused by a secondary ray: or rather I should say, by a longer ray,
that striking nearer to the hither ^dge of the glasses superficies (which is
the furthest from the object) makes a more acute angle then a shorter ray
does, that strikes upon a part of the glass further from our eye, but nearer
the object. And therefore the image which is made by this secondary or longer
ray, must appear both nearer and more dusky, then the image made by the
primary and shorter ray. And the further from the object that the glass
through which it reflecteth is situated (keeping still in the same parallele to
the horizon) the further the place where the second dusky picture appears, is
from the place where the primary strong picture appears.

If any man have a mind to satisfy himself by experience, of the truth of this
note, let him place a sheet of white paper upon a black carpett covering a
table, so as the paper may reach within two or three fingers of the edge of the
carpet, (under which, let there be nothing to succeed the black of the
carpet, but the empty dusky air) and then let him set himself at a
convenient distance, (the measure of which is, that the paper appear at his
feet, when he looks through the glass) and look at the paper through his
Prisme situated in such sort as we have above determined, and he will perceive
a whitish or lightsome shadow proceed from the lively picture that he sees of
white, and shoot out nearer toward him then that lively picture is, and he
will discern that it comes into the glass through a part of it nearer to his
eye or face, and further from the object then the strong image of the white
does. And further, if he causes the nearer part of the paper to be covered
with some thin body of a sadder color, this dim white vanishes: which it
does not if the further part of the paper be covered. Whereby it is evident,
that it is a secondary image, proceeding from the hither part of the paper.

The reason of the various colors that appear in looking throwgh a prisme.
Now then to make use of what we have said, to the finding out of the reason why
the red and blew and other colors appear when one looks through a prisme:
let us proceed upon our former example, in which a white paper lies upon a
black carpett (for, the diametrall opposition of those colors, makes them
most remarkable) in such sort that there be a parcel of black on the hither
side of the paper: and therein, let us examine according to our grounds, what
colors must appear at both ends of the paper looking upon them through the
triangular glass.

To begin with the furthest end, where the black lies beyond the white: we
may consider, how there must come from the black, a secondary dark mysty
shadow (besides the strong black that appears beyond the paper) which must
shoot toward you (in such sort as we said of the whitish lightsome shadow)
and consequently, must lie over the strong picture of the white paper: now in
this case, a third middling color must result out of the mixture of these two
extremes of black and white; since they come to the eye, almost in the same
line, at the least in lines that make so little a difference in their angles as
it is not discernable.

The like whereof happens in clothes, or stuffes, or stockings, that are
wouen of diverse colored but very small thriddes: for if you stand so far of
from such a piece of stuff, that the little thriddes of different colors which
lie immediate to one an other may come together as in one line to your eye; it
will appear of a middling color, different from both those that it resulteth
from: but if you stand so near that each thridde sends rays enough to your
eye, and that the basis of the tria^gle which comes from each thridde to your
eye, be long enough to make at the vertex of it (which is in your eye) an
angle bigg enough to be seen singly by it self; then each color will appear
apart as it truly is.

Now the various natures of middling colors we may learn of painters; who
compose them upon their palettes by a like mixture of the extremes. And they
tell us, that if a white color prevail strongly over a dark color, reds and
yellowes result out of that mixture: but if black prevail strongly over
white, then, blewes, violets, and seagreenes are made. And accordingly, in our
case, we can not doubt but that the primarily lively picture of the white, must
prevail over the faint dusky sable mantle with which it comes mingled to the
eye: and doing so, it must needs make a like appearance as the suns beams
do, when reflecting from a black cloud, they fringe the edges of it with red
and with yellow; and the like he does, when he looks through a rainy or a
windy cloud: and much like hereunto, we shall see this mixture of strong white
with a faint shadow of black, make at this brimme of the paper, a fair ledge
of red; which will end and vanish, in a more lightsome one of yellow.

But at the hither edge of the paper, where the secondary weak picture of
white is mingled with the strong black picture, in this mixture, the black is
preualent, and accordingly (as we said of the mixture of the painters colors)
there must appear at the bottom of the paper, a lembe of deep blew: which
will grow more and more lightsome, the higher it goes: and so, passing through
violet and seagreene it will vanish in light, when it reaches to the mastering
field of primary whiteness, that sends his stronger rays by direct lines:
and this transposition of the colors at the several ends of the paper
shows the reason why they appear quite contrary, if you put a black paper
upon a white carpet. And therefore, we need not add any thing particularly
concerning that.

And likewise, The reason^ why the prisme in one position, may make the colors
appear quite contrary to what they did, when it was in an other position.
out of this we may understand, why the colors appear quite contrary (that
is, red where before blew appeared; and blew, where red) if we look upon the
same object through the glass in an other position or situation of it: namely,
if we raise it so high, that we must look vpwardes to see the object; which
thereby appears above us: whereas in the former situation, it came in through
the lower superficies, and we looked down to it, and it appeared under us: for
in this second case, the objects coming into the glass by a superficies not
parallele as before, but sloaping, from the obiectwardes: it follows, that
the nearer the object is, the lesser must the angle be, which it makes with
the superficies; contrary to what happened in the former case: and likewise,
that if from one point of the nearer object, there fall two rays upon the
glass, the ray that falls uppermost, will make a lesser angle, then the
other that falls lower: and so, by our former discourse, that point may come
to appear in the same place with a point of the further object; and thereby
make a middling color.

So that in this case, the white which is nearer, will mingle his feeble
picture with the black that is further off; whereas before the black that was
further off, mingled his feeble shadow with the strong picture of the nearer
white. Wherefore by our rule we borrowed of the painters, there will now
appear a blew on the further end off the paper, where before appeared a red;
and by consequence on the nearer end a red will now appear, where in the
former case a blew appeared. This case we have chosen, as the plainest to show
the nature of such colors: out of which he that is curious, may derive his
knowledge to other cases, which we omit; because our intent is only to give a
general doctrine, and not the particulars of the science: and rather to take
away admiration, then to instruct the Reader in this matter.

The reason of the various colors in general by pure light passing through a
prisme.
As for the various colors, which are made by strayning light through a glass,
or through some other diaphanous body; to discover the causes and variety of
them, we must examine what things they are that do concur to the making of
them: and what accidents may arrive unto those things, to vary their product.
It is clear, that nothing interueneth or concurreth to the producing of any of
these colors, besides the light it self which is dyed into color, and the
glass or diaphanous body through which it passes. In them therefore, and in
nothing else, we are to make our enquiry.

To begin then, we may observe, that light passing through a Prisme, and
being cast upon a reflecting object, is not always color; but in some
circumstances it still continues light, and in others it becomes color.
Withal we may observe that those beams which continue light, and endure very
little mutation by their passage, making as many refractions, do make much
greater deflexions from the straight lines by which they came into the glass,
then those rays do which turn to color; as you may experience, if you oppose
one surface of the glass perpendicularly to a candle, and set a paper (not
irradiated by the candle) opposite to one of the other sides of the glass: for
upon the paper, you shall see fair light shine without any color: and you may
perceive, that the (...) by which the light comes to the paper, is almost
perpendicular to tha^ ^ine by which the light comes to the prisme. But when
light becomes color, it stricketh very obliquely upon one side of the glass;
and comes likewise, very obliquely out of the other, that sends it in color
upon a reflectent body; so that in conlusion, there is nothing left us
whereupon to ground the generation of such colors, besides the litlenesse of
the angle and the sloapingnesse of the line, by which the illuminant strikes
one side of the glass, and comes out at the other, whem colors proceed from
such a percussion.

To this then we must wholly apply our selves: and knowing that generally, when
light falls upon a body with so great a sloaping or inclination, so much of
it as gets through, must needs be weak and much diffused; it follows
that the reason of such colors, must necessaryly consist in this diffusion and
weakness of light; which the more it is diffused, the weaker it grows; and
the more lines of darkness, are between the lines of light, and do mingle
themselves with them.

To confirm this, you may observe, how just at the egresse from the prisme of
that light which going on a little further becomes colors, no color at all
appears upon a paper opposed close to the side of the glass; until removing
it further off, the colors begin to show themselves upon the edges: thereby
conuincing manifestly, that it was the excess of light which hindered them
from appearing at the first. And in like manner, if you putt a burning glass
between the light and the prisme, so as to multiply the light which goes
through the prisme to the paper, you destroy much of the color by converting
it into light. But on the other side, if you thicken the air, and make it
du^ky wi^h smoke, or with dust; you will plainly see, that where the light
comes through a conuexe glass (perpendicularly opposed to the illuminant)
there will appear colors on the edges of the cones that the light makes: and
peradventure the whole cones would appear colored if the darkening were
conveniently made: for if an opacous body, be set within either of the cones,
its sides will appear colored, though the air be but moderately thickened:
which shows that the addition of a little darkness, would make that which
otherwise appears pure light, be thoroughly dyed into colors. And thus you
have the true and adequate cause of the appearance of such colors.

Now, Upon what side every color appears that is made by pure light passing
through a prisme.
to understand what colors, and upon which sides, will appear: we may
consider, that when light passes through a glass, or other diaphanous body,
so much of it as shines in the air, or upon some reflecting body bigger then
itself, after its passage through the glass, must of necessity have darkness
on both sides of it; and so be comprised and limited by two darkenesses: but if
some opacous body, that is less then the light, be putt in the way of the
light, then it may happen contrariwise, that there be darkness (or the shadow
of that opacous body) between two lights.

Again, we must consider, that when light falls so upon a prisme as to make
colors, the two outward rays which proceed from the light to the two sides of
the superficies at which the light enters, are so refracted that at their
coming out again through the other superficies, that ray which made the less
angle with the outward superficies of the glass, going in, makes the greater
angle with the outside of the other superficies, coming out: and contrariwise,
that ray which made the greater angle, going in, makes the lesser, at its
coming out: and the two internal angles, made by those two rays, and the
outside of the superficies they issue at, are greater then two right angles:
and so we see that the light dilateth it self at its coming out.

Now, because rays that issue through a superficies, the nearer they are to be
perpendiculars unto that superficies, so much the thicker they are: it
follows, that this dilatation of light at its coming out of the glass, must
be made and must increase from that side where the angle was least at the going
in, and greatest at the coming out: so that, the nearer to the contrary side
you take a part of light, the thinner the light must be there: and
contrariwise, the thicker it must be, the nearer it is unto the side where the
angle at the rays coming out is the greater. Wherefore, the strongest light,
(that is, the place where the light is least mixed with darkness) must be
nearer that side then the other. Consequently hereunto, if by an opacous body
you make a shadow comprehended within this light, that shadow must also have
its strongest part, nearer unto one of the lights betwixt which it is
comprised, then unto the other: for, shadow being nothing else, but the want of
light, hindered by some opacous body; it must of necessity lie auersed from the
illuminant, just as the light would have layen if it had not been hindered.
Wherefore, seeing that the stronger side of light, does more impeach the
darkness, then the feebler side does; the deepest dark must incline to that
side, where the light is weakest; that is, toward that side on which the
shadow appears, in respect of the opacous body or of the illuminant, and so,
be a cause of deepenesse of color on that side, if it happen to be fringed
with color.

THE ONE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER. The causes of certain appearances in luminous
Colors; with a conclusion of the discourse touching the senses and the
sensible qualities.
The reason of each several color in particular caused by light passing
through a prisme.
OVt of these grounds, we are to seek the resolution of all such symptoms as
appear unto us in this kind of colors. First therefore calling to mind, how
we have already declared, that the red color is made by a greater proportion
of light mingled with darkness, and the blew with a less proportion: it must
follow, that when light passes through a glass in such sort as to make
colors; the mixture of the light and darkness on that side where the light
is strongest will incline to a red: and their mixture on the other side, where
the light is weakest, will make a violet or blew: and this we see to fall out
accordingly, in the light which is tincted by going through a prisme; for a red
color appears on that side from which the light does dilate or decrease, and
a blew is on that side toward which it decreaseth.

Now, if a dark body be placed within this light, so as to have the light come
on both sides of it: we shall see the contrary happen about the borders of the
picture or shadow of the dark body: that is to say, the red color will be on
that side of the picture which is toward or over against the blew color that
is made by the glass: and the blew of the picture, will be on that side which
is toward the red that is made by the glass, as you may experience if you
place a slender opacous body a long the prisme in the way of the light, either
before or behind the prisme. The reason whereof is; that the opacous body
standing in the middle, enuironned by light, divides the light, and makes two
lights of that which was but one; each of which lights, is comprised between
two darkenesses, to wit, between each border of shadow that joins to each
extreme of the light that comes from the glass, and each side of the opacous
bodies shadow. Wherefore, in each of these lights; or rather in each of their
commixtions with darkness, there must be red on the one side, and blew on the
other; according to the course of light which we have explicated.

And thus it falls out agreeable to the rule we have given, that blew comes
to be on that side of the opacous bodies shadow, on which the glass casts
red, and red on that side of it on which the glass casts blew: likewise when
light going through a conuexe glass makes two cones, the edges of the cone
betwixt the glass and the point of concurse will appear red, if the room be
dark enough: and the edges of the further cone, will appear blew, both for
the reason given: for in this case the point of concurse is the strong light
betwixt the two cones: of which, that betwixt the glass and the point, is the
stronger, that beyond the point, the weaker: and for this very reason, if an
opacous body be put in the axis of th^se two cones, both the sides of its
picture will be red, if it be held in the first cone which is next to the
glass; and both will be blew if the body be situated in the further cone; for
both sides being equally situated to the course of the light, within its own
cone, there is nothing to vary the colors, but only the strength and the
weakness of the two lights of the cones, on this side, and on that side the
point of concurse: which point, being in this case the strong and clear light
whereof we made general mention in our precedent note, the cone toward the
glass and the illuminant, is the stronger side, and the cone from the glass,
is the weaker.

In those cases, where this reason is not concerned, we shall see the victory
carried in the question of colors, by the shady side of the opacous body: that
is, the blew color will still appear, on that side of the opacous bodies
shadow that is furthest from the illuminant. But where both causes do concur
and contrast for precedence, there the course of the light carries it: that is
to say, the red will be on that side of the opacous bodies shadow, where it is
thicker and darker, and blew on the other side where the shadow is not so
strong; although the shadow be cast that way that the red appears: as is to
be seen, when a slender body is placed betwixt the prisme and the reflectent
body, upon which the light and colors are cast through the prisme: and it is
evident, that this cause of the course of the shadow, is in it self a weaker
cause, then the other of the course of light, and must give way unto it
whenever they encounter (as it can not be expected, but that in all
circumstances* shadows should to light) because the colors which the glass
casts in this case, are much more faint and dusky then in the other.

For effects of this later cause, we see that when an opacous body lies cross
the prisme, whiles it stands endwayes, the red or blew color, will appear
on the upper or lower side of its picture, according as the illuminant is
higher or lower the^ the transuerse opacous body: the blew ever keeping to that
side of the picture, that is furthest from the body, and the illuminant that
make it: and the red the contrary; likewise if an opacous body be placed out of
the axis, in either of the cones we have explicated before, the blew will
appear on that side of the picture which is furthest advanced in the way that
the shadow is cast: and the red, on the contrary: and so, if the opacous body
be placed in the first cone (beside the axis) the red will appear on that side
of the picture in the basis of the second cone, which is next to the
circumference; and the blew, on that side which is next the axis: but if it be
placed on one side of the axis in the second cone, then the blew will appear
on that side the picture which is next the circumference; and the red, on that
side which is next the center of the basis of the cone.

A difficult problem resolved touching the prisme.
There remains yet one difficulty of moment to be determined: which is why,
when through a glass, two colors (namely blew and red) are cast from a candle
upon a paper or wall, if you put your eye in the place of one of the colors
that shines upon the wall, and so that color comes to shine upon your eye,
in such sort that an other man who looks upon it, will see that color
plainly upon your eye, nevertheless, you shall see the other color in the
glass? As for example, if on your eye there shines a red, you shall see a
blew in the glass; and if a blew shines upon your eye, you shall see a red.

The reason hereof is, that the colors which appear in the glass, are of the
nature of those luminous colors which we first explicated, that arise from
looking upon white and black bordering together: for a candle standing in the
air, is as it were a white situated between two blackes: the circumstant
dusky air, having the nature of a black: so then, that side of the candle
which is seen through the thicker part of the glass, appears red; and that
which is seen through the thinner, appears blew: in the same manner as when
we look through the glass; whereas, the colors shine co^trarywise upon a
paper or reflecting object, as we have already declared, together with the
reasons of both these appearances; each fitted to its proper case, of looking
through the glass upon the luminous object serrownded with darkness, in the
one; and of observing the effect wrought by the same luminous object in some
medium or upon some reflectent superficies, in the other.

And to confirm this, if a white paper be set standing hollow before the
glass (like half a hollow pillar, whose flatt stands edgewayes toward the
glass, so as both the edges may be seen through it) the further edge will
seem blew and the nearer will be red; and the like will happen, if the paper
be held in the free air parallele to the lower superficies of the glass,
without any black carpet to limit both ends of it (which serves to make the
colors the smarter) so that in both cases, the air serves manifestly for a
black; in the first, between the two white edges; and in the second, limiting
the two white ends: and by consequence, the air about the candle must
likewise serve for two blackes, including the light candle between them.

Several other delightful experiments of luminous colors I might produce, to
confirm the grounds I have laid, for the nature and making of them. But I
conceive that these I have mentioned, are abundantly enough for the end I
propose unto my self: therefore I will take my leave of this supple and nice
subject; referring my Reader (if he be curious to entertain himself with a
full variety of such shining wonders) to our ingenious countryman and my worthy
friend, Mr. Hall: who at my last being at Liege, showed me there most of the
experiences I have mentioned; together with several other very fine and
remarkable curiosities concerning light; which he promised me he would shortly
publish in a work, that he had already cast and almost finished upon that
subject: and in it, I doubt not but he will give entire satisfaction to all the
doubts and Problemes that may occur in this subject: whereas my little
exercise formerly, in making experiments of this kind, and my less conueniency
of attempting any now, makes me content my self with thus spinning of a
course thridde from wool carded me by others, that may run through the whole
doctrine of colors, whose causes have hitherto been so much admired: and that
it will do so, I am strongly persuaded, both because if I look upon the causes
which I have assigned a priori, me thinks they appear very agreeable to
nature and to reason; and if I apply them to the several Phoenome^s which Mr.
Hall showed me, and to as many others, as I have otherwise met with, I find
they agree exactly with them, and render a full account of them.

And thus, you have the whole nature of luminous colors, resolved into the
mixtion of light and darkness: by the due ordering of which, who has skill
therein, may produce any middle color he pleases: as I my self have seen
the experience of infinite changes in such sort made; so that it seems unto
me, nothing can be more manifest, then that luminous colors are generated in
the way that is here delivered. Of which how that gentle and obedient
Philosophy of Qualities (readily obedient to what hard task soever you assign
it) will render a rational account; and what discreet virtue, it will give the
same things to produce different colors, and to make different appearances,
merely by such nice changes of situation, I do not well understand: but
peradventure the Patrones of it, may say that every such circumstance is a
Conditio sine qua non: and therewith (no doubt) their Auditors will be much the
wiser in comprehending the particular nature of light, and of the colors that
have their origin from it.

Of the rainebow, and how by the color of any body we may know the
compositio^ of the body it self.
The Rainebow, for whose sake most men handle this matter of luminous colors,
is generated in the first of the two ways we have delivered for the production
of such colors: and has its origin from refraction, when the eye being at a
convenient distance from the refracting body, looks upon it to discern what
appears in it. The speculation of which may be found in that excellent
discourse of Monsieur des Carts, which is the sixth of his Meteors; where he
has with great acuratenesse delivered a most ingenious doctrine of this
mystery: had not his bad chance of missing in a former principle (as I
conceive) somewhat obscured it. For he there gives the cause so neat, and so
justly calculated to the appearances, as no man can doubt but that he has
found out the true reason of this wonder of nature, which has perplexed so
many great wits: as may almost be seen with our very eyes; when looking upon
the fresh deaw in a sunneshiny morning, we may in due positions perceive the
raynebow colors, not three yardes distant from us: in which we may distinguish
even single drops with their effects. But he having determined the nature of
light to consist in motion, and proceeding consequently, he concludes colors
to be but certain kinds of motion: by which I fear it is impossible that any
good account should be given of the experiences we see.

But what we have already said in that point, I conceive is sufficient to give
the reader satisfaction therein: and to secure him, that the generation of the
colors in the rainebow, as well as all other colors, is likewise reduced to
the mingling of light and darkness: which is our principal intent to prove:
adding thereunto by way of aduertissement, for others whose leisure may permit
them to make use thereof, that who shall balance the proportions of luminous
colors, may peradventure make himself a step to judge of the natures of
those bodies, which really and constantly do wear like dies; for, the figures
of the least parts of such bodies, jointly with the connection or mingling of
them with pores, must of necessity be that which makes them reflect light unto
our eyes, in such proportions, as the luminous colors of their tincture and
semblance do.

For two things are to be considered in bodies, in order to reflecting of
light: either the extancies and cauities of them; or their hardenesse and
softness. As for the first; the proportions of light mingled with darkness
will be varied, according as the extancies or the cauities do exceed, and as
each of them is great or small: since cauities have the nature of darkness, in
respect of extancies, as our modern Astronomers do show, when they give
account of the face (as some call it) in the orb of the moon. Likewise in
regard of soft or of resistent parts, light will be reflected by them, more or
less strongly, that is, more or less mingled with darkness; for whereas it
reboundeth smartly back, if it strikes upon a hard and a resistent body, and
accordingly (...) show it self in a bright color: it must of necessity not
reflect at all, (...) very f^ebly, if it penetrateth into a body of much
humidity, or if ^^^oseth it self in the pores of it* and that little which
comes so weakly from it, must consequently appear of a dusky dye: and these
two, being all the causes of the great variety of colors we see in bodies,
according to the quality of the body, in which the real color appears, it
may easily be determined from which of them it proceeds: and then, by the
color, you may judge of the composition and mixture of the rare and dense
parts, which by reflecting light begets it.

In fine, That all the se^sible qualities are real bodies resulting out of
several mixtures of rarity and density.
out of all we have hitherto said in this Chapter, we may conclude the primary
intent of our so long discourse; which is, that as well the senses of living
creatures, as the sensible qualities in bodies, are made by the mixtion of
rarity and density, as well as the natural qualities we spoke of in their
place: for it can not be denied but that heat and cold, and the other couples
or payres, which beat upon our touch, are the very same as we see in other
bodies: the qualities which move our taste and smell, are manifestly a kin and
joined with them: ligh^ we have concluded to be fire: and of motion (which
affects our ear) it is not disputable: so that it is evident, how all
sensible qualities, are as truly bodies, as those other qualities which we call
natural.

To this we may add, that the proprieties of these sensible qualities, are
such as proceed evidently from rarity and density; for (to omit those which
our touch takes notice of, as too plain to be questioned) Physicians judge
and determine the natural qualities of meats, and of medecines, and of
simples, by their tastes and smells: by those qualities they find out powers in
them to do material operatio^s; and such as our instruments for cutting,
filing, brushing, and the like, do unto ruder and grosser bodies. All which
virtues, being in these instruments by the different tempers of rarity and
density, is a conuincing argument, that it must be the same causes, which must
produce effects of the same kind in their smells and tastes: and as for light,
it is known how corporeally it works upon our eyes.

Again, if we look particularly into the composition of the organes of our
senses; we shall meet with nothing but such qualities as we find in the
composition of all other natural bodies. If we search into our eye, we shall
discover in it nothing but diaphaneity, softness, diverse colors, and
consistencies; which all Anatomistes, to explicate, do parallele in other
bodies: the like is of our tongue, our nosethrilles, and our ears. As for our
touch; that is so material a sense, and so diffused over the whole body, we
can have no difficulty about it. Seeing then that all the qualities we can
discover in the organes of our senses, are made by the various minglings of
rarity with density, how can we doubt, but that the active powers over these
patients, must be of the same nature and kind.

Again, seeing that the examples above brought, do convince, that the objects
of one sense, may be known by an other; who can doubt of a community among
them, if not of degree, at ^^e least of the whole kind? As we see that the
touch, is the groundworke of all the rest; and consequently, that being
evidently corpore^^^, and consisting in a temper of rarity and density, why
should we m^^e difficulty in allowing the like of the rest?

Besides, let us compose of rarity and density, such tempers as we find in our
se^ses; and let us again compose of rarity and density, such actors, as we
have determined the qualities, which we call sensible, to be; and will it not
manifestly follow, that these two applied to one an other, must produce such
effects, as we affirm our senses have? that is, to pass the outward objects,
by different degrees, unto an inward receiver.

Why the senses are only five in number: with a conclusion of all the former
doctrine concerning them.
Again, let us cast our eyes upon the natural resolution of bodies, and how
they move us, and we shall th^reby discover, both what the senses are, and why
they are just so many, and that they can not be more. For an outward body may
move us, either in its own bulk or quantity; or as it works upon an other.
The first is done by the touch: the second by the ear, when a body moving the
air, makes us take notice of his motion. Now in resolution, there are three
active parts proceeding from a body, which have power to move us. The fiery
part; which you see works upon our eyes, by the virtue of light. The ayry
part, which we know moves our nosethrilles, by being sucked in with the air.
And lastly the salt; which dissolueth in water, and so moves our watery sense;
which is our taste.

And these being all the active parts, that show themselves in the resolution
of a body; how can we imagine there should be any more senses to be wrought
upon? for what the stable body shows of it self, will be reduced to the
touch: what as it moves, to hearing: what the resolutions of it, according to
the nature of the resolved atoms that fly abroad; will concern the other
three senses, as we have declared. And more ways of working, or of active
parts, we can not conceive to spring out of the nature of a body.

Finally, if we cast our eyes upon the intention of nature: to what purpose are
our senses, but to bring us into knowledge of the natures of the substances we
converse with all? surely, to effect this, there can not be invented a better,
or more reasonable expedient, then to bring unto our judgment seat the
likenesses or extractes of those substances, in so delicate a model, that they
may not be offensive or cumbersome; like so many patterns presented unto us,
to know by them, what the whole piece is: for all similitude, is a
communication between two things in that quality, wherein there likeness
consists: and therefore we can not doubt, but that nature has given us, by
the means we have explicated, an essay of all the things in the world, that
fall under our commerce, whereby to judge whether they be profitable or nociue
unto us; and yet in so delicate and subtle a quantity, as may in no ways be
offensive to us, whiles we take our measures to attract what is good, and
avoid what is noxious.

THE TWO AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER. Of sensation, or the motion whereby sense is
properly exercised.
OVt of the considerations which we have delivered in these last Chapters,
Monsieur des Carts his opinion touching sensation.
the Reader may gather the unreasonableness of vulgar Philosophers, who to
explicate life and sense, are not content to give us terms without explicating
them; but will force us to believe contradictions: telling us, that life
consists in this, that the same thing has a power to work upon it self:
and that sensation, is a working of the active part of the same sense, upon its
passive part; and yet will admit no parts in it: but will have the same
indivisible power work upon it self. And this, with such violence and
downebearing of all opposition, that they deem him not considerable in the
schools, who shall offer only to doubt of what they teach him hereabout; but
brand him with the censure of one who knows not, and contradicts the very
first principles of Philosophy. And therefore, it is requisite we should look
somewhat more particularly into the manner how sensation is made.

Monsieur des Carts (who by his great and heroyke attempts, and by showing
mankind how to steer and husband their reason to best advantage, has left us
no excuse for being ignorant of any thing worth the knowing) explicating the
nature of sense, is of opinion, that the bodies without us, in certain
circumstances, do give a blow upon our exterior organes: from whence, by the
continuity of the parts, that blow or motion is continued, till it come to our
brain and seat of knowledge; upon which it gives a stroke answerable to
that, which the outward sense first received: and there this knock causing a
particular effect, according to the particular nature of the motion (which
depends off the nature of the object that produced it) our soul and mind
has notice, by this means, of every thing that knocks at our gates: and by
the great variety of knockes or motions that our brain feels (which arises
from as great a variety of natures in the objects that cause them) we are
enabled, to judge of the nature and conditions of every thing we converse
withal.

As for example: he conceiueth light to be nothing else but a percussion made
by the illuminant upon the air, or upon the ethereall substance, which he
puts to be mixed with, and to run through all bodies: which being a
continuate medium between the illuminant and our sense; the percussion upon
that, strikes also our sense; which he calls the nerve that reaches from
the place stricken (to wit, from the bottom of our eye) unto the brain. Now,
by reason of the continuity of this string or nerve, he conceiueth that the
blow which is made upon the outward end of it by the Either, is conveyed by the
other end of it to the brain; that end, striking the brain in the same
measure as the Either struck the other end of it: like the jack of a
virginal, which stricketh the sounding cord, according as the musicians hand
presses upon the stop. The part of the brain which is thus struken, he
supposes to be the fantasy, where he deemeth the soul does reside; and
thereby takes notice of the motion and object that are without. And what is
said thus of sight, is to be applied proportionably to the rest of the senses.

This then is the sum of Monsieur des Carts his opinion, which he has very
finely expressed, with all the advantages that opposite examples, significant
words, and clear method can give unto a witty discourse. Which yet is but a
part of the commendations he deserves, for what he has done on this
particular. He is, over and above all this, the first that I have ever met
with, who has published any conceptions of this nature, whereby to make the
operations of sense intelligible. Certainly, this praise will ever belong unto
him, that he has given the first hinte of speaking groundedly, and to the
purpose upon this subject: and whosoever shall carry it any further (as what
important mystery was ever borne and perfected at once?) must acknowledge to
have derived his light from him.

The Authors opinion touching sensation.
For my part, I shall so far agree with him, as to allow motion alone to be
sufficient to work sensation in us: and not only to allow it sufficient, but
also to profess, that not only this, but that no other effect whatsoever can
be wrought in us, but motion, and by means of motion. Which is evident out of
what we have already delivered, speaking of bodies in general; that all action
among them, either is local motion, or else follows it: and no less
evident, out of what we have declared in particular, concerning the operations
of the outward senses, and the objects that work upon them: and therefore,
whosoever shall in this matter, require any thing further then a difference of
motion, he must first seek other instruments in objects to cause it. For,
examining from their very origin, the natures of all the bodies we converse
withal; we can not find any ground to believe they have power or means to
work any thing beyond motion.

But I shall crave leave to differ from him, in determining what is the subject
of this motion, whereby the brain judges of the nature of the thing that
causes it. He will allow no local change of any thing in a man, further then
certain vibrations of stringes, which he gives the objects to play upon from
the very sense up to the brain: and by their different manners of shaking the
brain, he will have it know, what kind of thing it is, that strikes the
outward sense, without removing any thing within our body from one place to an
other. But I shall go the more common way; and make the spirits to be the
porters of all news to the brain: only adding thereunto that these news
which they carry thither, are material participations of the bodies, that
work upon the outward organes of the senses; and passing through them, do
mingle themselves with the spirits, and so do go whither they carry them, that
is to the brain; unto which, from all parts of the body, they have immediate
resort, and a perpetual communication with it.

So that, to exercise sense (which the latins do call, sentire, but in English
we have no one word common to our several particular notions of diverse
perceptions by sense) is, Our brain to receive an impression from the externe
object by the operation or mediation of an organicall part made for that
purpose, and some one of those which we term an externe sense; from which
impression, usually flows some motion proper to the living creature. And thus
you see that the outward senses, are not truly senses, as if the power of
sensation were in them: but in an other meaning, to wit, so far as they are
instruments of qualifying or conueying the object to the brain.

Now, Reasons to persuade the authors opinion.
that the spirits are the instruments of this co^ueyance, is evident, by what
we daily see, that if a man be very atte^tiue to some one externe object (as to
the hearing or seeing of something that much delights or displeases him) he
neither hears or sees any thing but what his mind is bent upon; though all
that while, his eyes and ears be open, and several of their objects be
present, which at other times would affect him. For what can be the reason of
this, but that the brain employing the greatest part of his store of spirits
about that one object, which so powerfully entertayneth him, the others find
very few free for them to imbue with their tincture? And therefore, they have
not strength enough to give the brain a sufficient taste of themselves, to
make it be observed; nor to bring themselves into a place where they may be
distinctly discerned: but striving to get unto it, they loose themselves in
the throng of the others, who for that time do besiege the brain closely.
Whereas, in Monsieur des Carts his way (in which no spirits are required) the
apprehension must of necessity be carried precisely according to the force of
the motion of the externe object.

This argument I confess, is not so conuincing a one against his opinion, but
that the necessity of the consequence may be avoided; and an other reason be
given for this effect, in Monsieur des Carts his doctrine: for he may say,
that the affection being vehemently bent upon some one object, may cause the
motion to be so violent by the addition of inward percussions, that the other
coming from the outward sense, being weaker, may be drowned by it; as lesser
soundes are by greater, which do forcibly carry our ears their way, and do
fill them so entirely, that the others can not get in to be heard: or as the
drawing of one man that pulls backewardes, is not felt when a hundred draw
forwards. Yet this is hard to conceive, considering the great eminency which
the present object has over an absent one, to make it self be felt: whence it
follows, that the multiplication of motion must be extremely increased
within, to ouertoppe and bear down the motion, caused by a present object
actually working without.

But that which indeed conuinceth me to believe I go not wrong in this course,
which I have set down for externe bodies working upon our sense and
knowledgde: is first, the conuenience, and agreeableness to nature, both in
the objects and in us, that it should be done in that manner: and next, a
difficulty in Monsieur des Carts his way, which me thinks, makes it
impossible that his should be true. And then, his being absolutely the best of
any I have hitherto met withal, and mine supplying what his falls short in,
and being sufficient to perform the effects we see: I shall not think I do
amiss in believing my own to be true, till some body else show a better.

That vital spiritts are the immediate instruments of sensation by conueying
sensible qualities to the brain.
Let us examine these considerations one after an other. It is manifest by what
we have already established, that there is a perpetual flux of little parts
or atoms out of all sensible bodies, that are composed of the four Elements,
and are here in the sphere of continual motion by action and passion: and such
it is, that in all probability these little parts can not choose but get in at
the doors of our bodies, and mingle themselves with the spirits that are in our
nerves. Which if they do, it is unavoidable, but that of necessity they must
make some motion in the brain; as by the explication we have made of our
outward senses, is manifest: and the brain being the source and origin of all
such motion in the animal, as is termed voluntary; this stroke of the object,
will have the power to cause some variation in its motions that are of that
nature: and by consequence, must be a sensation, for, that change which being
made in the brain by the object, is cause of voluntary motion in the animal,
is that, which we call sensation.

But we shall have best satisfaction, by considering how it fares with every
sense in particular. It is plain, that our touch or feeling is affected by the
little bodies of heat, or cold, or the like, which are squeesed or euaporated
from the object; and do get into our flesh, and consequently, do mingle
themselves with our spirits: and accordingly, our hand is heated with the flood
of subtle fire, which from a great one without, streameth into it: and is
benumbed with multitudes of little bodies of cold, that settle in it. All which
little bodies, of heat, or of cold or of what kind soever they be, when they
are once got in, must needs mingle themselves with the spirits they meet with
in the nerve: and consequently, must go along with them up to the brain: for
the channel of the nerve being so little, that the most acurate inspectours of
nature can not distinguish any little cauity or hole running along the substance
of it: and the spirits which ebb and flow in those channels, being so
infinitely subtle, and in so small a quantity, as such cha^nels can contain:
it is evident, that an ato^e of insensible biggenesse, is sufficient to imbue
the whole length and quantity of spirit that is in one nerve: and that atome,
by reason of the subtility of the liquor it is immersed in, is presently and as
it were instantly, diffused through the whole substance of it: the source
therefore of that liquor being in the brain, it can not be doubted, but that
the force of the externe object, must needs affect the brain according to the
quality of the said atome: that is, give a motion, or knock, conformable to
its own nature.

As for our taste, it is as plain, that the little parts expressed out of the
body which affects it, do mingle themselves with the liquour that being in
the tongue, is continuate to the spirits: and then, by our former argument it
is evident, they must reach unto the brain. And for our smelling, there is
nothing can hinder odours from having immediate passage up to our brain, when
by our nose, they are once gotten into our head.

In our hearing, there is a little more difficulty: for sound being nothing but
a motion of the air, How sound is conveyed to the brain by vital spirits.
which strikes our ear; it may seem more then needs, to send any
corporeal substance into the brain: and that it is sufficient, that the
vibrations of the outward air, shaking the drum of the ear, do give a like
motion to the air within the ear, that on the inside touches the tympane:
and so this air, thus moved, shakes and beats upon the brain. But this, I
conceive, will not serve the turn; for if there were no more, but an actual
motion, in the making of hearing; I do not see, how soundes could be conserved
in the memory: since of necessity, motion must always reside in some body;
which argument, we shall press anon, against Monsieur des Carts his opinion
for the rest of the senses.

Out of this difficulty, the very inspection of the parts within the ear,
seems to lead us: for had there been nothing necessary besides motion, the
very striking of the outward air against the tympanum, would have been
sufficient without any other particular and extraordinary organization, to have
produced soundes, and to have carried their motions up to the brain: as we see
the head of a drum brings the motions of the earth unto our ear, when we
lay it thereunto, as we have formerly delivered. But Anatomistes, find other
tools and instruments, that seem fit to work and forge bodies withal;
which we can not imagine, nature made in vain. There is a hammer and an
anuile: whereof the hammer, stricking upon the anuile, must of necessity beat
off such little parts of the brainy steames, as flying about do light and
stick upon the top of the anuile: these by the trembling of the air
following its course, can not miss of being carried up to that part of the
brain, whereunto the air within the ear is driven by the impulse of the
sound: and as soon as they have given their knock, they rebound back again
into the celles of the brain, fitted for harbors to such winged messenger:
where they remain lodged in quietness, till they be called for again, to
renew the effect which the sound did make at the first: and the various blows
which the hammer strikes, according to the various vibrations of the tympanum
(unto which the hammer is fastened; and therefore is governed by its motions)
must needs make great difference of biggenesses, and cause great variety of
smartnesses of motion, in the little bodies which they forge.

The last sense is of seeing; whose action we can not doubt, is performed by
the reflection of light unto our eye, How colors are conveyed to the brain by
vital spirits.
from the bodies which we see: and this light, comes impregnated with a
tincture drawn from the superficies of the object it is reflected from; that
is, it brings along with it, several of the little atoms, which of
themselves do stream, and it cutteth from the body it struck upon and
reboundeth from; and they, mingling themselves with the light, do in company of
it get into the eye: whose fabrike, is fit to gather and unite those species,
as you may see by the anatomy of it: and from the eye, their journey is but a
short one to the brain: in which, we can not suspect that they should loose
their force; considering, how others that come from organes further off, do
conserve theirs: and likewise considering the nature of the optike spirits,
which are conceived to be the most refined of all that are in man's body.

Now, that light is mingled with such little atoms issuing out of the bodies
from which it is reflected; appears evidently enough, out of what we have
Said, of the nature and operations of fire and light: and it seems to be
confirmed, by what I have often observed in some chambers where people seldom
come: which having their windows to the south, so as the sun lies upon them
a great part of the day in his greatest strength, and their curtains being
continually drawn over them, the glass becomes dyed very deep of the same
color the curtain is of: which can proceed from no other cause, but that the
beams which shoot through the glass, being reflected back from the
courtaine, do take something along with them from the superficies of it; which
being of a more solid corpulence then they, is left behind (as it were in the
strainer) when they come to press themselves through passages and pores, too
little for it to accompany them in: and so those atoms of color, do stick
upon the glass which they can not penetrate.

An other confirmation of it is, that in certain positions, the sun
reflecting from strong colors, will cast that very color upon some other
place; as I have often experienced in lively scarlet, and cloth of other smart
colors: and this, not in that gloating wise, as it makes colors of pure
light, but like a true real dye; and so, as the color will appear the same
to a man, wheresoever he stands.

Reasons against Monsieur des Carts his opinion.
Having thus showed in all our senses, the conueniency and agreeableness of our
opinion with nature; (which has been deduced, out of the nature of the
objects, the nature of our spirits, the nature and situation of our nerves, and
lastly from the property of our brain:) our next consideration shall be, of
the difficulty that occurreth in Mr. des Carts his opinion. First we know not
how to reconcile the repugna^cies appearing in his position of the motion of
the Either; especially in light: for that Ethereall substance being extreme
rare, must perforce by either extreme liquid, or extreme brittle: if the first;
it can not choose but bow and be pressed into fouldes, and bodies of unequal
motions, swimming every where in it; and so it is impossible, that it should
bring unto the eye any constant apparition of the first mouer.

But let us suppose there were no such general interruptions, every where
encountering, and disturbing the conueyance of the first simple motion: yet, how
can we conceive that a push, given so far off, in so liquid an element, can
continue its force so far? We see that the greatest thunders and concussions,
which at any time happen among us, can not drive and impart their impulse the
ten thousandeth part of the vast distance, which the sun is removed from our
eye; and can we imagine, that a little touch of that luminous body, should make
an impression upon us, by moving an other so extremely liquid and subtle, as
the Either is supposed; which like an immense Ocean, tossed with all varieties
of motion, lies between it and us.

But admit there were no difficulty nor repugnance in the medium, to convey
unto us a stroke, made upon it by the suns motion: let us at the least
examine, what kind of motions we must allow in the sun, to cause this effect.
Certainly, it must needs be a motion toward us, or else it can not stricke
and drive the medium forward, to make it stri^ke upon us. And if it be so,
either the sun must perpetually be coming nearer and nearer to us; or else it
must ever and anon be receding backwardes, as well as moving forwards. Both
which, are too chymericall for so great a wit to conceit.

Now, if the Either be brittle, it must needs reflect upon every rub in
meets with in its way, and must be broken and shiuered by every body that
moves acrosse it: and therefore, must always make an uncertain and most
disorderly percussion upon the eye.

Then again; after it is arrived to the sense, it is no ways likely it should
be conveyed from thence to the brain, or that nature intended such a kind of
instrument as a nerve, to continue a precise determinate motion: for if you
consider how a lute string, or any other such medium conueyeth a motion made in
it; you will find, that to do it well and clearly, it must be stretched
throughout to its full extent, w^^h ^ kind of stiffenesse: whereas our nerves
are not straight, but lie crooked in our body; and are very lither, till upon
occasion spirits coming into them, do swell them out. Besides, they are bound
to flesh, and to other parts of the body; which being cessible, must needs
dull the stroke, and not permit it to be carried far. And lastly, the
nerves are subject to be at every turn contracted and dilated, upon their own
account, without any relation to the strokes beating upon them from an externe
agent: which is by no means, a convenient disposition for a body, that is to
be the porter of any simple motion; which should always lie watching in great
quietness, to observe scrupulously, and exactly the arrant he is to carry: so
that for my part, I can not conceive, nature intended any such effect, by
mediation of the sinnewes.

That the symptoms of the palsy do no way confi^me Monsieur des Carts his
opinion.
But Monsieur des Carts endeavors to confirm his opinion, by what uses to
fall out in palsies, when a man loses the strength of moving his hands, or
other members, and nevertheless retains his feeling: which h^ imputes to
the remaining entire of the stringes of the nerves, whiles the spirits are
someway defective. To this we may answer, by producing examples of the
contrary in some men, who have had the motion of their limbs entire and no
ways prejudiced, but have had no feeling at all, quite over their whole case
of skin and flesh: as particularly a servant in the college of Physicians in
London, whom the learned Haruey (one of his Masters) has told me, was
exceeding strong to labor, and very able to carry any necessary burden, and
to remove things dexterously, according to the occasion: and yet he was so
void of feeling that he used to grind his hands against the walls, and
against course lumber, when he was employed to rummage any; in so much, that
they would run with blood, through grating of the skin, without his feeling
of what occasioned it.

In our way, the reason of both these conditions of people, (the paralitike,
and the insensible) is easy to be rendered: for they proceed out of the diverse
disposition of the animal spirits in these parts: which if they thicken too
much, and become very gross, they are not capable of transmitting the subtle
messengers of the outward world, unto the tribunal of the brain, to judge of
them. On the other side, if they be too subtle, they neither have, nor give
power to swell the skin, and so to draw the muscles to their heads. And
surely Monsieur des Carts takes the wrong way, in the reason he gives of the
palsy: for it proceeds out of abundance of humors; which clogging the
nerves, renders them washy, and makes them loose their dryness, and become
lither and consequently, unfit and unable, in his opinion, for sensation
(which requires stiffenesse) as well as for motion.

Yet besides all these, one difficulty more remains against this doctrine,
That Monsieur des Carts his opinion, can not give a good account, how things
are co^serued in the memory.
more insuperable (if I mistake not) then any thing, or all together we have
yet said: which is, how the memory should conserve any thing in it, and
represent bodies to us, when our fancy calls for them, if nothing but
motions do come into the brain. For it is impossible, that in so diuisible a
subject as the spirits, motion should be conserved any long time: as we see
evidently in the air; through which move a flaming taper never so swiftly, and
as soon as you set it down, almost in the very instant, the flame of it
leaves being driven or shaken on one side, and goes quietly and euenly up its
ordinary course: thereby showing, that the motion of the air, which for the
time was violent, is all of a soddaine quieted and at rest: for otherwise, the
flame of the taper would blaze that way the air were moved. Assuredly, the
bodies that have power to conserve motion long, must be dry and hard ones. Nor
yet can such, conserve it very long, after the cause which made it, cease
from its operation. How then can we imagine, that such a multitude of pure
motions, as the memory must be stored withal for the use and service of a man,
can be kept on foot in his brain, without confusion; and for so long a time
as his memory is able to extend unto? Consi^er a lessen played upon the lute or
virginals; and think with your self, what power there is, or can be in nature,
to conserve this lesson ever continually playing: and reflect, that if the
impressions upon the common sense are nothing else but such things, then they
must be actually conserved, always actually moving in our head* to the end
they be immediately produced, whenever it pleases our will to call for them.

And if peradventure it should be replied, that it is not necessary the motions
themselves should always be conserved in actual being; but that it is
sufficient, there be certain causes k^pt on foot in our heads, which are apt
to reduce these motions into act, whenever there is occasion of them: all I
shall say hereunto is* that this is merely a voluntary position, and that
there appears no ground, for these motions to make and constitute such
causes; since we neither meet with any instruments, nor discover any signs,
whereby we may be induced to believe or understand any such operation.

It may be viged, that diverse soundes are by diseases oftentimes made in out
ears, and appearances of colors in our fantasy. But first, these colors and
soundes, are not artificial ones, and disposed and ordered by choice and
judgment; for no story has mentioned, that by a disease any man ever heard
twenty verses of Virgil, or an ode of Horace in his ears: or that ever any man
s^w f^ire pictures in his fansye, by means of a blow given him upon his eye
And secondly, such colors and soundes as are objected, are nothing else, but
(in the first case) the motion of humour^ in a man's eye by a blow upon it;
which humors have the virtue of making light, in such sort as we s^e sea wate^
has, when it is clash^d together: and (in the second case) a cold vapor in
certain parts of the brain, which causes beatinges or motion there; whence
proceeds ^he imitation of soundes: so that these examples do nothing
advantage that party, thence to infer that the similitudes of objects, may be
made in the common sense, without any real bodies reserved for that end.

Yet I intend not to exclude motion from any commerce with ^he memory* no more
then I have done from sensation. For I will not only grant, that all our
remembering is performed by the means of motion; but I will also acknowledge,
that (in men) it is* for the most part, of nothing e^se but of motion. For what
are words, but motion? And words are the chiefest objects of our remembrance.
It is true, we can, if we will, remember things in their own shapes, as well
as by the words that express them; but experience tells us, that in our
familiar conversation, and in the ordinary exercise of our memory, we remember
and make use of the words, rather then of the things themselves.

Besides, the impressions which are made upon all our other senses, as well as
upon our hearing, are likewise for the most part of things in motion: as if we
have occasion to make a conception of a man, or of a horse, we ordinarily
conceive him walking, or speaking, or eating, or using some motion in time: and
as these impressions are successively made upon the outward organes; so are
they successively carried into the fantasy, and by like succession, are
delivered over into the memory: from whence, when they are called back again
into the fantasy, they move likewise successively; so that in truth, all our
memory will be of motion; or at the least, of bodies in motion: yet it is not
chiefly of motion, but of the things that are moved; unless it be, when we
remember words: and how those motions, do frame bodies which move in the
brain, we have already touched.

THE THREE AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of Memory.
But how are these things conserved in the brain? And how do they revive in
the fantasy, How things are co^serued in the memory.
the same motions by which they came in thither at the first? Monsieur des
Carts has putt us in hope of an explication: and were I so happy, as to have
seen that work of his, which the world of learned men so much longs for; I
assure my self, I should herein receive great help and furtherance by it.
Although withal, I must profess, I can not understand how it is possible,
that any determinate motion should long be preserved vntaynted in the brain;
where there must be such a multitude of other motions in the way, to mingle
with it, and bring all into confusion. One day I hope this jewel will be
exposed to public view, both to do the Author right, and to instruct the world.

In the mean time, let us see what our own principles afford us. We have
resolved, that sensation is not a pure driving of the animal spirits, or of
some penetrable body in which they swim, against that part of the brain,
where knowledge resideth: but that it is indeed the driving thither of solid
material bodies (exceeding little ones) that come from the objects themselves.
Which position, if it be true, it follows that these bodies must rebound from
thence upon other parts of the brain; where at the length, they find some
vacant cell, in which they keep their ranks and files, in great quiett and
order; all such sticking together, and keeping company with one an other, that
entered in together: and there they lie still and are at rest, until they be
stirred up, either by the natural appetite, (which is the ordinary course of
beasts) or by chance, or by the will of the man in whom they are, upon the
occasions he meets with of searching into them. Any of these three causes
rayseth them up, and gives them the motion that is proper to them; which is
the same with that, whereby they came in at the first: for (as Galilaeus
teaches us) every body has a particular motion peculiarly proper to it, when
nothing diuerteth it: and then they slide successively, through the fantasy in
the same manner, as when they presented themselves to it the first time. After
which, if it require them no more; they return gently to their quiett
habitation in some other part of the brain, from whence they were called and
summoned by the fantasies messengers, the spirits: but if it have longer use of
them, and would view them better then once passing through permits; then
they are turned back again, and lead a new over their course, as often as is
requisite: like a horse, that a rider paceth sundry times along by him that he
shows him to; whiles he is attentive to mark every part and motion in him.

But let us examine a little more particularly, How things co^serued in the
memory are brought back in to the fantasy.
how the causes we have assigned, do raise these bodies that rest in the
memory, and do bring them to the fantasy. The middlemost of them (namely
chance) needs no looking into, because the principles that govern it, are
uncertain ones. But the first, and the last (which are, the appetite, and the
will) have a power (which we will explicate hereafter) of moving the brain and
the nerves depending of it, conveniently and agreably to their disposition. Out
of which it follows, that the little similitudes, which are in the caves of
the brain wheeling and swimming about (almost in such sort, as you see in the
washing of currantes or of rise, by the winding about and circular turning of
the cooks hand) diverse sorts of bodies do go their courses for a pretty
while; so that the most ordinary objects, can not choose but present themselves
quickly, because there are many of them, and are every where scattered about:
but others that are fewer, are longer ere they come in view: much like as in a
pair of beads, that containing more little ones then great ones, if you pluck
to you the string they all hang upon, you shall meet with many more of one
sort, then of the other.

Now, as soon as the brain has lighted on any of those it seeks for, it
puts as it were a stop upon the motion of that; or at the least, it moves
it so, that it goes not far away, and is reuocable at will: and seems like
a bait to draw into the fantasy others belonging unto the same thing, either
through similitude of nature, or by their connection in the impression: and by
this means hinders other objects, not pertinent to the work the fancy has
in hand, from offering themselves unseasonably in the multitudes that otherwise
they would do. But if the fancy should have mistaken one object for an other,
by reason of some resemblance they have between themselves; then it shakes
again the liquid medium they all floate in, and rooseth every species lu^king
in remotest corners, and runs over the whole beaderoule of them: and
continues this inquisition and motion, till either it be satisfied with
retriuing at length what it required, or that it be grown weary with tossing
about the multitude of little inhabitants in its numerous empire, and so gives
over the search, unwillingly and displeasedly.

A Confirmation of the former doctrine.
Now, that these things be as we have declared, will appear out of the
following considerations; first, we see that things of quite different
natures, if they come in together, are remembered together: upon which principle
the whole art of memory depends: such things, can not any way be comprised
under certain heads, nor be linked together by order and consequence, or by
any resemblance to one an other: and therefore all their connection must be,
that as they came in together into the fantasy, so they remain together in
the same place in the memory: and their first coupling, must proceed from the
action that bound them together, in driving them in together.

Next, we may observe, that when a man seeks and tumbleth in his memory for
any thing he would retriue, he has first some common and confused notion of
it: and sometimes he has a kind of flasking or fadeing likeness of it; much
what, as when in striving to remember a name, men use to say, it is at their
tongues end: and this shows, that he attracteth those things he desires,
and has use of, by the likeness of something belonging to them. In like
manner, when hunger makes one think of meat, or thirst makes one dream of
drink, or in other such occasions, wherein the natural appetite stirs
objects in the memory and brings the^ to the fantasy; it is manifest, that
the spirits informing the brain of the defect and pain, which several parts
of the body do endure, for want of their due nourishment; it gives a motion to
the heart, which sends other spirits up to supply the brain, for what service
it will order them: by which, the brain being fortifyed, it follows the
pursuit of what the living creature is in want of; until the distempered
parts be reduced into their due state, by a more solid enjoying of it.

How things renewed in the fantasy, return with the same circumstances that
they had at first.
Now, why objects that are drawn out of the memory, do use to appear in the
fantasy, with all the same circumstances which accompanied them at the time
when the sense did send them thither, (as when in the remembrance of a friend,
we consider him in some place, and at a certain time, and doing some
determinate action) the reason is, that the same body, being in the same
medium, must necessarily have the same kind of motion; and so consequently,
must make the same impression upon the same subject. The medium which these
bodies move in (that is, the memory) is a liquid vaporous substance, in which
they floate and swim at liberty.

Now, in such a kind of medium, all the bodies that are of one nature, will
easily gather together, if nothing disturb them: for as when a tuned lute
string is stricken, that string by communicating a determinate species of
vibration to the air round about it, shakes other stringes, within the
compass of the moved air; not all, of what extent soever, but only such, as
by their natural motion, would cause like curlinges, and fouldes in the air,
as the other does; according to what Galileus has at large declared: even so,
when some atome in the brain is moved, all the rest there about, which are apt
to be wasted with a like vndulation, must needs be moved in chief: and so
they moving, whiles the others of different motions, that having nothing to
raise them, do either lie quiett or move very little in respect of the former;
it is no wonder if they assemble together; and (by the proper course of the
brain) do meet at the common rendez-vous of the fantasy.

And therefore the more impressions, How the memory of things past is lost, or
confounded: and how it is repaired again.
that are made from the same object upon the sense; the more participations of
it, will be gathered together in the memory: and the stronger impressions, it
will upon occasion make in the fantasy: and themselves will be the stronger to
resist any cause that shall strive to deface them. For we see that multitude of
objects, ouerwhelmeth the memory; and puts out, or at the least, makes
unprofitable, those that are seldomst thought on. The reason of which is, that
they being little in quantity, because there are but few species of them; they
can never strike the seat of knowledge, but in company of others; which being
more and greater, do make the impression follow their nature against the
lesser: and in tract of time, things seldom thought of, do grow to have but a
maimed and co^fused shape in the memory; and at length are quite forgotten.
Which happens, because in the liquid medium, they are apt to moulder away, if
they be not often repaired: which mouldring and defacing, is helped on by the
shockes they receive from other bodies: like as in a magasin, a thing that were
not regarded, but were carelessely rumbled up and down, to make room for
others, and all things were promiscuously thrown upon it; it would soon be
bruised and crushed into a misseshapen form, and in the end be broken all in
pieces.

Now, the repairing of any thing in the memory, is done, by receiving new
impressions from the object; or in its absence, by thinking strongly of it:
which is an assembling, and due peecing together of the several particles of
bodies, appertayning to the same matter. But sometimes it happens, that when
the right one can not be found entire, nor all the orderly pieces of it, be
retriued with their just correspondance to one an other; the fancy makes up a
new one in the place of it: which afterward, upon presence of the object,
appears to have been mistaken: and yet the memory, till then, keeps quietly
and vnquessionedly for the true object, what either, the thought, or chance,
mingling several parts, had patched up together.

And from hence, we may discern, how, the loosing or confounding of ones
memory, may happen either by sickness, that distemper the spirits in the
brain, and disorder their motions; or by some blows on the head, whereby a
man is astonished, and all things seem to turn round with him. Of all which
effects, the causes are easy to be found in these suppositions we have laid.

THE FOUR AND THERTIETH CHAPTER: Of voluntary motion: Natural faculties: and
passions.
Of what matter the brain is composed.
HItherto we have labored to convey the object into the brain: but when it is
there, let us see what further effects it causes: and how that action, which
we call Voluntary motion, does proceed from the brain. For the discovery
whereof, we are to note, that the brain is a substance composed of watery
parts mingled with earthy ones: which kind of substances we see are usually
full of stringes: and so in strong hard beer, and in vinegar, and in other
liquors of the l^ke nature, we see (if they be exposed to the sun) little
long fl^kes, which make an appearance of worms or magates floating about. The
reason whereof is, that some dry parts of such liquors, are of themselves as
it were hairy o^ sleasy, that is, have little downy parts, such as you see upon
the legs of flies, or upon caterpillars, or in little looks of wool; by
which they easily catch and stick to other little parts of the like nature,
that come near unto them: and if the liquor be moved, (as it is in the boiling
of beer, or making of vinegar by the heat of the sun) they become long
stringes; because the liquor breaks the ties which are cross to its motion:
but such as lie along the stream, or rather the bubling up, do maintain
themselves in unity, and peradventure grow stronger, by the winding or foulding
of the end of one part with an other: and in their tumbling and rouling still
in the same course, the downy hairs are crushed in, and the body grows long
and round, as happens to a lump of dough, or wax, or wool, rouled a while
in one uniform course. And so, coming to our purpose, we see that the brain,
and all that is made of it, is stringy; wittenesse, the membranes, the flesh,
the bones, etc. But of all the rest, those which be called fibers, are most
stringy: and the nerves seem to be but an assembly of them: for although the
nerves be but a great multitude of stringes lying in a cluster; nevertheless,
by the consent of Physicians and Anatomistes, they are held to be of the very
substance of the brain, dried to a firmer consistence then it is in the head.

This heap of stringes (as we may call it) is enclosed in an outside made of
membranes; whose frame, we need not here display: only we may note, that it is
very apt and fit to stretch; and after stretching, to return again to its
own just length Next, we are to consider, how the brain is of a nature apt to
swell and to sink again: even so much, that Fallopius reports, it does
swell according to the increase of the moon: which whether it be true or no;
there can be no doubt, but that it being of a substance which is full of
skins and stringes, is capable of being stretched, and of swelling upon light
occasions; and of falling or sinking again upon as light: as being easily
penetrable by vapors and by liquors, whose nature it is, to swell and to
extend that which they enter into. Out of which it follows, that it must be
the nature of the nerves to do the like: and indeed, so much the more, by how
much more dry they are then the brain: for we see that (to a certain
measure) drier things are more capable of extension by the ingression of wett,
then moist things are; because these are not capable of receiving much more
wett into them.

These things being premised; What is voluntary motion.
let us imagine that the brain being first swelled, it does afterward
contract it self; and it must of necessity follow, that seeing the nerves are
all open toward the brain (though their concauities can not be discerned)
the spirits and moisture which are in the brain, must needs be pressed into
the nerves: which being already stored with spirits, sufficiently to the
proportion of their hard skins; this addition will make them swell and grow
hard, as a balloone does, which being competently full of air, has
nevertheless more air pressed into it.

Since therefore, the masters of Anatomy do teach us, that in every muscle
there is a nerve, which is spread into a number of little branches along that
muscle; it must follow, that if these little branches be swollen, the flesh
likewise of that muscle, must also needs be swollen. Now the muscle having
both its ends fastened, the one in a greater bone, the other in a lesser; and
there being least resistance on that part, where the bone is lesser, and more
moveable; the swelling of the muscle can not choose, but draw the little bone
toward the great one; and by consequence, move that little bone: and this is
that, which Philosophers usually call Voluntary motion: for since our knowledge
remains in the brain, whatsoever is done by knowledge, must be done by the
brain; and most of what the brain works for the common service of the
living creature, proceeds also from knowledge; that is, from the motion of
the fansy, which we have expressed.

This matter being thus far declared, What those powers are which are called
natural faculties.
we may now enter upon the explication of certain effects; which peradventure
might have challenged room, in the precedent Chapter; but indeed, could not
well be handled without first supposing this last discourse: and it is, what is
meaned by those powers, that are called natural faculties: the which howsoever
in their particulars they be manifold in a living creature, yet whenever any
one of them is resolved, it appears to be compounded of some of these five;
to wit, the attractiue, the retentiue, the secretiue the concoctiue, and the
expulsive faculty.

Of which, the attractiue, the secretiue, and the concoctiue do not seem to
belong unto the nerves, for although we may conceive that the part of the
animal does turn it self toward the thing which it attracteth;
nevertheless, that very turning seems not to be done by virtue of the
muscles, and of the nerves, but rather in a natural way, as the motion of the
heart is performed, in such sort as we have formerly declared: as for example,
if the stomach when it is greedy of meat, draws it self up toward the
throat, it seems rather to be a kind of dryness and of warping, such as we
see in bladders or in leather either by fire or by cold, which make them
shriuell up and grow hard; then that it is a true faculty of the living
creature to seek after meat.

How the attractiue and secretiue faculties, work.
Nor need we extend our discourse any further about these three faculties;
seeing that we have already declared in common, how attraction, drying, and
mixture of active bodies with passive ones, is performed; which needs but
applying unto these particulars, to explicate fully their natures: as for
example; if the kidneyes draw the matter of urine unto them out of the veins,
it may be by any of the following three manners, to wit, either by draught,
wett, or by steame. For if the serous parts that are in the blood which
runs in the veins, do touch some dry parts conformable to their nature,
tending toward the kidneyes* they will infallibly adhere more to those dry
parts, then to the rest of the blood. Which if they do in so great a quantity,
that they reach to other further parts more dry then these, they will leave
the first parts to go to the second: and thus by little, and little, will draw
a line of urine from the blood, if the blood do abound with it: and the nearer
it comes to the kidneyes, the stronger still the attraction will be.

The like will happen, if the serosity which is in the blood, do touch some
part wetted with a like serosity, or where such has lately passed; for as we
see that water will run more easily upon a wett part of a board or a stone
then upon dry one; so you can not doubt, but that if the serous part, which is
mixed with the blood, do light upon a current of its own nature, it will
stick more to that, then to the current of the blood; and so part from the
blood, to go that way which the current of its own nature goes.

Besides, it can not be doubted, but that from the kidneyes, and from the
passages between the kidneyes and the veins, in which the blood is conveyed,
there arises a steame: whose nature is, to incorporate it self with serous
matter, out of whose body it has been extracted. This steame therefore, flying
still to the serous blood which passes by, must of necessity precipitate (as I
may say) the serous parts of that blood* or rather must filter them out of
their maine stock; and so will make them run in that curre^t, from which it
self does flow. And thus you see how Attraction and Secretion are made: for
the drawing of the serosity without drawing the blood, is the parting of the
urine from the blood. And this example, of the kidneyes operation, may be
applied to the attractions of all the other parts.

Now, Concerning the concocti^^ faculty.
the concoctiue faculty (which is the last of the three we took together)
consists of two parts: the one is, as it were a drying of the humor, which
is to be concocted; the other is, a mingling the substance of the vessel in
which the humor is concocted, with the humor it self: for as if you boil
diverse kinds of liquors in brass pannes, the pannes will taynt the liquor
with the quality of the brass; and therefore Physicians forbid the use of
such, in the boiling of several medicines: so much more in a living creatures
body, there can be no doubt, but that the vessel in which any humor is
concocted, does give a tincture thereunto. Now concoction consisting in these
two, it is evident, what the concoctiue virtue is; to wit, heat, and ^he
specificall property of the vessel which by heat is mingled with the humor.

There remain yet, Concerning the retentiue and expulsive faculties.
the retentiue and the expulsive faculties to be discoursed of. Whereof one
kind, is manisfestly belonging to the voluntary motion which we have declared:
namely that retention, and that expulsion, which we ordinarily make of the
gross excrements either of meat, or of drink, or of other humors, either
from our head, or from our stomach, or from our lungs; for it is manifestly
done, partly by taking in of wind, and partly by compressing of some parts
and opening of others: as Galen shows in his curious book de vsu partium.

An other kind of retention and expulsion, in which we have no sense when it is
made, (or if we have, it is of a thing done in us without our will, though
peradventure we may voluntarily advance it) is made by the swelling of fibers
in certain parts, through the confluence of humors to them, (as in our
stomach it happens, by the drink and the juice of the meat that is in it)
which swelling, closes up the passages by which the contained substance should
go out (as the moystening of the stringes, and mouth of a purse, almost
shuts it) until in some (for example the stomach, after a meal) the
humor being attenuated by little and little, gets out subtilely; and so
leaving less weight in the stomach, the bag which weighth down lower, then
the nether orifice at which the digested meat issues, rises a little: and
this rising of it, is also furthered by the wrinkling up and shortning of the
upper part of the stomach which still returns into its natural corrugation,
as the mass of liquid meat leaves soaking it (which it does by degrees,
still as more and more goes out; and so what remains fills less place,
and reaches not so high of the stomach:) and thus at length, the residue and
thicker substance of the meat, after the thinnest is got out in steame, and
the middling part is boiled over in liquor, comes to press and grauitate
wholly upon the orifice of the stomach; which being then helped by the figure
and lying of the rest of the stomach, and its stringes and mouth relaxing, by
having the juice which swelled them, squeezed out of them; it opens it self,
and gives way unto that which lay so heavy upon it, to tumble out. In others
(for example, in a woman with child) the enclosed substance, (retained first
by such a course of nature as we have set down) breaks it self a passage
by force, and opens the orifice at which it is to go out by violence, when
all circumstances are ripe according to natures institution.

Concerning expulsion made by Physic.
But yet there is the expulsion which is made by physic, that requires a
little declaration. It is of five kinds: vomiting, purging by stool, by
urine, sweating, and saliuation. Every one of which, seems to consist of two
parts, namely the disposition of the thing to be purged, and the motion of the
nerves or fibers for the expulsion: as for example, when the Physician gives a
purge, it works two things; the one is, to make some certain humor more
liquid and purgeable the^ the rest; the other is, to make the stomach or
belly, suck or vent this humor For the first, the property of the purge must
be, to precipitate that humor out of the rest of the blood; or if it be
thick, to dissolve it that it may run easily. For the second, it ordinarily
heateth the stomach; and by that means, it causes the stomach to suck out
of the veins, and so to draw from all parts of the body. Besides this, it
ordinarily fills the belly with wind, which occasioneth those gripings men
feel when they take physic; and is cause of the guts discharging those
humors, which otherwise they would retain.

The like of this happens in saliuation; for the humors are by the same
means brought to the stomach, and thence sublimed up to be spitten out: as we
see in those, who taking Mercury into their body, either in substance or in
smoke, or by application, do vent cold humors from any part; the Mercury
rising from all the body up to the mouth of the patient, as to the helm of a
sublimatory: and the like some say of Tobacco.

As for vomiting, it is in a manner wholly the operation of the fibers, provoked
by the feeling of some inconvenient body, which makes the stomach wrincle it
self, and work and strive to cast out what offends it.

Sweating seems to be caused, by the heating of some introus body by the
stomach; which being of subtle parts, is by heat dispersed from the middle
to the circumference; and carries with it light humors, which turn into
water as they come out into the air. And thus you see in general, and as much
as concerns us to declare, what the natural faculties are: and this,
according to Galen his own mind: who affirms, that these faculties do follow
the complexion, or the temper of the parts of a man's body.

How the brain is moved to work voluntary motion.
Having explicated how voluntary motion proceeds from the brain: our next
consideration ought to be, to examine what it is; that such an object, as we
brought, by means of the senses, into the brain from without, does contribute
to make the brain apply it self to work such voluntary motion. To which
purpose, we will go a step or two back, to meet the object at its entrance
into the sense; and from thence accompany it in all its journey and motions
onwardes. The object which strikes at the senses door, and getting in,
mingleth it self with the spirits it finds there; is either conform and
agreeable to the nature and temper of those spirits, or it is not: that is to
say in short, it is either pleasing or displeasing to the living creature: or
it may be of a third kind, which being neither of these, we may term
indifferent. In which sort soever the object affect the sense, the spirits
carry it immediately to the brain; unless some distemper or strong thought,
or other accident hinder them.

Now, if the object be of the third kind; that is, be indiffent; as soon as it
has stricken the brain, it reboundeth to the circle of the memory: and there,
being speedily joined to others of its own nature, it finds them annexed to
some pleasing or displeasing thing, or it does not: if not, in beasts it
serves to little use: and in men, it remains there until it be called for.
But if, either in its own nature, it be pleasing or displeasing, or
afterward, in the memory it became joined to some pleasing or annoying
fellowshipp; presently, the heart is sensible of it: for the heart being joined
to the brain by straight and large nerves, full of strong spirits which ascend
from the heart; it is impossible, but that it must have some communication with
those motions, which pass in the brain: upon which the heart, or rather the
spirits about it, is either dilated or compressed.

And these motions, may be either totally of one kind, or moderated, and
allayed by the mixture of its contrary: if of the former sort; one of them we
call joy, the other grief; which do continue about the heart (and peradventure
do oppress it if they be in the utmost extremity) without sending any due
proportion of spirits to the brain until they settle a little, and grow more
moderate.

Now, when these motions are moderate; they immediately send up some abundance
of spirits to the brain: which if they be in a convenient proportion, they are
by the brain thrust into such nerves as are fit to receive them: and swelling
them, they give motion to the muscles and tendons that are fastened to them:
and they do move the whole body, or what part of it is under command of those
nerves, that are thus filled and swelled with spirits by the brain.

If the object was conformable to the living creature, then the brain sends
spirits into such nerves, as ca^^y the body to it: but if otherwise, it causes
a motion of auersion or flight from it. To the cause of this latter, we give
the name of Fear: and the other, that carries one to the pursuit of the
object, we call Hope. Anger, or Audaci^y, is mixed of both these; for it
seeks to avoid an evil by embracing and ouercoming it: and proceeds out
of abundance of spirits.

Now, if the proportion of spirits sent from the heart, be too great for the
brain, it hinders or peruerteth the due operation both in man and beast.

All which it will not be amiss to open a little more particularly: and first;
Why pleasing objects do dilate the spirits, and displeasing ones contract them.
why painful or displeasing objects, do contract the spirits, and grateful
ones, do contrary wise, dilate them? It is, because the good of the heart
consists in life, that is in heat and moisture: and it is the nature of
heat, to dilate it self in moisture; whereas cold and dry things, do
contract the bodies they work upon: and such are enemies to the nature of men
and beasts: and accordingly experience, as well as reason, teaches us, that
all objects, which be naturally good, are such as be hot and moist in the due
proportion to the creature that is affected and pleased with them.

Now, the living creature being composed of the same principles as the world
round about him is; and the heart being an abridgement of the whole sensible
creature; and being moreover full of blood, and that very hot; it comes to
pass, that if any of these little extracts of the outward world, do arrive to
the hot blood about the heart, it works in this blood such like an effect, as
we see a drop of water falling into a glass of wine; which is presently
dispersed into a competent compass of the wine: so that any little object,
must needs make a notable motion in the blood about the heart.

This motion, according to the nature of the object, will be either conformable
or contrary; unless it be so little a one, as no effect will follow of it; and
then, it is of that kind, which above we called indifferent. If the ensuing
effect, be connaturall to the heart, there rises a motion of a certain fume
about the heart; which motion we call pleasure; and it never fails of
accompanying all those motions which are good, as Joy, Love, Hope and the like:
but if the motion be displeasing; there is likewise a common sense of a
heaviness about the heart* which we call grief: and it is common to sorrow,
fear, hate, and the like.

Now it is manifest by experience, that th^se motions are all of them different
ones, and do strike against diverse of those parts of our body which encompasse
the heart: out of which striking follows that the spirits sent from the heart,
do affect the brain diversely; and are by it, conveyed into diverse nerves, and
so do set diverse members in action. Whence follows, that certain members
are generally moved upon the motion of such a passion in the heart, especially
in beast, ^ho have a more determinate course of working, then man has: and if
^ometimes we see variety, even in beasts, upon knowledge of the circumstances,
we may easily guess at the causes of that variety: the particularities of all
which motions, we remitt to Physicians and to Anatomistes: aduertising only,
that the fume of pleasure, and the heaviness of grief, do plainly show, that
the first motions do participate of dilatation* and the latter of compression.
Concerning the five senses for what use and end they are.


Thus you see, how by the senses, a living creature becomes judge of what is
good, and of what is bad for him: which operation, is performed more perfectly
in beasts; and especially in those, who live in the free air, remote from
humane conversation, (for their senses are fresh and vntaynted, as nature made
them) then in men. Yet without doubt nature has been as favorable in this
particular to men, as unto them; were it not, that with disorder and excess,
we corrupt and oppress our senses: as appears evidently by the story we have
recorded of John of Liege: as also by the ordinary practice of some Hermites in
the diserts, who by their taste or smell, would presently be informed whether
the herbs, and roots, and fruits they met withal, were good or hurtful for
them, though they never before had had trial of them.

Of which excellency of the senses, there remains in us only some dim
sparks, in those qualities which we call sympathies and antipathies: whereof
the reasons are plain, out of our late discourse: and are nothing el^e, but a
conformity or opposition of a living creature, by some individual property of
it, unto some body without it: in such sort, as its conformity or opposition
unto things by its specificall qualities, is termed natural or against
nature. But of this we shall discourse more at large hereafter.

Thus it appears, how the senses are seated in us, principally for the end of
moving us to, or from objects, that are good for us, or hurtful to us. But
though our Reader be content to allow this intent of nature, in our three
inferior senses; yet he may peradventure not be satisfied, how the two more
noble ones (the hearing and the seeing) do cause such motions to, or from
objects, as are requisite to be in living creatures for the preservation of
them: for (may he say) how can a man, by only seeing an object, or by hearing
the sound of it, tell what qualities it is embued withal? Or what motion of
liking or disliking, can be caused in his heart, by his mere receiving the
visible species of an object at his eyes, or by his ears hearing some noise it
makes? And if there be no such motion there, what should occasion him, to
prosecute or avoid that object? When he tastes, or smells, or touches a
thing, he finds it sweet, or bitter, or stinking, or hot, or cold; and is
therewith either pleased or displeased: but when he only sees or hears it,
what liking or disliking can he have of it, in order to the preservation of his
nature?

The solution of this difficulty, may in part appear out of what we have
already said. But for the most part, the objects of th^se two nobler senses,
d^^moue us, by being joined in the memory with some other thing that did either
please or displease some of the other three senses. And from thence it is, that
the motion of going to embrace the object, or ^uersion from it, does
immediately proceed: as when a dog sees a man that uses to give him meat,
the species of the man coming into his fancy, calls out of his memory the
others which are of the same nature, and are former participations of that man,
as well as this f^esh one is: but these are joined with specieses of meat;
because at other times, they did use to come in together: and therefore the
meat being a good unto him, and causing him (in the manner we have said) to
move toward it; it will follow that the dog will presently move toward
that man, and express a contentedness in being with him. And this is the
ground of all assuefaction in beasts, and of making them capable of receiving
any instructions.

THE FIVE AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of the material instruments of Knowledge and
Passion; of the several effects of Passions; of Pain and Pleasure; and how
the vital spirits are sent from the brain into the intended parts of the
body, without mistaking their way.
That Septum Lucidum is the seat of the fancy.
TO conclude this great business, which concerns all the mutations and
motions, that are made by outward Agents in a living creature, it will not be
amiss, to take a short and general suruay of the material instruments, which
concur to this effect. Whereof the brain being the principal, or at least,
the first and next of the principalles; we may take notice that it contains,
toward the middle of its substance, four concauities, as some do count them:
but in truth, these four, are but one great concauity, in which, four, as it
were, diverse rooms, may be distinguished. The nether part of these
concauities, is very unequal, having joined unto it, a kind of nett, wrought
by the entangling of certain little arteries, and of small emanations from a
Sinus, which are interwouen together. Besides this, it is full of kernels,
which do make it yet more uneven.

Now, two rooms of this great concauity, are divided by a little body, somewhat
like a skin, (though more fryable) which of it self is clear; but there it
is somewhat dimmed, by reason that hanging a little slack, it somewhat
shriueleth together: and this, Anatomistes do call Septum Lucidum, or speculum;
and is a different body from all the rest that are in the brain. This
transpare^t body, hangs as it were straightwardes, from the forehead toward
the hinder part of the head: and divides the hollow of the brain, as far as
it reaches, into the right and the left ventricles.

This part seems to me, (after weighing all circumstances, and considering
all the conueniencies, and fittenesses) to be that, and only that, in which the
fancy or common sense resideth: though Monsieur des Carts has rather chosen
a kernel to place it in. The reasons of my assertions are; first, that it is
in the middle of the brain, which is the most convenient situation to receive
the messages from all our body, that do come by nerves, some from before, and
some from behind. Secondly, that with its two sides, it seems to be
conveniently opposed to all such of our senses, as are double; the one of them
sending its little messengers or atoms, to give it aduertissements on one side,
the other on the other side; so that it is capable of receiving impression
indifferently from both. Again, by the nature of the body, it seems more
fit to receive all differences of motion, then any other body near it. It is
also most comfortable to the nature of the eye; which being our principal
outward sense, must needs be in the next degree to that, which is elevated a
strain above our outward senses. Fifthly, it is of a single and peculiar
nature* whereas the kernels are many, and all of them of the same condition,
quality, and appearance. Sixthly, it is seated in the very hollow of the brain;
which of necessity must be the place and receptacle where the specieses and
similitudes of things do reside; and where they are moved and tumbled up and
down, when we think of many things. And lastly, the situation we putt our
head in, when we think earnestly of any thing, favors this opinion: for
then we hang our head forwards, as it were forcing the specieses to settle
toward our forehead, that from thence they may rebound, and work upon this
diaphanous substance.

This then supposed, What causes us to remember not only the object it self;
but also that we have thought of it before.
let us consider, that the atoms or likenesses of bodies, having given their
touch upon this Septum or Speculum, do thence retire back into the
concauities, and do stick (as by chance it happens) in some of the
inequalities they encounter with there. But if some wind or forcible steame,
should break into these caves, and as it were brush and sweep them over; it
must follow, that these little bodies will loosen themselves, and begin to
play in the vapor which fills this hollow place: and so floting up and
down, come a new to strike and work upon the Speculum or fantasy: which being
also a soluble body, many times these atoms striking upon it, do carry some
little corporeal substance from it sticking upon them: whence ensues, that
they returning again with those tinctures or participations of the very
substance of the fantasy; do make us remember, not only the objects themselves,
but also that we have thought of them before.

Further we are to know, How the motions of the fantasy, are derived to the
heart.
that all the nerves of the brain, have their beginnings not far of from
this speculum: of which we shall take a more particular consideration of two,
that are called the sixth pair or couple: which pair has this singularity,
that it begins in a great many little branches, that presently grow together,
and make two great ones contained within one skin. Now this being the
property of a sense (which requires to have many fibers in it, to the end that
it may be easily and vigorously stricken, by many parts of the object lighting
upon many parts of those little fibers) it gives us to understand, that this
sixth couple has a particular nature, conformable to the nature of an externe
sense; and that the Architect who placed it there, intended by the several
conduites of it, to give notice unto some part they go unto, of what passes
in the brain: and accordingly one branch of this nerve, reaches to the heart;
not only to the Pericardium, as Galen thought, but even to the very substance
of the heart it self, as later Anatomistes have discovered: by which we
plainly see how the motion which the senses do make in the Speculum, may be
derived down to the heart.

Of pain and pleasure.
Now therefore let us consider, what effects the motions so conveyed from the
brain, will work in the heart. First remembering how all that moves the heart,
is either pain or pleasure (though we do not use to call it pain, but grief,
when the evil of sense moves us only by memory, and not by being actually in
the sense) and then calling to mind, how pain (as Naturalistes teach us)
consists in some division of a nerve, (which they call Solutio continui: and
must be in a nerve; for that no solution can be the cause of pain, without
sense, nor sense be without nerves; and therefore this solution must needs be
in nerves, to have it prove painful,) we may conclude, that the effect which
we call pain, is nothing else but a compression: for although this solution of
continuity may seem to be a dilatation; yet in truth, it is a compression, in
the part where the evil is, which happens unto it in the same manner as we
showed (when we spoke of the motion of restitution) it does to stiff bodies,
that by violence are compressed and drawn into a less capacious figure, then
their nature affects, and return into their own state as soon as the
mastering violence leaves them at liberty.

Pleasure therefore, must be contrary to this, and consist in a moderate
dilatation; for an immoderate one, would cause a compression in some adherent
parts; and there would become pain. And conformable to this, we experience,
that generally they are hard things which breed pain unto us; and that these
which breed pleasure, are oily and soft; as meats, and odours, which are
sweet to the taste and smell; and soft substances, which are grateful to the
touch: the excess of all which proves offensive and painful; so that from
the extremity of pleasure, one enters presently upon the confines of pain.

Now then let us consider, how the little similitudes of bodies, which from
without do come into the fantasy, must of necessity work there, according to
their little power, effects proportionable to what they wrought first in the
outward senses, from whence, they were conveyed to the brain: for the senses
(that is the nerves) and the Septum Lucidum, having both of them their origin
from the very substance of the brain, and differing only in degrees of purity
and refinement, the same object must needs workelike effects in both,
compressing or dilating them proportionably to one an other: which compression
or dilatation, is not pain or pleasure, as it is in the outward sense; but as
it is reported to the heart: and that, being the seat of all pains or
pleasures wrought in other parts, and that (as it were) dies them into those
qualities, is not capable of feeling either it self: so that the strokes of
any little similitudes upon the fantasy, do make only compressions or
dilatations there, not pains or pleasures.

Of Passion.
Now their bodies or similitudes, if they be reuerberated from the fantasy or
septum Lucidum, upon the little roots of the nerves of the sixth couple, which
go to the heart, they must needs work there a proportionable impression to
what they wrought upon the fansy, either compressing or dilating it; and the
heart being extremely passive, by reason of its exceeding tenderness and heat;
can not choose but change its motion, at the least in part, if not in whole:
and this with relation to two causes; the one the disposition of the heart it
self; the other, the vehemence of the stroke.

This change of motion and different beating of the heart, is that which
properly is called passion: and is ever accompanied with pleasure or with
grief, according to the nature of the impression, that either contracteth or
dilateth the heart and the spirirs about it: and is discovered by the beating of
the arteries and of the pulse. Conformable whereunto, Physicians do tell us,
that every passion has a distinct pulse.

These pulses are divided in common, Of several pulses caused by passions.
by abundance, or by want of spirits: yet in both kinds, they may have common
differencies; for in abundance, the pulse may be quick or slow, regular or
irregular, equal or unequal: and the like may happen in defect of spirits;
according to the motions of the heart, which are their causes. Again, the
object by being present or absent, nearer or further off, makes the stroke
greater or lesser: and accordingly, varyeth the motion of the heart.

Let us then call to mind, how we have formerly declared, that life consists
in heat and humidity; and that these two joined together, do make a thing
great: and we may conclude, that of necessity the motion which is most lively,
must have a great, full, and large stroke; like the eue^ rolling waves of a
wide and smooth sea; and not too quick or smart, like the breaches of a narrow
Fretum, agitated by tempestuous winds. From this, other motions may vary
either by excess, or by deficiency: the first makes the stroke become smart,
violent, and thick: the other slackeneth it, and makes it grow little, slow,
weak, and thin, or seldom.

And if we look into the motions of our heart, we shall see these three
differencies of them, follow three several chief passions. The first,
follows the passion of joy: the second, the passion of anger: and the third
the passion of grief. Nor need we look any further into the causes of these
several motions; for we see that joy and grief, following the stroke of
sense, the one of them must consist in an oily dilatation: that is, the spirits
about the heart, must be dilated by a gentle, large, great, and sweet motion,
in a moderation between velocity and slownesse: the other contrariwise,
following the stroke of sense in pain, as the first did in pleasure, must
contract the spirits; and consequently make their motion or stroke become
little, and deficient from all the properties we have above set down.

As for anger, the motion following that passion, is, when the abundance of
spirits in the heart is a little checked by the contrary stroke of sense, but
presently ouercometh that opposition: and then, as we see a hindered water, or
a man, that suddenly or forcibly break through what withstood their motion,
go on with a greater violence then they did, and as it were precipitately: so
the heart, having overcome the contraction, which the sense made in it, dilateth
it self with a fury, and makes its motion smart and vehement. Whence also it
follows, that the spirits grow hoater then they were: and accordingly, it is
often seen, that in the scoulding of a woman, and in the irritation of a dog,
if ever now and then, one thwart them, and interpose a little opposition, their
fury will be so sharpened and heightened, that the woman will be transported
beyond all limits of reason, and the dog will be made mad with nothing else
done to him, but angring him at convenient times: and some men likewise, have
by sleight oppositions, iterated speedily upon them, before their spirits could
relent their vehement motion (and therefore, must still increase it) been
angered into feauers.

This passion of anger, seems almost to be solitary on the side of excess
beyond joy: which is, as it were the standard and perfection of all passions*
as light or whiteness, is of all colors: but on the otherside, of deficiency,
there are several middle passions, which participate more or less of joy and
grief: as particularly those two famous ones, which govern man's life, Hope
and Fear. Concerning which, Physicians tell us, that the pulse or beating of
fear, is quick, hard, and unequal: unto which I conceive we may safely add,
that it must also be small and feeble* the perfection of joy, decreasing in it
on one side, to wit, from greatness and largeness; but not entirely; so that
a kind of quickness supplyeth in part the other defect. Hope on the other
side, is in such sort defective from joy, that nevertheless it has a kind of
constancy, and moderate quantity, and regularity in its motion: and therefore
is accounted to be the least hurtful of all the passions, and that which most
prolongeth man's life. And thus you see how those motions, which we call
passions, are engendered in the heart, and what they are.

Let us then in the next place consider, what will follow in the rest of the
body, out of these varieties of passions, Of several other effects caused
naturally in the body by passions.
once raised in the heart and sent into the brain. It is evident, that
according to the nature and quality of these motions, the heart must needs in
every one of them, void out of it self into the arteries, a greater or lesser
quantity of blood, and that in diverse fashions: and the arteries which lie
fittest to receive these sudden egestions of blood, are those which go into
the brain: whose course being directly vpwardes, we can not doubt, but that it
is the hoatest and subtilest part of the blood, and the fullest of spirits,
that flies that way. These spirits then running a long and perplexed journey
up and down in the brain, by various meanders and anfractuosities, are there
mingled with the humide steame of the brain it self, and are therewith
cooled; and do come at the last, to smoke at liberty in the hollow ventricles
of the brain, by reeking out of the little arteriall branches, that do weaue
the plexus choroides, or net we spoke of ere while: and they being now grown
heavy, do fall (by their natural course) into that part or process of the
brain, which is called medulla spinalis, or the marrow of the back bone:
which being all besett by the nerves that run through the body, it can not
happen otherwise, but that these thickened and descending spirits, must either
fall themselves into those nerves, or else press into them other spirits which
are before them, that without such new force to drive them violently forwards,
would have slided down more leisurely. Now, this motion being downewardes, and
meeting with no obstacle till it arrive unto its utmost periode that way, the
lowest nerves are those, which naturally do feel the communication of these
spirits first.

But it is true, if the flowing tide of them be great and plentiful, all the
other nerves will also be so suddenly filled, upon the filling of the
lowermost, that the succession of their swellings, will hardly be perceptible:
as a sudden and violent inundation of water, seems to rise on the sides of
the channel, as it does at the milldamme; though reason assures us it must
begin there, because there it is first stopped.

On the contrary side, if the spirits be few, they may be in such a proportion,
as to fill only the lower nerves, and to communicate little of themselves to
any of the others. And this is the case in the passion of fear: which being
stored with fewer spirits, the^ any other passion that causes a motion in the
body, it moves the legs most; and so carries the animal that is affrayd,
with violence from the object that affrighteth him. Although in truth, it is a
faint hope of escaping, mingled with fear, which begets this motion: for
when fear is single, and at its height, it stops all motion by contracting
the spirits, and thence is called stupor; as well as grief, for the same
reason: and accordingly we see extreme cowardes in the extremity of their
fear, have not the courage to run away, no more then to defend or help
themselves by any other motions.

But if there be more abundance of spirits; then the upper parts are also
moved, as well as the legs; whose motion contributeth to defense: but the
brain it self, and the senses which are in the head, being the first in the
course of this flood of spirits, that is sent from the heart to the head; it is
impossible, but that some part of them, should be pressed into the nerves of
those senses, and so will make the animal vigilant and attentive to the cause
of its fear or grief.

But if the fear be so great, that it contracteth all the spirits, and quite
hinders their motion, (as in the case we touched above) then it leaves also
the nerves of the senses destitute of spirits; and so by too strong
apprehension of a danger, the animal neither sees nor apprehends it: but as
easily precipitateth it self into it, as it happens to avoid it; being
merely governed by chance; and may peradventure seem valiant, through
extremity of fear.

And thus you see in common, how all the natural operations of the body, do
follow by natural consequence out of the passions of the mind: without needing
to attribute discourse or reason, either to men or beasts to perform them.
Although at the first sight, some of them may appear unto those that look not
into their principles and true causes, to flow from a source of intelligence:
whereas it is evident by what we have laid open, they all proceed from the
due ranging and ordering of quantitatiue parts, so or so proportioned by
rarity and density. And there is no doubt, but who would follow this search
deeply, might certainly retriue the reasons of all those external motions,
which we see use to accompany the several passions in men and Beasts. But
for our intent we have said enough, to show by what kind or order and course
of nature, they may be effected (without confining our selves over scrupulously
to every circumstance that we have touched) and to give a hinte, whereby others
that will make this inquiry their task, may compile an entire, and well
grounded and intelligible doctrine of this matter.

Only we will add one aduertissement more; which is, that these external
motions caused by passion, are of two kinds: for some of them are as it were
the beginnings of the actions, which nature intends to have follow out of the
passions that cause them: but others are only bare signs of the passions that
produce them, and are made by the co^nexion of parts unnecessary for the maine
action that is to follow out of the passion, with other parts that by the
passion are necessarily moved: as for example, when an hungry man's mouth
waters at the sight of good meat; it is a kind of beginning of eating, or of
preparation for eating for when we eat, nature draws a moisture into our
mouth, to humectate our meat, and to convey the taste of it into the nerves of
the tongue, which are to make report of it unto the brain: but when we laugh,
the motion of our face aymeth at no further end, and follows only by the
connection of those muscles, which draw the face in such a sort, unto some
inward parts, that are moved by the passion, out of which laughing proceeds.

Of the diaphragma.
But we must not leave this subject without some mention of the diaphragma: into
which the other branch of those nerves, that are called of the sixth
conjugation, does come: for the first branch we have said goes into the heart,
and carries thither the objects that come into the brain: and this, we shall
find, carries back to the brain the passion or motion, which by the object
is raised in the heart. Concerning this part of our body, you are to note, that
it is a muscolous membrane, which in the middle of it has a sinnewy circle;
whereunto is fastened the case of the heart, called the Pericardium. This
Diaphragma is very sensible, receiving its virtue of feeling from the above
mentioned branch of the sixth couple of nerves: and being of a trembling nature,
is by our respiration kept in continual motion: and flappeth upon all
occasions, as a drum head would do, if it were slack and moist; or as a
sail would do, that were brought into the wind.

Out of this description of it, it is obuious to conceive, that all the changes
of motion in the heart, must needs be expressed in the Diaphragma. For the heart
beating upon the Pericardium, and the Pericardium being joined to the
Diaphragma; such iogges and vibrations must needs be imprinted and ecchoed
there, as are formed in the heart: which from thence, can not choose but be
carried to the brain by the sixth couple of nerves. And thus it comes about,
that we feel and have sensation of all the passions, that are moved in our
heart. Which peradventure is the reason, why the Greeks do call this part
(...); and from it derive the verb (...), that in latin signifies Sapere,
with us, to savor or to like: for by this part of our body, we have a liking
of any object, or a motion of inclination toward it: from whence (...) is
derived, by composition of (...), with (...): for a prudent man is he, that
likes, and is moved to compass wholesome and good things. Which Etymology of
the word, seems unto me more natural, then from the phrenesy, from whence
some derive it; because a great distemper or inflammation in the Diaphragma,
often causes that disease.

Now, Concerning pain and pleasure caused by the memory of things past.
because the object is conveyed from the brain to the heart some part of its
way, by the same passage, as the motion of the heart is reconueyed back to the
brain* it must of necessity follow, that who is more atte^tiue to outward
sense, does less consider or reflect upon his passion; and who is more
attentive to observe, and be gouuerned by what passes in his heart, is less
wrought upon by external things. For if his fantasy draws strongly unto it,
the emanations from outward agents upon the senses, the stream of those
emanations will descend so strongly from the ouerfilled fantasy into the heart,
that it will hinder the ascent of any fewer and weaker spirits by the same
pipe. But if the current do set strongest vpwardes, from the heart by the
Diaphragma to the brain, then it will so fill the pipe by which it ascends,
that little of a weaker tide, can make a contrary eddy water in the same
channel.

And by this means, nature effects a second pleasure or pain in a living
creature, which moves it (oftentimes very powerfully) in absence of the
primary object: as we may observe, when thinking of any pleasing or displeasing
action, we find about our heart a motion which enticeth us to it, or auerteth us
from it: for as the first pleasure was occasioned by the stroke, which the
object applied to the outward sense, made upon the fantasy, (which can judge of
nothing without being stricken by it) so the second pleasure springs from the
spirits moved in the heart, by messengers from the brain, which by the
Diaphragma do rebound a stroke back again upon the fantasy. And from hence
it proceeds, that memory delights or afflicts us; and that we think of
past things with sweetness or with remorse: and thereby assuefaction is
wrought in beasts, as far as the appetitiue part does contribute thereunto,
to perfect what was begun in their cognoscitiue part, by the ingression of
corporeal speciefes into their fantasy, in order to the same effect, as we
have touched before.

How so small bodies as atoms are, can cause so great motions in the heart.
But now let us examine, how so small a quantity of a body, as comes from an
object into our sense, can be the cause of so great a motion about our heart. To
which purpose we are to remember, that this motion is performed in the most
subtle and thin substance, that can be imagined: they are the vital
spirits, that do all this work; which are so subtle, so agile, and so hot,
that they may in some sort be termed fire. Now if we reflect how violent fire
is, we need not wonder at the sudden and great motion of these passions.

But we must further take notice, that they are not in the greatest excess,
but where the living creature has been long inured and exercised unto them,
either directly or indirectly: so that they arrive not to that pitch so much
out of the power of the agent, as out of the preparation and disposition of the
patient; as when cold water has been often heated by extinguishing red hot
irons in it, after some repetitions a few quenchinges will reduce it from cold
to boiling, that at the first would scarce have made it lukewarm: and
accordingly we see a heart, that for a long time has loved, and vehemently has
desired enjoying, is transported in a high degree, at the least sight and
renuance of strokes from its beloved object; and is as much dejected, upon any
the least deprivation of it: for to such an object, the living creature is
hurried away by a force much resembling the gravity or celerity of a dense
body, that is set on running down a steep hill; unto which, the only taking
away of a weak let or the least stop, gives a precipitate course; not out
of the force of what is done to it, but out of the force which was formerly in
the thing, though for the present it lay there undiscovered: and so likewise in
these cases, the object rather gives the occasion of the violent motion, then
the force or power to it.

How the vital spirits sent from the brain, do run to the intended part of
the body without mistake.
These things being thus determined, some peradventure may ask, how it comes
to pass, that the spirits which cause motion, being sent on their arrant by
the brain, do always hitt the right way, and light duly into those very
sinnewes, which move the living creature according as is requisite for its
nature? Since all the passages are open, what is it that governs them, so as
they never mistake, and the animal is never driven toward harm, instead of
flying from it? Who is their guide in these obscure paths? But it were to
impute ignorance to the maker, to think that he framed all the passages alike,
and so every one of them, promiscuously apt to receive into them, all sorts of
spirits howsoever they be moved: and therefore, we may assure our selves, that
since in these diversities of occasions, there are likewise diverse kinds of
motions from the hart^ either there is proportionable unto them, diverse kinds
of passages fit to receive and entertain the spirits, according to the
condition they are in, so as the passages which are aiusted to one kind of
spirits, will not admit any of an other nature: or else, the first motions of
liking or disliking in the heart, which (as we have said) do cause a swelling or
a contraction of it against this or that part; does stop and hinder the the
entrance of the spirits into some sinews, and does open others, and drives
the spirits into them: so as in the end, by a result of a chain of swellings
and contractions of several parts successively one against an other, the due
motions of prosecution or auersion are brought about.

As for example; an object that affects the heart with liking, by dilating the
spirits about the heart, sends some into the opt^ke nerves, and makes the
living creature turn his eye toward it and keep, it steady upon what he
desires as contrariwise, if he dislike and fear it, he naturally turns his
eye and head from it. Now, of this motion of the eye and head, may depend the
running to the thing in one case, and the running from it in the other: for the
turning of the neck one way, may open a passage for the spirits into those
sinews, which carry the rest of the body toward the object: and the turning
of it to the other side, may open other sinews, which shall work a contrary
effect, and carry the animal from the object: and the moving of those sinews,
which at the first do turn the neck, does proceed from the quality and number
of the spirits that ascend from the heart, and from the region of the heart from
whence they are sent: according to the variety whereof, there are diverse
sinews fitted to receive them.

To make up which discourse, we may call to mind, what we have said a little
above, concerning the motions caused in the external parts of the body, by
passion moving within: as when fear mingled with hope, gives a motion to the
legs, anger to the arms and hands, and all the rest of the body, as well as
to the legs; and all of them, an attention in the outward senses; which
nevertheless peruerteth every one of their functions, if the passion be in
extremity. And then surely, we may satisfy our selves, that either this, or
some way like it (which I leave unto the curious in Anatomy to settle with
exactenesse; for it is enough for my intent, to show in gross how these
operations may be done, without calling in some incomprehensible qualities to
our aid) is the course of nature in motions, where no other cause interueneth,
besides the object working upon the sense: which all the while it does, it is
the office of the eye of fantasy or of common sense, to lie ever open; still
watching to observe what warninges the outward senses do send unto him; that
accordingly he may direct and change, the motions of the heart and of the whole
body.

But if the object do make violent impressions upon the sense; How men are
blinded by Passion.
and the heart, being then vehemently moved, do there upon send abou^dance of
spirits up to the brain; this multitude of spirits thronging upon the common
sense, oppresses it (as we have already said) in such sort, that the notice
which the sense gives of particular circumstances, can not prevail to any
effect in the brain: and thus by the misguidance of the heart, the work of
nature is disordered: which when it happens, we express in short, by saying
that passion blinds the creature, in whom such violent and disorderly motions
have course; for passion is nothing else, but a motion of the blood and spirits
about the heart; and is the preparation or beginning of the animals working; as
we have above particularly displayed.

And thus you see in common, how the circuit is made from the object to the
sense, and from it by the common sense and fantasy, to the heart; and from the
heart back again to the brain; which then sets on work those organes or
parts the animal is to make use of in that occasion: and they either bring him
to, or carry him from the object, that at the first caused all this motion, and
in the end becomes the periode of it.

THE SIX AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of some actions of beasts, that seem to be
formal acts of reason, as doubting, resolving, inuenting.
The order and connection of the subsequent Chapters.
IN the last Chapter the foundations are laid, and the way is opened, for the
discovering how all operations which proceed from nature and passion, are
performed among living creatures: and therefore, I conceive I have thereby
sufficiently complied with the obligation of my intention: which is but to
express and show in common, how all the actions of sensible bodies may be
reduced to local motion, and to material application of one boy unto an
other, in a like manner (though in a different degree) as those motions which
we see in liueliest bodies. Yet because among such animals as pass for
irrational, there happen some operations of so admirable a strain, as
resemble very much the highest effects which proceed from a man: I think it
not amiss, to give some further light, by extending my discourse to some more
particulars then hitherto I have done; whereby the course and way how they are
performed, may be more clearly and easily looked into: and the rather, because
I have met with some men, who either wanting patience to bestow on thoughts
of this kind so much time as is necessary for the due scanning of them; or else
through a promptitude of nature, passing swiftly from the effect they look
upon in gross, to the most obuious seeming cause; do suddenly and strongly
resolve, that beasts use discourse upon occasions, and are endewed with reason.

This I intend not to do quite in particular, for that were to write the
history of every particular animal: but will content my self with touching the
causes in common; yet in such sort, that the indifferent Reader may be
satisfied of a possibility, that these effects may proceed from material
causes: and that I have poynted out the way, to those who are more curious, and
have the patience and leisure to observe diligently what passes among beasts,
how they may trace these effects from step to step, until at length they
discover their true causes.

To begin then; I conceive we may reduce all those actions of beasts, which
seem admirable, and above the reach of an irrational animal, unto three or
four several heads. The first may be of such, as seem to be the very
practice of reason, as doubting, resolving, inuenting and the like. The next
shall be of such, as by docility or practice beasts do oftentimes arrive unto.
In the third place, we will consider certain continuate actions of a long
tract of time, so orderly performed by them, as that discourse and rational
knowledge seem clearly to shine through them. And lastly we will cast our eye
upon some others, which seem to be even above the reason that is in man
himself, as the knowing of things which the sense never had impression of
before, a prescience of future events, prouidences, and the like.

As for the first: From whence proceeds the doubting of beasts.
the doubting of beasts, and their long wavering sometimes between objects
that draw them several ways, and at the last their resolving upon some one of
them, and their steady pursuance of that afterward; will not be matter of
hard digestion to him, that shall have well relished and meditated upon the
contents of the last Chapter: for it is evident, that if several objects of
different natures do at the same time present themselves unto a living
creature, they must of necessity make diverse impressions in the heart of it,
proportionable unto the causes from whence they proceed: so that if one of them
be a motion of hope, and the other be of fear; it can not choose but follow
thence, that what one of them begins, the other will presently break off:
by which means it will come to pass, that in the beasts heart there must
needs be such wauinges, as we may observe in the sea, when at the beginning of
a tide of stood, it meets with a bank that checketh the coming in of the
waves, and for a while, beats them back as fast as they press upon it; they
offer at getting over it, and by and by retire back again from the
steepness of it, as though they were apprehe^siue of some danger on the other
side; and then again attempt it a fresh: and thus continue laboring, one
while one way, an other while an other; until at the length the flood
increasing, the water seems to grow bolder, and breaks a maine over the
bank, and then flows on, till it meets with an other, that resists it,
as the first did: and thus you see, how the sea can doubt and resolve, without
any discoursing. In the like manner it fares with the heart of a beast (whose
motions do steer the rest of his body) when it beats betwixt hope and fear,
or between any other two contrary passions, without requiring any other
principles from whence to deduce it, then those we have already explicated.

But now to speak of their invention; Concerning the invention of Foxes and
other beasts.
I must confess, that among several of them, there appears so much cunning
in laying of their plots (which when they have compassed, they seem to grow
careless and to unbend their attention, as having obtained what with
earnestness they desired) that one might think they wrought by design, and
had a distinct view of an end; for the effecting of which, they used discourse
to choose the likeliest means.

To this purpose the subtilities of the fox are of most note. They say he
uses to lie as if he were dead; thereby to make hens and duckes come boldly
to him. That in the night, when his body is unseen, he will fix his eyes upon
poultry, and so make them come down to him from their rooste. That to rid
himself of the fleas that afflict him in the summer, he will sink his body by
little and little into the water, while the fleas creep up to his head (to save
themselves from drowning) and from thence to a bough he holds in his mouth,
and will then swim away, leaving them there. That to cosen the badger of his
earth, he will piss in it; as knowing that the rank smell of his urine, will
drive the oath cleanelier beast to quitt it. That when dogs are close upon
him, and catching at him, he will piss upon his tail, and by firking that up
and down, will endeavor (you may believe) to make their eyes smarte, and so
retarde their pursuit, that he may escape from them.

And there are particular stories, that express yet more cunning then all
these: as of a fox, that being sore hunted, hanged himself by the teeth among
dead vermin in a warren; until the dogs were passed by him, and had lost
him. Of an other, that in the like distress, would take into his mouth a
broom bush growing upon a steep cliffe on the side hand near his den
(which had an other way to it, easy enough of access) and by help of that,
would securely cast himself into his hole; whiles the dogs that followed him
hastily, and were ignorant of the danger, would break their necks down the
rocks.

It is said, that in Thracia, the country people so know whether the rivers
that are frozen in the winter, will bear them or no, by marking whether the
foxes venture boldly over them, or retire after they have laid their ears to
the ice, to listen whether or no they can hear the noise of the water running
under it: from whence you may imagine they collect, that if they hear the
current of the stream, the ice must needs be thin; and consequently
dangerous to trust their weight unto it.

And to busye my self no longer with their suttleties, I will conclude with a
famous tale of one of these crafty animals; that having killed a goose on the
other side of the river, and being desirous to swim over with it, to carry it
to his den, before he would attempt it (least his prey might prove too heavy
for him to swim withal, and so he might loose it) he first weighed the goose
with a piece of wood, and then tried to carry that over the river, whiles he
left his goose behind in a safe place; which when he perceived he was able to
do with ease, he then came back again, and ventured over with his heavy bird.

They say it is the nature of the Iacatray to hide it self, and imitate the
voice of such beasts, as it uses to prey upon; which makes them come to him,
as to one of their own fellows; and then he seiseth upon them and deuoureth
them.

The Iaccall, that has a subtle sent, hunteth after beasts; and in the chase,
by his barking guides the lion, (whose nose is not so good) till they overtake
what they hunt; which peradventure would be too strong for the Iaccall; but the
lion kills the quarry, and having first fed himself, leaves the Iaccall his
share: and so between them both, by the ones dexterity, and by the others
strength, they get meat for nourishment of them both.

Like stories are recorded of some fishes. And every day we see the inventions
of beasts to save themselves from catching: as hares, when they are hunted,
seek always to confound the sent; sometimes by taking hedges, other whiles
waters; sometimes running among sheep and other beasts of stronger sents;
sometimes making doubles, and treading the same path over and over; and
sometimes leaping with great iumpes hither and thither, before they betake
themselves to their rest; that so the co^tinuatenesse of the sent may not lead
dogs to their form.

Now, to penetrate into the causes of these and of such like actions; we may
remember, Of foxes that catch hens by lying under their roost, and by gazing
upon them.
how we showed in the last Chapter, that the beating of the heart works two
things: the one is, that it turns about the specieses, or little corporeities
(streaming from outward objects) which remain in the memory: the other is,
that it is always pressing on to some motion or other: out of which it
happens, that when the ordinary ways of getting victuals, or of escaping
from enemies, do fail a creature whose constitution is active; it lights
sometimes (though peradventure very seldom) upon doing something, out of which
the desired effect follows; as it can not choose but fall out now and then,
although chance only do govern their actions: and when their action proves
successful, it leaves such an impression in the memory, that whenever the
like occasion occurreth, that animal will follow the same method; for the same
specieses do come together from the memory into the fantasy. But the many
atte^pts that miscarry, and the ineffectuall motions which straightes do cast
beasts upon, are never observed, nor are there any stories recorded of them: no
more then in the temple of Neptune, were kept upon the registres, the relations
of those unfortunate wretches, who making vows unto that god in their
distress, were nevertheless drowned.

Thus peradventure, when the fox sees his labor in chaceing the hens, to
be to no purpose; and that by his pursuit of them, he drives them further out
of his reach; he lays himself down to rest, with a watchful eye, and
perceiving those silly animals to grow bolder and bolder, by their not seeing
him stir, he continues his lying still, until some one of them comes
within his reach, and then on a sudden, he springs up and catches her: or
peradventure some poultry might have strayed within his reach whiles he was
asleep, and have then wakened him with some noise they made; and so he happen
to seize upon one of them, without either design or pains taking before hand:
by such degrees he might chance to catch one the first time: and they being
settled in his memory, together with the effect; it happened that an other time
when hunger pressed him, and sent up to his brain like spirits unto those
which ascended thither whiles he lay watching the hens; these spirits brought
the other from his memory into his fantasy (in such sort as we have showed in
the last Chapter) and so drove him to the same course, until by frequent
repetitions, it became ordinary and familiar with him: and then they that look
only upon the performance of the artifice, are apt to infer discourse and a
design of reason, out of the orderly conduct of it.

But how can we conceive the fox has judgment to know when the hen is come
within his leap, and accordingly offers not art her till then; unless we
resort to some other principle, then what is yet declared? The answer unto
this objection I think will not be hard to find; for if the motion, which the
presence of the object makes in the heart, be proportioned out by nature (as
there is no doubt but it is) it will not be so great and powerful, as to make
the fox leap at it, until it be arrived so near him, that by his
nimblenesse he can reach it; and so without any aim, further then by the mere
flux of his passion conveniently raised, he does the feate: but if his passion
be too violent, it makes him miss his aim; as we may frequently observe both
in men and beasts: and particularly, when fear presses either of them to
leapeouer a ditch, which being too broad, he lights in the midst of it.

The same watchfullnesse and desire to have the poulen, that sit upon a tree
out of his reach, makes him fix his eyes upon them, when they are at rooste:
and at length, either the brightness and sparkling of them, dazeleth the
birds, and makes them come down to them, (as flies do in the night about the
flame of a candle; or as fishes do to a light in a boats head;) or else they
are afraid; and their fear increasing, their spirits return to the heart,
which thereby is oppressed, and their outward parts are bereaved of strength
and motion; from whence it follows necessarily, that their footing loses
their hold fast, and they tumble down half dead with fear; which happens
also frequently to catts, when they look wistly upon little birds that sit
quietly. Or peradventure, their fear makes them giddy; as when some man
looking down a precipice from a dangerous standing, he falls by the turning
of his brain, though nothing be behind him to thrust him forewardes. Or it may
be, some steame comes from the fox, which draws such creatures to him; as
it is reported that a great and very poisonous toade will do a weasell, who
will run about the toade a great while, and still make his circle lesser and
lesser, till at length he perishes in the center, where his foe sits still,
and draws him to him: which he does in such sort, as animated Mercury will
draw leaf gold duly prepared, or as the loadestone attracteth iron: and yet
it is apparent, the weasell comes not with his good will; but that there are
some powerful chains, steaming from the body of the toade, which pluck him
thither against his liking; for by his motions and running, he will express
the greatest fear that can be.

The method which foxes do practice, From whence proceeds the foxes
invention to rid himself of fleas.
to rid themselves of their fleas (if it be true) is obuious enough for them
to fall upon; for in summer, their fleas together with their thick furred
coat, can not choose but cause an exceeding great itching and heat in their
bodies; which will readily inuit them to go into the water to cool
themselves; as the marchantes at the Isles of Zante and of Cephalonia told me
(when I was there) it was the custom of our English dogs (who were habituated
unto a colder clyme) to run into the sea in the heat of summer, and lie
there most part of the day, with only their noses out of the water, that they
might draw breath, and would sleep there with their heads laid upon some
stone, which raised them up, whiles their bodies were covered with the sea: and
those dogs which did not thus, would in one summer usually be killed with
heat and fleas.

Now when the fox feels the ease that the coolness of the water affords
that part of him which sits in it, he goes further and further; yet would
not putt himself to swim, which is a labor, and would heat him, and
therefore he auoydeth it; so that whiles he thus cools himself in some shady
place (for it is natural unto him, in such an occasion, to resort unto the
cool shade, rather then to lie in the sun) and in such there being for the
most part some boughs hanging over the water, it happens naturally enough,
that he takes some of the lowest in his mouth, to support him, and save him
the labor of swimming, whiles he lies at his ease, soaking and cooling
himself in the river. By which means it comes to pass, that the fleas
finding no part of him free from water, do creep up to the bough to rescue
themselves from drowning: and so, when he is cooled enough, he goes away and
leaves them there. In all which finding a benefitt and satisfaction,
whenever the like occasion brings those specieses, from his memory into his
fantasy, he betaketh himself to the same course, and therein finding his
remedy, at length it grows familiar to him.

In the like manner, Thales his mule, that was heavily laden with salt,
happening to stumble, and to fall in a river she was going over, the salt
melted by the water soaking into the sackes, and so she was eased of her
burden; which success made her, whenever she came to a river, and was
troubled with her loading, she would lie down in the water; and could not be
reclaymed from it, till they charged sackes of wool upon her back, which
growing heavier by their imbibing of water, weaned her from her former crafty
habit. By which it is apparent, that it was memory and not judgment, which
made her for a while behave her self so subtlely.

An explication of two other inventions of foxes.
For the foxes driving the badget from his earth, you will not think it
needful to allow him a forecast and design in pissing in it: but as it is
natural for him, to rest in a place that he meets with fit for that
purpose; so is it for him to piss in it, if the list take him whiles he is
there; which in all likelihood it will, if he stay any time there, and give a
relaxation to all his parts by sleep.

And when he pisseth in his tail, and shakes it in the dogs ey^s, it is
evident that fear, not craft causes this effect; for it avails him (...),
and therefore is not likely to proceed from judgment. And of the other, it is
a natural effect in all beasts (when it is violent) to contract their tails
between their legs, and to make their urine come from them, (by compressing
the spirits in their heart, which should support their outward parts, and
strengthen their splincter muscle) which their being snapped at and seiled upon
by the dogs, shakes from their busshy tails (fit to retain it) and then
lighting in the dogs eyes, the acrimony of it hurts them, and makes them
shutt their liddes.

The story (if it be true) of the fox, that to save himself from the dogs
that he heard following him in full cry, did hang by his teeth among dead
vermin in a warren, is a very strange one I confess: but it is conceiuable,
how fear and weariness might cause him to seek a shelter to hide himself:
and in so plain a tract of ground as warrens use to be in, without any bush or
hill to have recourse unto for relief, there appearing nothing but a gallows
hanged full of vermin; his fantasy might be moved (he being able to run no
further) to thrust himself among those dead bodies, that he saw rested
quietly: and having no way to mingle himself with them, but hanging by his
teeth; he might continue in that posture, till the dogs not suspecting him in
the air, might run under him, and ouershoote the sent: which whiles they
cast about to recover, by running to beat the next wood or shelter in view (as
is there custom in losses of their chase; unto which they are brought by their
masters hunting them in that method at the first) the wyly animal steals an
other way, and recouereth himself.

Concerning Mountagues argument to prove that dogs make syllogismes.
This ouerrunning of the sent by dogs in the earnestness of their chase,
puts me in mind of Montagues argument, out of which he will infer, that
dogs use discourse, and do make syllogismes in their hunting: for (says he)
when they have followed their chase down a lane, that a length divides it
self into three others; they will carefully smell at the first and at the
second, and not finding that it has gone in either of those, they boldly run
upon the third, without ever laying their noses to the ground* as being assured
by their discourse and reason, that since it went not in the two first, and
there being but one remaining, it must of necessity have gone there.

But this needs no other cause, then that their eagerness of hunting having
made them ouershoote the sent, (which for a while remains in their noses,
after they are parted from the object that caused it) they cast back again
(as they accustomed to be made to do in like occasions by the hunters that
train them up) and with their noses they try the ground all the way they go;
till coming near where the chase went indeed, the sent strikes their noses
(that by this time are grown empty of it) before they come at the place: and
then they run amain in pursuit of it, with their heads held up, (which is
their conuenientest posture for running) and all the way, the sent fills them
at that distance without their needing to smell upon the earth, to fetch it
from thence.

That fox which used to cast himself by the advantage of a bough into his
den, A declaration how some tricks are performed by foxes, which seem to
argue discourse.
was so closely pursued by the dogs the first time he ventured upon this
feate, that he had not time to go into his earth (his ordinary retreat, when
he is near it) by the easy and accessible way; but on the one side, to get
thither being strong in his fantasy, and on the other side, the precipice which
he had often seen, coming likewise thither from his memory; these two
concurring could not choose but make him go warily thither: and in so
dangerous a leap, it is natural for him, to help himself by any thing in the
way that can advantage him: which happening to be by catching in his mouth a
bough that hung over his den, (the only sudden means he has to take hold
of any thing) and from thence taking as it were a new rise for a second leap,
he finds himself in security: whiles the dogs unacquainted with the place,
run violently on, as in the rest of their chase: and so are upon the brimme
of the precipice, before they perceive it; and then it is too late for them to
stop their course; and consequently, they break their necks. Which
mischief to them the fox needs not have in his design, and accordingly
toll them that way; but chance begetting this deliurance of him at the first,
when he was so hard pressed, his memory teaches him to follow the same course,
whenever the like occasion occurreth.

But how many foxes do there perish in attemps, which if they had succeeded,
would have been accounted by slight iudgers, to be notable subtilities; but
miscarrying are esteemed tumultuary motions without design, caused by that
animals fantasy and spirits, when he is in extremity? I remember how upon a
time, when I was hunting one, he being hard set, and but little before the
dogs and the hunters, caught in his mouth the bough of a crooked ashetree he
run up a pretty way; which being in a hedge, h^ thereby hung down a long the
side of the hedge, and when we struck him over the ribs with our poles, he
would not quitte his hold, (so strongly the fear of the dogs wrought in his
fantasy) till greater blows knocked him on the head. Which shows evidently
that this action, was the effect of chance pressing his fantasy to do
something; and not any reason or discourse providing for his safety: as we have
already said upon occasion of the others hanging among the dead vermin in the
warren.

Those in Thracia, that will not go over a frozen river, when the ice is too
thin to bear them, are by their memory, not by their judgment taught to
retire; for at other times they have been wetted, when they have hard the
noise of the stream running under the ice: or the very running of the water,
calls the specieses of swimming out from their memory, along with it into
their fantasy (neither of which is pleasant to them in the winter) and so
disliking the noise for the other effects sake, that used to accompany it, they
avoid that which begets it, and so retire from the river. And the reason of
their listening to the noise, proceeds from the spirits, that their passion
upon apprehension of a danger presses into the nerves of their senses, as well
as into the other nerves of their brain; which accordingly makes them so
vigilant, and attentive then to outward objects and motions.

Of the Iaccatrays invention in calling beasts to himself.
That the Iaccatray or Hyaena, when he is hungry, should have his fantasy call
out from his memory, the images of those beasts, which use to serve him in that
occasion, is the ordinary course of nature: and that together with those
images, there should likewise come along the actions and soundes which used to
accompany them, and are lodged together with them in the memory, is also
natural; then, as little strange it is, that by his own voice he should
imitate those soundes, which at that time do so powerfully possess his
imagination: and having a great docility in those organes which form the
voice, like a parrat he represents them so lively, that the deceived beasts
flock to him, and so are caught by him: which at the first happens by
chance, but afterward by memory, and grows familiar to him.

Of the Iaccalls design in serving the lion.
Nor can we imagine, that the Iaccall has a design of serving the lion; but
his nature being (like a dog) to bark when he feels the sent hot (which he
pursues for his own sake) the lion that dwells in the same woods with him,
meets with the noise, and follows it; and peradventure would kill the
Iaccal himself, as well as what he hunteth, if he could overtake him: but he
being too nimble for the lion, keeps out of his reach; till having wearied
the beast he chaceth, the lion that follows by the cry, comes in when he is
at abbay, and soon teareth in pieces what the other had not strength enough so
suddenly to master, and feeds himself upon the quarry till he be full. All
this while the Iaccall dares not come near the lion, but stands at a
distance with fear waiting till he have done, and then after he is gone away,
he takes his turn to feed upon what his surly master has left.

Of several inventions of fisshes.
The like reasons it is probable we might find out among those fishes that serve
one an other, if we had the conueniency of observing particularly how they
behave themselves; as when the Whale has service from his little guide (if the
report be true; which is a necessary circumstance to be inserted in every such
tale) and others of the like strain.

The suttlety of the Torpedo (who hides himself in the mudde to benumme
fishes, that may afterward serve him to feed upon) will not require to have
its origin from reason, and be done by design; when you shall consider it is
natural for such cold creatures to emmudde themselves: and then the fishes
that swim within the reach of his benumming faculty, will be stayed and frozen
there: which because they see him not, they apprehend not, till it be too late
for them to avoid it: and then, when the Torpedo comes out, he feeds upon
what he finds lying ready in his way.

And in like manner, the scuttle fish, when he is in straights of being taken
by the fisherman, casts out a blackenesse that is within him, and so making
the water become like ink, he oftentimes escapes their hands in the darkened
Element: which arises from no discourse of his, but fear makes him void
this liquor that is in him (as it made the fox void his urine) and in
consequence thereunto, the effect follow^th.

Lastly, A discovery of diverse things done by hares, which seem to argue
discourse.
when hares do use those means we have mentioned to confound the sent, and to
save themselves from the dogs that hunt them, we may observe, that they take
therein the readiest ways, and the most obuious unto sense, to avoid the
evil they fly from. For what can be more direct to that effect, then to hide
themselves in hedge bottomes, or in woods? Or to swim over a river, when that
is the most immediate way to run from the dogs? And when they are in a
plain, where there is no other shelter but flocks of sheep or heardes of
dear, what can be more natural, then for them to hide themselves among them,
and run a long with them, till the cry of the approaching hounds fright
them away, whiles those tamer beasts abide it nearer?

Their doublings backward and foreward, may proceed from their fear, that
diuerteth them still from the way they are in at present, till the dogs coming
near, do putt the hare out of those wauerings, and do make her run straight
away: for they never double but when they are a great way before the dogs, and
do not hear them. Or else it may be, that not hearing or seeing the dogs,
their fear may be almost passed; and then the agitation which their spirits
are in, gouuerneth the motions of their body, and will not let them rest
until they be more appeased, (as you see weary people, that at their first
ceasing from running, can not sit still: the like of which happens also
frequently in the motions of joy or of anger) and so it makes them walk
backwards and forewardes, in a pace proportionate to the agitation of the
spirits within: and sometimes those moved spirits do make them bound and leap
too and fro (like the loaf with quickesiluer, we have heretofore spoken of) as
they issue from the heart by pulses and strokes; which happens when they
begin to settle toward rest. Or else peradventure their form is so framed,
that if they should get into it otherwise then by a iumpe, they would disorder
some part of it, and so be unfenced and acold, or otherwise at unease during
their repose: and therefore their iumping too and froe, before they leap plump
in, is to take their aim; not much unlike to dogs, turning about several
times before they lie down: for harefinders (who use to watch them) say they
will do thus, though they be not pursued. And thus these actions which are
imputed to craft, thereby to confound the dogs, or to wisdom, to walk
themselves until they be grown into a fitting temper to sit still; may all
of them be reduced to those material and corporeal causes, which make them do
their other ordinary motions, wherein we find no difficulty.

Of a fox reported to have weighed a goose, before he would venture with it
over a river; and of fabulous stories in common.
If that of the foxes weighing his goose, before he would venture to carry it
over the river, were plainly true as it is set down; I auowe I should be
hard set to find the principles from whence that discretion in him proceeded:
but I conceive this tale may be paired with that, which tells us of an other
fox who having his prey taken from him by an eagle, brought the next day a new
prize into the same place, having first rolled it in the fire, so that some
burning coals stuck upon it; which the eagle coming again and snatching from
him, carried to her nest, which was thereby set on fire; and the young ones
falling down, became the foxes share, insteede of what their damme had robbed
him of. Such stories so quaintly contrived, are fitter for a moral then for a
natural Philosopher: Aesope may entertain himself and his disciples with
them; whiles all the reflection I shall make upon them, is, that when I hear
any such finely ordered tales, I can not doubt but they are well amended in the
relation, by those that tell them: it being the inclination and custom of most
men, (partly through a desire of having strange things come from them; and
partly out of a care that what they say may appear like truth, and so be the
easilier believed) to add circumstances beyond the truth of the matter: which
increasing at every new man's relation of the same accident (for this humor
reigns very generally) at the length, so hansome, and yet so strange a tale
is composed, that the first author or teller of it, wondereth at it as well as
others, and can not discern that his story begott this latter.

Therefore, when one of these fine tales is proposed to speculate upon, and
that I have no light to guide me in determining what part of them to allow, and
what to reject; I think it better to exspect an authentike record of it, then
be too hasty at guesses: leaving such as pretend ability in reading of riddles,
to descant of the ways how such actions may be effected: but for others, that
have a semblance of truth, or do happen ordinarily, be they at the first sight
never so like the operatio^s of reason, I doubt not but that the causes of
them, may be reduced to the principles we have already established; and the
ways of performing them, may be pitched upon by such discourses about them, as
we have made about those examples we have above produced. Especially if the
actions themselves, were observed by one that could judge of them, and were
reported with a desire of expressing the truth nakedly as in it self it lies;
for diverse times it happens, that men saying nothing but truth, do express
it in such a manner, and with such terms, that the ignorant hearer conceiueth
the thing quite an other way, then indeed it is, merely for the too
emphaticall expression: especially if the relatour himself misseth in
conceiving the true causes of what he reports, and so expresses it
proportionable to those which he apprehends.

To conclude then this first branch, we see how the doubting, the resolving,
the aiming the inuenting, and the like, which we experience in beasts, may by
the vestigies we have traced out, be followed unto their root, as far as the
division of rarity and density; without needing to repair unto any higher
principle, saving the wisdom of the orderer and Architect of nature, in so
admirably disposing and mingling these material, gross, and lifelesse bodies,
that strange effects and incomprehensible unto them, who will not look into
their several joints, may follow out of them, for the good of the creature in
whose behalf they are so ordered.

But before we go to the next point, Of the several cryings and tones of
beasts: with a refutation of those authors who maintain the^ to have complete
la^guages.
we can not forbear mentioning their vanity as well as ignorance, who to
purchase the estimation of deeper knowers of nature, would have it believed,
that beasts have complete languages as men have to discourse with one an other
in; which they vaunted they had the intelligence of. It is true, that in us
speaking or talking is an operation of reason, not because it is in reason; but
because it is the work of reason, by an other instrument; and is no where to
be found without reason: which those irrational Philosophers, that pretended
to understand the language of beasts, allowed them, as well as the ability of
talking to one an other: but it was because they had more pride then knowledge.
Of which rank one of the chief was Apollonius, surnamed from Thyana; for if
he had known how to look into the nature of beasts, he would have perceived
the reason of the diverse voices which the same beast in diverse occasions
forms.

This is evident, that an animals lunges and chest, lying so near as they do
unto his heart; and all voice being made by the breathes coming out of his
mouth, and through his windpipe; it must necessarily follow, that by the diverse
ordering of these instruments, his voice will become diverse; and these
instruments will be diversely ordered in him, according to the diverse motions of
his heart: that is, by diverse passions in him (for so we may observe in our
selves, that our breath is much changed by our being in passion;) and
consequently, as a beast is agitated by various passions, he must needs utter
variety of voices; which ca^ not choose, but make diverse impressio^s in other
beasts, that have commerce with him; whether they be of the same kind as he is,
or of a different: and so we see, that if a dog sets upon a hogg, the
bitten hogs cry makes an impressio^ in the other hogs, to come to their
fellows reskew, and in other dogs to run after the crying hogg: in like
manner anger in a dog makes snarling or barking, pain, whining; desire, an
other kind of barking; and his joy of seeing a person that the uses to receive
good by, will break out in an other kind of whining. So in a hen, her diverse
passions work diverse kinds of clocking; as when she sees a kite, she has
one voice; when she meets with meat, an other; when she desires to gather
her chickins under her wings, a third: and so, upon diverse occasions, a diverse
sound; according to the diverse ordering of her vocal instruments, by the
passion which presses her heart. So that who would look curiously into the
motions of the dispositions of a beasts vocal instruments, and into the
motions of the spirits about his heart (which motion we have showed is passion)
would be able to give account, why every voice of that beast was such a one,
and what motion about the heart it were that caused it.

And as much may be observed in men, who in pains and griefs, and other
passions, do use to break out into those voices, which we call interiections,
and which signifies nothing in the understanding of them that form them, but
to the hearer are signs of the passion from whence they proceed: which if a
man do heedefully mark in himself, he will perceive, that they nothing else,
but the sudden eruptions of a great deal of breath together, caused by some
compression made within him, by the pain he is in. Which is the reason that
the striving against groanings in certain occasions, does sick persons much
harm; for it disordereth the natural motions of some principal parts within
him, that are already too much agitated; and the countermotion by which they
are checked, puts them further into a more violent agitation. In the
observation of these natural eruptions of men's breath, caused by Passion, our
fore fathers of old were so industrious, as to transfer the imitation of
nature in this particular into Music, so that their kinds of music, were
distinguished according to the division of men's passions; and by similitude
would raise them in the hearers.

Out of this discourse also reason may be given, why birds are more musical
then other creatures, to wit, because they are of a hoater complexion; and
therefore, to their biggenesse, do require more breath and air to cool them;
and consequently do make more noise, and more variety of it. Likewise, among
beasts, dogs are the most vocal of any that converse with us; who by their
ready anger appear to be the hoatest. Among men, those that are merry, or
soon become heated with a little wine, are given to talking and singing: and so
are children, and women likewise; not so much through abundance of heat, as
because their heat does easily vent.

And thus it is evident, that there is no true language among beasts: their
voices not being tokens of diverse things or conceptions, but merely the
effects of diverse breathings, caused by diverse passions. Wherefore, since both
breathing and passion, are easily reduced to the common principles of rarity
and density; we need not trouble our selves any further, to seek into the
origin of this vocal faculty of beasts.

THE SEVEN AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of the docility of some irrational animals;
and of certain continuate actions of a long tract of time so orderly performed
by them, that they seem to argue knowledge in them.
AS for docility, How hawks and other creatures are taught to do what they
are browght up to.
(which is our second head) Apes and Elephantes are most famed. Though
peradventure, the cunning and obedience of our hawks and dogs, is no whitt
inferior to what is reported of them; and would be as much admired, were it
not so common. I have by sundry persons who have seen him, been told of a
baboone, that would play certain lessons upon a guitarre. The indian histories
make mention of Apes, that will go to the tavern and fetch wine for their
Masters; as Lipsius his dog would bring his Master as much meat from the
market, as he carried money to his butcher to pay for. Of Elephants likewise,
strange things are told: but because we can not easily judge how to understand
reports, whereof we have not seen the experience; not how far to believe
them, ^ intend not to insist upon the examining of them; for by looking into
the nature and art of our hounds that follow a suite of blood, or that draw
dry foot; and of our hawks, especially of the decoy duckes and Cormorants; a
scantling may be given at all the rest. And al^hough these things told at
random, may justly seem very admirable to any man the first time he hears
of them, yet to him that understands how they are taught, there is no one
passage but will appear plain enough.

The first degree is to tame the h^wke by watching her from sleep, and to
acquaint her with the man, by continually carrying her upon his fist, and using
her to take her meat quietly, as she sits upon his hand. Then he makes her
hoppe a little way to it in a pair of cranes; and after a while, kill a seeled
pigeon; from which he takes her when she is grown steady in her lesson so
far, and feeds her up with other meat: and thus in time he brings her to
fly at what he will have her, and to be content with a small reward, leaving
her quarry to her Master; so that a spectatour, who understands not the
mystery, nor ever saw hawking before, may well admire to see a bird so
dutifully and exactly obey a man's command: and may conceive she has a
reasonable soul, whereby to understand him, and discourse of the means to
bring his purpose to effect. Whereas indeed all this is no more, then to make
her do for you and when you please, the same which she does by nature to feed
her self.

The cunning of dogs is begotten in the same way. Coyduckes are beaten and
whipped to what they are taught, like setting dogs* Cormorantes have their
throats tied, that they may not swallow the fish they catch, but be
constrained to bring it to the man that employeth them; so that looking along
step by step, you shall meet with nothing but what is plain, and easy to
be taught, and to be performed by sense and memory; without needing to
attribute any discourse or reasoning unto beasts.

Apes are likewise taught as dogs may be, to carry things to a certain
house; where receiving what is given them, they return home with it: and you
may be confident, this serviceableness of the Ape, grew out of his being
carried first to the tavern by the maid or boy, who there gave him somewhat
that pleased him; and then being made to carry the pott along by the boy; and
afterward being made to carry money in one hand, and the pott in an other;
whereof some drawer discharged him of the one, and filled the other, and
withal gave him a reward* which also was repeated to him at his return home
with his full pott: till at the last, when he was sufficiently used to this
exercise, he would of himself go straight thither, as soon as he was
harnessed in such sort as he used to be for this service. Which appears to be
assuefaction and custom, not judgment, by his receiving indifferently
whatsoever is put into his pott.

And by the tale of Lipsius his dog; from whom other less dogs, snatching as
he trotted along, part of what hung out of his basket (which he carried in his
mouth) he set it down to werry one of them; whiles in the mean time, the
others fed at liberty and at ease upon the meat that lay there unguarded;
till he coming back to it, drove them away, and himself made an end of eating
it up. Whereby we may conceive, that the species of carrying his basket to his
Master (which custom had settled in his memory) was disordered, and thrust out
of his fantasy, by a stronger of fighting for his meat with the other curres:
after which it followed naturally in his fantasy, to eat what he had fought
for. And that sending then spirits into his nerves, agreeable to the nature of
it, and governing the parts depending of the brain, a motion and action
ensewed, which was suitable to the object in the fantasy; and this could be none
other, but of eating what the fantasy found conformable unto its nature.

Of the Baboone that played on a guitarre.
The baboone we have mentioned, might be taught some lessons made on purpose
with very few stoppes, and upon an instrument whereon all the stringes may be
stricken with one blow, and but one frette to be used at a time, and that
frette to be stopped with one finger: of which, much labor and time might
beget a habit in him: and then, imitation of the sound, might make him play in
due measure. And if we will mark it in our selves, we shall see, that although
in the first learning of a lesson upon the lute, we employ our reason and
discourse about it; yet when we have it very perfect, our fingers (guided by a
slight fantasy) do fall by custom, without any reflection at all, to play it as
well as if we thought never so carefully upon it. And there is no comparison,
between the difficulty of a guitarre and of a lute.

I have been told, that at the Duke of Florence his marriage, there was a
dance of horses, in which they kept exact time of music. The means used for
bringing them to it, is said to have been, by tying and hampering their legs
in such a sort, that they could lift them up but in a determinate way: and then
setting them upon a pauement, that was heated underneath so hott, as they could
not endure to stand still, whiles such musical airs were played to them, as
fitted their motions. All which being often repeated, the horses took a
habitt, that in hearing those airs, they would lift up their legs in that
fashion; and so danced to the tune they had been taught.

Of the Elephantes, Of the teaching of Elepha^tes and other beasts to do
diverse tricks.
it is said that they may be taught to write; and that purely upon words and
commanding them, they will do what they are bidden; and that they are able to
keep account, and will leave working at a precise number of reuolutions of the
same action, which measures out their task unto them. All which (as I said
before) if it were plainly and literally true, would require very great
consideration: but because the teachers of beasts, have certain secrets in
their art, which standers by do not reach unto; we are not able (upon such
scanty relations as we have of them) to make sufficient judgment how such
^hinges are done; unless we had the managing of those creatures, whereby to
try them in several occasions, and to observe what cause produces every
operation they do; and by what steps they attain unto their instructions
and serviceableness.

It is true, the uncontrolled reports of them, oblige us to believe some
extraordinary matter of their docility, and of strange things done by them:
but withal, the example of other taught beasts among us, and of the strange
judgments that are made of them by persons, who do not penetrate into their
causes, may instruct us how easy it is to mistake the matter; and assure us,
that the relations which are made us, do not always punctually agree with the
truth of what passed. He that should tell an Indian, what feats Banks his
horse would do; how he would restore a glove to the due owner, after his master
had whispered that man's name in his ear; how he would tell the just number of
pence in any piece of silver coin barely showed him by his master; and even
obey presently his command, in discharging himself of his excrements
whenever he bad him (So great a power art may have over nature:) would make
him I believe, admire more at this learned beast, then we do at their docile
Elephantes, upon the relations we have of them. Whereas every one of us
knows, by what means his painful tutor brought him to do all his tricks:
and they are no whitte more extraordinary, then a f^wkeners manning of a hawke,
and trayning her to kill partridges, and to fly at the retriue: but do all of
them (both these, and all other iuggling artificies of beasts) depend upon the
same, or like principles; and are known to be but directions of nature,
ordered by one that composeth and leuelleth her operations to an end further
off (in those actions) then she of her self would aim at. The particulars of
which, we need not trouble ourselves to meddle with.

Of the Orderly train of actions performed by beasts in breeding their young
ones.
But it is time that we come to the third sort of actions performed by beasts,
which we promised to discourse of. These seem to be more admirable, then any
we have yet touched: and are chiefly concerning the breeding of their young
ones. Above all others, the orderly course of birds in this affair, is most
remarkable. After they have coupled they make their nest, they line it with
moss, straw, and feathers; they lay their eggs, they set upon them, they
hatch them, they feed their young ones, and they teach them to fly: all which
they do with so continuate and regular a method, as no man can direct or
imagine a better.

But as for the regularity, orderlinesse, and continuance of these actions, the
matter is easy enough to be conceived: for seeing that the operation of the
male, makes a change in the female; and that this change beginning from the
very first, grows by time into diverse proportions; it is no wonder that it
breeds diverse dispositions in the female, which cause her to do different
actions, correspondent to those diverse dispositions. Now, those actions must of
necessity be constant and orderly, because the causes whence they proceed, are
such.

But to determine in particular, how it comes to pass, that every change in
the female, disposes her to such and such actions, there is the difficulty;
and it is no small one: as well, for that there are no careful and due
observations, made of the effects and circumstances, which should guide us to
judge of their causes; as because these actions, are the most refined ones of
sensitive creatures; and do flow from the top and perfection of their nature;
and are the last strain of their utmost vigor, unto which all others are
subordinate. As in our enquiry into the motions and operations of the bodies of
a lower orb then these, we met with some (namely the loadestone, and such
like) of which it is very hard to give an exact and plain account; the Author
of them reserving something from our clear and distinct knowledge; and
suffering us to look upon it but through a miste: in like manner we can not
but expect, that in the depth of this other perfecter nature, there must be
somewhat whereof we can have but a glimmering and imperfect notion. But as in
the other, it served our turn to trace out a way, how those operations might
be effected by bodies, and by local motion (though peradventure, we did not in
every circumstance hitt exactly upon the right) thereby to defend ourselves
from admitting those chymericall qualities, which we had already condemned,
upon all other occasions.

So I conceive, it will be sufficient for us in this, to show how these actions
may be done by the senses, and by the motion of corporeal spirits, and by
material impressions upon them; without being constrained to resort unto an
immateriall principle, which must furnish birds with reason and discourse: in
which, it is not necessary for my purpose, to determine precisely every step,
by which these actions are performed, and to settle the rigorous of them: but
leaving that unto those, who shall take pains to deliver the history of their
nature, I will content my self with the possibility and probability of my
co^iectures. The first of which qualities, I am obliged to make plain, but the
later concerns this treatise no more, then it would do a man to enquire
anxiously into the particulars of what it is that a beast is doing, whiles
looking upon it, at a great distance, he perceives plainly that it moves it
se^fe: and his arrant is, but to be assured whether it be alive or dead: which
the moving of it self in common, does sufficiently demonstrate, without
descending into a particular search, of what his motions are.

But let us come to the matter: first I conceive no man will make any
difficulty in allowing, that it is the temper of the blood and spirits in
birds (brought thereunto by the quality of their food, and by the season of
the year) which makes them accouple with one an other; and not any aim or
desire of having young ones, that occasioneth, this action in the^. Then it
follows that the hens eggs will increase in her belly; and when they grow
big, they can not choose but be troublesome unto her; and therefore, must of
necessity breed in her an inclination to rest in some soft place, and to be
rid of them. And as we see a dog or a catt pressed by nature, searches
about to find a convenient place to disburthen themselves in, not only of their
young ones, but even of their excrements; so do birds, whose eggs within them,
making them heavy and unfit to fly, they begin to sit much, and are
pleased in a soft and warm place: and thereupon, they are delighted with
strawes and moss, and other gentle substances; and so carry them to their
sitting place: which that they do not by design, is evident by the manner of
it; for when they have met with a straw or other fit material, they fly not
with it directly to their nest, but first to a bough of some tree, or to the
top of a house; and there they hoppe and dance a while with it in their
beakes; and from thence skippe to an other place, where they entertain
themselves in like manner: and at the last, they get to their nest: where if
the strawes should lie confusedly, their ends would prick and hurt them: and
therefore they turn and alter their positions till they lie smooth: which we
that look upon the effect, and compare them with our performing of like
actions (if we had occasion) may call a iuditious ordering of them, whereas in
them, it is nothing but removing such things as press upon their sense,
until they cause them no more pain or unquietness.

Their plastering of their nestes, may be attributed to the great heat reigning
in them at that time; which makes them still be dabbling in moist clay, and in
water, and in gravel, (without which, all birds will soon grow sick, blind,
and at length dye (which for the coolness of it, they bring home to their
nestes in their beakes and upon their feet; and when it grows dry, and
consequently troublesome to them, they wipe it off, and rub their durty
parts upon the place where they use to sit; and then fly for more refresh
themselves withal.

Out of all which actions (set on foot by the wise orderer of nature, to
compass a remote end, quite different from the immediate end that every one of
them is done for) there resulteth a fit and convenient place for these little
builders (that know not whay they do, whiles they build themselves houses) to
lie in, and to lay their eggs in. Which the next year, when the like occasion
occurreth, they build again; peradventure then, as much through memory of the
former, as upon their temper and other circumstances, moving their fantasy in
such sort as we have set down.

In like manner, that whiles the Halcyon lays and hatcheth her eggs, the sea
is calm, needs no more be attributed to the wisdom and providence of that
bird, in choosing a fit season, then to any good nature or discourse in that
rouling and merciless Element; as though it had a pious care of preserving the
eggs committed to his trust: no such supplements are requisite to be added
unto the distributions of nature, who has set material causes on foot, to
produce a coniuncture of both those effects at the same periode of time, for
the propagation of this animals species.

In fine, both the time and the place of the Halcyons breeding, and the manner,
and order, and season of all birds making their nestes, proceeds from secret
motions, which do require great observing and attention to understand them; and
do serve for directions unto every bird, according to her kind, to make her
neste fittest for her use. Which secret motions, we can not doubt but are
material ones, and do arise out of the constitution and temper of their bodies
and spirits; which in like circumstances are alike in them all: for all the
birds of one kind, do make their nestes exactly alike; which they would not
do, if this work proceeded from reason in them, and were governed by their
own election and design: as we see it happen among men upon all occasions,
either of building houses, or of making clothes, or of what action soever is
guided by their reason governing their fantasy; in all which we see so great
variety and inconstancy.

And therefore this in variability in the birds operations, must proceed from
a higher intellect, that has determinately and precisely ordered a complexe or
assembly of sundry causes, to meet infaillibly and by necessity, for the
production of an effect that he has designed: and so, the birds are but
material instruments to perform without their knowledge or reflection, a
superior reasons counselles: even as in a clock, that is composed of several
pieces and wheels, all the parts of it, do conspire to give notice of the
several effluxes and periodes of time, which the maker has ordered it for.

And although this be a work of reason and discourse in him, that d^d set it
together; yet the isntrumental performance of it, depends merely of local
motion, and of the reuolutions of bodies, so orderly proportioned to one an
other, that their effects can not fail when once the engine is wound up: in
like manner then, the bird is the engine of the Artificer, infinitely more
perfect, and knowing, and dexterous then a poor clockemaker; and the plummets
which do make it go, are the row and order of causes chained together, which
by the design of the supreme workman, do bring to pass such effects, as we
see in the building of their nestes, and in doing such other actions, as may be
compared to the strickings of the clock, and the ringing of the allarum at due
times.

And as that king of China, upon his first seeing a watch, thought it a living
a iuditious creature, because it moved so regularly of it self; and believed
it to be dead, when it was run out; till the opening of it and the winding it
up, discovered unto him the artifice of it: so any man may be excused, that
looking upon these strange actions, and this admirable economy of some living
creatures, should believe them endewed with reason, until he have well
reflected upon every particular circumstance of their nature and operations:
for then he will discern how these are but material instruments of a
rational Agent working by them; from whose orderly prescriptions, they have
not power to swerve in the least circumstance that is. Every one of which
considered singly by it self, has a face of no more difficulty, then that
(for example) an ingenier should so order his matters, that a mine should be
ready to play exactly at such an hour, by leaving such a proportion of kindled
match hanging out of one of the barrels of powder, whiles in the mean time, he
either sleeps, or attends to something else.

And when you have once gained thus much of your self, to gr^ee unto an
orderly course and generation of any single effect, by the power of a material
cause working it; raise but your discourse a strain higher, and look with
reverence and duty upon the immensity of that provident Architect, out of whose
hands these masterpieces issue, and unto whom it is as easy to make a chain
of causes of a thousand or of a million of linkes, as to make one link alone:
and then you will no longer stick at allowing the whole economy of those
actions, to be nothing else, but a production of material effects, by a due
ranging and ordering of material causes.

But let us return to our theme: as we see that milk coming into the
breasts of liuebearing female creatures, when they grow weary big, heateth and
makes them seek the mouths of their young ones, to disburthen and cool them:
so the carriage and biggenesse of the eggs, heateth exceedingly the breasts
and bodies of the birds; and this causes them to be still rubbing of their
breasts, against the sides of their nestes (where unto their vnwieldinesse
then, confineth them very much) and with their beakes to be still picking their
feathers; which being then apt to fall off and me we (as we see the hair of
women with child, is apt to shed) it happens that by then they are ready
to lay their eggs, they have a soft bed of their own feathers, made in their
nestes, over their courser mattrasse of strawes they first brought thither: and
then, the eggs powerful attracting of the annoying heat from the hens
breast (whose imbibing of the warmeth, and stonelike shell, can not choose but
cool her much inuiteth her to sit constantly upon them, until sitting
hatcheth them; and it is evident, that this sitting must proceed from their
temper at that time, or from some other immediate cause, which works that
effect; and not from a judgment that does it for a remote end: for housewifes
tell us, that at such a season, their hens will be sitting in every
convenient place they come unto, as though they had eggs to hatch, when never
a one is under them: so as it seems that at such time, there is some
inconvenience in their bodies, which by sitting is eased.

When the chickens are hatched, what wonder is it, if the little crying of
tender creatures, of a like nature and language with their da^mes, do move
those affections or passions in her bosom, which causes her to feed the^,
and to defend, and breed them, till they be able to shift for themselves? For
all this there needs no discourse or reason; but only the motion of the blood
about the heart (which we have determined to be passion) stirred by the young
ones chirpinges, in such sort, as may carry them unto those actions which by
nature (the supreme intellect) are ordered for their preservation. Wherein the
birds (as we have already said) are but passive instruments, and know not why
they do those actions: but do them they must, whenever such and such objects
(which infaillibly wo^ke in their due times) do make such and such impressions
upon their fantasies, like the allarum that necessarilly strikes, when the
hand of the dyall comes to such a point; or the gunnepouder that necessarily
makes a ruin and breach in the wall, when the burning of the match reaches
to it.

Now this love in the damme, growing by little and little wearisome and
troublesome to her; and at last, fading quite away; and she not being able to
supply their increased needs, which they grow every day stronger to provide
for of themselves; the straight commerce begins to dye on both sides: and by
these degrees the damme leaves her young ones, to their own conduct.

And thus you see how this long series of actions, may have orderly causes,
made and chained together, by him that knew what was fitting for the work he
went about. Of which, though it is likely I have missed of the right ones (as
it can not choose but happen in all disquisitions, where one is the first to
break the ice, and is so slenderly informed of the particular circumstances of
the matter in question, as I profess to be in this) yet I conceive this
discourse does plainly show, that he who has done more then we are able to
comprehend and understand, may have set causes sufficient for all these
effects, in a better order, and in compleater ranks, then those which we have
here expressed: and yet in them so coursely hewed out, appears a possibility
of having the work done by corporeal agents. Surely it were very well worth
the while, for some curious and iuditious person, to observe carefully and
often, the several steps of nature in this progress: for I am strongly
persuaded, that by such industry, we might in time arrive to very particular
knowledge of the immediate and precise causes, that work all these effects.
And I conceive, that such observation needs not be very troublesome; as not
requiring any great variety of creatures to institute it upon; for by ma^king
carefully all that passes among our homebred hens, I believe it were easy to
guess very nearly at all the rest.

THE EIGHT AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of prescience of future euentes,
prouidencies, the knowing of things never seen before; and such other
actions, observed in some living creatures; which seem to be even above the
reason that is in man himself.
THe fourth and last kind of actions, why beasts are affraide of men.
which we may with astonishment observe among beasts, I conceive will avail
little to infer out of them, that the creatures which do them, are endewed
with reason and understanding: for such they are, as if we should admit that,
yet we should still be as far to seek for the causes whence they proceed.
What should move a lamb to tremble at the first sight of a wolf? or a hen,
at a kite never before seen? neither the grimmest mastife, or the biggest
owl, will at all affright them.

That which in the ordinary course of nature, causes beasts to be affraide of
men, or of other beasts, is the hurt and the evil they receiue^ from them:
which coming into their fantasy, together with the Idaea of him that did it,
is also lodged together with it in the memory; from whence they come linked or
glewed together, whenever the stroke of any new object calls either of
them back into the fantasy. This is confirmed by the tamenesse of the birds
and beasts, which the first discouerers of Islandes not inhabitated by men,
did find in those they met withal there. Their stories tell us, that at their
first arrival upon those coasts, where it seems men had never been, the
birds would not fly away, but suffered the mariners to take them in their
hands: nor the beasts, which with us are wild, would run from them: but
their discourteous guestes used them so hardely, as they soon changed their
confidence into distrust and auersion; and by little they grew, by their
commerce with men, and by receiving injuries from them, to be as wild, as any
of the like kind in our parts.

From the dammes and sires, this apprehension and fear at the sight of men, so
deeply rooted in them, is doubtlessely transmitted to their young ones: for it
proceeds out of the disposition of the body, and out of the passion which is
immediately made in the heart; and that is as truly a material motion, as any
whatsoever can be; and must have settled material instruments sitted to it, if
it be constant, as well as any other natural operation whatsoever: and this
passion of the heart, proceeds again from a perpetual connection, of the two
objects in the memory: which being a perpetually constant thing, is as true a
quality of that beasts brain in whom it is, as the being of a quick or dull
apprehension, or the being apt to know one kind of meat from an other (which
is natural to the whole species) or any other quality whatsoever, residing in
that beast.

How some quali^^es caused at first by chance in beasts, may pass by
generation to the whole offspring.
Wherefore it is no wonder, that it passes by generation to the offspring:
which is a thing so common, even in man kind, as there can be no doubt of it:
and is at the first, made by a violent cause, that greatly alters the body:
and consequently, their seed must be imbewed with a like disposition; and so
it passes together with the nature of the fire, or of the damme, into the
brood. From hence proceeds that children do love the same meats, and
exercises, that their fathers and mothers were affected with, and fear the
like harms.

This is the reason, why a grandchilde of my Lord of Dorset (whose honored
name must never be mentioned by me, without a particular respect, and humble
acknowledgement of the noble and steady frendshippe, he has ever been pleased
to honor we with) was always extremely sick, if but the nurse did eat any
capers (against which my Lords antipathy is famous) whiles she gave suck to
that pretty infant. The children of great Mathematicians, who have been used
to busye their fantasies continually with figures and proportions, have been
oftentimes observed, to have a natural bent unto those sciences. And we may
note, that even in particular gestures, and in little singularities in familiar
conversation, children will oftentimes resemble their parents, as well as in
the lineaments of their faces. The young ones of excellent setting dogs, will
have a notable aptitude to that exercise; and may be taught with half the
pains, that their sire or damme was, if they were chosen out of a race of
spaniels not trained to setting. All which effects can proceed from no other
cause, but (as we have touched already) that the fantasy of the parent,
alters the temper and the disposition of his body and seed, according as it
self is tempered and disposed: and consequently, such a creature must be made
of it, as retains the same qualities: in such sort as it is said that
sufficient tartar putt at the root of a tree will make the fruit have a winy
taste.

But nothing does confirm this so much, as certain notable accidents, whereof
though every one in particular would seem incredible, How the parents fantasy
does oftentimes work strange effects in their issue.
yet the number of them, and the weight of the reporters, who are the witnesses
can not choose but purchase a general creditt to the kind of them. These
accidents are, that out of some strong imagination of the parents, but
especially of the mothers, in the time of conception, the children draw such
maine differences, as were incredible, if the testifying authority were not so
great: but being true, they convince beyond all question the truth we have
proposed, of the parents imagination working upon, and making an impression in
the seed, whereof children or young ones of their kind are made. Some children
of white parents are reported to have been black, upon occasion of a black
moors picture too much in the mothers eye. Others are said to have been borne
with their skins all hairy, out of the sight of St. John Baptistes picture as
he was in the desert, or of some other hairy image. An other child is f^med to
have been borne deformed, in such sort as devils are painted, because the
father was in a devils habitt when he got the child.

There was a Lady a k^nswoman of mine, who used much to wear black^ patches
upon her face (as was the fashion among young women) which I to putt her from,
used to tell her in jest, that the next child she should go with, whiles the
solicitude and care of those patches was so strong in her fantasy, would come
into the world with a great black spott in the midst of its forehead: and
this apprehension was so lively in her imagination at the times she proved with
child, that her daughter was borne ma^k^d just as the mother had fansied,
which there are at hand witnesses enough to confirm; but none more pregnant,
then the young Lady herself, upon whom the mark is yet remaining. Among other
creatures, it is said that a hen hatched a chicken with a kites bill, because
she was frigh^ed with a kite, whiles the cock was treading her. The story of
Jacobs sheep is known to all: and some do write, that the painting of
beautiful colored pigeons in a douehouse, will make the following race become
like them: and in Authors store of such examples may be found.

To give a reasonable and fully satisfying cause of this great effect, I
confess is very difficult; seeing that for the most part, the parents seed is
made long time before the accoupling of the male and female: and though it were
not, we should be mainely to seek for a rational ground to discourse in
particular upon it. Yet not to leave our Reader without a hinte which way to
drive his inquisition, we will note thus much, that Aristotele and other
natural Philosophers and Physicians do affirm, that in some persons the
passion is so great in the time of their accoupling, that for the present it
quite bereaueth them of the use of reason; and that they are for the while, in
a kind of short fit of an epylepsie. By which it is manifest, that abundance
of animal spirits do then part from the head, and descend into those parts
which are the instruments of generation. Wherefore, if there be abundance of
specieses of any one kind of object then strong in the imagination, it must of
necessity be carried down together with the spirits into the seed: and by
consequence, when the seed infected with this nature, begins to separate
and distribute it self, to the forming of the several parts of the Embryon,
the spirits which do resort into the brain of the child (as to their proper
Element) and from thence do finish all the outward cast of its body (in such
sort as we have above described) do sometimes happen to fill certain places of
the childs body, with the infection and tincture of this object; and that
according to the impression with which they were in the mothers fa^tasy: for so
we have said, that things which come together into the fantasy, do naturally
stick together in the animal spirits. The hairynesse therefore, will be
occasioned in those parts, where the mother fansyed it to be: the color
likewise, and such extancies or defects, as may any way proceed from such a
cause, will happen to be in those parts, in which they were fansyed. And this
is as far, as is fit to wade into this point, for so general a discourse as
ours is; and more the^ was necessary for our turn: to the serving whereof, the
verity of the fact only, and not the knowledge of the cause, was required: for
we were to show no more, but that the apprehensions of the parents, may descend
to the children.

Out of this discourse, the reason appears, why beasts have an auersion from
those, who use to do them harm: and why this auersion descends from the old
ones to their brood; though it should never have happened that they had
formerly encountered with, what at the first sight they fly from and avoid.

Of Antipaties.
But yet the reason appears not, why (for example) a sheep in England (where
there are no wolves bred, nor have been these many ages) should be affraide,
and tremble at sight of a wolf, since neither he, nor his damme or sire, nor
theirs in multitudes of generations, ever saw a wolf, or received hurt by any.
In like manner, how should a tame weasell brought into England from Ireland
(where there are no poisonous creatures) be affraide of a toade as soon as he
sees one? Neither he, nor any of his race, ever had any impressions following
harm, made upon their fantasies: and as little can a lion receive hurt from a
household cock: therefore we must seek the reasons of these and such like
antipathies, a little further, and we shall find them hanging upon the same
string, with sympathies proportionable to them.

Let us go by degrees: we daily see that dogs, will have an auersion from
glouers, that make their ware of dogs skins: they will bark at them, and
be churlish to them, and not endure to come near them, although they never saw
the^ before. The like hatred they will express to the dog killers in the
time of the plague, and to those that flea dogs. I have known of a man that
used to be employed in such affairs, who passing sometimes over the grounds
near my mothers house (for he dwelled at a village not far off) the dogs
would wind him at a very great distance, and would all run furiously out the
way he was, and fiercely fall upon him; which made him go always well
provided for them: and yet he has been sometimes hard put to it, by the
fierce mastifes there, had it not been for some of the servants coming in to
his reskew; who by the frequent happening of such accidents, were warned to
look out when they observed so great commotion and fury in the dogs, and yet
perceived no present cause for it. Warreners observe, that vermin will hardly
come into a trappe, wherein an other of their kind has been lately killed:
and the like happens in mousetrappes, into which no mouse will come to take
the bayte, if a mouse or two have already been killed in it; unless it be
made very clean, so that no sent of them remain upon the trappe: which can
hardly be done on the sudden otherwise then by fire.

It is evident, that these effects are to be referred, to an actiuity of the
object upon the sense; for some smell of the skins, or of the dead dogs, or
of the vermin, or of the mice, can not choose but remain upon the men and
upon the trappes; which being altered from their due nature and temper, must
needs offend ^h^m. Their conformity on the one side (for something of the
canine nature remains) makes them have easy ingression into them; and so
they presently make a deep impression: but on the other side, their distemper
from what they should be, makes the impression repugnant to their nature, and
be disliked by them, and to affect them worse, then if they were of other
creatures, tha^ had no conformity with them: as we may observe, that stinkes
offend us more, when they are accompanied with some weak perfume, then if they
set upon us single; for the perfume gets the stink easyer admittance into
our sense: and in like manner, it is said that poisons are more dangerous, when
they are mingled with a cordial that is not able to resist them: for it
serves to convey them to the heart, though it be not able to overcome their
malignity.

From hence then it follows, that if any beast or bird do prey upon some of
an other kind, there will be some smell about them, exceedingly noisome to all
others of that kind: and not only to beasts of that same kind, but (for the
same reason) even to others likewise, that have a correspondence and agreement
of temper and constitution with that kind of beast, whose hurt is the original
cause of this auersion. Which being assented unto, the same reason holds to
make those creatures, whose constitutions and tempers do consist of things
repugnant and odious to one an other, beat perpetual enmity, and fly from one
an other at the first sight, or at the least, the sufferer from the more active
creature: as we see among those men, whose unhappy trade and continual
exercises it is to empty iakeses, such horride stinkes are by time grown so
conformable to their nature, as a strong perfume will as much offend them, and
make them as sick, as such stinks would do an other man bred up among
perfumes: and a cordial to their spirits, is some noisome smell, that would
almost poysone an other man. And thus, if in the breath of the wolf, or in the
steame coming from his body, be any quality offensive to the lamb (as it may
very well be, where there is so great a contrariety of natures) it is not
strange, that at the first sight and approach of him, he should be distempered
and fly from him; as one fighting cock will do from an other, that has eaten
garlike: and the same happens between the weasell and the toade, the lion and
the cock, the toade and the spider, and several other creatures, of whom like
enmities are reported.

All which are caused in them, not by secret instincts, and antipathies, and
sympathies, whereof we can give no account; (with the bare sound of which
words, most men do pay themselves, without examining what they mean;) but by
down right material qualities, that are of contrary natures (as fire and
water are) and are either begotten in them in their original constitution, or
are implanted in them afterward by their continual food, which nourishing
them, changes their constitution to its complexion. And I am persuaded this
would go so far, that if one man were nourished continually with such meat
(and greedily affected it) which an other had auersion from, there would
naturally follow much dislike between them; unless some superior regard,
should master this auersion of the sense. And I remember to have seen two
notable examples of it: the one in Spain, of a Gentleman that had a horror to
garlike, who (though he was very subject to the impressions of beauty) could
never weane himself from an auersion he had settled him to a very handsome
woman, that used to eat much garlike, though to win him, she forebore the
use of that meat, which to her was the most sauory of all others. And the like
I knew in England between two, whereof the one did extremely love cheese, and
the other as much hated it, and would fall into a strange agony, and be reduced
(one would think) to the point of death, if by inaduertence or others trial
of him, he had swallowed never so little, of what the other would have quitted
all meats else to live upon.

And not only such auersions, as spring from differences of complexions in the
constitutions of several animals, do cause these effects of fear, and of
trembling, and of flying from those that do make such impressions; but even the
seeing them angry and in fury does the like: for such passions do alter the
spirits; and they issuing from the body of the animal in passion, can not
choose but be received by an other in a different manner, then if they were of
an other temper. Then if the one kind be agreeable to their nature, the other
must needs be displeasing. And this may be the reason why bees never sting
such as are of a mild and gentle disposition; and will never agree with
others, that are of a froward and angry nature. And the same one may observe
among dogs: and peradventure, a man's fantasy may be raised to such a height
of fury, that the fiercest beasts may be affraide to look upon him; and can
not endure that those mastering spirits, which stream out of the man's eyes
should come into his; so much they distemper his fantasy: and therefore he will
turn away from the man, and avoid him. Which discourse may be confirmed by
sundry examples of lions and bears, that have run from angry and confident
men, and the like. Since then, a man that in his natural hew gives no
distaste, does so much affright fiercest beasts, when he puts on his
threatening looks; it is no wonder, that beasts of a milder and softer nature,
should have fear of him settled in them, when they never saw him otherwise
then angry, and working mischief to them. And since their brood do receive
from their parents, a nature easily moved unto fear or anger, by the sight of
what moved them, it is not strange, that at the first sight, they should
tremble or swell, according as the inward motion of the spirits affords.

Now if this has rendered the birds in the wild Islandes affraide of men,
who otherwise would be indifferent to them, it is no maruayle to see more
violent effects in the lambs auersion from the wolf, or in the larkes from
the hobbey; since they peradventure have over and above the hurt they use to do
them, a di^formity in their constitutions: and therefore, though a lark will
fly as well from a man as from a hobbey, yet because there is one cause more
for his dislike against the hobbey, then against the man (namely the di^formity
of their constitutions) he will fly into the man's hand, to avoid the hawks
talons.

Unto some of these causes all antipathies may be reduced: O^ Sympaties.
and the like reason may be given for the sympathies we see between some
creatures. The little corporeities which issue from the one, have such a
conformity with the temper of the other, that it is thereby moved to join it
self unto the body from whence they flow, and affects union with it in that
way, as it receives the impression. If the smell do please it, the beast will
always be smelling at it: if the taste, nothing shall hinder it from feeding
upon it when it can reach it. The fishermen upon the bank over against
newfound land, do report that there flocketh about them a kind of bird, so
greedy of the fishes livers which they take there, as that to come at them and
feed upon them, they will suffer the men to take them in their hands; and
will not fly away, as long as any of their desired meat is in their eye:
whence the French men that fish there, do call them Hap foyes. The like
power, a certain worm has with nigthingales.

And thus you see, how they are strong impressions upon sense, and not any
discourse of reason, that do govern beasts in their actions: for if their
avoiding men, did proceed from any sagacity in their nature, surely they would
exercise it, when they see that for a bitte of meat they incur their
destruction* and yet neither the examples of their fellows killed before their
eyes in the same pursuit, nor the blows which themselves do seele; can serve
them for warning, where the sense is so strongly affected: but as soon as the
blow that removed them is passed, (if it misle killing or laming them) and they
be gotten on wing again, they will return to their prey as eagerly and as
confidently, as if nothing were there to hinder them.

That the Antipathy of beasts toward one an other, may be taken away by
assuefaction.
This then being the true reason of all sympathy and antipathy, we can not
admit that any beasts should love or hate one on other, for any other cause,
then some of those we have touched. All which are reduced to local motion, and
to material application of bodies of one nature, to bodies of an other; and
are as well transmitted to their young ones, as begotten in themselves: and as
the satisfying of their sense, is more preualent in the Hap foyes, then the
fear which from other grounds is begotten in their fantasy; and so makes
them approach to what the other would drive them from.

In like manner, any auersion of the fantasy may be mastered not only by a more
powerful agent upon the present sense, but also by assuefaction, and by
bringing into the fantasy with pleasing circumstances that object which before
was displeasing and affrightfull to it: as we see that all sorts of beasts or
birds, if they be taken young may be tamed and will live quietly together.
Dogs that are used to hunt and kill dear, will live friendly with one that is
bred with them; and that fawn which otherwise would have been affraide of
them, by such education grows con^ident and plays boldly with them. Of
which we can no longer remain in doubt, if we will believe the story of a
tygar (accounted the cruellest beast of all others) who being shutt up with a
dear, that had been bred with him from a kidde, and from his being a whelpe;
and no meat given him, used means to break prison, when was half starued,
rather then he would hurt his familiar friend. You will not suspect, that it was
a moral consideration, which made him so kind: but the dear had never come
into his fantasy accompained with other circumstances, then of play or of
warmth: and therefore hunger (which calls only the species of meat out of
the memory into the fantasy) would never bring the dear thither, for remedy of
that passion.

And that which often happens to those men, in whom the fantasy only works,
is not much unlike to this: among whom I have seen some frenetike persons,
that if they be persuaded they are tied, and can not stir from the place
where they are; they will lie still, and make great complaints for their
imprisonnement; and not go a steep, to reach any meat or drink, that should
lie in sight near them, although they were never so much pressed with hunger
or with thirste. The reason is evident, for the apprehension of being tied, is
so strong in their fantasy, that their fantasy can send no spirits into other
parts of their body, whereby to cause motion.

And thus the dear was beholding to the tygars fantasy, not to his discourse
of moral honesty, for his life. The like of this tygar and dear, is to be
seen every day in the tower of London* where a little dog, that was bred with
a lion from his birth, is so familiar and bold with them, that they not only
sleep together, but sometimes the dog will be angry with him, and will bite
him; which the lion never ressenteth from him, though any other dog that is
putt to him, he presently teareth in pieces.

And thus we plainly see, how it comes about, that beasts may have strange
auersions from things, which are of an annoying or destructive nature to them,
even at the first sight of them: and again, may have great likings of other
things, in a manner contrary to their nature, without needing to allow them
reason, whereby to discourse and judge what is hurtful to them, or to instruct
the tygar we have spoken of, or Androdus his lion, the duties of frendshippe
and of gratitude.

The longing marks which are often times seen in children, Of longing marks
seen in children.
and do remain with them all their life, seem to be an offspring of the same
root or cause: but in truth, they proceed from an other, although of kin to
this: for the operation of the seed is passed, when these longing marks are
imprinted; the child being then already formed and quickened; and they seem to
be made suddenly, as by the print of a seal. Therefore to render the cause
of them, let us consider an other sympathy which is more plain and common We
see that the laughing of one man, will set an other on laughing that sees him
laugh, though he know not the cause why the first man laugheth: and the like we
see in yawning and stretching, which breeds alike effect in the looker on. I
have heard of a man, that seeing a roasted pigge, after our English fashion with
the mouth gaping, could not shutt his own mouth as long as he looked upon the
pigges* and of an other, that when he saw any man make a certain motion with
his hand, could not choose but he must make the same: so that, being a tyler by
his trade, and having one hand employed with holding his tools, whiles he held
himself with the other upon the eaues of a house he was mending, a man
standing below on the ground, made that sign or motion to him; whereupon he
quitted his holdfast to imitate that motion, and fell down, in danger of
breaking his neck.

All these effects, do proceed out of the action of the seen object upon the
fantasy of the looker on: which making the picture or likeness of its own
action in the others fantasy, makes his spirits run to the same parts; and
consequently, move the same members, that is, do the same actions. And hence it
is, that when we hear one speak with love and tenderness of an absent
person, we are also inclined to love that person, though we never saw him, nor
heard of him before: and that whatsoever a good orator delivers well, (that
is, with a semblance of passion agreeable to his words) rayseth of its own
nature, like affection in the hearers: and that generally men learn and
imitate (without design) the customs and manners of the company they much
haunt.

To apply this to our intent, it is easy to conceive, that although the child
in the mothers womb, can neither see nor hear what the mother does;
nevertheless there can not pass any great or violent motion in the mothers
body, whereof some effect does not reach unto the child, which is then, one
continuate piece with her: and the proper effect of motion or of trembling in
one body, being to produce a like motion or a trembling in an other, (as we see
in that ordinary example of tuned stringes, whereof the one is moved at the
striking of the other, by reason of the stroke given to the air, which
finding a moveable easily moved with a motion of the same tenor, communicates
motion unto it) it follows that the fantasy of the child, being as it were
well tuned to the fantasy of the mother, and the mothers fantasy making a
special and a very quick motion in her own whole body, (as we see that
sudden passions do) this motion or trembling of the mother, must needs
cause the like motion and trembling in the child, even to the very swiftness
of the mothers motion. Now as we see when one blusheth, the blood comes into
his face, so the blood runs in the mother to a certain place, where she is
stricken by the thing longed for: and the like happening to the child, the
violence of that sudden motion, dies the mark or print of the thing in the
tender skin of it: the blood in some measure piercing the skin, and not
returning wholly into its natural course: which effect is not permanent in the
mother, because her skin being harder, does not receive the blood into it,
but sends it back again, without receiving a tincture from it.

Far more easy is it, to discover the secret cause of many antipathies or
sympathies, Why diverse men hate some certain meats, and particularly cheese.
which are seen in children, and endure with them the greatest part, if not
the whole term of their life, without any apparent ground for them: as, some
do not love cheese, others garlike, others duckes, others diverse other kinds
of meat, which their parents loved well; and yet in token that this auersion
is natural unto them, and not arising from some dislike accidentally taken and
imprinted in their fantasy, they will be much harmed if they chance to eat any
such meat; though by the much disguising it, they neither know, nor so much as
suspect they have done so. The story of the Lady He^nage (who was of the
bedchamber to the late Queen Elizabeth) that had her check blistered by
laying a rose upon it whiles she was a sleep, to try if her antipathy against
that flower, were so great as she used to pretend, is famous in the Court of
England. A kinsman of mine, whiles he was a child, had like to have dyed of
drought, before his nurse came to understand, that he had an antipathy against
beer or wine; until the tender nature in him, before he could speak, taught
him to make earnest signs for water, that by accident he saw; the greedy
drinking of which, cured presently his long languishing and pining sickness:
and such examples are very frequent.

The cause of these effects many times is, that their mothers, upon their first
suppression of their usual euacuations, (by reason of their being with child)
took some strong dislike to such things, their stomachs being then oppressed
by unnatural humors, which ouerflow their bodies upon such retentions; and
which make them oftentimes sick and prone to vomiting, (especially in the
mornings, whiles they are fasting) and sometimes to desire earnestly (which
they call longing) to feed upon some unwholesome, as well as some particular
wholesome things; and otherwhiles, to take auersion against meats, which at
other seasons they affected well. Now the child being nourished by the so
imbued blood of the mother, no wonder if it takes affections or dislikes,
conformable to those which at that present reign in the mother: the which for
the most part used to be purged away, or are overwhelmed by the mastering
qualities of better aliments succeding: but if by some mischance, they become
too much grafted in the childs stomach, or in some other part, through which
the mass of blood must pass; then the child gets an auersion from those
meats: and we often see, that people retain a strong conversion to such
meats or drinks, as their mothers affected much or longed for, whiles they
bred child of them.

And thus we will leave this particular; adding only one note, why there are
more persons generally, who have antipathy against cheese, the^ against any one
sort of meat besides whatsoever. A principal reason of which symptom (where
the precedent one has not place) I conceive to be, that their nurses proved
with child, whiles they gave them suck for I have by experience found it to
have been so, in as many as I have made inquiry into. And it is very
conformable to reason; for the nurses milk, curdling in her breast upon her
breeding of child, and becoming very offensive to the childs tender stomach,
(whose being sick obliges the parents to change the nurse, though
peradventure they know nothing of the true reason that makes her milk
unnatural) he has a dislike of cheese (which is strong curdled milk) ever
after settled in him; as people that have once surfeted violently of any meat,
seldom arrive to brook it again.

Now, Concerning the providence of Aunts in laying up in store for winter.
as concerning those animals who lay up in store for winter, and seem therein
to exercise a rational providence; who sees not, that it is the same humor,
which moves rich misers to heap up wealth, even at their last gasp, when
they have no child nor friend to give it to, nor think of making any body their
heirs? Which actions because they have no reason in them, are to be imputed to
the passion or motion of the material appetite. In the doing of them, these
steps may be observed; first the object presenting it self to the eye,
provoke love and desire of it; especially if it be joined with the memo^y of
former want: then, this desire stirs up the animal (after he has fed
himself) to gather into the place of his chief residence, as much of that
desired object as he meets withal; and whenever his hunger returning,
brings back into his fantasy the memory of his meat, it being joined with
the memory of that place (if he be absent from it) he presently repaireth
thither, for relief of what presses him: (and thus dogs when they are
hungry, do rake for bones they had hidden when their bellies were full.) Now if
this food, gathered by such providence (which is nothing else, but the
conformity of it, working upon him by his sense) and lay^d up in the place,
where the owner of it resideth, (as the corn is, which the auntes gather in
summer) be easily portable, he will carry it abroad wi^h him the first time he
stirs after a long keeping in; for then nothing works so powerfully in his
fantasy, as his store; and he will not easily part from it, though other
circumstances inuit him abroad. From hence it proceeds, that when a fair
day comes after long foul weather, the auntes, who all that while kept close
in their dens with their corn lying by them, do then come abroad into the
sun, and do carry their grain along with them: or peradventure it happens,
because the precedent wett weather, has made it grow hot, or musty, or
otherwise offensive within; and therefore they carry it out, as soon as
themselves dare peep abroad; which is, when the fair weather, and heat of
the day, inuiteth them out into the open air: and before night that they
return into their holes, the offensive vapors of the corn are exhaled and
dried up, and move their fantasies no longer to auersion: whereupon they carry
it back again; having then nothing but their long contracted love unto it to
work upon them. The like whereof men doing by discourse, to air their corn,
and to keep it sweet, and the same effect following herein, they will
presently have it, that this is done by the auntes, for the same reason, and by
design. Then the moisture of the earth swelling the grain, and consequently,
making it begin to shoot at the ends (as we declared, when we spoke of the
generation of plants; and as we see in the moystening of corn to make malt of
it) those little creatures, finding that part of it more tender and iuicy then
the rest, do nibble upon it there, and do feed themselves first with that,
which consequently hinders the grows of the corn. And here again, men
will contend that this must be done by providence and discourse, to prevent
that their store should not grow out of their reach, and changing nature,
become vselesse to them in their need.

Concerning the foreknowing of beasts.
To conclude, the foreknowing of beasts is nothing else, but their timely
receiving impressions, from the first degrees of mutation in things without
them; which degrees are almost imperceptible to us, because our fantasies and
spirits, have otherwise such violent agitations, more then theirs, which hinder
them from discerning gentle impressio^s upon them. If you be at sea, after
along calm, a while before a gaile blows to fill your sails, or to be
discernable by your sense in quality of wind, you shall perceive the sea
begin to wrinkle his smooth face that way the wind will come; which is so
infaillible a sign that a gaile will come from that coast, as mariners
immediately fall to trimming their sails accordingly; and usually, before they
can have done, the wind is with them: shall we therefore say that the sea has
a providence to foresee which way the wind will blow? Or that the corns upon
our toes, or calluses, or broken bones, or joints that have been dislocated,
have discourse, and can foretell the weather? It is nothing else, but that the
wind rising by degrees, the smooth sea is capable of a change by it, before we
can feel it: and that the air, being changed by the forerunners of worse
weather, works upon the crasiest parts of our body, when the others feel
not so small a change: so beasts are more sensible then we (for they have
less to distract them) of the first degrees of a changing weather: and that
mutation of the air without them, makes some change within them, which they
express, by some outward actions or gestures.

Now they who observe, how such mutations and actions are constantly in them,
before such or such weather, do think they know beforehand, that rain (for
example) or wind, or drought is coming, according to the several signs they
have marked in them: which proceeds out of the narrowness of their
discourse, that makes them resort to the same causes, whenever they mere
with like effects: and so they conceive, that things must needs pass in
beasts, after the same tenor, as they do in me^. And this is a general, and
maine error, running through all the conceptions of mankind, unless great
heed be taken to prevent it, that what subject soever they speculate upon,
whether it be of substances, that have a superior nature to theirs, or whether
it be of creatures inferior to them, they are still apt to bring them to their
own standard, and to frame such conceptions of them, as they would do of
themselves: as when they will have Angels discourse, and move, and be in a
place, in such sort as is natural to men; or when they will have beasts
rationate and understand, upon their observing some orderly actions performed
by them, which in men would proceed from discourse and reason. And this
dangerous rock (against which many fine conceptions do suffer shipperack^)
whosoever studyeth truth, must have a maine caution to avoid.

Sed nos immensum spatijs confecimus aequor:
Etiam tempus equum fumantia soluere colla.
THE CONCLUSION OF THE FIRST TREATISE.
THus at the last (by Gods assistance) we are clymbed up to the top of the
hill; from whence looking down over the whole region of bodies, we may delight
our selves, with seeing what a height the weary steps we ascended by, have
brought us unto. It is true, the path we have walked in, is of late so
untrodden, and so ouergrowne with briars* as it has not been without much
labor, that we have made our way through. And peradventure, it may seem
toylesome unto others to follow us, especially such as are not much enured to
like iourneyes: but I hope, the fruit which both we and they are now arrived
to gather of our pains, in this general view we have taken of the empire of
matter, and of corporeal agents, is such, as none of us has reason to be ill
satisfied with the employing of them. For what can more powerfully delight, or
more nobl^ entertain an understanding soul, then the search and discovery of
those works of nature, which being in their effects so plainly exposed to our
eyes, are in their causes so abstruse and hidden from our comprehension, as
(through despair of success) they deter most men from inquiring into them?

And I am persuaded, that by this summary discourse (short indeed in regard of
so large a scope, how ever my lame expressions may peradventure make it appear
tedious) it appears evidently, that none of natures greatest secrets, whereof
our senses give us notice in the effects, are so ouershaded with an
impenetrable veyle, but that the diligent, and wary hand of reason, might
unmask them, and show them to us in their naked and genuine forms, and
delight us with the contemplation of their native beauties; if we had as much
care and constancy in the pursuit of them, as we daily see men have in heaping
up of wealth; or in striving to satisfy their boundelesse ambitions; or in
making their senses swim in the muddy lake of base and contemptible
pleasures. For who shall througly consider and weigh what we have hitherto
said, will plainly see a continual and orderly progress, from the simplest,
heighest, and most common conception, that we frame of a body in general, unto
the furthest and most abstruse effects, that in particular are to be found in
any body whatsoever: I mean, any that is merely corporeal, without mixture
of a nobler nature; for hitherto we have not moved, nor so much as looked out
of that o^be. He shall find one continued thridde, spunne out from the
beginning to the end. He will see, that the various twisting of the two
specieses of Bodies, Rare, and Dense, do make the yarne, of which all things
and actions within the sphere of matter, are wouen.

And although peradventure, in the drawing out of the thridde, there may be
some little brackes, or the stuff made of it, be not every where so close
wrought, as a better workman, at more leisure might have done; yet truly, I
believe, that the very consent of things throughout is such, as demonstrateth,
that the maine contexture of the doctrine I have here touched, is beyond
quarrelling at. It may well be that in sundry particulars, I have not lighted
upon exact truth: and I am so far from maintaining peremptorily any thing I
have here said, as I shall most readily ha^ken to whatsoever shall be objected
against it; and be as ready upon cause, to desert my own opinions, and to
yield unto better reason. But withal, I conceive, that as the failing of a
brick here and there in the rearing of the walls of a house, does nothing at
all prejudice the strength and security of the fabrike; no more (I hope) will
the slight escapes, which so difficult a task as this is subject unto,
endamage or weaken the maine body of what I have here delivered. I have not yet
seen any piece upon this subject, made up with this method; beginning from
the simplest and plainest notions, and composing them orderly, till all the
principal variety which their nature is capable of, be gone through: and
therefore it can not be expected, but that the first model of this kind (and
molded by one distracted with continual thoughts of a much different strain;
and whose exercise, as well as profession, has allowed him but little commerce
with books and study) must needs be very rough hewed, and require a great
deal of polishing. Which whosoever shall do, and be as exact and orderly in
treating of Philosophy and Theology, as Mathematicians are in delivering their
sciencies, I do assure my self, that Demonstrations might be made, and would
proceed in them as currently, and the conclusions be as certain and as full,
as in the Mathematikes themselves. But that is not all: these demonstrations
would have the odds exceedingly of the other, and be to us, inestimably more
aduantagious: for out of them, do spiring much higher and nobler effects, for
man's use and life, then out of any Mathematical ones; especially when they
extend themselves to the gouuernement of Man as he is Man: which is an art, as
far beyond all the rules of Physike, or other gouuernement of our body, or
temporal goods, as the end is beyond the means we employ to gain it; for
all the others, do but serve instrumentally to this end, That we may live well:
whereas these do immediately teach it.

These are the fruits in general, that I hope may in some measure, grow out
of this discourse, in the hands of equal and iuditious Readers: but the
particular aim of it, is to show what actions can proeeed from a body, and
what can not. In the conduct whereof, one of our chief endeauours has been
to show, that those actions which seem to draw strongly into the order of
bodies, the unknown nature of certain entities named Qualities, either do or
may proceed, from the same causes, which produce those known effects, that all
sides agree, do not stand in need of any such mystical Philosophy. And this
being the maine hinge, upon which hangs and moves, the full and clear
resolving of our maine, and great question, Of the Immortality of the Soul; I
assure my self, the pains I have taken in this particular, will not be deemed
superfluous or tedious: and withal, I hope I have employed them with so good
success, as hence foreward, we shall not be any more troubled, with objections
drawn from their hidden and incomprehensible nature: and that we stand upon
even ground, with those of the contrary opinion: for since we have showed how
all actions may be performed among bodies, without having any recourse to such
Entities and Qualities as they pretend and paint out to us; it is now their
part (if they will have them admitted) to prove that in nature there are such.

Having th^n brought the Philosophy of bodies unto these terms; that which
remains for us to perform, is to show that those actions of our soul, for
which we call her a spirit, are of such a nature, as they can not be reduced
into those principles, by which all corporeal actions are effected. For the
proof of our original intent, no more then this, can be exacted at our
hands; so that if our positive proofs, shall carry us yet beyond this, it can
not be denied, but that we give ouermeasure, and do illustrate with a greater
light, what is already sufficiently discerned. In our proceeding, we have the
precedence of nature: for laying for our ground, the natural conceptions which
mankind makes of quantity; we find that a body is a mere passive thing,
consisting of diverse parts, which by motion may be diversely ordered; and
consequently, that it is capable of no other change or operation, then such as
motion may produce, by various ordering the diverse parts of it: and then,
seeing that Rare and Dense, is the primary and adequate division of Bodies; it
follows evidently, that what can not be effected by the various disposition
of rare and dense parts, can not proceed or be effected by a pure body: and
consequently, it will be sufficient for us to show, that the motions of our
souls are such: and they who will not agree to this conclusion, must take upon
them to show, that our first premisse is defective; by proving that other
unknown ways are necessary, for bodies to be wrought upon or to work by: and
that the motion, and various ordering of rare and dense parts in them, is not
cause sufficient for the effects we see among them. Which whosoever shall
attempt to do, must remember that he has this disadvantage before he
begins, that whatsoever has been hitherto discovered in the science of
bodies, by the help, either of Mathematikes or Physickes, it has all been
resolved and has fallen, into this way which we declare.

Here I should set a periode to all further discourse concerning this first
Treatise of bodies, did I not apprehend, that the prejudice of Aristotle's
authority, may dispose many to a harsh conceit of the draught we have made.
But if they knew how little reason they have to urge that against us, they would
not cry us down for contradicting that oracle of nature: not only because he
himself, both by word, and by example, exhorts us, when verity leads us an
other way, to forsake the trackes, which our forefathers have beaten for us, so
we do it with due respect and gratitude for the much they have left us: nor yet
because Christian Religion, as it will not hear of any man (purely a man) free
from sin, so it inclines to persuade us, that no man can be exempt from
error; and therefore it sauoureth not well, to defend peremptorily any man's
sayings (especially if they be many) as being uncontrollable; how be it I
intend not to prejudice any person, that to defend a worthy authors honor,
shall endeavor to vindicate him from absurdities and gross errors: nor lastly
because it has ever been the common practice of all grave Peripatetikes and
Thomistes, to leave their Masters, some in one article, some in an other: but
indeed, because the very truth is, that the way we take, is directly the same
solid way, which Aristotle walked in before us: and they who are scandalized
at us for leaving him, are exceedingly mistaken in the matter: and out of the
sound of his words (not rightly understood) do frame a wrong sense of the
doctrine he has left us, which generally we follow.

Let any impartial Aristotelian answer, whether the conceptions we have
delivered of Quantity, of Rarity and De^sity, of the four first Qualities, of
the combinations of the Elements, of the repugnance of vacuities, be not
exactly and rigorously Aristotle's? Whether the motion of weighty and light
things, and of such as are forced, be not by him, as well as by us, atttibuted
to externe causes? In which all the difference between us is, that we enlarge
ourselves to more particulars then he has done. Let any man read his books
of Generation and Corruption, and say whether he does not expressly teach,
that mixtion (which he delivers to be the generation or making of a mixed
body) is done per minima; that is in our language and in one word, by atoms;
and signifies, that all the qualities, which are natural qualities following
the composition of the Elements, are made by the mingling of the least parts
or atoms of the said Elements; which is in effect to say, that all the nature
of bodies, their qualities, and their operations, are compassed by the mingling
of atoms: the showing and explicating of which, has been our labor in this
whole Treatise. Let him read his books of Meteores, and judge whether he
does not give the causes of all the effects he treats of there, by mingling
and seperating of great and little, gross and subtle, fiery and watery, aerie
and earthy parts, just as we do. The same he does in his Problemes, and in his
Parua naturalia, and in all other places, wheresoever he has occasion to
render Physically, the causes of Physical effects. The same do Hippocrates and
Galen: the same, their Master Democritus; and with them the best sort of
Physicians: the same do Alchymistes, with their Master Geber; whose maxim to
this purpose, we cited above: the same do all natural Philosophers, either
ancient commentatours of Aristotle, or else modern inquirers into natural
effects, in a sensible and vnderstandable way: as who will take the pains to
look into them, will easily perceive. Wherefore, let any iuditious Reader
that has looked further into Aristotle then only upon his Logical and
Metaphysicall works, judge whether in bulk our doctrine be not conformable to
the course of his, and of all the best Philosophers that have been and are;
though in detaile or particulars, we sometimes mingle therewith, our own
private judgments; as every one of them, has likewise showed us the way to
do, by the liberty themselves have taken to dissent in some points from their
predecessors.

And were it our turn, to declare and teach Logike and Metaphisikes, we should
be forced to go the way of matter, and of forms, and of priuations, in such
sort as Aristotle has trodden it out to us, in his works of that strain. But
this is not our task for the present; for no man that contemplateth nature as
he aught, can choose but see that these notions are no more necessary, when we
consider the framing of the elements, then when we examine the making of
compounded bodies: and therefore, these are to be set apart, as higher
principles, and of an other strain, then need be made use of for the actual
composition of compounded things, and for the resolution of them into their
material ingredients, or to cause their particular motions; which are the
subjects we now diseourse of.

Upon this occasion, I think it not amiss to touch, how the latter
sectatours, or rather pretenders of Aristotle, (for truly they have not his
way) have introduced a model of doctrine (or rather of ignorance) out of his
words, which he never so much as dreamed of; howbeit they allege textes out
of him to confirm what they say, as Heretics do out of scripture to prove
their assertions: for whereas he called certain collections or positions of
things, by certain common names (as the art of Logike requires) terming some
of them Qualities, others actions, others places, or habites, or relatiues, or
the like: these his latter followers, have conceited that these names did not
design a concurrence of sundry things, or a diverse disposition of the parts
of any thing, out of which some effect resulted; which the understanding
considering all together, has expressed the notion of it by one name: but have
imagined, that every one of these names had correspondent unto it, some real
positive entity or thing, separated (in its own nature) from the maine thing
or substance in which it was, and indifferent to any other substance; but in
all unto which it is linked, working still that effect, which is to be expected
from the nature of such a quality, or action, etc. And thus, to the very
negatiues of things, as to the names of points, lines, instantes, and the
like, they have imagined positive Entities to correspond: likewise, to the
names of actions, places, and the like, they have framed other Entities: as
also to the names of colors, soundes, tastes, smells, touches, and the rest of
the sensible qualities, they have unto every one of them, allotted special
Entities; and generally to all qualities whatsoever. Whereas nothing is more
evident, then that Aristotle meaned by qualities no other thing, but that
disposition of parts, which is proper to one body, and is not found in all: as
you will plainly see, if you but examine, what beauty, health, agility,
science, and such other qualities are; (for by that name he calls them; and
by such examples, gives us to understand what he means by the word Quality)
the first of which is nothing else, but a composition of several parts and
colors, in due proportion to one an other: the next, but a due temper of the
humors, and the being of every part of the body, in the state it should be:
the third, but a due proportion of the spirits and strength of the sinnewes:
and the last, but ordered Phantasmes.

Now when these peruerters of Aristotle have framed such Entities, under that
conception which nature has attributed to substances, they do immediately upon
the nicke, with the same breath that described them as substances, deny them to
be substances: and thus they confound the first apprehensions of nature, by
seeking learned and strained definitions for plain things. After which, they
are feign to look for glue and paste, to join these entities unto the
substance they accompany: which they find with the same facility, by imagining
a new Entity, whose nature it is to do that which they have need of.

And this is the general course of their Philosophy; whose great subtility,
and queint speculations in enquiring how things do come to pass afford no
better satisfaction then to say upon every occasion, that there is an Entity
which makes it be so. As if you ask them, how a wall is white, or black?
They will tell you, there is an Entity or Quality, whose essence is to be
whiteness or blackenesse, diffused through the wall. If you continue to ask,
how does whiteness stick to the wall? They reply, that it is by means of an
Entity called Union, whose nature it is actually to join whiteness and the
wall together. And then if you enquire how it comes to pass, that one white
is like an other? They will as readily answer, that this is wrought by an
other Entity, whose nature is to be likeness, and it makes one thing like an
other. The consideration of which doctrine, makes me remember a ridiculous
tale of a trewant schooleboyes latin: who upon a time when he came home to see
his friends, being asked by his father, what was latin for bread? answered
breadibus; and for beer? beeribus; and the like of all other things he asked
him, adding only a termination in Bus, to the plain English word of every one
of them: which his father perceiving and (though ignorant of Latin) yet
presently apprehending, that the mysteries his son had learned, deserved not
the expense of keeping him at school, bad him immediately putt of his hosibus
and shoosibus, and fall to his old trade of treading Morteribus. In like
manner, these great Clerks do as readily find a pretty Quality or mood,
whereby to render the nature or causes of any effect in their easy Philosophy,
as this Boy did a Bus to stamp upon any English word, and coin it into his
mockelatine.

But to be serious, as the weight of the matter requires, let these so
peremptory pretenders of Aristotle, show me but one text in him, where he
admits any middle distinction (such as those modern Philosophers do, and
must needs admit, who maintain the qualities we have rejected) betwixt that
which he calls Numericall, and that which he calls of Reason, or of Notion,
or of Definition, (the first of which we may term to be of, or in things; the
other to be in our heads, or discourses: or the one Natural, the other
Logical:) and I will yield that they have reason, and that I have grossly
mistaken what he has written, and that I do not reach the depth of his sense.
But this they will never be able to do.

Besides, the whole scope of his doctrine, and all his discourses and
intentions, are carried throughout, and are built upon the same foundations,
that we have laid for ours. Which being so, no body can quarrel with us for
Aristotle's sake; who as he was the greatest Logician, and Metaphysitian, and
Universal scholar peradventure that ever lived; and was so highly esteemed,
that the good turn which Sylla did the world in saving his works, was thought
to recompense his many outrageous cruelties and tyranny; so his name must never
be mentioned among scholars, but with reverence, for his vnparalleled worth;
and with gratitude for the large stock of knowledge he has enriched us with.
Yet withal we are to consider, that since his reign was but at the beginning
of sciences, he could not chose but have some defects and shortenesses, among
his many great and admirable perfections.

THE SECOND TREATISE; DECLARING, THE NATVRE AND OPERATIONS OF MAN'S SOVLE; OVT
OF WHICH, THE IMMORTALITY OF REASONABLE SOVLES, IS CONVINCED.

Pro captu Lectoris, habent sua fata libelli.
THE PREFACE.
IT is now high time for us to cast an eye upon the other leaf of our
accounts: or peradventure I may more properly say, to fall to the perusal of
our own accountes: for hitherto, our time and pains have been taken up, in
examining and casting the accountes of others: to the end, that from the foot
and total of them, we may drive on our own the more smoothly. In ours then,
we shall meet with a new Capital; we shall discover a new world, of a quite
different strain and nature from that which all this while we have employed
ourselves about. We will enter into them, with taking a suruay of the great
Master of all that large family, we have so summarily viewed: I mean of Man,
as he is Man: that is, not as he is subject to those laws whereby other bodies
are governed (for therein he has no praeeminence, to raise him out of their
throng:) but as he exceeds the rest of creatures, which are subject to his
managing: and as he rules over nature herself, making her serve his designs;
and subiecting her noblest powers, to his laws, and as he is distinguished
from all other creatures whatsoever. To the end we may discover, whether that
principle in him, from whence those actions do proceed which are properly his,
be but some refined composition, of the same kind we have already treated of:
or whether it deriueth its source and origin, from some higher spring and
stock, and be of a quite different nature.

Having then by our former Treatise mastered the oppositions, which else would
have taken arms against us, when we should have been in the midst of our
aedifice; and having cleared the objections which lay in our way, from the
perverse Qualities of the souls neighbors, the several common wealths of
Bodies: we must now begin with David to gather together our Materials; and
to take a suruay of our own provisions: that so we may proceed with Solomon,
to the sacred building of Gods temple. But before we go about it, it will not
be amiss, that we show the reason, why we have made our porch so great, and
have added so long an entry, that the house is not likely to have thereunto a
correspondent bulk: and when the necessity of my doing so, shall appear, I
hope my pains will meet with a favorable censure, and receive a fair
admittance.

We proposed unto our selves to show that our souls are immortal: whereupon,
casting about to find the grounds of immortality, and discerning it to be a
negative, we conceived that we ought to begin our search, with enquiring What
Mortality is; and what be the causes of it. Which when we should have
discovered, and have brought the soul to their test, if we found they
tre^ched not upon her, nor any way concerned her condition, we might safely
conclude, that of necessity she must be immortal. Looking then into the causes
of mortality, we saw that all bodies round about us were mortal: whence
perceiving that mortality extended it self as far as corporeity, we found
our selves obliged, if we would free the soul from that law, to show that she
is not corporeal. This could not be done without enquiring what corporeity
was. Now it being a rule among Logitians, that a definition can not be good,
unless it comprehend and reach to every particular of that which is defined;
we perceived it impossible to know completely, what a Body is, without taking a
general view of all those things, which we comprise under the name and
meaning of Bodies. This is the cause, we spent so much time in the first
Treatise: and I hope to good purpose; for there we found, that the nature of a
Body, consisted in being made of parts: that all the differencies of bodies,
are reduced to having more or less parts, in comparison to their substance,
thus and thus ordered: and lastly, thall all their operations, are nothing else
but local motion, which follows naturally out of having parts. So as it
appears evidently from hence, that if any thing have a being, and yet have no
parts; it is not a body, but a substance of an other quality and condition:
and consequently, if we can find the souls Being to be without parts, and
that her operations, are no local translation* we evidently conclude her to be
an immateriall or spiritual substance.

Peradventure it may be objected, that all this might have been done a much
shorter way then we have taken; and that we needed not have branched our
discourse, into so many particulars, nor have driven them so home, as we have
done: but that we might have taken our first rise from this ground, (which is
as evident, as light of Reason can make it) that seeing we know biggenesse and
a Body, to be one and the same, as well in the notion as in the thing; it must
of necessity follow, that what has not parts, nor works, nor is wrought
upon by division, is not a body. I confess, this objection appears very
reasonable, and the consideration of it weighed so much with me, as, were all
men of a free judgment, and not imbued with artificial errors, I would for
its sake, have saved my self a great deal of pains: but I find (as in the
former Treatise I have frequently complained of) that there is crept into the
world a fansy so contrary to this pregnant truth, and that it is so deeply
settled in many men's minds (and not of the meanest note,) as all we have said,
is peradventure too little to root it out.

If any that being satisfied with the rational maxim we even now mentioned,
and therefore has not deemed it needful, to employ his time in reading the
former Treatise, should wish to know how this is come to pass, I shall here
represent unto him, the sum of what I have more at large scattered in
several places of the former Treatise; and shall entreat him to consider, how
nature teaches us to call the proprieties of things whereby one is
distinguished from an other, the Qualities of those things; and that according
to the varieties of them, they have diverse names suited out to diverse of them;
some being called Habites, others Powers; and others by other names. Now what
Aristotle, and the learned Grecians did mean by these things, is clear by
the examples they give of them: they term Beauty and Health, Habites: the
dispositions of our bodies to our bodily motions, Powers; as strength (which is
the good temper of the sinews) a Power; likewise Agility, a Power; so they use
the names of the concoctiue, the nutritive, the retentiue, the excretiue,
Power; the health of the eyes, the ears, the nosethrills, etc: they call the
Powers of seeing, of hearing, of smelling, etc: and the like of many others.
But later Philosophers, being very disputatiue, and desiring to seem ignorant
of nothing (or rather, to seem to know more then any that are gone before them
and to refine their conceptions) have taken the notions, which by our first
Masters were set for common and confused explications of the natures, (to
serve for conueniency and succinctenesse of discourse) to be truly and really
particular Entities, or things of themselves: and so have filled their books,
and the schools, with inexplicable opinions, out of which no account of nature
can be given: and which is worse, the way of searching on, is barred to others;
and a mischievous error is grown into men's beliefes, that nothing can be
known. By this means they have choked the most plain and evident definition
of a body; bringing so many instances against it, that unwary men are forced to
desert and deny the very first notions of nature and reason: for in truth, they
turn all bodies into spirits, making (for example) hear, or cold, to be of it
self indivisible, a thing by it self, whose nature is not conceiuable; not
the disposition or proportion of the parts of that body which is said to be
hot or cold; but a real thing, that has a proper Being and nature peculiar
to it self; whereof they can render you no account: and so, may as well be
against the notion of a body as not: for if light, the virtue of the
loadestone, the power of seeing, feeling etc, be things that work without
time, i^ an instant; if they be not the dispositions of parts as parts,
(whose nature is, to be more or less, to be next or far off, etc:) how can
it be truly said, that the notion of a body, is to be of parts? For if this be
a true definition of a body, it follows that all corporeal qualities and
actions must likewise be some disposition and order of parts as parts: and
that what is not so, is no body, nor bodily quality or propriety.

This then was it that obliged me to go so far about, and to show in common,
how all those effects which are so much admired in bodies, are, or may be made
and continued by the sole order of quantitatiue parts and local motion: this
has forced us to anatomise nature, and to begin our dissection, with what
first occurreth unto our sense from a body. In doing which, out of the first
and most simple notion of Biggenesse or Quantity, we found out the prime
division of Bodies, into Rare and Dense: then finding them to be the Qualities
of dividing and of being divided (that is, of local motion) we gained
knowledge of the common properties of Gravity and Leuity: from the combination
of these, we retriued the four first Qualities: and by them, the Elements.
When we had agreed how the Elements were made, we examined how their action
and composition, raises those second qualities, which are seen in all mixed
bodies, and do make their divisions. Thence, proceeding into the operations of
life, we resolved, they are composed and ordered merely by the varieties of
the former: nay, that sense and fantasy (the highest things we can discern
out of man) have no other source, but are subject to the laws of parts, and
of Rarity and Density; so that in the end we became assured of this important
Maxim: That nothing whatsoever we know to be a Body, can be exempted from the
declared laws, and orderly motions, of Bodies: unto which, let us add two
other positions, which fell also within our discovery: the first that it is
constantly found in nature, that none of the bodies we know, do move
themselves; but their motion must be founded in some thing without them: the
second, that no body moves an other, unless it self be also moved: and it
will follow evidently out of them, (if they be of necessity and not
preuaricable) that some other Principle beyond bodies, is required to be the
root and first ground of motion in them: as Mr. White has most acutely and
solidely demonstrated, Dialog: 3o. Nodo 2do.
in that excellent work, I have so often cited in my former Treatise.

But it is time we should fall to our intended discourse, leaving this point
settled by what we have already said, that if we show our soul, and her
operations, to be not composed of parts, we also therein conclude, that she is
a spiritual substance, and not a body. Which is our design and intention in
this Treatise.

And for this intent, we must look upon those actions of man, which are
peculiarly his: and upon those things which result out of them, and are
called, Opera or labores hominum; as houses, Towns, Tillage, Handicrafts,
Arms, ships, Commonwealthes, Armies, Books, and the like; in which great
men's life's and thoughts have beeue spent. In all these we find one general
thridde, to run quite through them; and that all of them are composed of the
same stuff, and are built upon the same foundation: which is, a long chain of
discourses, whereof every little part or link is that which scholars do call
a Syllogism: and Syllogismes we know are framed of enuntiations; and they of
single or vncomposed apprehensions. All which are actions wrought by the
understanding of a man. But beyond these, we can not proceed to any further
subdiuision of parts, and contain our selves within the orb of humane
Actions; for simple apprehensions, can not be further resolved into other
parts, beyond the degree of apprehensions, and yet still remain actions
peculiar to a man: so that we may be sure, we shall have left nothing out of
enquiry, concerning Man's actions as he is Man, if we begin with anatomizing
his first bare apprehensions; and so go on by degrees, compounding them, till
we come to faddome those great and admirable machines of books and works,
which he (as I may say) weaueth out of his own bowels; and the like of which,
is done by no other creature whatsoever, upon the face of our contemptible
Earth.

These then (which are all comprised under the names of Apprehensions, of
Enuntiations or Judgments, and of Discourses) shall be the subject of this
second Treatise: and in it, we will first consider these operations in
themselves; which being done, we will endeavor to prove out of the nature and
manner of performing them, that the souls unto whom they belong, are
Immateriall and Immortal.

THE SECOND TREATISE; DECLARING, THE NATVRE AND OPERATIONS OF MAN'S SOVLE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of simple Apprehensions.
THAT we may duly understand, What is a right apprehension of a thing.
what a right Apprehension is, let us consider the preeminence that a man who
apprehends a thing rightly, has over him who misseth of doing so. This
latter can but roue wildely at the nature of the thing he apprendeth; and will
never be able to draw any operation into act, out of the apprehension he has
framed of it. As for example: if a man be to work upon gold, and by reason of
its resemblance unto brass, has formed an apprehension of brass, instead of
an apprehension of gold, and then (knowing that the action of fire, will
resolve brass into its least parts, and sever its moist from its dry ones)
will go about to calcine gold in the same manner as he would do brass; he will
soon find that he loses his labor; and that ordinary fire is not an
adequate Agent to destroy the homogeneall nature, and to sever the minute
parts of that fixed metal: all which happens, out of the wrong
apprehension he has made of gold. Whereas on the other side, he that
apprehends a thing rightly, if he pleases to discourse of what he
apprehends, finds in his apprehension all the parts and qualities, which
are in the thing he discourses of: for example, if he apprehends rightly a
knife, or a beetle, or a siuue, or any other thing whatsoever; in the knife he
will find hafte and blade; the blade of iron, thick on the back, and thin
on the edge; tempered to be hard and tough; thus beaten, so ground, in such
manner softened, thus quenched, and whatsoever else concerns the Being or the
making of a knife: and all this he draws out of his notion or apprehension of
a knife; which is, that it is an instrument fitted to cut such and such
things, in such a manner: for hence he finds, that it has an haft, fit to
hold it by in ones hand, to the end it may not hurt the hand, whiles it
presses upon the knife; and that the blade is apt to flide in betwixt the
parts of the thing which is to be cut, by the motion of being pressed or
drawn by the hand: and so he proceeds on, descending to the qualities of
both parts; and how they are to be joined, and held fast together. In the like
manner, he discourses of a beetle, of a siuue, or of whatsoever else comes in
his way. And he does this, not only in such manufacturers as are of man's
invention; but (if he be capable) he does the like in beasts, in birds, in
trees, in herbs, in fishes, in fossiles, and in what creature soever he
meets withal, within the whole extent of nature. He finds what they are
made for: and having discovered natures aim in their production, he can
instruct others, what parts and manner of generation they have, or ought to
have: and if he that in this manner apprehends any thing rightly, has a
mind to work upon it, either to make it, or to use and order it to some end
of his own; he is able by his right apprehension, to compare it unto other
things; to prepare what is any way fitting for the making of it; to apply it
unto what it will work its effect upon; and to conserve it from what may wrong
or destroy it: so, if he have framed a right apprehension of a siuue, he will
not employ it in drawing water; if of a beetle, he will not go about to cut
with it: neither will he offer, if he have a due apprehension of a knife, to
cut stone or steel with it, but wood, or what is softer. He knows what will
whette and maintain the edge of it; and understands what will blunt or
break it: In fine, he uses it in such sort, as the knife it self (had it
knowledge and will) would wish to be used; and moves it in such a manner, as
if it had power of motion, it would move it self: he goes about the making
it, even as nature would do, were it one of her plants: and in a word, the
knife in this apprehension made in the man, has those causes, proprieties, and
effects, which are natural unto it; and which nature would give it, if it were
made by her; and which are propotionable to those parts, causes, proprieties,
and effects, that nature bestows on her children and creatures, according to
their several essences.

The very thing it self is truly in his understanding who rightly apprehends
it.
What then can we imagine, but that the very nature of a thing apprehended, is
truly in the man, who does apprehend it? And that to apprehend ought, is to
have the nature of that thing within ones self? And that man, by apprehending,
does become the thing apprehended; not by change of his nature unto it, but by
assumption of it unto his?

Here peradventure some will reply, that we press our inference to far: and
will peremptorily deny the things real being in our mind, when we make a
true and full apprehension of it; accounting it sufficient for our purpose,
that some likeness, or image of the thing be there; out of which, we may draw
all th^se, whether contemplations, or works, or disposals of the thing. But by
that time this objection is thoroughly looked into, and that so much as they
allow is duly examined, I believe we shall find our quarrel to be only about
the word, not about the matter: and that indeed, both of us, do mean the
same, how be it diversely conceived: and that in substance their expression, in
what they grant, imports the same of ours does: which, it is true, they
first deny in words; but that may be, because the thing is not by them rightly
understood.

Let us then discuss the matter particularly. What is likeness, but an
imperfect unity between a thing, and that which it is said to be like unto? If
the likeness be imperfect, it is more unlike then it is like unto it: and the
liker it is, the more it is one with it; until at length, the growing
likeness may arrive to such a perfection, and to such a unity with the thing
it is like unto, that then, it shall no longer be like, but is become wholly the
same, with what formerly it had but a resemblance of. For example, let us
consider, in what consists the likeness unto a man, of a picture drawn
inblacke and white representing a man: and we shall find, it is only in the
proportions of the limbs and features; for the colors, the bulk, and all
things else are unlike; but the proportions are the very same, in a man and in
a picture; yet that picture is but a likeness, because it wants biggenesse
and color: give it them; and nevertheless it will yet be but a likeness,
because it wants all the dimensions of corporeity or bulk, which are in a
man's body: add also those to it; and still it will be but a likeness or
representation of a man, because it wants the warmeth, the softness, and
the other qualities of a living body, which belong to a man: but if you give it
all these, then it is no longer a likeness or image of a living creature, but
a living creature indeed; and if peradventure this living creature do continue
still to be but the likeness of a man, it is because it wants some
perfections or proprieties belonging to a man: and so in that regard, is unlike
a man: but if you allow it all those, so that in nothing it be unlike, then
your taking away all unlikeness, takes away likeness too: and as before of
dead, it became a living creature, so now of an other living creature, it
becomes a man, and is no longer like a man. You see then plainly the reason,
why that, which we call a like thing, is not the same; for in some part it is
dislike: but if the likeness were complete in every regard, then it were no
longer to be called like, but the very thing it self: and therefore we may
conclude, that if the likeness of a thing, which the objection allows to be
in our knowledge, do contain all that is in the thing known, then it is in
truth, no more a likeness, but the very known thing it self: and so what
they grant, amounts to as much as we require; though at the first they go
about to exclude it.

The Apprehension of things coming unto us by our senses, are resoluable into
other more simple apprehensions.
Having thus concluded, that when we apprehend any thing, that very thing is in
us; let us in the next place examine, how it comes thither, and what it is
there. Which we shall best do, by anatomising, and looking narrowly into the
nature of such apprehensions, as we daily make of things. It is true we said
even now, that we can not divide the actions of man's mind, further then into
apprehensions; and therefore we called them simple and vncomposed: and with
good reason; for if we reflect upon the operations of our mind, we shall
evidently perceive, that our bare apprehensions, and only they, are such: but
withal we must acknowledge, that all the apprehensions we make of things
coming unto us by our senses, are composed of other more single apprehensions,
and may be resolved into them: all which are as it were the limbs and parts,
that make up and constitute the other total one.

The apprehension of a Being is the most simple and Basis of all the rest.
Let us make use of our former example, and dissect the apprehension we make of
a knife: I find in my understanding that it is a thing so long, so broad, so
sharp, so heavy, of such a color, so molded, so tempered etc, as is fit to
cut withal. In this total appr^hension, I discover three kinds of
particular apprehensions, every one more simple and refined then the other. The
highest of them, and the foundation upon which the others are built, is the
notion of Being: which is of so high, and of so abstracted a nature, that we
can not retriue words to express in what manner we conceive it; but are feign
to content our selves with the outward sound of a word, by which, without
discribing our own, we stir up a like conception in an other: and that is
the word ^s, by which we intimate the Being of the thing we apprehend. And this
notion can be in our mind, without inferring any other: and therefore is the
simplest of all others: which of necessity, must imply it, and can not be
without it, although it can be without them.

The apprehension of a thing is in next degree to that of Being, and it is the
Basis of all the subseque^t ones.
Our next apprehension is of that which has Being: and is expressed by the word
Thing. This is not so simple as the former* for it is composed of it, and of
what receives it; of Being, and of what has Being: yet it is much simpler
then the next degree of apprehensions, which is caused in our mind by the great
variety of things, that come thither through our senses; and can be conceived
without any of them, though none of them can without it; for I can have in me
the notion of a thing, abstracting from all accidents whatsoever; as of
magnitude, of figure, of color, of resemblance, or the like: but I can not
conceive it to be long, or sharp, or blew, etc, without allowing it first to
be somewhat or something, that is in such sort affected: so that the
apprehension of a thing, or of that which has Being, is the basis of all our
other subsequent apprehensions; as the apprehension of Being, is the basis of
the apprehension of a thing: for had it not Being, it were not a thing; and
were it not a thing, it could not be said to be a long thing or a sharp thing;
nor indeed that it were long or sharp: for to be so, does include Being; and
what has Being, is a Thing. And thus we may observe, how the bulk of our
apprehensions is composed of something aduentitious, and of something formerly
within us, which is of a very different nature from all the others; and yet so
fitted and necessary to them, that none of them can be without it, although it
not only can be, but is best conceived without relation to any of them.

We shall easily discern, The apprehension of things known to us by our
senses, does consist in certain respects betwixt too things.
of how different a strain this conception of Being, is from all others, that
enter by our senses, (as from the conceptions of colors, of soundes, and the
like) if we but reflect upon that act in us, which makes it; and then compare
it with the others: for we shall find, that all they do consist in, or of
certain respects betwixt two things; whereas this of Being, is an absolute
and simple conception of it self, without any relation to ought else; and can
not be described or expressed with other words, or by comparing it to any
other thing: only we are sure, we understand and know what it is.

But to make this point the clearer, it will not be amiss to show more
particularly, wherein the other sort of apprehensions are different from this
of Being; and how they consist in certain respects between different things,
and are known only by those respects: whereas this is known only in it self;
abstracting from all other things whatsoever. An example will do it best: when
I apprehend the whiteness in the wall, I may consider how that white, is a
thing which makes such an impression upon my fantasy; and so accordingly, I
know or express the nature of white, by a respect or proportion of the wall,
to work upon my fantasy. In like manner, if we take a notion that arises out
of what enters immediately by our senses, (for by joining such also to the
notion of Being, we make ordinary apprehensions) we shall find the same nature:
as when I consider how this white wall, is like to an other white wall, the
apprehension of likeness that I have in my mind, is nothing else, but a notion
arising out of the impression, which both those walls together, do make upon
my fantasy; so that, this apprehension is as the former, a certain kind of
respect or proportion of the two walls to my imagination: not as they make
their impressions immediately upon it, but as an other notion arises, out of
comparing the several impressions, which those two white walls made in it.

Let us proceed a little further, Respect or relation has not really any
formal being, but only in the apprehension of man.
and examine what kind of thing that is, which we call respect or proportion,
and where it resideth. We shall find, that there is a very great difference,
between what it is in it self, or in its own essence, and what it is in the
things that are respective: for in them, it is nothing else but the things,
being plainly and bluntly what they are really in themselves: as for example,
two white walls to be like, is in them nothing else, but each of them to be
white: and two quantities to be half and whole, is in them nothing else, but
each quantity to be just what it is. But a respect in its own nature, is a
kind of tie, comparison, tending, or order, of one of those things to an
other; and is no where to be found in its formal subsistence, but in the
apprehension of man: and therefore it can not be described by any similitude,
nor be expressed by any means* but (like Being) by the sound of a word, which
we are agreed upon to stir up in us such a notion; for in the things, it is
not such a thing as our notion of it is: (which notion is that, which we use to
express by prepositions and conjunctions, and which Aristotle and Logitians
express in common, by the word (...), or ad) and therefore there is nothing
out of us, to paint it by: as I could do white, or square, or round, or the
like; because these have a being in the things that are white, or square etc,
and consequently they may be expressed by others of the like nature: but the
likeness that one white has to an other, or the respect that either of them
has to man's imagination, is only in Man; who by comparing them, gives birth
to the nature and Being of respect. That Existence or being is the proper
affection of man: and that man's soul is a comparing power.


Out of this discourse, we may collect two singularities of man; which will
much import us, to take particular notice of* the one is, that Being or a thing
(the formal notion of both which is merely Being) is the proper affection of
man; for every particular thing is in him, by being (as I may say) grafted upon
the stock of Existence or of Being: and accordingly we see, that whatsoever we
speak of, we say it is something: and whatsoever we conceive, we give it the
nature of a thing; as when we have said, the wall is white, we frame whiteness
as a thing: so did we immediately before speaking of Respect, we took respect
as it were a thing and enquired, where it is: so that it is evident, that all
the negotiation of our understanding, tradeth in all that is apprehended by it,
as if they were things.

The other singularity we may observe in man is, that he is a comparing power;
for all his particular knowledges, are nothing else but respects or comparisons
between particular things: as for example, for a man to know heat, or cold
etc, is to know, what effects fire or water etc, can work upon such or such
bodies.

A thing by coming into the understanding of man, loses nothing of its own
peculiar nature.
Out of the first of these proprieties it follows, that what affects a man,
or makes impression upon his understanding, does not thereby loose its own
peculiar nature, nor is it modifyed to the recipient; the contrary of which, we
see happens perpetually in bodies: observe the sustenance we take; which that
it may be once part of our body, is first changed into a substance like our
body, and cease being what it was: when water or any liquid body is received
into a vessel, it loses its own figure, and puts on the figure of the
vessel it is in: if heat enters into a body that is already hot, that
heat becomes thereby more heat; if into a cold body, it is converted into
warmeth: and in like manner, all other corporeal things are accommodated to
the qualities of the recipient; and in it, they loose their own proper terms
and consistences: but what comes into the understanding of a man, is in such
sort received by him or joined to him, that it still retains its own proper
limitations and particular nature* notwithstanding the assu^ption of it unto
him: for Being is joined to every thing there; since (as we have said) it is by
Being that any thing comes thither: and consequently this stock of Being,
makes every graft that is inoculated into it, Be what of its own nature it
is; for Being joined to an other notion, does not change that notion, but
makes it be what it was before; sithence if it should be changed, Being were
not added to it: as for example, add Being to the notion of knife, and it
makes a knife, or that notion, to Be a knife: and if after the addition, it
does not remain a knife, it was not Being, that was added to a knife.

Out of the later of the singularities proper to man, A multitude of things may
be united in man's understanding without being mingled or comfounded together.
it follows, that multitude of things may be united in him, without
suffering any confusion among themselves; but every one of them, will remain
with its proprieties, and distinct limitations: for so of necessity it must be,
when that which unites them to him, is the comparing of them to something
besides themselves: which work could not be performed, unless what is to be
compared, do retain exactly its own nature, whereby the comparison may be
made: no more then one can weigh two quantities one against an other, unless
he keep asunder what is in each scale, and keep all other weights from
mingling with them: and accordingly we see, that we can not compare black to
white, or a horse to an ox, unless we take together, the properties by which
black differs from white, or an ox from a horse: and consequently, they
must remain unmingled and without confusion, precisely what in themselves they
are, and be different in the sight of the comparer.

But indeed, if we look well into the matter, we shall find, that setting a
side the notion of Existence or of Being, all our other notions are nothing
else, but comparisons and respects: and that by the mediation of respects, the
natures of all things are in us: and that by the varying of them, we multiply
our notions: which in their first division, that reduces their several kinds
into general heads, do increase into the ten famous tribes, that Logitians
call Predicaments: and they do comprehend under them, all the particular
notions that man has, or can have, according to the course of knowledge in
this life. Of which Predicaments the seven last are so manifestly respective,
that all men acknowledge them to be so. Substance we have already showed to
have a respect unto Being* Quantity we proved in the first Chapter of the
former Treatise of the nature and of the operation of Bodies, to consist in a
respect unto parts. Quality is divided into four branches: whereof Power is
clearly a respect to that over which it has power, or from which it may
suffer. Habit is a respect to the substance wherein it is; as being the
property by which it is well or ill, conveniently or inconueniently affected,
in regard of its own nature; as you may observe in health, or sickness, or
the like. The passible Qualities are those which we have explicated, in
discoursing of the Elements and of Mixtes; and whose natures we have there
showed do consist in respects of acting or of suffering. Figure or shape (which
is the last branch of the division of the Predicament of Quality) is nothing
else, but a certain disposition of one part of a body to an other. And so you
see, how all the ten Predicaments do consist purely in diversity of Respects:
and by consequence, all our conceits and notions (excepting that of Being,
which is the stock, upon which all the rest are grafted) are nothing else, but
various respects; since all of them whatsoever, are comprised under those
general heads. Concerning which, we shall not need to dilate ourselves any
further; seeing they are to be found in Aristotle, and in his Commentators,
largely discoursed of.

Of abstracted and concrete terms.
In the next place, let us observe, how our understanding behaueth it self, in
considering and in apprehending these respects. We have already declared, that
the variety of our notions, does arise out of the respects which diverse things
have to one an other: hence will follow, that of the same thing, we may have
various notions: for comparing it to different things, we shall meet with
different respects between them; and consequently, we shall consider the same
thing, under different notions: as when we consider an apple, under the notions
of greenenesse, of sweetness, of roundenesse, of mellownesse etc: in such
sort, as we have amply declared in the first Treatise, and therefore need not
here enlarge ourselves any further upon this particular. Now these notions are
so absolutely severed one from an other, and every one of them has such a
completenesse within it self, that we may use any one of them, without
meddling at all with any of the others. And this we do two several ways: the
one, when our manner of apprehension determines us to one precise notion,
which is so summed up within it self, as it not only abstracteth from all
other notions, but also quite excludes them, and admits no society with
them. The other way is, when we consider a thing under a determinate notion,
yet we do it in such a manner, that although we abstract from all other
notions, nevertheless we do so, rather by neglecting then by excluding them:
and even in the manner of our expression of it, we insinuate that there are
other notions (without specifying what) belonging unto it.

Of the first kind of notions, are whiteness, weight, heat, and such like,
(whose names are called abstracted terms) which although they arise out of our
comparing of the things that are white, heavy, hot, etc: to our fantasy, or
to other things; yet these notions are so precise, and shutt up within
themselves, that they absolutely exclude all others, (as of long, short,
square, rough, sharp, or whatsoever else) which may in the things accompany
the whiteness, weight, heat, etc, that our consideration is then busied only
withal Of the second kind of abstracted notions, are white, heavy, hot etc
(whose names, expressing them, are called concrete terms:) which although they
cause in us no other apprehensions then of whiteness, of weight, of heat etc:
yet they are not so rigorously paled in, as the others are, from admitting
society with any besides; but do imply tacitly, that the thing which is white,
heavy, hot etc: has besides that, some other consideration belonging unto it
(whatsoever it be) which is not expressed.

Now in this later abstraction, it happens sometimes, that the notion
expressed, has but an accidental connection with the other notions, that are
in the thing unexpressed: as for example; it is merely accidental to the
white wall as it is white, to be high or low, of stone, of plaster, or the
like. But otherwhiles, the expressed notion is so essential to the concealed
ones, that they can not be without it: as when we apprehend a cloven foot;
although this apprehension do abstract from all other notions besides
clouenfootednesse (if so I may say) yet, (as above we have declared) it is in
such a manner, that it implies other considerations, not yet expressed, in
that cloven foot: among which, some may be of that nature, that they can not
have a Being without presupposing clouenfootednesse; but others may be merely
accidental to that notion: as (for instance sake) let one be, that the foot
is cloven into three parts; and let an other be, that it is black or hairy;
of these, this later notion of black or hairy, is of the first kind of
abstractions, which we said had but an accidental connection with that which
comprehended them without expressing them: for other things besides the cloven
foot, may be black or hairy; in such sort as height or lowness, to be of
stone or of plaster, may belong unto other structures besides the white wall:
but to be cloven footed into three parts, does so necessarily depend of being
cloven footed in general, (which implies this particular) and so directly
includes it, as it can not subsist without clouenfootednesse: for though we
may conceive a foot to be cloven, without determining in our apprehension,
into how many toes it is cloven; yet we can not conceive it to have three,
four, or five toes, without apprehending it to be cloven: so that in such like
apprehensions, the notion which is expressed, is so essential to the notion
that is concealed and added unto it, as the concealed one can not be conceived
without the expressed one; and whenever it is mentioned, the other is
necessarily also brought in, and affirmed with it.

Now, Of universal notions.
some of these later kinds of notions, (in which what is expressed is
essential to what is concealed) may be of such a nature, as to be capable of
receiving the addition of sundry other notions, so repugnant unto one an other,
that they can not agree together in one subject; and yet that general notion,
without determining any of the others, be indifferent to the contrary additions
that include it, and belong as much to any one, as to any other of them: and so
consequently, whatsoever may be affirmed, and is true, of the primary notion,
may as well be affirmed, and is as true, of the several particulars, arising
out of the repugnant additions. Such a notion, Logitians term an Universal
one: that is, one that reaches indifferently and equally to all the
particulars comprised under it. As for example: to the notion of a living
creature, may be added the notions of Reasonable and unreasonable: which first
notion, when it is barely expressed, it determines no one of the two secondary
notions, more then it does the other* but is alike indifferent to either; and
whatsoever belongs to a living creature, belongs entirely both to a man and
to a beast: yet no one thing, can be both reasonable and unreasonable. In like
manner when I say, a man is a discursiue creature; under this word man, there
lies a notion, by which may be signified any particular man, as Thomas, John,
William, etc: though of it self, it determine no one man whatsoever: and
consequently, every one of these particular men, must be allowed to be a
discursiue creature, because the being such, belongs unto the notion of man,
and that notion unto all the particulars of Thomas, John, Willian, etc: and yet
no particular man can be both Thomas and John, or John and Willian, etc.

In this kind of notion, we may observe yet one propriety more: which is, that
of it self, and in its common term, it does not cause ones thought to range
unto several objects; nor does it imply that there are many particulars
comprised under it: yet if there be never so many, that conceit will fit them
every one; and if there be but one, still it will be no less accommodated to
that one. As for example: He that makes a right apprehension of a sun, does
not by that conception determine, whether there be many suns or but one: and
if every one of the stars (which we call fixed) be suns to other earthes,
it fitteth them all; and if there be no other sun, then that which shines to
us, it is satisfied and taken up with that: so likewise; before the production
of Eve, the notion of a man was as fully taken up by Adam alone, as it is now
by his numerous progeny that fills the world: nor does our understanding,
when that term is pronunced, consider (out of the force of the term) whether
there be many men, or only one.

Of apprehending a multitude under o^e notion.
An other propriety in man's apprehension not much unlike to this, is, that he is
able to comprise a multitude in one indivisible notion; and yet, that notion
express the multiplicity of what it contains: as we see in numbers, where
the indivisible conception of ten, a hundred, a thousand, etc, does plainly
express the subject to be many; and yet that notion of the number binds the^
up (as I may say) into one bundle, that in it self admits no division, nor
will permit that the least part be taken from it* for if it be, the whole
bundle is destroyed and vanishes: as when I take ten, if one be diminished
from it, it is no longer ten, but nine. It fares in like manner with the
conceptions we frame of All, and Every one, as it does with numbers; for if but
one be deficient, it is but a part, and not all, or every one: so that these
notions do indiuisibily terminate a multitude. And like to this notion, is the
name or term whole, in respect of things which as yet have not division, but
are capable of being divided; for it is so rigorous, that if the least atome or
thought be wanting, it is no longer the whole, but only a part.

And this is as much as at present appears unto me needful to be said,
concerning single apprehensions: unless I be permitted to add for a
conclusion, The power of the understanding reaches as far as the extent of
being.
this little note (which peradventure might have been more properly sert down
in an other place where we discoursed of Being, but that it occurred not then
to me) that apprehension being rooted in the nature of Being, the power of it
spreads it self as far as the extent of Being: and consequently reaches
to all things whatsoever; for whatsoever is a thing, has Being; and that unto
which Being does not reach, is nothing. Nay, it is not limited there, but
graspeth even at nothing, and aymeth to make a notion of it, and planteth its
generation, by multiplying it self by negations of whatsoever is. Hence we
have the notions of deafness, of dumbness, of blindness, of lamenesse, of
baldenesse, of death, of sin, and of all evils whatsoever, by the want of
such goods, as are sensible unto us.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Of Thinking and Knowing.
Having thus declared the nature of single apprehensions, How a judgment is
made by the understanding.
the method we have prescribed ourselves, requires that we examine in the
next place, what effect the joining of them together may have; for from thence
do spring Enunciations or Judgments; which are in the next rank after simple
apprehensions, and are the materials whereof discourses are immediately framed:
as when of the two apprehensions of knife and of sharp, we make this
enunciation, the knife is sharp. In this enquiry the first thing that
occurreth unto us, is to consider, in what manner two differing simple
apprehensions, do become joined to one an other: and we shall find, that they
are not tied together like several distinct things in one bundle, or like
stones in a heap, where all that are comprised under one multitude, are yet
circumscribed within their own limits, and thereby are wholly distinguished
from each other; but that they are as it were grafted upon one stock; which
being common to both, gives the same life to both; and so becoming one with
each of them, makes them be one and the same thing between themselves. And
this is the notion of Being or Existence, in the subject we speak of: which
(as we have already showed) is the Basis and foundation of all other
apprehensions; and by being common and indifferent to all, is the fittest glue
to unite those that are capable of such conjunction: and accordingly we see,
that most of our speech runs upon this strain, that this is that, or does
that (which is as much to say as is doing that) that Socrates is a man, or that
Socrates runs, (which signifies, is running) and the like: and since our
speech proceeds from the conceptions of our mind; it is clear, that as the
words which express Being or Existence, do join together the other words
that we use, (or at least, the greatest part of them) so likewise in our mind
the apprehension of Being, is the glue that joins our apprehensions
corresponding to our words.

That two or more apprehensions are identifyed in the soul by uniting them in
the stock of being.
All which will appear to be said with great reason, if we reflect upon it; for
when diverse apprehensions may be thus joined together, it is indeed, that one
and the same thing affecting us several ways and under different
considerations; those different impressions do begett different apprehensions
in us: and so, till we examine the matter, every one of them seems to be a
different thing: but when we trace these streams up to the fountain head, we
discern that all of them do belong to one and the same thing; and that by
being in that thing, they are among themselves the very same thing, howeuer
they affect us variously; and therefore may truly be said to be one, as indeed
they are: and consequently, nothing is more fit to join together in our mind
those different apprehensions, then the apprehension of Being; which makes us
apprehend as one thing, those notions which really, and in the thing it self,
are but one, as we have often touched, both in the former Treatise, and lately
in this: for this is the way to join things in the mind intelligently, and
according to the proper nature of the mind; which receiving impressions from
things existent, ought to consider those impressions as they flow from the
very things, and not as they are in the mind it self; and by mediation of
those impressions, must take a suruay of the things themselves; and not stay
at the intellectual impressions they make in her: and consequently, must
apprehend those things to be one in themselves, (although in us they be not
so) according to the course of our original and legitimate apprehensions of
things; which is, as they are existent; that is, as they are in their own
nature, and in themselves; and not according to the discourses and secondary
apprehensions we make of the images we find of them in our mind. And thus
things are rightly joined by apprehension; without caution in which
particular, we shall run into great errors in our discourse: for if we be not
very careful herein, we are apt to mistake the use of the impressions we
receive from things, and to ground our judgments concerning them, according
to what we find of them in our mind, and not according to what they are in
themselves: which two several considerations, have quite different faces;
although (it is true) those impressions are made by the things, and are the
only means by which we may rightly judge of them: provided, that we consider
them as they are in the things, and not as they are in us.

Now this conjunction of apprehensions, by the mediation and the glue of Being,
is the most natural and fitting, not only in regard of the things, but even
in regard of us: for (as we have already showed) it is of all others the most
common and universal, the most simple or vncomposed, and the most natural and
deepest rooted in man: out of all which, it is evident, that this union of
apprehensions by the means of Being, is in truth an Identification of them:
for Unity being a negation of multiplicity, it follows, that what is one, is
the same: and this identification is truly and naturally expressed by saying,
that the one is the other.

But insisting a little further upon this consideration, How the notio^s of a
substantive and an adjective, are united in the soul, by the common stock of
being.
how different apprehensions become joined and united together, by the notion
of Being; we may observe that this happens, not only to two single ones, but
to more; according as more then two, may belong unto one thing: and it may so
fall out, that more then one, be on either side the common ligament. Thus when
we say, A Man is a discoursiue creature; or a Rational soul, is an immortal
substance, the two apprehensions, of discoursiue, and of creature, are joined
together in a third of Man, by the tie of one Being: and the two apprehensions
of Immortal, and of Substance, are united to the two others of Rational and
of Soul, likewise by the ligament of one single Being. Evident it is then,
that the extremes are vni^ed by one Being: but how the two apprehensions that
are ranked together on the same side of the ligament (as in our former
examples, the apprehensions of discoursiue and of creature, of rational and of
Soul, of Immortal and of substance) are between themselves joined to one an
other, is not so easy to express. It is clear, that it is not done by mere
conglobation; for we may observe, that they do belong, or are apprehended to
belong, unto the same thing; and the very words that express them, do
intimate so much, by one of them being an adjective; which shows, they are
not two things; for if they were, they would require two substantives to
describe them: and consequently it follows that one of them must needs
appertain to the other: and so both of them make but one thing.

And there is no doubt, but in the inward apprehension, there is a variety
correspondent to the variety of words which express it; since all variety of
words that is made by intention, resulteth out of some such variety of
apprehensions. Therefore, since the words do import, that the things have a
dependence the one of the other, we can not doubt, but that our apprehensions
have so too: which will be conceived best, by looking into the act of our mind,
when it frames such variety of apprehensions belonging to one thing,
correspondent to the variety in words of an adjective glewed unto his
substantive; and attending heedfully to what we mean, when we speak so. The
Hebrews do express this union, or comprising of two different apprehensions
under one notion, by putting in the genitive case, the word which expresses
one of them, (much like the rule in Lillies grammar, that when two substantives
come together, if they belong to the same thing, the one is putt in the
genitive case.) As when in the scripture we meet with these words, the judge
of injustice, the spence of wickedness, the man of sin, or of death; which
in our phrase of speaking, do signify an unjust judge, a wicked spence, and a
sinful or dead man. In which it is evident, that as well the manner of
understanding, as of speaking, takes each pair of these notions to belong
unto one thing; that is, to have both of them, one and the same Existence,
although there interuene not the formal expression of their being one. Thus we
see, how one Being serves two different ways to join and unite several
apprehensions: and if we will examine all the negotiations of our
understanding, we shall hardly find any notions so far distant, but may be
brought together, either by the one of these ways, or by the other.

That a settled judgment becomes a part of our soul.
But this composition and joining of several apprehensions by the glue of
Being, is not sufficient to make us deem a thing to be really such, as their
union painteth in the mind, or as the words so tied together do express in
speech. Well may it cause us to think of the thing; but to think, or to deem
it such an one (which word of deeming, we shall be obliged henceforward to use
frequently, because the word thinking is subject to equivocation) requires the
addition of something more, then barely this composition of apprehensions;
which unless they be kept straight by some level, may as well swerve from the
subject, as make a true picture of it. Here then we are to examine, what it is
that makes us think any thing to be such as we apprehend it: this we are sure
of, that when we do so, our actions which proceed upon reason, and which have
relation to that thing, are governed and steered in every circumstance, just as
if the thing were truly so: as for example, if a man do really deem the
weather to be cold, or that his body is distempered, he puts on warmer
clothes, or takes physike; although peradventure he is mistaken in both: for
his deeming them to be so, makes him demean himself in such sort, as if
really they were so. It is then evident, that by such thinking or deeming, the
nature conceived, is made an active principle in us: unto which if we add,
that all the knowledge we have of our soul, is no more, but that it is an
active force in us, it seems, that a thing, by having apprehensions made of
it in our mind, and by being really thought to be agreeable to such
apprehensions, becomes (as it were) a part or affection of our soul, and one
thing with it. And this peradventure is the cause, why an understanding man can
not easily leave an opinion once deeply rooted in him; but does wrestle and
strive against all arguments that would force him from it, as if a part of his
soul or understanding were to be torn from him: in such manner as a beast
will cry and struggle to save his body, from having any of his limbs
disioynted or pulled in pieces.

How the Soul comes to deem or settle a judgment.
But this observing the effect which follows of our deeming a thing to be thus
or so, is not sufficient to inform us, what it is that causes that deeming.
We must therefore take the matter a little higher, and look into its immediate
principles: and there we shall find, that it is the knowing of what we say to
be true, and the assurance, that the things are as we deem them, which
quieteth our soul, and makes it consent unto them, and proceed to action
upon that consent. Now this knowledge, is the most eminent part of deeming; and
of all our acquisitions, is the most inseparable from us: and indeed in rigor,
it is absolutely inseparable by direct means; howeuer peradventure by indirect
means it may be separated.

Let us then consider how we attain unto it, and how sometimes we fail in the
purchase of it; and what degrees of assurance or of probability there are
between it and error. To this intent, we may observe that the greatest
assurance, and the most eminent knowledge we can have of any thing, is of such
Propositions, as in the schools are called Identicall; as if one should say,
John is John, or a man is a man: for the truth of these propositions is so
evident and clear, as it is impossible any man should doubt of them, if he
understand what he says: and if we should meet with one that were not
satisfied of the verity of them, we would not go about to prove them to him,
but would only apply ourselves to make him reflect upon the words he speaks,
without using any further industry to gain his assent thereunto: which is a
manifest sign, that in such propositions, the apprehending or understanding
them, is the same thing as to know them and to consent unto them: or at the
least, that they are so necessarily conjoined, as the one follows immediately
out of the other, without needing any other causes to promote this effect, more
then that a man be disposed, and willing to see the truth: so as we may
conclude, that to understand a proposition which openly carries its evidence
with it, is to knew it. And by the same reason, although the evidence of a
proposition, should not at the first sight be presently obuious unto us, yet
with unfolding and explicating of it, we come at length to discern it; then
likewise the apprehending of it, is the knowing of it.

We must therefore enquire, what it is that causes this evidence: and to that
purpose, reflecting upon those instances we have given of Identicall
propositions, we may in them observe, that evidence arises out of the plain
Identification of the extremes that are affirmed of one an other; so that, in
what proposition soever, the Identification of the extremes is plain, the
truth of it is evident unto us, and our mind is satisfied and at quiet; as
being assured that it knows it to be so as the words say it. Now all
affirmative propositions do by the form of them import an Identification of
their extremes, (for they all agree in saying This is that) yet they are not
all alike in the evidence of their Identification: for in some it shows it
self plainly, without needing any further help to discover it; and those are
without any more ado known of themselves, as such Identicall sayings, we even
now gave for examples: others require a journey somewhat further about to show
their Identification; which if it be not so hidden, but that it may in the end
be discovered and brought to light, as soon as that is done, the knowledge
settled by them in the soul, is certain and satisfactory as well as the
other: but if it be so obscure, that we can not display the Identification of
it, then our mind suspendeth his assent, and is unquiet about it, and doubts
of the truth of it: in some propositions, whiles he searches and enquireth
after the Identification of their extremes; peradventure he discerns, that it
is impossible there should be any between them; and then on the other side, he
is satisfied of the falsity of them: for if a proposition be affirmative, it
must necessarily be a false one, if there be no Identification between the
extremes of it.

By this discourse, we have found two sorts of propositions, which begett
knowledge in us. The one, where the Identification of the extremes, is of it
self so manifest, that when they are but explicated, it needs no further
proof. The other, where though in truth they be Identified, yet the
Identification appears not so clear, but that some discourse is required to
satisfy the understanding therein. Of the first kind, are such propositions as
do make one of the extremes the definition of the other whereof it is affirmed:
as when we say, a man is a reasonable creature; which is so evident, if we
understand what is meaned by a Man, and what by a reasonable creature, as it
needs no further proof to make us know it: and knowledge is begotten in us,
not only by a perfect Identification of the extremes, but as well by an
imperfect one: as when what is said of an other, is but part of its definition;
for example, if one should say, a man is a creature, no body that knows him
to be a rational creature, (which is his complete definition) could doubt of
his being a creature; because that the being a creature, is partly identifyed
to being a rational creature. In like manner, this obuious evidence of
Identification, appears as well where a complete division of a thing is
affirmed of the other extreme, as where that affirmation is made by the total
or partial definition of it: as when we say, number is even or odd: an
enuntiation is true or false, and the like: where, because what is said,
compriseth the differences of the thing whereof it is said, it is plain that
one of them must needs be that whereof we speak.

Peradventure some may expect, that we should give Identicall propositions
(among others) for examples of this plain evidence: but because they bring no
acquisition of new knowledge unto the soul, (the doing of which, and the
reflecting upon the manner, is the scope of this Chapter) I let them pass
without any further mention, upon this occasion having produced them once
before, only to show by an undeniable example, what it is that makes our soul
consent unto an enuntiation, and how knowledge is begotten in her, that we
might afterward apply the force of it to other propositions.

Let us therefore proceed to the second sort of propositions, which require
some discourse, to prove the Identification of their extremes. Now the scope of
such discourse is, by comparing them unto some other third thing, to show their
Identification between themselves; for it shows, that each of them a part is
identifyed with that new subject it brings in: and then our understanding is
satisfied of there identity, and our soul is secure of that knowledge it thus
acquireth, as well as it is of that which resulteth out of those propositions,
which bear their evidence in their first aspect.

This negotiation of the understanding to discover the truth of propositions,
when it is somewhat hidden, (which we call discourse) as it is one of the
chiefest and noblest actions of the soul, so does it challenge a very
heedefull inspection into it: and therefore we will allow it a peculiar Chapter
by it self, to explicate the nature and particularities of it. But this little
we now have said concerning it, is sufficient for this place; where all we aim
at is to prove (and I conceive we have done it very fully) that when Identity
between two or more things, presents it self to our understanding, it
makes and forces knowledge in our soul.

Whence it is manifest, that the same power or soul, which in a single
apprehension is possessed with the Entity or Unity of it, is that very power or
soul, which applied to an Enunciation, knows or deemeth; since knowing is
nothing else, but the apprehending of manifest Identity in the extremes of a
proposition, or an effect immediately consequent out of it, in the soul that
applies it self to apprehend that Identity. Which apprehension is made,
either by the force of the extremes, applied immediately to one an other, or
else by the application of them to some other thing: which peradventure may
require yet a further application unto new apprehensions, to make the Identity
between the first extremes appear evidently.

Now, How opinion is begotten in the understanding.
as when Identity truly appears, it makes evidence to our understanding, and
begets assured knowledge in our soul; so, when there is only an apparent
Identity, but not a real one, it happens that the understanding is quieted
without evidence; and our soul is fraught with a wrong or slight belief,
instead of certain knowledge: as for example, it is for the most part true,
that what wise men affirm, is so as they say; but because wise men are but men
(and consequently not infaillible) it may happen that in some one thing, the
wisest men that are may miss, though in most and generally speaking, they hitt
right. Now if any body in a particular occasion, should (without examining the
matter) take this proposition rigorously and peremptorily, that what wise men
affirm is true; and should there upon subsume with evidence, that wise men say
such a particular thing, and should there upon proceed to believe it; in this
case he may be deceived, because the first proposition is not verily, but only
seemingly evident.

And this is the manner how that kind of deeming, which is either opposed, or
inferior to knowledge, is bred in us: to wit, when either through temerity,
in such cases where we may, and it is just we should examine all particulars so
carefully, that no equivocation or mistake in any part of them, be admitted to
pass upon us for a truth, and yet we do not: or else, through the limitednesse
and imperfection of our nature, when the minutenesse and variety of petty
circumstances in a business is such, as we can nor enter into an exact
examination of all that belongs to that matter, (for if we should exactly
discuss every slight particular, we should never get through any thing of
moment) we settle our understanding upon grounds, that are not sufficient to
move and determine it. Now in some of these cases, (and particularly in the
later) it may happen, that the understanding it self is aware, that it neither
has discovered, nor can discover evidence enough, to settle its assent with
absolute assurance: and then it judges the belief it affords unto such a
proposition, to be but probable; and instead of knowledge, has but opinion
concerning it. Which opinion appears to it more or less probable, according
as the motives it relyeth on, are stronger or weaker.

How faith is begotten in the understanding.
There remains yet an other kind of deeming for us to speak of; which though
it ever fail of evidence, yet sometimes it is better then opinion, for
sometimes it brings certitude with it. This we call faith; and it is bred in
this sort: when we meet with a man, who knows something which we do not, if
withal we be persuaded that he does not, nor will not tell a lie; we then
believe what he says of that thing to be true: now according to the persuasion
we have of his knowledge and veracity, our belief is strong, or mingled with
doubt: so that if we have absolute assurance and certainety, that he knows
the truth and will not lie, then we may be assured, that the faith which we
yield to what he says, is certain as well as evident knowledge is certain,
and admits no comparison with opinion, be it never so probable: but so it
may happen, that we may be certainly assured that a man does know the truth of
what he speaks of, and that he will not lie in reporting it to us: for seeing
no man is wicked without a cause; and that to tell a lie in a serious matter,
is a great wickedness; if once we come to be certain that he has no cause,
(as it may fall out we may) then it follows, that we are assured of the thing
which he reports to us.

Yet still such faith falls short of the evidence of knowledge in this
regard, that its evidence sticks one degree on this side the thing it self:
and at the push, in such a case we see but with an others eyes; and
consequently, if any opposition do arise against our thought thereabout, it is
not the beams, and light of the thing it self, which strengthen us against
such opposition, but the goodness of the party upon whom we rely.

Why truth is the perfection of a reasonable soul: and why it is not found in
simple apprehensions as well as in Enuntiations.
Before I go any further, I must needs remember one thing, that our Masters
teach us: which is, that truth and falsehood are first found in sayings or
Enuntiations; and that although single apprehensions are in our mind before
these judgments, yet are they not true or false themselves, nor is the
understanding so by them. To comprehend the reason of this maxim, let us
consider what truth and falsehood are: surely truth is nothing else, but the
confirmity of our understanding, with the things that make impression upon it:
and consequently, falsehood is a disagreeing between our mind and those
things: if the existence which the things have in us, be agreeable to the
Existence they have in themselves; then our understanding is true; otherwise it
is false. Now the natural perfection of our Soul or understanding, is to be
fraught with the rest of the whole world, that is to have the knowledge of all
things that are; the knowledge of their essences, of their natures, of their
proprieties, of their operations, and of whatsoever else belongs to them all
in general, and to every one of them in particular: but our soul can not be
stored or fraught with any thing, by other means then by her assent or
deeming: whereupon it follows, that she can not have her perfection, until
her deemings or judgments be perfect; which is, that they be agreeable unto
the things in the world: when they are so, then are they true. And this is the
reason why truth is the aim and perfection of the soul. Now then, truth
residing only in the assents and judgments of the soul, (which are the
traffic whereby she enricheth her self with the rest of the world) and they
being framed by her discerning an identity between two things; which she
expresses by affirming one of them of the other: it follows, that nothing
can be true or false, but where there is a composition of two extremes, made by
the ones being affirmed of the other; which is done only in Enuntiations or
judgments: whiles single apprehensions assent to nothing, and therefore settle
no knowledge in the soul; and consequently are not capable of verity or
falsity, but are like pictures made at fansy, some one of which may happen to
be like some Person, but can not be said to be the picture of him, because it
was not drawn from him: so these bare apprehensions, because there is not in
the man union of the soul to the outward world, or to the Existence which
actuateth its object, therefore they make not the soul to be the image of the
things existent: but the judgment, which still takes a thing existent, or as
existent, in the subject of the proposition, draws its picture from the thing
it self: and therefore it makes the soul to be well or ill painted, in
respect of the thing that is true or false.

And this is the reason, why in one sense doubtful propositions, which the
understanding (not being yet resolved) makes inquiringly to inform it self
of the truth of them, can not be said to be true or false; for all that while,
the soul yields no assent unto them, either one way or other; yet in an
other sense they may, which is, taking them as subjects that the understanding
determines unto it self to treat of: for there being two extremes in them,
and the proposition consisting in this, whether these extremes be identifyed or
no, it follows, that since one part must of necessity be, such a proposition
spoken at random, or written by chance without design, is of necessity either
true or false; according as the extremes of it, are or are not one thing. What
is a solid judgment, and what a slight one.


There occurreth no more unto my consideration to be said in this place,
concerning the assents and judgments of the mind: unless it be, to explicate
in a word or two, the several qualities of them, which are found in several
Persons; and to point at the reason why they are called by those names, which
they are universally known by. To which purpose we may observe, that judgment
or deeming, being a quieting of the mind, it follows that the mind must
needs be in disquiet and at unrest, before it comes to judge: so that we may
conclude, that judgment or thinking, is a good attained by a former motion.
Now according to the quality of this motion, the judgment or assent, is
qualifyed and denominated. We must therefore consider what belongs to motion;
which when we have done, we shall in judgments find something proportionable
thereunto.

We know there is a beginning and an ending in motion; and that there are
parts by which it is drawn out in length: all which must be particularly
considered, in our comparing of motions unto judgments. Now then, as he that
would know precisely the nature of any motion, must not begin his suruay of
it, after it has been some time in flux; nor must give over his observing
it, before it have arrived unto its utmost periode; but ought to carry his
attention along from its first origin, and pass with it through all its
parts, until it ceasing, give him leave to do so too (for otherwise, it may
happen that the course of it be differing in those parts he has not observed,
from those that he has, and accordingly, the picture he shall make of it by
that imperfect s^n^tling, will prove an erroneous one;) so in like manner, when
a man is to make a judgment of any matter in question, to give a good account
of it, he must begin at the root, and follow successively all the branches
it divides it self into, and drive every one of them to their utmost
extremity and periode: and according as in judging he beheaueth himself well
or ill, in the several circumstances that are proportionable to the beginning,
ending, and parts of motion; so his judgment is qualifyed with the names of
several virtues agreeing thereunto, or of their opposite defects.

If he begin his considerations very low, and from the very bottom and
root of the affair, which is from the first and all comprehending principles
of the question, and proceed on orderly taking all before him; his judgment
is accounted deep, profound, and solid: for he that casts so far, as to
leave behind him no part of the matter he is inquiring about, and then drives
his course steadily and smoothly forwards, without any leapes over rugged
passages, or interruptions, or loose breaches; must of necessity make a well
grounded judgment; and such an one, as can not easily be overthrown, or he be
easily removed from it.

And this is indeed the full reason, of what a little above we only glanced
at: namely, why understanding men are usually accounted obstinate in their
tenets, and are hard to be removed from their opinions once settled in their
minds: for when other men oppose them,they urge nothing (for the most part)
against these iuditious men's resolutions or beliefes, but what they have
already thoroughly foreseen: but these on the other side, do see a great deal,
that their opposers reach not unto; so that notwithstanding all such
opposition, they continue still unshaken in their judgments: for which, the
others which see not as much as they, do think them obstinate, and not led
by reason, because they follow not that short reason, beyond which themselves
can not reach.

The contrary vice to this, is called a slight judgment: and consists
herein, that a man out of a few, and an insufficient number of circumstances,
resolves the whole case: which temerity and short sightednesse of judgment,
is significantly taxed in our English proverb, that a fools bolt is soon
shot. What is an acute judgment, and what a dull one.


Thus much for the beginning of a judgment: the next consideration may be
concerning the end of it; in regard whereof, if it reach to the utmost extent
and periode of what is considerable in a hard question proposed, it gains the
title of sharp, or of subtle, and acute; for the hardnenesse of the matter
that perplexeth ones judgment, consists in the inuolution of things, which
looked upon in gross, do seem to have no distinction or opposition among
themselves; and yet are in truth of very different and contrary natures. Now a
good judgment divides and cutteth through them, and allotteth unto every
particular thing its proper limits and bounds: wherefore, as in corporeal
substances, the virtue of dividing is sharpness and edge, by translation from
thence, such a judgment as pierces neately and smartly between
contradictories that lie close together, is called sharp and acute. In like
manner, subtility is a virtue, whereby a liquor or other body searches every
little hole and part of what it works upon, till it get through it; and from
thence, it is used in judgments to signify the same: whose opposite vice is
called dullenesse.

In the last place we are to examine, In what consists quickness and
Clearenesse of judgment: and there oposite vices.
what proportion a judgment holds with the parts of motion: in these, two
things are to be considered, namely the quantity or multitude of those parts,
and the order of them. As for the quantity in a motion, it belongs either to
long or short, or to quick and slow: now, where the beginning and ending are
already known and determined, and consequently where the length is determined,
and depends not at all of the judge to alter it, (for he must take it as the
matter gives it) there a judgment can acquire no denomination of perfection
or deficiency, from length or from shortness; for they belong originally to
the matter of the judgment; and the judgment must accordingly fit it self
to that; and therefore is liable neither to commendations nor to reproach, for
being long or short: it remains then, that the virtue is judging answerable
to the quantity of motion, must consist in quickenesse and celerity; and the
contrary vice, in slownesse and heaviness.

As for order in the several parts of motion, we know that if they be well
ordered, they are distinct and easily discernable. Which virtue, in our
subject, is called cleerenesse of judgment; as the contrary vice is confusion.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of Discoursing.
How discourse smade.
IN the last Chapter we have showed, how two apprehensions joined together do
make a judgment: now in this our first employment will be, to show how three
of these thoughts or judgments, well chosen and duly ordered, do compose the
first and most simple of perfect discourses; which Logitians call a syllogism:
whose end and effect is to gain the knowledge of something, before hidden and
unknown. The means whereby this is compassed, is thus. By the two first
judgments, we join the extremes of the proposition we desire to know, unto
some third thing; and then, by seeing that they both are one third thing, and
that one can be but one, we come to discern, that truly one of them is the
other; which before we saw not: so that, the identity which first made an
identicall proposition be known and agreed unto, and afterward caused the
like assent to be yielded unto those maxims, whose identification presently
showed it self, now by a little circuit and bringing in of a third term,
makes the two first (whose identification was hidden and obscure, whiles we
looked upon the terms themselves) appear to be in very truth but one thing.

Of the figures and moodes of Syllogismes.
The various mingling and disposing of these three terms in the two first
propositions, begets a variety in the syllogismes that are composed of them:
and it consists in this, that the assumed term unto which the other two are
interchangeably joined, is either said of them, or they are said of it: and
from hence spring three different kinds of syllogismes; for either the assumed
or middle term, is said of both the other two; or both they are said of it; or
it is said of one of them, and the other is said of it: neither is there any
deeper mystery then this, in the three figures, our great Clerks talk so much
of: which being brought into rules, to help our memory in the ready use of
this transposition of the terms; if we spinne our thoughts upon them into over
small thriddes, and thereof weaue too intricate webbes (mean while not
reflecting upon the solid ground within ourselves, where on these rules are
built, not considering the true end why;) we may spend our time in triuiall and
vselesse subtilities: and at length, confound and misapply the right use of our
natural discourse, with a multitude of precepts drawn from artificial logike.

But to return to our matter in hand; under this primary threefold variety, is
an other of greater extent, growing out of the diverse composition of the three
terms, as they are qualifyed by affirmation or negation, and by universality
or particularity: for that unity, which the two terms, whose identification is
enquired after, must have by being joined with the third, becomes much varied
by such diverse application: and from hence shoots up that multitude of kinds
of syllogismes, which our Logitians call moodes. All which I have thus
particularly expressed, to the end we may observe how this great variety
hangs upon the sole string of identity.

Now these Syllogismes, That the life of man as man, does consist in discourse,
and of the vast extent of it.
being as it were interlaced and wouen one within an other, (so that many of
them do make a long chain, whereof each of them is a link) do breed, or
rather are all the variety of man's life: they are the stepps by which we walk
in all our conuersations and in all our businesses: man as he is man, does
nothing else but weaue such chains: whatsoever he does, swaruing from this
work, he does as deficient from the nature of man: and if he do ought beyond
this, by breaking out into diverse sorts of exterior actions, he finds
nevertheless in this linked sequel of simple discourses, the art, the cause,
the rule, the bounds, and the model of it.

Let us take a summary view of the vast extent of it, and in what an imme^se
Ocean one may securely sail, by that never varying compass, when the needle
is rightly touched, and fitted to a well molded box; making still new
discoueries of regions, far out of the sight and belief of them, who stand
upon the hither shore. Humane operations are comprised under the two general
heads of knowledge and of action: if we look but in gross, upon what an
infinity of divisions these branch themselves into, we shall become giddy, our
brains will turn, our eyes will grow weary and dim, with aiming only at a
sudden and rouing measure of the most conspicuous among them, in the way of
knowledge. We see what mighty works men have extended their labors unto; not
only by wild discourses, of which huge volumes are composed, but even in the
rigorous method of Geometry, Arithmetike, and Algebra; in which, an Euclide,
an Apollonius, an Archimedes, a Diophantus, and their followers, have reached
such admirable heights, and have wound up such vast bottomes, sometimes showing
by effects, that the thing proposed must needs be as they have set down, and
can not possibly be any otherwise; otherwhiles, appaying the understanding
(which is never truly at rest, till it has found the causes of the effects it
sees) by exposing how it comes to be: so that the reader calling to mind, how
such a thing was taught him before, and now finding an other unexpectedly
convinced upon him, easily sees that these two put together, do make and force
that third to be, whereof he was before in admiration how it could be effected:
which two ways of discourse, are ordinarily known by the names of
Demonstrations; the one called a Priori, the other a Posteriori.

Now if we look into the extent of the deductions out of these, we shall find
no end. In the heavens, we may perceive Astronomy measuring whatsoever we can
imagine; and ordering those glorious lights, which our Creator has hanged out
for us; and showing them their ways, and pricking out their paths, and
prescribing them (for as many ages as he pleases before hand) the various
motions they may not swerve from in the least circumstance. Nor want there
sublime souls, that tell us what metal they are made of, what figures they
have, upon what pillars they are fixed, and upon what gimals they move and
perform^ their various periodes: Dialo: de mundo.
witness that excellent and admirable work, I have so often mentioned in my
former Treatise. If we look upon the earth, we shall meet with those, that
will tell us how thick it is, and how much room it takes up: they will show
us how men and beasts are hanged unto it by the heels; how the water and air
do cover it; what force and power fire has upon them all; what working is in
the depths of it; and of what composition the maine body of it is framed: where
neither our eyes can reach, nor any of our senses can send its messengers to
gather and bring back any relations of it. Yet are not our Masters contented
with all this: the whole world of bodies is not enough to satisfy them: the
knowledge of all corporeal things, and of this vast machine of heaven and
earth, with all that they enclose, can not quench the unlimited thirst of a
noble mind, once set on fire with the beauty and love of truth. Aestuat
infoelix, angusto limite mundi,
Vt Gyarae clausus scopulis, paruaque seripho.
But such heroike spirits, cast their subtle nets into an other world, after
the winged inhabitans of the heavens; and find means to bring them also into
account, and to serve them (how imperceptible soever they be to the senses) as
daynties at the souls table. They enquire after a maker of the world we see,
and are ourselves a maine part of; and having found him, they conclude him (o^t
of the force of contradiction) to be aeternall, infinite, omnipotent,
omniscient, immutable, and a thousand other admirable qualities they determine
of him. They search after his tools and instruments, wherewith he built this
vast and admirable palace, and seek to grow acquainted with the officiers and
stewardes, that under him govern this orderly and numerous family. They find
them to be invisible creatures, exalted above us more then we can estimate, yet
infinitely further short of their and our maker, then we are of them. If this
do occasion them, to cast their thoughts upon man himself, they find a nature
in him (it is true) much inferior to these admirable Intelligences, yet such
an one, as they hope may one day arrive unto the likeness of them: and that
even at the present, is of so noble a moulde, as nothing is too big for it to
faddome, nor any thing too small for it to discern.

Thus we see knowledge has no limits; nothing escapes the toils of science;
all that ever was, that is, or can ever be, is by them circled in: their extent
is so vast, that our very thoughts and ambitio^s are too weak and too poor to
hope for, or to aim at what by them may be compassed. And if any man, that is
not invred to raise his thoughts above the pitch of the outward objects he
co^uerseth daily with, should suspect that what I have now said, is rather like
the longing dreams of passionate lovers, whose desires feed them with
impossibilities, then that it is any real truth; or should imagine that it is
but a poetike Idea of science, that never was or will be in act: or if any
other, that has his discoursing faculty vitiated and perverted, by having
been imbued in the schools with unsound and vmbratile principles, should
persuade himself, that howsoever the pretenders unto learning and science, may
talk loud of all things, and make a noise with scholastike terms, and
persuade their ignorant hearers that they speak and unfold deep mysteries,
yet in very truth, nothing at all can be known: I shall beseech them both, to
suspend their conjectures or beliefes herein, and to reserve their censure of
me, whether or no I have strained too far, until the learned author of the
Dialogues of the world, have enriched it with the work he has composed of
Metaphysikes: in which, going orderly and rigorously by continued propositions,
in such sort as Mathematicians demonstrate their vndertakinges, he has left no
scope for wrangling brains to make the least cavil against his doctrine: and
casting his sharp sighted thoughts over the whole extent of nature, and
driving them up to the Almighty Author of it, he has left nothing out of the
verge of those rules, and all comprehending principles he gives of true
science. And then I doubt not, but they will througly absolve me from having
used my amplification, in aiming at the reach of this allgrasping power. For my
part, the best expression that I am able to make of this admirable piece, I
must borrow from witty Galileus, when he speaks of Archimedes his long missed
book of glasses; and profess, that having some of the Elements or books of
it entrusted in my hands by the Author, I read them over with extreme
amazement, as well as delight, for the wonderful subtility, and solidenesse of
them.

Thus much for knowledge. Of humane actions, and of those that concern
ourselves.
Now let us cast an eye upon humane actions. All that we do (if we do it as we
should do, and like men) is governed and steired by two sorts of qualities:
the one of which, we call Arts: the other Prudences. An art, is a collection
of general rules, comprehending some one subject, upon which we often work.
The matters we work upon (out of which the particular subjects of arts do
spring) are of three kinds: our selves, our neighbors, an such dumb or in
sensible things, as compose the rest of the world.

Our actions upon our selves, are the highest and the noblest of all the rest,
and those by which we live and work as men: or to express my self better,
they are those by which we perfect that part of us, which makes us men, and by
which we direct and level all we do, according to the rule of reason; not
suffering our actions to swerve from what she dictateth unto us. This is done,
by multiplying and heightning the thoughts of those things, which maintain us
in reason; whether the motives be moral, as the examples of worthy persons,
and the precepts and persuasions of wise men, and the like; or whether they be
natural, as the consideration of the sweet and contented life, which virtue
gives ve here, by good conversation, honor, profit, quiet, pleasure, and what
else soever grows out of so excellent a root: as also, of the beatitude and
happy state it brings us to in the next; and of the contrary effects which
spring from vice. Again, by observing the motives and ways of our passions
and animal desires, we learn how to prevent them; how to terrify them; and
how to wear them gently away by little and little, through sometimes giving them
diuersions, through otherwhiles restraining them with moderation, and through
oftentimes cutting of the occasions, and abridging them of their natural
encreasings. All these things are brought into art and rule; whose lessons,
were men but as careful and industrious to study, as they are to become
Masters in vain and triuial things, they would enjoy happy life's.

Of humane actions as they concern our neighbors.
In the next place, we are to consider the actions whereby we work upon our
neighbors. They are chiefly gouuernement and negotiation: both which are of
one kind; and have but this difference, that the one is done in common, the
other is performed in particular. The means by which we command, are rewards
and punishments; which who has in his hands, may assuredly by wise using
them, bring to pass whatsoever he has a mind unto.

Upon occasion of mentioning these two powerful motives, which have so maine
an influence in men's actions, we may note by the way, that many of them, and
that work most forcibly upon men's minds, are things whose subsistence we
know not where to find; as honor, praise, glory, command, singularity,
eminency, shame, infamy, subjection, reproach, and the like: unto any of which,
none of our senses can reach; and yet they govern man's life, in a manner wholly
and perfectly.

In negotiation, we propose to single men their own interests and profits; not
such as the proposer can, or will effect; but such as are likely to arise out
of the action we endeavor to draw him unto with whom we treat. In both these,
the usual labor is, to make our neighbors willing to leave some present
good, in hope of a greater to come; or to be content to undergo some present
harm, for fear of a greater to ensue. The general instrument which they use,
is discoursing, whose virtue consists partly in our own mind, and partly in
delivering our mind to others: for first we must know what we should say, and
next in what manner we should say it.

Of Logike.
The art which directs our own mind, and teaches us what to say, is Logike:
whose parts are two; according as the affairs falling into discourse, are
likewise of a twofold nature: the one instructs us how to manage and order
our reason, when it deals with such subjects as we may attain to certainety
in. And here the rules of Demonstration take place; teaching us to define, to
divide, and to conclude. The other instructs us how to behave ourselves, when
we meet with such subjects, as a good and probable guess is the farthest we
can reach unto toward the knowledge of them: and for these, the Topicall part
of Logike serves; the which, taking a view of all the accidents belonging to
any thing propounded, shows how to draw probabilities from every one of them.

Our discoursing to others, Of Grammar.
is either to open our minds barely unto them; or to persuade them of somewhat
ourselves believe; or to win them to somewhat we would have them do. For the
bare delivery of our minds to others, we have Grammar; the scope of which art,
consists first, in teaching us to deliver our conceptions plainly and
clearly, (which is the maine intent of speaking) next, in making, our
discourse be succinct and brief, (which is the measure of our speaking, both
for ourselves and others;) and lastly, in sorting our words, so as what we
say, may be accompanied with sweetness; both in common, in regard of the ear,
by avoiding such harsh soundes as may offend it; and in particular, in regard
of the custom of the language wherein we speak, and of the persons to whom we
speak.

The art whereby we may persuade others, Of Rhetorike.
and win them to assent unto what we would have them, is Rhetorike. Her rules
instruct us how to dispose and order with best advantage, in regard of the
Auditors disposition, both the reasons which Logike affords us, and the
words which Grammar storeth us with: as also, how to give life and motion to
what we say, by our action and gesture; that so we may persuade our Auditory,
such passions reign in us, as we seek to stir up in them: for as we may
observe, that one who yawneth, makes an other likewise yawne; and as our
seeing others laugh, provoke laughing also in us (the reasons whereof we have
touched in the former Treatise;) after the same manner, what passion soever we
exhibit in ourselves, the same steals insensibly upon those we speak unto;
whiles their mind attending to the words they hear, is not a ware of the
subtle spirits motions, that by a kind of contagion rise and swell in their
hearts: according to which natural inclination in all men, the Master of Poets
and excellent obseruer of men's humors said passing well: Si vis me flere,
dolendum est
Primum ipsi tibi.
Hence grow those increases by metaphores, hyperboles, and other tropes and
figures: hence those feruors by interrogations, exclamations, apostrophes, and
the like; which when they are fittely placed, they carry the Auditor even
against his will.

Of Poetry.
Poetry, is not a governor of our Actions, but by aduantagious expressing some
eminent ones, it becomes an useful directour to us; and therefore challenges
a place here. The design of it is, by representing humane actions in a more
august and admirable hew, them in themselves they usually have: to frame
specious Ideas, in which the people may see, what is well done, what amiss,
what should be done, and what by error is wont to be done: and to imprint in
men's minds a deep conceit of the goods and evils, that follow their virtuous
or vicious comportement in their life's.

If those who assume the title of Poets, did aim at this end, and would hold
themselves strictly to it, they would prove as profitable instruments as any
the commo^wealth had: for the delightfullnesse and blithenesse of their
compositions, inuiteth most men to be frequently conversant with them; (either
in songs, or upon the stage, or in other Poemes) whiles the sober aspect and
severity of bare precepts, deturneth many from lending a pleased ear to their
wholesome doctrine; and what men swallow with delight, is conuerteth into
nourishment: so that, if their drift were to settle in men's minds a due
valuation of virtue, and a detestation of vice, no art would do it more
universally, nor more effectually: and by it, men's hearts would be set on fire
to the pursuit of the one, and be shrunk up with dislike and horror against
the other. But unto such a Poet as would aim at those noble effects, no
knowledge of Morality, nor of the nature and course of humane actions and
accidents must be wanting: he must be well versed in History; he must be
acquainted with the progress of nature, in what she brings to pass; he must
be deficient in no part of Logike, Rhetorike, or Grammar: in a word, he must be
consummate in all arts and sciencies, if he will be excellent in his way.

Of the Power of speaking.
But whiles we thus entertain ourselves with those arts, which serve us in
discoursing with others, it were a great oversight to forgett that faculty,
which is the basis and ground work of all those: and that is, the power of
speech, which nature has bestowed upon us. It consists in two actions: the
one outward, the other inward: the outward, is the giving of various soundes to
our breath, as it passes through our mouth, by diverse conjunctions of our
tongue, teeth, and lips, to themselves, or to diverse parts of our mouth, or
by their separations from them: in which, we see that birds are able to
imitate us, and I am persuaded, the like might be effected by insensible
creatures, if a dexterous man would employ his time, in contriuing and making
an instrument to express those different soundes; which, not having more then
seven substantial differences besides the vowels (as some who have carefully
noted them, do affirm) it would peradventure be no hard matter to compose such
an engine.

The inward action of locution, is the framing of convenient answers to what
is asked; of fit replies to what is said; and in a word, to speak appositely,
and to the purpose; whereunto, neither beast nor dead instrument can be
brought, unless the artificier be able to endue it with understanding.

All other arts, Of arts that concern dumb and insensible creatutes*
instruct us how to work orderly upon beasts and insensible bodies: by some
of them, we cultiuate living creatures; as when husband men nourish sheep,
oxen, foul, and the like, for slaughter: by others, we discipline them, as
when we teach horses, dogs, apes, hawks, parrats, and some kind of fishes,
to hunt, to play, and in a word, to do somewhat either for our profit, or for
our pleasure: and again, by others we use their natures to our ends; as when
we lay baits to catch them, when we set eggs under hens, to have the
chickens, and the like: by other arts, we work as powerfully upon insensible
creatures; among which, by knowing the natures of diverse trees, herbs,
minerals, etc: we are able to bring any of them to what use soever we find most
expedient for our service: from hence grow all those arts and trades, in which
we see men daily spend their whole life's; so as it is needelesse to insist upon
the particulars of them, since towns and the cities are composed of the
several tribes of persons that profess them and live by them.

But we must not leave this subject, without noting how admirably man's wit
turns it self to so different sorts, and to such an infinite variety of
things. For what man is there, (if he be a man) but might have become Master
in any of these so differing trades, in case h^ had applied himself as
constantly to that, as he has done to some other he is perfect in? Again,
let us consider how it happens often, that he does not the same thing twice
the same way, but according to his own, or an other man's fancy, changes his
work at will, now doing it after one fashion, now after an other; as having no
law or determination from nature, but being wholly left to his own direction.

There still remains one art, Of Arithmetike.
not yet spoken of; which knows not where to challenge a place, whether among
the moderatours of our own actions, or among those whereby we govern things:
and that is Arithmetike: which seems to belong unto things, and yet it
meddleth not with them: and again, it seems to be a maine directour of our
internal actions, and yet belongs neither to Morals, nor to Logike.
Wheresoever its due be to place it, I am sure it is not to be forgotten; seeing
it is so principal an one, as our life can hardly consist without it. It
works upon notions that are no where; for every thing that is in the world,
is but one; and to be, or to make a number, can not happen without an
understanding: the affections likewise of them, are as the subject, all
invisible; as to be even or odd, to be cubes, squares, roots, etc: and yet
how great the power and extent of this art is, none can rightly understand or
believe, but he that has the knowledge of it, or has seen the virtue and
efficacity of it.

All these arts, Of Prudence.
consist in common rules, which require the second of those qualities, whereby
we said humane actions are governed, to apply them to their particular matter:
and that is Prudence; which we may define to be, a quality or power, by whose
assistance we apply unto the matter we are to work upon, such instruments, as
in our present judgment appear fittest to bring it to that pass, which
serves best for our intentions, when by our senses, or by other guesses, we
know the particular dispositions of the matter, and of the instruments
wherewith we are to change it. Now howbeit this occurreth generally in all
arts, yet its special place and necessity, is in governing and moderating our
own or other men's Moral actions; and accordingly, its name is especially
addicted thereunto: and that man is said to be prudent or discreet, who
governs himself and others well.

This quality of Moral Prudence in general, is divided into three particular
ones: the first of which, belongs to a governor in a state or commonwealth:
the next may be assigned to him that is skillfull in the laws: and the third
concerns the managing and conduct of military actions. The reason of this
long received distribution peradventure is, because in these occurrences, our
passion swayeth us generally more then in any others: and the operation and
effect of Prudence, (whose province is to curb and moderate our passions by
reason) is greatest, and appears most in those subjects, where passion
reigns usually with greatest impetuosity.

Observations upon what has been said in this Chapter.
Thus have we run over the maine parts of discourse, and the general heads
of man's action as man: which peradventure may through their numerousnesse,
appear to be as it were but loosely scattered from our pen; (as happens
unto all materials, that must serve for after buildinges; and that till they be
employed, require no more but sorting, and laying together in several heaps,
to the end they may be ready for use:) and therefore before we go any further,
it will not be amiss to make reflections upon what we have said; and to draw it
nearer our intended scope; and to square out and give some figure and polishing
to these stones, here where we dig them out of the quarry, whereby they may
hereafter with less ado, fit the places we have assigned them, in the
structure we intend: and so, a little trouble here, whiles our tools are still
in our hands, and our matter lies ready for our strokes, and our thoughts
are warmeth with working upon them, may save us a great deal there, where our
maine employment will be, to lay artificially, and to join closely, what now
we but hew out: and therefore will require finer instruments, and a sharper
edge, then what at present serves our turn.

Let us then bring back to account all we have said in this Chapter: and when
we have well reflected upon every particular, we shall find they all agree in
this, that they are nothing else, but a due ordering of one thing with an
other: a syllogism, is an ordering of some few notions: a science is an
ordering of syllogismes, in such sort, as a new proposition may follow out of
those which went before: and as we se that when by our thoughts diverse
syllogismes are well ordered, hidden things come to be disclosed in our
understanding; even so among bodies, if things whose proprieties are known,
be likewise ordered and put together, those very effects, which were discovered
by the ordering of notions in our head, will spring forth in nature: as for
example, if by knowing the natures of fire and of towe, our discourse finds
that towe put to fire will presently become fire, the same will happen in
nature, if we put material towe, or some other body that has the qualities of
it, to real fire, or to some other substance that is endewed with the virtues
of fire: in like manner, if by knowing that colors are nothing else, but
various mixtures of light and of darkness in bodies, our discourse assures
us, that by several compoundings of these extremes, reds, blewes, yellowes,
greenes, and all other intermediate colors may be generated; accordingly we
shall find in effect, that by the several minglings of black and white bodies
(because they reflect or drown light most powerfully) or by interweauing
streams of pure light and of shadows one with an other, we may procreate new
colors in bodies, and begett new luminous appearances to our eyes: so that
hence it appears clearly, that the same nature is in our understanding, and
in the things: and that the same ordering, which in the one makes science, in
the other causes natural transmutations.

An other reflection, which will be fit for us to make upon these long
discourses, is this, that of necessity there must be a joining of some things
now actually in our knowledge, unto other things we think not of: for it is
manifest, that we can not at the same time actually think of a whole book of
Euclide; and yet to the due knowledge of some of the last propositions, the
knowledge of almost all the former is required: likewise it is impossible we
should at the same time think of all the multitude of rules belonging to any
art, as of Grammar, of Metering, of Architecture; and yet when we write in
Latin, make a poem, or lay the design of a house, we practice them whiles we
think not of them, and are assured we go not against them, howeuer we
remember them not.

Nay, even before we know a thing, we seem to know it; for since we can have a
desire of nothing, but of what we know* how could we desire to know such or
such a thing, unless we know both it, and the knowledge of it? And for the
most part we see a horse, or man, or herb, or workemanshippe, and by our sense
have knowledge that such a thing it is, before we know what, or who, or how, it
is: that grows afterward out of the diligent observation of what we see:
which is that, whereby learned men differ from the unlearned, for what strikes
the sense, is known a like by them both but then here is the difference
between them, the later sorth sits still with those notions, that are made
at the first, by the beating of our sense upon us, without driving them any
further: and those that are learned, do resolve such compounded notions, into
others made by more common beatinges, and therefore more simple: and this is
all the odds in regard of knowledge, that a scholar has of an unlettered man.

One observation more we will draw out of what we have said, and then end this
Chapter: it is, how a man does oftentimes enquire among his own thoughts, and
turns up and down the images he has in his head, and beats his brains,
to call such things into his mind, as are useful unto him, and are for the
present out of his memory: which, as we see it so necessary, that without it no
matter of importance can be performed in the way of discourse (whereof I my
self have too frequent experience in the writing of this Treatise) so on the
other side, we can not perceive that any creature besides man, does it of set
purpose and formally as man does.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. How a man proceeds to Action.
That humane actions proceed from two several principles, understanding and
sense.
Having thus taken a summary view of the principal Qualities a man is endewed
withal, Apprehending, Judging, and Discoursing; and having showed how he is
enriched in and by them with the natures of all things in the world; it
remains for our last work in this part, to consider in what manner he makes
use of this treasure in his ordinary actions: which it is evident are of two
different kinds, and consequently have two several principles, understanding
and sense; these sway by turns, and sometimes join together, to produce a
mixed action of both.

If only sense were the fountain from whence his actions spring, we should
observe no other strain in any of them, then merely that according to which
beasts perform theirs: they would proceed ever more in a constant vnuaryable
tenor, according to the law of material things, one body working upon an
other, in such sort as we have declared in the former Treatise.

On the other side, if a man were all understanding, and had not this bright
lamp enclosed in a pitcher of clay, the beams of it would shine without any
allay of dimmenesse, through all he did; and he could do nothing contrary to
reason, in pursuit of the highest end he had prefixed unto himself; for he
neither would, nor could do any thing whatsoever, until he had first
considered all the particular circumstances, that had relation to his action in
hand; and had then concluded, that upon the whole matter, at this time, and in
this place, to attain this end, it is fitting and best to do thus or thus:
which conclusion could be no sooner made, but that the action would without any
further disposition on his side, immediately ensue, agreeable to the principles
it springs from. Both parts of this assertion are manifest: for the first,
it is evident, that whenever an Agent works by knowledge, he is unresolved
whether he shall work or not work, as also of his manner of working, until
his knowledge (that ought to direct and govern his working) be perfect and
complete: but that can not be, as long as any circumstance not as yet
considered, may make it seem fit or unfit to proceed: and therefore, such
actions as are done without exact consideration of every particular
circumstance, do not flow from a pure understanding. From whence if follows,
that when an understanding is not satisfied of every particular circumstance,
and consequently can not determine what he must immediately do, but
apprehends that some of the circumstances not as yet considered, may (or
rather must) change some part of his action, it must of necessity be
undetermined in respect of the immediate action; and consequently, it must
refrain absolutely from working. The other part is clear; to wit, that when
the understanding, upon consideration of all circumstances, knows absolutely
what is best, the act on follows immediately (as far as depends of the
understanding) without any further disposition on his behalf: for seeing that
nothing but knowledge belongs to the understanding, he who supposes all
knowledge in it, allows all that is requisite or possible for it to work by:
now if all be put, nothing is wanting that should cause it to work: but where
no cause is wanting, but all requisite causes are actually being, the effect
must also actually be, and follow immediately out of them: and consequently,
the action is done, (in as much as concerns the understanding, and indeed
absolutely, unless some other cause do fail) as soon as the understanding
knows all the circumstances belonging to it: so as it is manifest out of this
whole discourse, that if a man wrought only by his understanding, all his
actions would be discreet and rational, in respect of the end he had proposed
to himself; and till he were assured what were best he would keep himself in
suspens and do nothing; and as soon as he were so, he would admit of no
delays, but would at the instant proceed to action according to hi^
knowledge: the contrary of all which, we daily see by experience in every man.

We may then safely conclude, How our general and inbred maxims do concur
to humane actio^.
that in humane nature there are two different centers, from whence cross
actions do flow: the one he has common with beasts, and whose principles and
laws we delivered in the former Treatise, where we discoursed of life, and the
motions of life and of passions: the other is the subject of our present
enquiry; which in this place, expects at our hands, that we should consider
how it demeaneth it self, and what it does in us, when by its guidance we
proceed to any action. Experience must be our informer in general: after
which, our discourse shall anatomise what that presents us in bulk. She
gives us notice of three especial effects of our understanding: first, that
it orders a right those conceptions which are brought unto it: secondly, that
when they appear to be not sufficient for the intended work, it casts about
and seeks out others: and thirdly, that it strengthens those actions which
spring from it; and keeps them regular and firm and constant to their
beginnings and principles. Unto which last seems to belong, that it sometimes
ch^cketh its own thoughts, and brings back those it would have, and
appears to keep as it were a watch over its own ways.

As for the ordering of the present notions, it is clear that it is done by a
secret dependence from the rules of discourse, and from the maxims of humane
action: I call this dependence a secret one, because a man in his ordinary
course, makes use of those rules and maxims which serve his turn as though
they were instilled into him by nature, without so much as ever thinking of
them, or reflecting upon them to square out his actions by them: nay, some of
them so far out of the reach of most men, as they can not think of them,
though they would; for they know them not: as in particular, the rules of
discourse, the use of which is so necessary, as without it no man can converse
with an other, nor do any thing like a man, that is, reasonably. From whence
then can this proceed, that so familiarly and readily a man makes use of what
he is not conscious to himself that he has any acquaintance withal? It can
be nothing else, but that the soul, being in her own nature ordered to do the
same thing* which scholars with much difficulty arrive to know what it is by
reflection and study, and then frame rules of that afterward carry their
discourse to a higher pitch, she by an inborne virtue makes a man do it
orderly, constantly, and certainly.

That the rules and maxims of arts do work positiuely in us though we think
not of them.
The like may be observed in the daily use men make of the maxims of humane
action: which are certain knowledges that formerly they have gotten, but that
they usually think not of, whiles they work agreeable to them; yet it seems
they work by them; for if their action should jar against any of them, they
would presently reflect upon their Maxim, and by it correct what they were
about: for example, one who is skilled in the rules of Grammar, or of accenting
his speech, or has his ear used to Music, whiles he hears true
construction, or even verse, or consonant song, never reflecteth how it is
made; or at most does but consider in gross, that it is right: but if a
solecisme, or false quantity, or discord interuene he presently is aware, not
only that it is amiss, but remembers the very particular precise rule,
against which the breach is made.

This at the first sight might occasion us to imagine, that the rules by which
any composition is made, do w^^ke only negatiuely in us, whiles we are busy
about it: that is, that they contribute nothing to the making of the thing, but
only hinder us from committing errors: but if we consider the matter well, we
shall find it impossible, but that they should work even positiuely in us; for
we know that when we first learn any of these things, we look industriously
for such a gender, or number, or case, or tense, for such a foot or quantity,
such a note, or consonance; and we are sure, that use and practice of the same
thing, does not change, but only facilitate the work: therefore it follows
of necessity, that we still use those very instructions, by which at the first
we could but slowly creep, but now manage them with such celerity, as our
fansy can not keep pace with what we do. And this is the reason why we do not
perceive that we think of them, but may peradventure at the same time think
of a quite different matter; as when a musician plays voluntary division upon
a ground he never saw before, and yet has all the while some other thought in
his head; or when a painter draws a picture, and all the while discourses
with a by stander.

This truth may be convinced by an other argument: as thus; it can not be
doubted, but that a verse or song is made by the power of making such
compositions: but that power is the art of them; and that art is nothing else
but the rules whereby they are made: and accordingly we see, that who has not
the art, can not make such compositions: but who has, can when he pleases:
and if any man would be able to make them, he presently studyeth the art: so
that it can not be doubted, but that artificial things are always made by
the use of those rules which teach the making of them; although for the most
part we are not able to perceive how such rules are used* and besides this, we
are sure that we do not only make use of those rules we learned at the first,
but when we are arrived to Maistery in any art, we make use of them in a quite
different manner then we did in the beginning, and then we do in any other
thing, wherein we find pain and difficulty.

In the second effect that we experience of our understanding, How the
vndesta^ding does cast about when it wants sufficient grounds for action.
(which is, our casting about for new conceptions, when those it already has,
appear not sufficient to direct what it has in hand) the force and working of
it, is very evident: for this effect proceeds out of a want of satisfaction:
and this belongs properly to the understanding; for if evidence and
satisfaction be qualities of it, then of necessity the privation of these
qualities, must likewise belong unto it; as also to discern that privation,
and to use means to avoid it: and in the very casting about, we see a choice
made; and that things are not taken promiscuously as they come of a row, but
that some of them are set aside, and others advanced for use: which argues
plainly the knowledge and government of the understanding. How reason does
rule over sense and passion.


But the third operation, is that which gives clearest evidence of the
peculiar and distinct working of the understanding: for if we mark the
contestation and strife within us, between our sensual part and his
antagonist which mainteneth the resolution set by reason, and observe how
exceedingly their courses and proceedings differ from one an other; we shall
more plainly discern the nature, and power, and efficacy of both of them. We
may perceive that the motions against Reason, rise up turbulently, as it were
in billows, and like a hill of boiling water (as truly Passion is a
conglobation of spitits) do putt us into an unquiet and distempered heat and
confusion: on the other side, Reason endeavors to keep us in our due
temper, by sometimes commanding down this growing sea; otherwhiles, by
contenting in some measure the desires of it, and so diuerting an other way its
unruly force: sometimes she terrifyeth it, by the proposal of offensive
things joined unto those it is so earnest to enjoy: again, sometimes she
preuenteth it, by cutting of all the causes and helps that promote on its
impotent desires, and by engaging before hand the power of it in other things,
and the like.

All which do evidently convince, that as Reason has a great strength and
power in opposition of sense, so it must be a quite different thing, and of a
contrary nature unto it: we may add, that the work of Reason can never be
well performed, but in a great quiet and tranquillity; whereas the motions of
Passion, are always accompan^ed with disorder and perturbation: so as it
appears manifestly, that the force of Reason, is not purely the force of its
instruments, but the force of its instruments as they are guided, and as the
quantities of them are proportioned by it: and this force of Reason, is
different from the force of its instruments in themselves, in such sort as the
force of a song, is different from the force of the same soundes, whereof it is
composed, taken without that order which the musician puts in them: for
otherwise the more spirits that are raised by any thought (which spirits are
the instruments whereby Reason performs all her operations in us) the more
strongly Reason should work; the contrary of which is evident, for we see that
too great abundance of spirits confounds Reason.

How we recall our thoughts from distractions.
This is as much as at present I intend to insist upon, for proof that our
understanding has its proper and distinct operations, and works in a
peculiar manner, and in a quite different strain from all that is done by our
senses. Peradventure some may conceive, that the watchfulness and recalling of
our thoughts back to their enjoined work, when they break loose and run
astray, and our not letting them range abroad at random, does also convince
this assertion: but I confess ingeniously, the testimony of it seems not
clear to me; and therefore I rank it not with those, that I would have (if it
may be) solidely weighty, and undeniable to who shall consider maturely the
bottom and full efficaciousnesse of them. Of such, a few, or any one, is
enough to settle ones mind in the belief of a truth: and I hope, that this
which we have labored for in this Chapter, is so sufficiently proved, as we
need not make up our evidence with number of testimonies.

But to show the exceptions I take against this argument, let us examine, how
this act within us which we call watchfullnesse, is performed: truly, me
thinks it appears to be nothing else, but the promptitude and recourse of
some spirits, that are proper for this effect, which by a man's earnestness in
his resolution, do take a strong impression, and so are still ready to knock
frequently at the door of our understanding, and thereby enable it with power
to recall our strayed thougths. Nay, the very reflection it self, which we make
upon our thoughts, seems unto me to be only this, that the object beating
upon the fancy, carries back with it at its retiring from thence, some little
particle or atome of the brain or Septum Lucidum, against which it beats,
sticking upon it; in like manner as upon an other occasion, we instanced in a
ball rebounding from a green mudde wall, unto which some of the matter of the
wall must needs adhere: now this object, together with the addition it gets
by its stroke upon the fancy, rebounding thence, and having no more to do
there at present, betaketh it self to rest quietly in some cell it is disposed
into in the brain, as we have delivered at large in our former Treatise, where
we discoursed of Memory: but whenever it is called for again by the fancy,
or upon any other occasion returns thither, it comes as it were capped with
this additional piece it acquired formerly in the fancy; and so makes a
representation of its own having been formerly there.

Yet, be these actions performed how they will, it can not be denied, but that
both of them are such, as are not fit, nor would be any ways useful to
creatures, that have not the power of ordering their own thoughts and fancies,
but are governed throughout merely by an uniform course of nature: which
ordering of thoughts, being an operation feasible only by rational creatures,
and by none others, these two actions (which would be in vain, where such
ordering is not used) seem to be specially ordained by nature, for the service
of Reason and of the Understanding; although peradventure a precise proper
working of the understanding, do not clearly shine in it. Much less can we by
experience find among all the actions we have hitherto spoken of, that our
Reason or Understanding works singly and alone by it self, without the
assistance and consortshippe of the fantasy: and as little can I tell how go
about to seek any experience of it.

But what Reason may do in this particular, How reason is sometimes overcome by
sense and passion.
we shall hereafter enquire: and end this Chapter, with collecting out of what
is said, how it fares with us, when we do any thing against Reason, or against
our own knowledge. If this happen by surprise, it is plain that the watch of
Reason was not so strong as it should have been, to prevent the admittance or
continuance of those thoughts, which work that transgression. Again, if it be
occasioned by Passion, it is evident that in this case* the multitude and
violence of those spirits which Passion sends boiling up to the fantasy, is
so great, as the other spirits, which are in the jurisdiction and government
of Reason, are not able for the present to balance them and stay their
impetuosity, whiles she makes truth appear. Sometimes we may observe, that
Reason has warning enough, to muster together all her forces, to encounter, as
it were in set battle, the assault of some concupiscence, that sends his
unruly bands to take possession of the fancy, and constrain it to serve
their desires, and by it to bring Reason to their bente. Now if in this pitched
field she loose the bridle, and be carried away against her own resolutions,
and be forced like a captive to obey the others laws, it is clear that her
strength was not so great as the contrary factions.

The cause of which is evident; for we know that she can do nothing, but by the
assistance of the spirits which inhabit the brain: now then it follows,
that if she have not the command of those spirits which flock thither, she
must of necessity be carried alo^g by the stream of the greater and stronger
multitude; which in our case, is the throng of those that are sent up into the
brain by the desired object; and they come thither so thick and so forcibly,
that they displace the others which fought under Reasons standard: which if
they do totally, and excluding reasons party, do entirely possess the fancy
with their troops, (as in maddenesse and in extremity of sudden passion it
happens) then must Reason wholly follow their sway, without any struggling at
all against it; for whatsoever beats on the fancy, occasioneth her to work;
and therefore when nothing beats there but the messengers of some sensual
object, she can make no resistance to what they impose: but if it bappen that
these tumultuary ones, be not the only spirits which beat there, but that
Reason has likewise some under her jurisdiction, which keep possession for
her, though they be too weak to turn the others out of doors; then it is
true, she can still direct fairly, how in that case a man should govern
himself; but when he comes to execute; he finds his sinews already
posessed, and swelled with the contrary spirits; and they keeping out the
smaller and weaker number, which reason has ranked in order, and would furnish
those parts withal, he is drawn even against his judgment and Reason, to
obey their appetites, and to move himself in prosecution of what they propose;
in such sort as the Poet expresses that Medea found in her self, when she
complained and bemoaned her self in these words: Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor: and in this case, a man foreseeth his misery all the way he
rouleth toward it, and leapeth into the precipice with his eyes open: which
shows that the army of thoughts on Reasons side, should be increased in
number, to have her strong enough to wage battle with the rebellious
adversary: or else, that her adversary should be so much weakened, that she,
though not grown stronger in her self, yet might, through the others
enfeebling, be able to make her party good; (and hence is the use of corporeal
mortifications, to subject our Passions to the beheast of Reason) even as when
we see, that when we are in health, our arms, and legs, and all our limbs,
obey our will, reaching what we command them, and carrying us whither we
desire, because the spirits which are sent into them from our brain, are
strong enough to raise and move them as they are directed; but if our sinews
be so steeped in some cold and watery humor, that the spirits coming down,
find not means to swell and harden them; well we may wish and strive, but all
in vain: for we shall not be able to make them perform their due functions.
In like manner, if reason do send her emissaries into the same arm or leg or
other member, and no other spirits do there strive against them, then that
limb is moved and governed absolutely according to her directions: but if at
the same time, a greater multitude of others, do hinder Reasons servants from
coming thither, or flocking into other sinews, do carry that limb a contrary
way; in vain does Reason strive to move them to her byas; for those obeyng
parts must observe the rules which the violent conqueror prescribes.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Containing proofs out of our single apprehensions, that our
soul is incorporeall.
AS in our first Treatise we dissected nature, The co^nection of the subsequent
Chapters with the precedent.
and showed, how out of the notion and first division of Quantity, arises that
vast multiplicity of things, which filling this world, falls under the
consideration of our senses: so in the beginning of this second Treatise, we
have searched into those operations of a man (attributed to his soul) by which
he is conceived to excel all other living creatures: and there discovered,
that the admirable, and unlimited variety of works, which is seen in men's
writings and actions, does all flow from the source of single apprehensions;
and even from one bare notion of Being: which is the root and principle, from
whence all others derive their origin; and into which all may be resolved;
works proceeding from resolutions, they from discourses, these being composed
to judgments, and judgments of single apprehensions. This part we must now
reuiew, and enquire what we can find in man's operation, arguing the Quality of
his Soul, whether it be corporeal or no. For if these single apprehensions,
and the processes compounded of them, may be performed by the ordering of rare
and dense parts (as the other works of nature are) then they will be
corporeal, and of the same kind with those, which we opened in the first
Treatise: but if we shall prove, that they can not possibly be deduced from
multiplicity, and order of Quantitatiue parts, then we may confidently resolve
ourselves, that in the cause from which they flow, is a nature wholly discrepant
from that which resideth among bodies, and among corporeal things.

This we shall here labor to do: and to that end, we will begin our work
with reflecting upon what we have delivered of a single apprehension, in the
first Chapter of this second Treatise: whose nature we there first explicated
common; and thence proceeded to some particular apprehensions; and lastly
showed the extent they comprehended. These then must be the subject of our
present speculation.

The inexiste^ce of corporeal things in the soul by the power of
apprehension, does prove her to be immateriall.
As for their nature, we may remember, how we resolved three things: first,
that by apprehension, the very thing apprehended is by it self in our soul:
next, that the notion of Being, is the first of all notions, and is resumed in
all others: and thirdly, that what is added to the notion of Being, is but
respects to other things. Now then let us consider, what kind of engines they
must be, that may have the power to make things themselves to be in our soul,
if they were to be there materially? How shall the place, or the time passed,
be removed, and be putt in an other place, and in an other time? How shall the
quantity of the heavens, of the whole world, nay of biggenesse exceeding all
that by millions of proportional increases, be shutt up in the little circuit
of man's brain? And yet if we examine our selves strictly, we shall find
nothing wanting; all is there. How shall the same thing, be corporeally in two,
nay in two thousand places, at the same time? And yet, in so many is the sun,
when two thousand men think of it at once. We must then allow, that things
are there immaterially; and consequently, that what receives them, is
immateriall: since every thing is received according to the measure and nature
of what receives it.

But I easily conceive, that the strangeness and incredibility of our
position, may counterballance the force of it: for who can persuade himself,
that the very thing he apprehends, is in his mind? I acknowledge, that if
its being there, were to be understood corporeally, it were impossible: but on
the other side, who shall consider, that he knows the thing he ^ightly
apprehends, that it works in him, and makes him work agreeable to its
nature, and that all the properties and singularities of it may be displayed by
what is in him, and are as it were unfolded in his mind, he can neither deny
nor doubt, but that it is there in an admirable and spiritual manner. If you
ask me how this comes to pass? And by what artifice, bodies are thus
spiritualized? I confess I shall not be able to satisfy you: but must answer,
that it is done, I know not how, by the power of the soul: show me a soul,
and I will tell you how it works: but as we are sure there is a soul, (that
is to say, a Principle from whence these operatio^s spring) though we can not
see it: so we may, and do certainly know, that this mystery is as we say;
though because we understand not the true and complete nature of a soul, we
can as little express the manner, how it is done by a soul. Yet, before we
take our leave of this matter of Apprehensions, we will in due place endeavor
to say something toward the clearing of this obscure point.

The notion of being, which is innate in the soul, does prove the same.
Our second consideration upon the nature of Apprehension, was, that our primary
and maine notion, is of Being. This discovers some little glympse of the
nature of the soul: for it is manifest that she applies this notion, as well
to no parts, as to parts: which we proved in the first Treatise, when we
showed that we have a particular notion of substance, distinct from the notion
of Quantity; for quantity and Parts being the same, it follows that if there
be a notion supposed by quantity, (as in substance there is) it must of
necessity abstract from parts: and consequently, we may conclude, that the
notion of Being, which is indifferently applyable either to quantity or to
substance, does of its own nature wholly abstract either from Parts, or from
no Parts. I then infer: that since this notion of Being, is the very first
and virgin notion our soul is imbued with or is capable of, and that it is the
root of all other notions, and into which she resolves every other notion, in
such sort, as when we have sifted and searsed the essence of any notion
whatsoever, we can discover nothing that is deeper then this, or precedent to
it, and that it agrees so completely with our soul, as she seems to be
nothing else but a capacity fitted to Being; it can not be denied, but that our
soul must needs have a very near affinity and rese^blance of nature with it:
but it is evident, that Being has not of it self any parts in it, nor of it
self is capable of division: and therefore it is as evident, that the soul,
which is framed (as it were) by that pattern and Idea, and is fitted for Being
as for its end, must also of it self be void of parts, and be in capable of
division. For how can parts be fitted to an indivisible thing? And how can two
such different natures ever meet porportionably?

If it be objected, that the very notion of Being, from whence we estimate the
nature of the soul, is accommodable to parts: as for example, we see that
substance is endewed with quantity. We answer, that even this does corroborate
our proof: for seeing that the substances, which our senses are acquainted
withal, have parts, and can not be without parts; and yet nevertheless in
our soul, the notion of such substance is found without parts; it is clear,
that such substance has this merely from our soul: and because it has this
indisibility from our soul, it follows that our soul has a power and
nature to bestow indiuisibility upon what comes into her. And since it can not
be denied, but that if any substance were once existent without parts, it
could never after have parts; it is evident, that the nature of the soul is
incapable of parts; because it is existent without parts. And that it is in
such sort existent, is clear: for this effect of the souls giving
indiuisibility unto what she receives into her, proceeds from her as she is
existent. Now since this notion of Being, is of all others the first and
original notion that is in the soul, it must needs above all others, savor
most of the proper and genuine nature of the soul: in which, and by which, it
is what it is, and has its indiuisibility.

If then it be pressed; how can substance (in reality or in things) be
accommodated unto Quantity, seeing that of it self it is indivisible? We
answer, that such substance, as is the subject of Quantity, and that has
Quantity, is not indivisible; for such substance can not be subsistent without
Quantity* and when we frame a notion of it, as being indivisible, it is an
effect of the force of our soul, that is able to draw a notion out of a thing
that has parts, without drawing the notion of the parts: which shows
ma^ifestly, that in her there is a power above having of parts: which being in
her, argues her existence to be such.

The same is proved by the notion of respects.
Our last consideration upon the nature of apprehension, was, how all that is
added to the notion of Being, is nothing else but respects of one thing to an
other; and how by these respects, all the things of the world come to be in
our soul. The evidence we may draw from hence of our souls immateriality,
will be not a whitt less, then either of the two former: for let us cast our
looks over all that comes into our senses, and see if from one end to an
other, we can meet with such a thing as we call a respect: it has neither
figure, nor color, nor smell, nor motion, nor taste, nor touch; it has no
similitude to be drawn out of by means of our senses: to be like, to be
half, to be cause, or effect, what is it? The things (indeed) that are so,
have their resemblances and pictures; but which way should a painter go about
to draw a likeness? Or to paint a half, or a cause, or an effect? If we have
any understanding, we can not choose but understand, that these notions are
extremely different, from whatsoever comes in unto us by the mediation of our
senses: and then if we reflect, how the whole negotiation of our understanding
is in, and by respects; must it not follow necessarily, that our soul is of an
extreme different nature from our senses, and from our Imagination? Nay, if we
look well into this argument, we shall see, that whereas Aristotle pretends,
that Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu; this Maxim is so
far from being true, (in rigor of the words) that the quite contrary
follows vndenyably out of it; to wit, that Nihil est in intellectu quod fuit
prius in sensu. Which I do not say to contradict Aristotle (for his words are
true in the meaning he spoke them;) but to show, how things are so much
changed by coming into the understanding and into the soul, that although on
the one side, they be the very same things, yet on the other side there
remains no likeness at all between them in themselves as they are in the
understanding; which is a most evident proof, (when the weight of it is duly
considered) that the nature of our soul, is mainely different from the nature
of all corporeal things, that come into our sense.

By this which we now come from declaring, the admiration, how corporeal
things can be in the soul, That corporeal things are spiritualized in the
understanding by means of the souls working in and by respects.
and how they are spiritualized by their being so, will in part be taken away:
for reflecting that all the notio^s of the soul, are nothing but the general
notion of a substance, or of a thing joined with some particular respect; ^f
then we consider, that the respects may be so ordered, that one respect may be
included in an other, we shall see, that there may be some one respect, which
may include all those respects that explicate the nature of some one thing: and
in this case, the general notion of a thing coupled with this respect, will
contain all whatsoever is in the thing: as for example, the notion of a knife,
that it is a thing to cut withal, includes (as we have formerly declared)
all that belongs unto a knife. And thus you see, how that mystical phrase,
of corporeal things being spiritualized in the soul, signifies no more, but
that the similitudes which are of them in the soul, are Respects.

Thus having collected out of the nature of Apprehension in common, That the
abstracting of notions from all particular and individual accidents, does
prove the immaterialitie of the soul.
as much as we conceive needful in this place to prove our assertion, our
next work must be, to try if we can do the like by reflecting upon particular
apprehensions. We considered them of two sorts, calling one kind, universal
ones; and the other, collectiue ones: in the universal ones, we took notice
of two conditions, the abstraction, and the universality of them: now truly if
we had no other evidence, but what will rise from the first of these, that
alone would convince and carry the conclusion: for though among corporeal
things, the same may be now in one place, now in an other, or sometimes have
one figure, sometimes an other, and still be the same things, as for example
wax or water; yet, it is impossible to imagine any bodily thing whatsoever, to
be at any time without all kind of figure, or without any place at all, or
indifferent to this or to that; and nevertheless, all things whatsoever, when
they are universally apprehended by the soul, have this condition in her by
reason of their abstraction there, which in themselves is impossible unto them.
When we say water, fire, gold, silver, bread etc: do we mean or express any
determinate figure? If we do, none but that precise figure, will serve or
content us: but it is evident, that of a hundred different ones, any and every
one does a like entirely satisfy us: when we call for money, if we reflect upon
our fansy, peradventure we shall find there a purse of crowns: nevertheless,
if our messenger bringes us a purse of pistoles, we shall not except against
it, as not being what we intended in our mind, because it is not that which was
painted in our fancy: it is therefore evident, that our meaning and our fancy
were different; for otherwise, nothing would have satisfied us, but that which
was in our fansy. Likewise, in the very word (which is the picture of our
notion) we see an indifferency; for no dictionary will tell us, that this word
Money does not signify as well pistoles as crowns: and accordingly we see,
that if our meaning had been precisely of crowns, we should have blamed
ourselves for not having named crowns, and not him that brought us pistoles,
when we spoke to him by the name of money: and therefore it is most clear,
that our understanding or meaning is not fixed or determined to any one
particular; but is equally indifferent to all: and consequently, that it can
not be like any thing which enters by the senses; and therefore not
corporeal.

The second condition of Universal Apprehensions, is their universality: That
the universality of abstracted notions does prove the same.
which adds unto their abstractio^, one admirable particularity, and it is,
that they abstract in such sort, as to express at the same time even the very
thing they abstract from. How is it possible, that the same thing, can be, and
not be in the same notion? Yet let a man consider what he means when he
says, Every man has two eyes; and he shall see that he expresses nothing,
whereby any one man is distinguished from an other: and yet the force of this
word Every, does express that every man is distinguished from an other; so
that in truth, he expresses particularity it self in common. Now, let our
smartest and ingeniousest adversary, show or imagine if he can, how this may be
done in a picture, or in a statue, or in any resemblance of a body or bodily
thing: but if he can not, let him acknowledge an eminent and singular
propriety in the soul, that is able to do it.

Let us reflect, that particularity in a body, is a collection of diverse
qualities and circumstances; as that it is white, of such a figure, in such a
place, in such a time, and an infinitude of such like conditions, conglobated
together: then, if our soul be a body, the expression of the particularity of
a body in the soul, must be a participation in her of such a conglobation, or
of such things conglobated. Now let us imagine if we can, how such a
participation should be in common, and should abstract from all color, all
place, and all those things of which the conglobation consists: and yet we
see, that in the soul this is done; and he who says Every man, does not
express any color, place, or time; and nevertheless he does by saying so
express, that in every man there is a conglobation of color, place, and time:
for it could not be Every one, unless there were such conglobations to make
Every one, one: and if any conglobation were expressed in this term Every one,
it would not be Every one, but only one alone. Now if any coordination of
parts, can unfold and lay open this riddle, I will renounce all Philosophy
and understanding.

That collectiue apprehensions do prove the same.
Collectiue apprehensions will afford us no meaner testimony then the other
two, for the spirituality of our soul: for although it may seem unto us,
before we reflect thoroughly on the matter, that we see, or otherwise discern
by our sense, the numbers of things; as that the men in the next room, are
three; that the chaires there, are ten; and the like of other things; yet
after due consideration, we shall find, that our eye, or sense tells us but
singly of each one, that it is one; and so runs over every one of them;
keeping them still each by themselves, under their own several unities: but
then the understanding comes, and joins under one notion, what the sense
kept a sunder in so many several ones, as there are things. The notion of
three, or of te^ne, is not in the things, but in our mind; for why three
rather then five, or te^ne rather then twelve, if the matter of which we speak
were not determined? and such determination of the matter, is an effect of the
understanding. If I had spoken of things, as I did of men, or of chaires,
there had been more then three or ten: it is then evident, that what
determined my speech, made the number be three or ten.

Again, we see that the notion of ten, is but one notion; for as the name of
ten, is but one sign, so it argues, that there is but one notion, by which
it is the sign of ten things. Besides, we see that Arithmetitians do find
out the proprieties and particular nature of any determinate number: and
therefore we may conclude, that every number has a definition, and a peculiar
nature of its own, as it is a number. If then this definition, or nature, or
notion of ten, be a corporeal one, it is a corporeal similitude of the
object. But is it like to any one of the things, or is it like to all the
ten? If to any one, then that one will be ten; if it be like to the whole
made of ten, then that whole being but one, ten will be just one, and not
ten things.

Besides, to be ten, does expressly imply to be not one: how then can that
be a material thing, which by being one represents many? Seeing that in
material things, one and many are opposite, and exclude one an other from the
same subject? And yet, this notion could not represent many together, but by
being one.

Again, if it be a material notion or similitude, it is either in an
indivisible of the brain, or it is in a diuisible part of it: I mean, that
the whole essence of the notion be in every part never so little of the brain,
or that one part of the essence, be in one part of the brain, and that an
other part of the essence, be in an other part of the brain. If you say, that
the whole essence is in every part of the brain, though never so little; you
make it impossible that it should be a body; for you make it the likeness of
ten determinate bodies, in an indivisible manner; seeing that what by
division grows not less, has the nature of an indivisible: but if you say,
that diverse parts of the essence, are in diverse parts of the brain, then you
make it impossible that the notion of ten, should be indivisible; since it
self is composed of several parts.

In a word* ten things can not be represented materially, but by ten other
things: and therefore it is most evident, that the soul which represents
ten by one thing or notion, does not represent the ten materially: and
consequently, that her self is immateriall.

What we have now said, will be confirmed by considering the terms, All and
whole: for it is clear, that these terms also, are of the nature of numbers;
but withal, do express particularly that no part is wanting. If then the
notion of All or whole, be said to be material and quantitatiue, it must be
diuisible: but if you divide it, no part remains All or whole: it is not
therefore diuisible; and consequently it is not material. And as this
argument, is manifestly applyable to numbers, so if we look into the arguments
concerning numbers, you will find all them likewise applyable to these terms,
The operations of the soul drawing allways from multitude to unity, do prove
the same.
All and whole.

Out of what has been hitherto discovered, we may gather this note: that it
is the nature of the soul, to draw from diuisibility, to indiuisibility; from
multitude, to unity; from indeterminatenesse and confusion* to a clarity and
determination: as appears evidently in this last example of Collections; in
which, whether we take numbers, or other collectiue terms, we see that
throughout their natures do consist in such a perfect indiuisibility, as no
part can be separated without destroying the essence of the notion: nay,
things which in themselves are many and consist in parts, do in the mind get
an impartible nature; for ten, is no longer ten, if it be divided: nor all,
is all, if any thing be taken away. In the same manner, though Philosophy teach
us, there be neither points in biggenesse, nor instances in motion or time,
yet nature makes us express all biggenesse by points, and all time by
instantes; the soul ever fixing it self upon indiuisibility.

And this is the reason, why we attribute the nature of substance to all our
notions: if we see a thing white, or black, or do, or suffer, or be in a
place, or in time; presently in our apprehension we conceive these
modifications of the thing, like substances; and accordingly we call them by
substantive names, Whiteness, Action, Vbication, Duration, etc: now the reason
of this is, because a substance, (that is terminated within it self) is a fit
and a steady ground for the soul to fix it self upon, whereas these other
Appendixes of substance, would not afford her easy footing to build her
structures upon, if she considered them as truly they are in themselves: and
therefore in her notion, she gives them the qualities of substance: but
withal it happens many times, that by her doing thus, if she be not very
wary, she is deceived and falls into gross errors.

One thing more we must remember to take notice of* and it is, that if we will
compare the notions in our understanding, The difference betwixt the notion of
a thing in our understanding, and the impression that correspondeth to the same
thing in our fancy, does prove the same.
with the signs which beating in our fancy do begett those notions; we shall
find, that these are but barely signs; and do not in their own nature
express, either the notions they raise, or the things they are signs of.
This is evident in the images of the soundes we call words: for it is clear,
they have no likeness either with the things they signify, or with the
thoughts they begett in us: and we shall find it no less true of other images;
for example, in the exterior impressions of sensible qualities, which seem by
themselves to be in the understanding; for if we consider the matter well, we
shall perceive that we understand nothing more by them, then we do by mere
words; and that to work, or to discourse out of them, we must seek into the
objects, and their definitions; whereof we learn nothing by those first
impressions: for it seems, that (for example) hot, or red, or sweet, to a
man that first sees, or feels, or tastes them, signifies nothing else, but
a thing which makes such an apprehension in his soul, or such a phantasme in
his interior sense; and nevertheless, as yet the man knows not that he has
a soul, or an interior sense; nor does reflect so far as to consider, that
this motion passes by his exterior sense; but his apprehension is immediately
carried to the thing without him; and he imagines that the impression he
feels, is in the thing he feels; and so he that should feel himself
heated by a burning glass, and were not acquainted with the virtue of such a
glass, would think the glass were hot: yet certainly, his first
apprehension is of the motion made in his fancy, (though he imagines it
elsewhere) which he conceiueth to be the nature of the thing that makes it.
And thus we see that the conversion of the soul, is immediate to a thing
without the man: which also is the effect of her being fixed to Existence; for
by reason of that, she still apprehends every impression as a thing.

But now, whether her apprehension does include the very impression, which is
in the sense or in the fancy, so that by its own likeness it be in the
soul, or whether the impression in the fancy makes a change in the soul,
which we can not discern in it self, but conceive it to be the impression
which is in the fancy, because that impression is at the first continually
present at the said mutation; is more obscure and hard to discover. But when we
reflect that after some time, words do succeed in lieu of this impression, and
do perform the same effect as the original impression, in what language
soever they be uttered, so they be understood; we may conclude out of this
evident sign, that the impression is in the understanding not in its own
likeness, but in an other shape, which we do not discover; and which is
excitated, as well by the name, as by the impression, in a man that is used to
the names.

Again, in a man that learneth things by himself, these impressions serve
for words, and not for things; for such a man never looks into his fancy
to discourse upon any thing, but only upon the mutation he conceiueth is made
in the externe sense: out of which he gathers by little and little, the nature
of the thing, whose notion was made at first in him by this impression. Out of
which it is manifest, that our knowledge is as different a thing, from the
Phantasmes which beat at the souls door, as the thing signified is from the
sound of the word, or as the wine in the cellar is from the bush: and
therefore, it is impossible that the soul (in which that knowledge resideth,
and which indeed is that knowledge) should be a corporeal or bodily thing:
since of all bodily things, the motions that are made by the sensible
qualities, arrive nearest to a spiritual nature.

It remains now, The apprehensio^ of negatio^s and priuations do prove the
same.
that we should argue for the immateriality of the soul, out of the extent of
our apprehension: which seems to be so excessive, as not to be comprehensible
by the limitations of bodies; and therefore can not belong unto a body: but
because all that needs to be said in this particular, follows plainly out
of grounds already urged, and that this point contains not any notable
particularity deserving mention here; we will not enlarge ourselves any further
upon it: but will pass on to the next line of operations proper unto our mind.

Only we may not omit taking notice of the expressions which our mind makes
of nothing, or as Logitians term it, of Negations and Priuations: which do
argue an admirable power in the soul, and of a quite different strain from
all corporeal things; and do evidently convince the immateriality of it: for
it can not be doubted, but that the soul knows what she means, when she
discourses of Nothing. Now if all her knowledge, were nothing else but
corporeal phantasmes, or pictures made by corporeal things, how should she
come to have a notion of Nothing? for since it is most clear, that something
can not be like Nothing, and that there can not be a participation of what is
not; how can we conceive that there should be a similitude made of Nothing?

The way therefore that the soul takes in this operation, is, that comparing
two things together, and finding that the one of them is not the other; she
reflecteth upon her own action, and dividing in it the thing said, from the
saying, she takes the thing said for a quality, or property, or predicate (as
Logitians call it) of that thing which she denies to be the other thing; and
then she gives it a positive name, after she has first made a positive
notion, unto which the name may agree: as for example; when the soul
considers a man that has not the power to see, as soon as she has to her
self pronunced, that he has not such a power, she takes the not power to
see, for a quality of that man; and then gives the name of blindness to that
not power of seeing; which though of it self it be nothing, yet by being that
which satisfyeth her act, when she says that he has not the power of seeing,
it seems to be ranked among those things, unto which names are due: for it
has a notion; and the having a notion, is the claim, or merit; or dignity,
in virtue whereof things are preferred to names.

Now then, let us enquire how the power of rarity and density, or the
multiplication and order of parts, can be raised and refined to the state of
being like nothing, or of being the similitude of a negation; or what operation
of rarity ad density, can forge out this notion of blindness, which we have
explicated: and when we ^ind, it is beyond their reach to compass, we must
acknowledge, that the soul is an other kind of engine, then all those which
are in the storehouse of bodies.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Containing proofs out of our souls operations in knowing
or deeming any thing, that she is of a spiritual nature.
The manner of judging or deeming by apprehending two things to be identified,
does prove the soul to be immateriall.
Our next consideration shall be to see what testimony our manner of Judging,
does yield us of the nature of the soul: concerning which, three things offer
themselves, worthy the reflecting on; which are, our manner of thinking; the
opposition which frequently occurreth in our thoughts; and the nature of truth
and of falsehood. As for the first, we may remember how we have showed, that
all judgment or deeming is but an apprehension of identification, or something
immediately following out of it: and that a settled judgment or assent of the
mind is as it were a limb, or branch, or graft in our soul; so that we find
that our perceiving of identification between two things, or our seeing that
the one is the other, is that by which our soul increases. Now, because when
two things are identifyed, the one reaches not further then the other, it is
clear that this increase of the soul is not made by parts, which being added
one to an other do cause it to be greater: and therefore, since this latter
course is the only means of increase in bodies and in quantity, it is as
clear that the nature of the soul, is quite different from the nature of all
corporeal or Quantitatiue things.

Again, it is against the nature of identification, to be of parts; and
therefore, they who take quantity to be one thing, and not many things tied
together, do acknowledge that truly there are no parts in it: and this is so
rigorously true, that although we speak of two things that in reality are
identifyed one with an other, yet if our words be such, as imply that our
understanding considers them as distinct parts, and by abstraction gives
them the nature of parts; then they are no longer identifyed, but in good
Logike, we ought in this case to deny the one of the other. As for example:
though the hand and the foot be the same thing, (as we have declared in our
first Treatise) yet because in the name hand, there is a secret exclusion of
any thing that is not in the definition of a hand, it follows that in our
speech we must say, that a hand is not a foot Likewise though it be confessed,
that the thing which is rationality is also risibility; nevertheless, it is a
solecisme in Logike, to say that rationality is risibility; because it is the
nature of these abstracted names, to confine their signifycations to one
definition; and the definitions of these two terms are diverse. Out of this
consideration it follows clearly, that seeing the nature of parts, is
contrary to the nature of identity; and that the soul in her judgments
works altogether by identity, it is impossible that her operations should
consist of parts, or in any sort resemble any proceeding of Quantitatiue
things.

The like will be convinced out of the opposition we find in our thoughts. The
same is proved by the manner of apprehending opposition in a negative judgment.
In it we may consider two things: first the generation of it: next, the
incompossibility of opposites in the soul. To begin with the first: we see
that in our speaking, opposition is produced by the addition of this word Not:
as when we say, not a man, not a penny, not a word; and therefore it follows,
that in our soul there is a notion of it, correspondent to the word that
expresses it. Now, seeing that a notion is a thing, and that it is the
likeness of its object, or rather the same with the object; let us cast
about, how we should of parts and of Quantity, make a nothing, or an
identification to not: and when we find that it is ridiculous and absurd to go
about it, let us conclude, that the manner of working, which our soul uses,
is far different from that which is used in bodies, and among material
things.

And if you object, that not only a body, but even any other substance
whatsoever (suppose it as spiritual as you will) can not be either like, or
identifyed to nothing; and therefore this argument will as well prove that the
soul is not a thing or substance, as that it is not a body: we answer, that
it is evident out of what we have already said, that the understanding is not
the objects it understands, by way of similitude, but by a higher means;
which we have showed to be by way of Respects. Now then, the respect which a
thing has to an other thing, by not having such a respect unto it, as a third
thing formerly considered has thereunto, may be expressed in way of Respects,
though it can not in way of similitude: and so our understanding is able to
express, what neither our fansy, nor any corporeal thing can arrive to the
expression of: as when first we find, that one man has a respect to the wall,
which we call the power of seeing, it if afterward we find that an other man
has a respect unto the wall of impotence, that he can not see it, this second
respect the understanding has a power to express as well as the first: as we
have touched above.

That things in themselves opposite to one an other having no opposition in
the soul, does prove the same.
As for the opposition that occurreth in our thoughts, we may consider it of two
kinds: the one is of the things or objects that come into our thougths or
into our soul: and this is not properly an opposition in the soul; for
although the things be opposite by their own nature in themselves, yet they
do not exercise their opposition in the soul: nay, though the oppositio^ be
even in the soul it self, if the soul with this oppositio^, be considered as
an object, it makes no opposition in the soul; for so you may consider your
soul learned and unlearned, ignorant and knowing, good and bad, and the like:
all which are oppositions in a soul supposed to be so qualifyed, but are no
oppositions in a soul that considers them: no more then fire and water,
heavy things and light, white and black, being and not being, an affirmative
proposition and its negative, and the like: all which are in themselves so
contrary and opposite to one an other, that they can not consist together in
one subject; they have an incompossibility among themselves; wheresoever the
one of them is, by its very entrance it drives out its opposite: and yet in
the soul they agree together without reluctance: she knows and considers
and weighs both sides of the scale at the same time, and ballanceth them
euenly one against an other: for unless both the opposites were in the same
instant in the same comparing power, that power could not by one act whose
beginning implies its ending, judge the difference and opposition of them: as
when we say black is contrary to white, or darkness is the want of light, we
pronounce one common not being of both extremes.

We may then boldly conclude, that since no body whatsoever can entertain at
the same time, and in the same place, these quarrelling Antagonistes, but that
by their conflict, they presently destroy one an other, and peradventure the
body too, into which they press for entrance, and the entire possession of
which each of them strives for; (those of them I mean, that are proportioned
to the reception of bodies) and that the soul imbibeth them together without
any difficulty or contrast, and preserves them always friends even in the
face of one an other, and lodges them together in the same bed; and that (in a
word) these opposite things do enjoy an admirable and unknown manner of Being
in the soul, and which has no parallele nor argument in bodily things: we
may (I say) boldly conclude, that the soul it self, in which all these are,
is of a nature, and has a manner of Being altogether unlike the nature of
bodies, and their manner of Being.

Out of this agreeing of all objects in the soul, That the first truths are
identified to the soul.
and their having no opposition there, even whiles she knows the opposition
that is between them in themselves, there follows an other consideration, of
no less importance: which is, that the amplitude of our soul in respect of
knowledge, is absolutely infinite; that is to say, she is capable of knowing at
the same time objects without end or measure. For the explicating whereof, we
are to consider, that the latter conclusions, which the soul gains knowledge
of, do hang to the former by identificatio^, or by the souls seeing that two
notions are identifyed, because they are identifyed to a third, as is before
expressed; and the first principles which seem to be immediately joined unto
the soul, have the identity of their terms plain and evident, even in the
very terms themselves. Nay, if we insist further, we shall find that the first
truths must have an identification to the very soul it self; for it being
evident that truth or falsehoode, is not in the soul but so far forth, as
she does apply her self to the external object, or to the existence of
things in themselves; and that we find that the souls knowing with evidence
that any thing is or has being, implies her knowing that her self is; (for
she can not know that a thing seems so to her, or makes such an impression
in her, without knowing that her self is; though peradventure she may not know
what her self is, but takes her self to be no other thing then the body of
the man in which she is) it is evident that the first truths which enter into
the soul, to wit, that this or that seems so or so unto her, (and these
truths no sceptike ever doubted of) are identifyed with the soul it self;
seeing that an objects seeming to be such or such, is nothing else, but the
soul so qualifyed.

And by this we find, that the certainty of the first Principles, as for
example of this Proposition, That the whole is bigger then the Part, will
depend in a particular soul of her certainty of her own Being: for although
this proposition would have a necessity in the very connection of the terms,
notwithstanding there were not in nature any whole or Part; yet this necessity
would not be a necessity of Existence or of Being in the object, but a
necessity of connection, as it were of two parts of the soul: and so, if
verity and falsity be not perfectly in the soul, but in comparison to actual
existence, the soul would not be perfectly true, or (to say more properly)
would not have the perfection of truth in her, by having or knowing this
proposition, unless withal she were certain, that there were existe^t, an
object of this Proposition: of which (as we have said) she can not be certain,
without being certain of her own Being; so that in effect, the identification
of other things among themselves, by which such things are known, does come
at the last to be retriued in the existence of the soul it self, and to be in
the soul, by the identification of those other things unto her self.

That the soul has an infinite capacity, and consequently is immateriall.
Now then to proceed to the proof of our proposed conclusion, it is clear,
that the adding of one thing to an other, does out of the force of this
addition, perfect the thing unto which the addition is made, if the aduenient
thing be added in such way, as the former is apt to receive it: but it is
evident, that the soul is made fit by former propositions, to be identifyed
to later ones; for we see that the former ones draw on, and infer the later
ones: and therefore it follows, that the more is added to the soul, the
greater is her aptitude to have more, or to be more increased: and
consequently, that the more is added unto her, the more may still be added; and
the more capable and more earnest she is, to have more. Wherefore it can not be
denied, but that since in the nature of the objects there is no impediment to
hinder their being together in the soul, (as we have proved a little above) and
that in her by receiving new objects into her, there is a continual increase
of capacity to receive more; she has an amplitude to knowledge absolutely
infinite, in such a manner as we have above expressed.

Now to apply to our purpose what we have gathered by this discourse, it is
clear, that these two conditions. of one thing not driving out an other, and
of infinity of accessions, do openly disclayme from quantity, and from matter;
for we see that what has Quantity, or is a Body, can not admit a new thing
into it, unless some other thing do first go out of it, to make room for the
aduenient one: and as for infinitude, it breeds a sea of contradictions, if
it be but thought of in Quantity: and therefore we may conclude, that the
soul, unto whom these two conditions do belong, is not quantitatiue or
corporeal, but immateriall, and of a spiritual nature. That the opposition of
contradictory propositions in the Soul does prove her immaterialitie.


The second kind of opposition, that occurreth in our thoughts, or in our
soul, is of Contradictory Propositions: it has its origin in the opposition
of Being to not Being: and is when a thing is identifyed unto the soul, in
such sort as we have said, that a Judgment or Deeming makes the object become
as it were a limb, or part of the soul: and because the conflict of two such
propositions, if they were together in the soul, would make her be something
contrary to the nature of Being (if any thing can be contrary to Being) which
in the schools they call ens and non ens; the impossibility of her admitting
into her self two such propositions together, does testify her firm cleaving
and her fixednesse to Being: and so does confirm and bring new evidence to
that argument for the souls spirituality, which in the first Chapter of this
part, we drew from the nature of Being.

As for truth and falsehood, they spring from the same root as the last; as
being qualities consequent to the opposition of affirmative and negative
propositions; whereof if the one be true, the other must necessarily be false:
and therefore, we need not spend time in setting down any particular
considerations of these; since what we have said of the other, is applyable
unto them: but it is sufficient, that we thus note them, to give the Reader
occasion to reflect upon them.

Among propositions, How propositions of eternal truth, do prove the
immaterialitie of the soul.
there are some which Logitians do term of Eternal truth: and out of these,
there are ingenious men, who imagine that the Immortality of the soul may be
immediately deduced. Herein they roue not quite from the mark; though withal
I must needs say, they do not directly hitt it. To understand the utmost that
may be inferred out of such propositions, we may note two conditions in them:
the first is, that generally these propositions are universal ones; and
thereby have that force to convince the spirituality of the soul, which we
have explicated and showed to belong unto universal terms: the second is,
that in these propositions, there is a necessity of connection between their
terms; such an one, or at the least very like thereunto, as we explicated in
those propositions, which bear their evidence plain in their very terms. And
out of this we may draw an other argument for the spirituality of the soul:
for we see that all corporeal agents and patients, are defectible and
contingent; that is to say, sometimes, or (if you will) most times, they
attain their effect; but withal, sometimes (be it never so seldom) they
miss of it: and accordingly, it happens sometimes that our eyes, our ears,
our touch, and the rest of our senses are deceived; though for the most part,
they give us true informations of what they converse with: but these
propositions of eternal verity do never fail: they have in themselves an
indefectibility insuperable; and consequently, they give evidence that the
souls nature is of a higher degree of constancy and certainty, then what
falls within the compass of bodies: and is of a nobler and different
strain, from all corporeal things: for this certainty is entayled upon such
propositions by the force of Being; which is the proper object of the soul:
and they have their Being, as limbs and parts of the soul.

As for the term of Eternal verity, it is not to be taken positiuely, as if
these propositions, or their objects, had any true eternity or perseverance,
without beginning or ending: but only negatiuely; that is, that there can be no
time, in which they are false: and therefore, we can not out of their having
such a kind of Eternity belonging to them, argue a capacity of infinite time or
duration in our soul that comprehends them.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. That our discoursing does prove our soul to be
incorporeall.
That in discoursing the soul contains more in it at the same time then is
in the fantasy, which proves her to be immateriall.
Having thus run over those proofs for the immateriality of our soul, which
arise out of her manner of working when she judges; in the next place, we are
to enquire what others, her manner of discoursing will afford us. We are sure,
that since our discourse is composed of judgments, and of single
apprehensions, it can not choose but furnish us with all those pregnant
arguments, that we drew from them. But that will not serve our turn: we look
after new evidence; and we shall see it will give it us with full hands. It
consists in this: that when we discourse, we may easily perceive there is
more at one time in our mind, then we can discover to be in our fantasy; for
we find, that in our fantasy, as one proposition comes, an other is gone: and
although they that are gone, seem to be ready at a call, yet they are not in
presence; as being things which consist in motion, and that require place; and
therefore the one iustleth the other out of the place it possessed. But if it
fared in like manner in our inward soul, we could never attain unto
knowledge: for it is manifest, that our soul is not assured of a conclusion,
but by her seeing the premises: if then the premises be taken away, the
conclusion that rests upon them, falls to the ground: but they are taken
away, if they be out of our mind: therefore, when our understanding yields
its assent to a conclusion, it must of necessity have the premises still in it.

But we must not rest here; this consideration will carry us on a wondrous
deal further: we know, that who so goes to frame a new demonstration in any
subject, must be certain he takes nothing contrary to what he has learned in
many books: likewise, that who will make a latin verse, or reads a Poem,
knows there is nothing in all that Poem contrary to his Prosodia: do we not
then manifestly perceive a certain remainder of all these in his soul? The
like is in all arts: in which he that goes about any work according to art,
shows he has in his head all the rules of that art, though he do not
distinctly remember them, or call them to mind whiles he works: for if he
have them not, how does he work by them? Since then it is clear that he
thinks not of them at that time, it is as clear, that more is in his soul
at one time, then is in his fantasy, or then can be there by material bodies,
(which we have showed is the way, whereby all things come into the fantasy)
although it be the nimblest and the subtilest Agent of all corporeal things
whatsoever.

An other consideration whereby to euince the immateriality of the soul, That
the nature of discourse does prove the soul to be ordered to infinite
knowledge, and consequently to be immateriall.
concerns the proceeding of syllogismes by linkes, fastened one to an other:
whence we may take notice, that every one of them is a step to an other: and
consequently, it is manifest that according to the nature of the soul, they
must be all together in her: since, if any one were absent, all the rest that
followed and depended upon that one, would have no grounding, nor fixednesse in
the soul. Now if to this we add, that what is to be known, is absolutely and
liquidly infinite, there can not be brought or expected a more pregnant and
home wittenesse of our souls spirituality: it following out of these grounds,
that the soul by its nature, is not only capable of, but is expressly ordered
to an infinite knowledge of infinite objects all together; for these two,
finite and infini^e science, are so vastly different from one an other, that if
the same subject be capable of both, it must of necessity be ordered to
infinite, as to its chiefest act and end: and thus out of capacity in this
subject, its being ordered is well inferred; though in other matters
peradventure the consequence may not be good. And accordingly, who looks into
Geometry, Arithmetike, Logike, or even nature it self, will evidently see that
the objects of knowledge, are every way, and in every science, multiplyable
without end.

Neither ough^ this to be neglected, That the most natural objects of the
soul are immateriall, and consequently the soul her self in such.
that a great part of the souls objects, and indeed of those that are most
natural to her, is above the capacity, and out of the reach of material
things. All Metaphysikes abstract from quantity: the inuestigation of God, of
Angels, of the soul it self, either concludes immateriality, or at the least
works about it. What shall I say of Logical notions, of those which are
called the second intentions; about which there is so much business, both in
the schools and in the world? It is sufficient that we have already expressed,
how all our notions are respective. But in particular the motives of humane
actions are very abstracted considerations: as for example, hope of things to
come, memory of things passed, virtue, vice, honor, shame, and the like. To
these let us add, that when we teach or explicate any thing to ignorant
persons, we must frame our own apprehensions to their capacity, and we must
speak such things as they may comprehend: which capacity or extent of
comprehension we can not see not perceive by any sense, but we judge it merely
by our Reason, and by our understanding. Wherefore, seeing that our operation
is mainely and chiefly on and by such motives, as are not liable to material
principles and compositions, it is evident, that the springhead from whence
such an operation flows, must also be immateriall and incorporeall.

I am not ignorant, that this argument uses to be answered by urging, that the
soul likewise knows Deafness, Dumbness, Blindness, and such other
notions of Nothinges; and yet is not from thence inferred to be nothing* it
conceiueth God and Eternity; and yet it is neither from it self, as God is,
nor eternal. In like manner (say they) it may know incorporeall things, and
yet not be therefore it self incorporeall. To this I reply, first with wishing
them not to mistake me, but to give my argument its full force and weight: for
there is a very great difference between the knowing of a thing, in a
strained, toylesome, and confuled manner, and the having a thing for its
ordinary matter and subject of negotiation: this argues connaturality between
the soul and what it is in such sort conversant about; but that does not. Now,
what is inferred out of whole sciences and arts, concerns a maine stock of
the souls business, and not some extraordinary virtue or power she has.

But to come up close to the answer: I say, that if we being thoroughly
acquainted with material things, can find that it is not in the possibility
of any such to be the likeness of an immateriall thing; and from thence do
infer that our soul, for being fraught with immateriall notions, is not
material; our conclusion is well collected, and a very good one; for the
premises out of which we do gather it, are within our kenning; and therefore
if there were any defect in the consequence, we should easily perceive it.
Whence it appears clearly, that there is no parity between the deduction of
our conclusion, and that other which the objection urges, that our soul,
because it can know eternal things, is also eternal; for eternity is a thing
beyond our comprehe^sion: and therefore it ought not be expected at our hands,
that we should be able to give an account where the bracke is. And to say the
truth, if knowledge be taken properly, we do not know eternity; howeuer by
supernatural helps we may come to know it: but in that case, the helps are
likely to be proportionable to the effect. Neither are negations properly
known, seeing there is nothing to be known of them. And thus we see that
these objections do proceed from the aequivocation of the word knowledge;
sometimes used properly, othertimes applied abusiuely.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER. Containing proofs out of our manner of proceeding to
action, that our soul is incorporeall.
That the souls being a power to order things proves her to be immateriall.
I Doubt not but what we have already said, has sufficiently convinced our
souls being immateriall, unto whomsoever is able to penetrate the force of the
arguments we have brought for proof thereof, and will take the pains to
consider them duly: (which must be done, by serious and continued reflection,
and not by cursary reading, or by interrupted attempts) yet since we have still
a whole field of proofs untouched, and that in so important a matter, no
evidence can be too clear, nor any pains be accounted lost, that may redouble
the light, although it shine already bright enough to discern what we seek;
we will make up the concert of unanimous testimonies to this already
established truth, by adding those arguments we shall collect out of the manner
of our souls proceeding to action, unto the others we have drawn from our
observations upon her apprehensions, her judgments, and her discourses.

Looking then into this matter: the first consideration we meet withal is,
that our understanding is in his own nature an orderer; and that his proper
work is to rank and putt things in order: for if we reflect upon the works
and arts of men, as, a good life, a commonwealth, an army, a house, a garden,
all artefactes; what are they, but compositions of well ordered parts? And in
every kind, we see that he is the Master, and the Architect, and is a accounted
the wisest, and to have the best understanding, who can best, or most, or
further then his fellows* set things in order. If then to this we join,
that quantity is a thing whose nature consists in a capacity of having parts
and multitude, and consequently is the subject of ordering and ranking; does it
not evidently follow, that our soul, compared to the whole mass of bodies,
and to the very nature of corporeity or quantity, is as a proper agent to its
proper matter to work upon? Which if it be, it must necessarily be of a nobler
strain, and of a different and higher nature then it; and consequently, can
not be a body, or be composed of Quantity: for had matter in it self, what it
expects and requires from the agent, it would not need the agents help,
but of it self it were fit to be an Agent. Wherefore if the nature of
corporeity, or of body, in its full latitude, be to be ordered, it follows
that the thing whose nature is to be an orderer, must as it is such, be not a
body, but of a superior nature, and exceeding a Body: which we express by
calling it a spiritual thing.

Well then, That the souls being able to move without being moved, does
prove her to be immateriall.
if the soul be an orderer, two things belong necessarily unto her: the one
is, that she have this order within her self, the other is, that she have
power to communicate it unto such things, as are to be ordered. The first she
has by science, of which enough already has been said toward proouing our
intent. Next, that her nature is communicatiue of this order, is evident out of
her action and manner of working. But whether of her self she be thus
communicatiue, or be so by her conjunction to the body she informs, appears
not from thence. But where experience falls short, reason supplyeth, and
shows us that of her own nature she is communicatiue of order; for seeing
that her action is an ordering, and that in this line there are but two sorts
of things in the world, namely, such as do order, and such as are to be
ordered* it is manifest, that the action must by nature and in the universal
consideration of it, begin from the orderer (in whom order has its life and
subsistence) and not from that which is to receive it: then, sithence ordering
is motion, it follows evidently, that the soul is a moouer and a beginner of
motion.

But since we may conceive two sorts of moouers; the one when the agent is
moved to move; the other, when of it self it begins ^he motion without
being moved; we are to enquire, unto which of these two the soul belongs.
But to apprehend the question rightly, we will illustrate it by an example:
let us suppose that some action is fit to begin at ten of the clock: now
we may imagine an agent to begin this action in two different manners; the
one, that the clock striking ten, breeds or stirs somewhat in him, from
whence this action follows* the other manner is, that the agent may of his
own nature, have such an actual comprehension or decurrence of time within
himself, as that without receiving any warning from abroad, but as though he
moved and ordered the clock as well as his own instruments, he may of
himself be fit and ready, just at that hour to begin that action; not as
if the clock told him what hour it is, but as if he by governing the clock,
made that hour to be, as well as he causes the action to begin at that
hour. In the first of these manners, the agent is moved to move: but in the
second, he moves of himself, without being moved by any thing else. And in
this second way, our soul of her own nature communicates her self to
quantitatiue things, and gives them motion: which follows out of what we
have already proved; that a soul, in her own nature, is the subject of an
infinite knowledge, and therefore is capable of having such a general
comprehension, as well of time, and of the course of all other things, as of
the particular action he is to do; and consequently, stands not in need of
a Monitor without her, to direct her when to begin.

If then it be an impreuaricable law with all bodies, that none whatsoever can
move unless it be moved by an other; it follows, that the soul which
moves, without being stirred or excitated by any thing else, is of a higher
race then they; and consequently is immateriall and void of Quantity. But let
me not be mistaken in what I come from saying; as though my meaning were, that
the soul exercises this way of moving her self, and of ordering her actions,
whiles she is in the body: for how can she; seeing she is never endewed with
complete knowledge requisite for any action, never fully comprehending all the
circumstances of it? But what I intend, is that the nature of the soul,
considered in it self, is such, as has a capacity and may reach to this
manner of working, (whence I infer that she is not a body but a spirit)
without determining, whether she work thus in the body, or out of it: That the
souls proceeding to action with an universality, and indifferency does prove
the same.
that enquiry belongs not to this place; it will follow by and by.

But for the present, having considered unto what kind of working, the nature
of the soul in abstract, is capable of attaining; we will conclude this
Chapter with reflecting upon those actions of hers, which fall daily under our
remarke, as being exercised in the body. In all of them we may observe, that
she proceeds with a certain universality and indifferency, beyond the
practice of all other creatures whatsoever: for example, if a man be spoken to,
or asked of a hundred several things that he never thought of before in all
his life, he will immediately shape pertinent replies, to all that is said, and
return fitting answers to every question: as, Whither such a man goes? How
long this staff is? What color that man's clothes are of? etc: to all which,
and to as many things more as you will (so they be within the compass of his
knowledge) he straight answers differently, and to the purpose. Whence it is
manifest, that his answers do not proceed upon set gimals or stringes,
whereof one being struck, it moves the rest in a set order, (which we have
showed, is the course in all actions done by beasts) but out of a principle
within him, which of it self is indifferent to all things; and therefore can
readily apply it self to the answer, according as by the question it is
moved: and the like may be observed in his actions; which he varyeth according
to the occasions presented.

I remember how Sir Philip Sidney (the Phoenix of the age he lived in, and the
glory of our nation, and the pattern to posterity of a complete, a gallant,
and a perfect gentleman) aptly calls our hands, the instruments of
instruments; from Aristotle, who terms them Organa organorum, or universal
instruments, fittly molded to be employed in any service; whereas nature has
to all other creatures appropriated their instruments to determinate actions,
but to man, she has (in these) given such, as might be applied to any kind of
work whatsoever: and accordingly we see, that the same kind of bird, still
builds her neast and breeds her young ones, in the same way, without any
the least variance at all: but men do build their houses as they please,
sometimes upon hills, sometimes in vales, sometimes under the earth, and
sometimes upon the tops of trees: and the manners of breeding or instructing
their children, are as diverse, as the customs of nations and towns: and in
all other actions, our Masters note it for a property peculiar to man, that he
uses to arrive unto the same end by diverse means; as to transport ourselves
to some place we would go unto, either by water, or by horse, or by coach, or
by litter, as we please: whereas we see no such variety in like actions of
other living creatures.

All which being so, we may conclude, that the souls proceeding either to
answers, or to action, argues clearly that she has within her self such an
indifferency, as is joined with a means to determine this indifferency: the
contrary whereof we see in all corporeal engines; for they have every step
in the whole course of their ways, chalked out unto them, by their very
framing, (as has been amply declared in the first Treatise) and have the
determination of their work, from end to end set down, and given them by
their artificier and maker: and therefore it is most evident, that the soul
can not be a thing composed or framed of material and quantitatiue parts,
seeing she has not her ways set down unto her, but frames them of her
self, according to the accidents that occur.

That the quiet proceeding of reason does prove the same.
The same nature of the soul, discovers it self in the quiet proceeding of
Reason, when it works with greatest strength and vigor; as well knowing,
that its efficaciousnesse consists not in the multitude of parts, which
Passion breeds, but in the well ordering of those it already has under its
command. Whereas the strength of Quantity, and the increase of its strength,
consists in the multitude of its parts: as will evidently appear to whom
shall consider this point deeply.

A conclusion of what has been said hitherto in this second Treatise.
Thus we have in a summary manner gone through all the operations of those
soul, which in the beginning of this latter Treatise, we heaped together as
materials, wherewith to raise an immateriall and spiritual building. Neither,
I hope, will our Reader be offended with us, for being more succinct and
concise in all our discourse concerning our soul, then where we delivered the
doctrine of Bodies: for the difficultnesse of this subject, and the nicety
required to the expressing our conceptions concerning it, wherein (as the
Proverb is) a hair is to be cloven, would not allow us that liberty of
ranging about, as when we treated of Bodies. What occurreth among them, may be
illustrated by examples within their own orb, and of their own pitch; but to
desplay the operations of a soul, we can find no instances that are able to
reach them; they would rather embroile and darken them: for the exact propriety
of words, must be strictly and rigorously observed in them: and the Reader
shall penetrate more into the nature and depth of them, by serious meditation
and reflection upon the hintes we have here given, (efficacious enough, I hope,
to excite those thoughts he should have for this purpose, and to steer them
the right way) then by much and voluminous reading, or by hearing long and
polished discourses of this subject.

For my part, if what I have here said, should to any man appear not
sufficient to convince that our soul is of a spiritual and far different
nature, from all such things as in our first Treatise we have discoursed upon,
and taken for the heads and most general kinds of Bodies, (unto which all
other particular ones, and their motions may be reduced) I shall become a
suitor to him, in entreating him to take this subject into his handling, where
it begins to be unwieldy for mine, and to declare unto us, upon the
principles we have settled in the first Treatise, and upon considering the
nature of a body (which is the first of all our notions) how these particulars
we have reflected upon in man's actions, can be drawn out of them; for I can
find no possible means to link them together: a vast and impenetrable Ocean,
lies between the discoueries we have made on each side of its shores; which
forbids all commerce between them; at the least, on the dark bodies side,
which has not wings to soar into the region of Intellectual light. By those
principles, we have traced out the course and progress of all operations
belonging to sense; and how beasts do or may perform all their actions, even
to their most refined and subtilest operations: but beyond the^, we have not
been able to carry these grounds, nor they us. Let him then take the pains
to show us, by what figures, by what first qualities, by what mixtion of rare
and dense parts, an universal apprehension, an evident judgment, a
legitimate consequence is made: and so of the like; as, of a man's determination
of himself to answer pertinently any question: of his choosing this way
before that; etc. Which if he can do (as I am sure he can not) I shall allow
it to be reason, and not obstinacy, that works in his mind, and carries him
against our doctrine: but if he can not, and that there is no appearance nor
possibility (as indeed there is not) that these actions can be effected by the
ordering of material parts, and yet he will be still unsatisfied, without
being able to tell why, (for he will be unwilling to acknowledge, that these
abstracted speculations, do not sink into him, and that nothing can convince
him, but what his senses may be judges of, and that he may handle, and turn on
every side like a brick or a tile) and will be still importune with cauillous
scrupules, and wild doubts, that in truth, and at the bottom do signify
nothing, we will leave him to meditate at his leisure upon what we have said;
whiles we proceed on to what follows out of this great principle, That our
soul is incorporeall and spiritual.

THE NINTH CHAPTER. That our soul is a Substance, and Immortal.
Having concluded that our soul is immateriall and indivisible; That Man's
Soul is a substance.
to proceed one step further, it can not be denied, but that it is either a
substance or an accident; if the later, it must be of the nature of the
substance whose accident it is; for so we see all accidents are: but in man
when his soul is excluded, there is no spiritual substance at all, whereof we
have any notice: and therefore if it be an accident, it must be a corporeal
accident, or some accident of a body; as some figure, temperature, harmony, or
the like: and consequently, it must be diuisible: but this is contrary to what
is proved in the former Chapters: and therefore it can not be a corporeal
accident. Neither can it be a spiritual accident: for unto what spiritual
substance should it belong, when as nothing in man can be suspected to be
spiritual, but it self. Seeing then that it can be no accident, a substance
it must be, and must have its Existence or Being in it self.

Here we have passed the Rubiton of experimental knowledge: That man is
compounded of some other substance besides his body.
we are now out of the bounds that experience has any jurisdiction over: and
from henceforth, we must in all our searches and conclusions rely only upon the
single evidence of Reason. And even this last conclusion we have been feign to
deduce out of the force of abstracted reasoning upon what we had gathered
before; not by immediate reflection upon some action we observe proceeding from
a man: yet withal, nature flasheth out by a direct beam, some little
glimmering of the verity of it, to the eye of Reason that is within us: for as
when we see a clock move, or a mill, or any thing that goes by many wheels,
if we mark that there are two contrary motions, in two diverse parts of it, we
can not think that those contrary motions, do belong to one and the same
continued body, but shall presently conclude, that there must be in that engine
two several bodies compacted together; so in man, though his body be the first
moouer that appears unto us, yet seeing that in his actions, some effects do
show themselves, which it is impossible should proceed from a body, it is
evident, that in him there is some other thing besides that one which we see:
and consequently we may conclude, that he is composed of a body and of somewhat
else that is not a body: which somewhat else, being the spring from whence
those actions flow, that are of a different strain from them that are derived
from the body, must necessarily be a spiritual substance.

That the soul does subsist of it self independently of the body.
But whiles we are examining, how far our present considerations, and short
discourses may carry us, as it were experimentally to confirm this truth, we
must not omit what Auicenna in his book de Anima and Almahad, and Monsieur
des Carts in his Method, do press upon the same occasion. Thus they say, or
to like purpose: if I cast with my self, who I am that walk, or speak, or
think; or order any thing; my reason will answer me, that although my legs
or tongue were gone, and that I could no longer walk or speak, yet were not I
gone, and I should know and see with my understanding, that I were still the
very same thing, the same Ego as before. The same as of my tongue or legs,
would reason tell me of my eyes, my ears, my smelling, tasting, and feeling,
either all of them together, or every one of them single, that were they all
gone, still should I remain: As when in a dream, (where I use none of all
these) I both am, and know my self to be Reason will tell me also, that
although I were not nourished, so I were not wasted, (which for the drift of
the argument may be supposed) yet still I should continue in Being. Whence it
would appear, that my heart, liver, lnges, kidneyes, stomach, mouth, and what
other parts of me soever, that serve for the nourishment of my body, might be
severed from me, and yet I remain what I am. Nay, if all the beautiful and
ayry fantasmes, which fly about so nimbly in our brain, be nothing else but
signs unto in our soul, of what is without us; it is evident, that though
peradventure she would not without their service, exercise that which by error
we missename Thinking; yet the very same soul and thinker might be without
them all: and consequently, without brain also; seeing that our brain is but
the playhouse and scene, where all these faery maskes are acted: so that in
conclusion Reason assures us, that when all body is abstracted in us, there
still remains a substance, a thinker, an Ego, or I, that in it self is no
whitt diminished, by being (as I may say) stripped out of the case it was
enclosed in.

And now I hope the intellige^t Reader will conceive I have performed my
promise, Two other arguments to prove the same: one positive, the other
negative.
and have showed the soul of man to be an Immortal substance: for since it is
a substance, it has a Being; and since it is an immateriall substance, it has
a Being of its own force; without needing a consort body, to help it to
sustain its Existence: for to be a substance, is to be the subject of
Existence; and consequently, to be an immateriall substance, is to be a subject
capable of Existence, without the help of matter or of Quantity. It can not
therefore be required of me, to use any further industry, to prove such a soul
to be immortal: but who will contradict her being so, is obliged to show that
she is mortal: for it follows in reason, that she will keep her being,
unless by some force she be bereaved of it; it being a rule, that whosoever
puts a thing to be, is not bound, for the continuation of that things
being, to prove that it is not changed: but on the other side, he that auerreth
it is changed, is bound to bring in his evidence of a sufficient cause to
change it: for to have a thing remain, is natures own dictamen, and follows
out of the causes which gave it being: but to make an alteration, supposes a
change in the causes; and therefore the obligation of proof lies on that side.

Nevertheless, The same is proved because the soul can not be obnoxious to
the cause of mortality.
to give satisfaction to those, who are earnest to see every article positiuely
proved, we will make that part too our Province. Let us then remember, that
Immortality signifies a negation, or a not having of Mortality: and that a
positive term, is required to express a change by; since nature teaches us,
that whatsoever is, will remain with the Being it has* unless it be forced
out of it: if then we show, that Man's soul has not those grounds in her,
which makes all things we see, to be mortal; we must be allowed to have
acquitted ourselves of the charge, of proving her Immortal. For this end, let
us look round about us, and enquire of all the things we meet with, by what
means they are changed, and come to a periode, and are no more. The pure
elements will tell you, that they have their change, by rarefaction and
condensation, and no otherwise: mixed bodies, by alteration of their mixture:
small bodies, by the actiuity of the Elements working upon them; and by the
means of rarefaction and condensation, entering into their very constitution,
and breeding an other temperament, by separation of some of their parts, and
in their stead mingling others. Plants, and trees, and other living creatures
will tell you, that their nourishment, being insinuated through their whole
bodies, by subtle pores, and blind passages, if they either be stopped by any
accident, or else be filled with bad nourishment, the mixture of the whole
fails of it self, and they come to dye. Those things which are violently
destroyed, we see are made away, for the most part by division; so fire by
division destroys all that comes in its way; so living creatures are
destroyed, by their parting of their blood from their flesh, or of one member
from an other, or by the euaporation or extinction of their natural heat. In
fine, we are sure that all things, which within our knowledge loose the ir
Being, do so by reason of their Quantity; which by division, or by rarefaction,
and compression, gains some new temperature, that does not consist with their
former temper. After these premises, I need say no more: the conclusion
displayeth it self readily and plainly, without any further trouble; for if
our labor has been hitherto, to show that our soul is indivisible, and that
her operations are such as admit not quantitatiue parts in her; it is clear,
that she can not be mortal, by any of those ways, whereby we see things
round about us to perish.

The like argument we may frame out of local motion; for seeing that all the
alteratiue actions we are acquainted withal, be performed by local motion,
(as is delivered, both in gross, and by detaile, in our first Treatise) and
that Aristotle, and all understanding Philosophers do agree, there can be no
local motion in an indivisible thing, (the reason whereof is evident, to
whomsoever reflecteth upon the nature of Place, and of local motion) it is
manifest, that there can be no motion to hurt the soul, since she is concluded
to be indivisible.

The same is proved because the soul has no contrary.
The common argument likewise used in this matter, amounts to the same effect:
to wit, that since things are destroyed only by their contraries; that thing
which has no contrary, is not subject to destruction: (which Principle both
Reason and experience, do every where confirm:) but a humane soul is not
subject to contrariety: and therefore such ^n one can not be destroyed. The
truth of the assumption, may be known two ways: first, because all the
contrarieties that are found within our cognizance, do arise out of the primary
opposition of Rarity and Density; from which the soul being absolutely free,
she likewise is so, from all that grows out of that root: and secondly, we
may be sure that our soul can receive no harm from contrariety; since all
contraries are so far from hurting her, as contrary wise, the one helps her
in the contemplation of the other: and as for contradiction in thoughts, which
at different times our soul is capable of admitting, experience teaches us,
that such thoughts do change in her, without any prejudice to her substance;
they being accidents, and having their contrariety only betwixt themselves
within her, but no opposition at all to her; which only is the contrariety that
may have power to harm her: and therefore, whether soever of such contrary
thoughts be in the soul, pertains no more to her subsistence, then it does
to the subsistence of a body, The same is proved from the end for which the
soul was created.
whether it be here or there, on the right hand, or on the left.

And thus I conceive my task is performed; and that I am discharged of my
undertaking to show the souls Immortality, which imports no more, then to
show, that the causes of other things mortality, do not reach her. Yet being
well persuaded, that my reader will not be offended with the addition of any
new light, in this dark subject; I will strive to discover (if it be possible)
some positive proof, or guess, out of the property and nature of the soul it
self, why she must remain, and ^nioy an other life after this. To this end,
let us cast our eye back, upon what has been already said, concerning her
nature. We found that truth is the natural perfection of Man's soul; and that
she can not be assured of truth naturally, otherwise then by evidence: and
therefore it is manifest, that evidence of truth, is the full complete
perfection, at which the soul does aim. We found also, that the soul is
capable of an absolute infinity of truth or evidence. To these two, we will
add only one thing more, which of it self is past question, and therefore
needs no proof; and then we will deduce our conclusion: and this is, that in
a man his soul is a far nobler, and perfecter part of him, then his body:
and therefore, by the rules of nature and of wisdom, his body was made for
his soul, and not his soul finally for his body.

These grounds being thus laid, let us examine, whether our soul does in
this life arrive to the end she was ordained for, or no: and if she do not then
it must follow of necessity, that our body was made but for a passage, by which
our soul should be ferried over into that state, where she is to attain unto
that end, for which her nature is framed and fitted: the great skill, and
artifice of nature, showing and assuring us, that she never fails of
compassing her end, even in her meanest works: and therefore without doubt
would not break her course in her greatest: whereof man is absolutely the head
and chief, among all those that we are acquainted with. Now, what the end is,
unto which our soul does aim, is evident; since the perfection of every
thing, is the end for which it is made: the perfection then, and end of the
soul being evidence; and she being capable of infinite evidence; let us
enquire, whether in this life she may compass it or no. To determine this
question, let us compare infinite evidence, to that evidence, which the
greatest and most knowing man that ever lived, has acquired by the work of
nature alone; or to that evidence, which by aim we may imagine is possible
ever to happen unto any one man to arrive unto: and balancing them well
together, let us judge whether all that any man can know here, is not in
respect of what a man's soul is capable of, to be styled as nothing, and
deserves not the name of evidence, nor to be accounted of that nature: and if
our sentence do conclude upon this, let us acknowledge that our soul arriueth
not to her perfection, nor enjoys her end, in this world; and therefore, must
have infaillibly an other habitation in the next world, unto which nature does
intend her. Experience teaches us, that we can not fully comprehend any one of
natures works: and those Philosophers, who in a disciplinable way search into
nature, (and therefore are called Mathematicians) after they have written large
volumes of some very slender subject, do ever find, that hey have left
untouched, an endless abisse of knowledge, for whomsoeuershall please to build
upon their foundations: and that they can never arrive near saying all that
may be said of that subject, though they have said never so much of it. We may
not then make difficulty to believe, that the wisest and learnedest men in the
world, have reason to profess with the father of Philosophers, that indeed
they know nothing* And if so, how far are they from that happiness and
perfection, which consists in knowing all things? Of which full sea, we
nevertheless find even in this low ebb, that our soul is a channel capable;
and is framed a fit vessel and instrument to receive it, when the tide shall
come in upon it: which we are sure it can not do, until the banks of our body
which hinder it, be broken down.

The same is proved because she can move without being moved.
This last consideration, without doubt, has added no small corroboration to
our former proofs; which are so numerous and so clear, as peradventure it may
appear superfluous, to say any more to this point: since one conuincing
argument establishes the verity of a conclusion, as efficaciously as a
hundred: and therefore Mathematicians use but one single proof, in all their
propositions; after which other supernumerary ones, would be but tedious
Nevertheless* since all the several ways, by which we may look into the
nature of our soul (the importantest subject we can busy our thoughts upon)
can not fail of being pleasing and delightful to us, we must not omit to
reflect a little upon that great property of our soul, by which she is able to
move and to work, without her self being moved or touched. Unto which
adding, that all life consists in motion, and that all motion of bodies
comes from some other thing without them; we may evidently conclude, that our
soul, who can move without receiving her motion from abread, has in her
self a spring of life; for the which she is not beholding (as bodies are) to
some extrinsecall cause, of a nature like unto her; but only to him, who gave
her to Be what she is. But if she have such a spring of life within her, it
were unreasonable to imagine, that she dyed upon the occasion of the death of
an other thing, that exercises no action of life, but as it is caused by an
other.

The same is proved from her manner of operation which is grounded in being.
Neither may we neglect that ordinary consideration, which takes notice, that
our soul makes use of propositions of eternal truth; which we have above
produced, among our proofs for her being of a spiritual nature; and shall now
employ it for the proving her Immortal: by considering, that the notion of
Being, which settleth these propositions so, as they fear no mutation or
shaking by time, is the very root of the soul; and that which gives her her
nature; and which ^heweth it self in all her operations: so that, if from
Being, arriueth unto these propositions, to fear no time; the like must of
necessity betide also the substance of the soul. And thus we see, that her
nature is out of the reach of time: that she can comprehend time, and set it
limits: and that she can think of things beyond it, and cast about for them.
All which are clear testimonies, that she is free and secure from the all
devouring and destroying tyranny of that Saturniall Conqueror of the whole
world of matter and of Bodies, whose servant is death.

After all these proofs drawn from the nature of the soul it self, Lastly
it is proved from the science of Morality, the principles whereof would be
destroyed if the soul were mortal.
every one of them of force to convince her immortality, I must crave leave to
add one consideration more, though it seems to belong unto an others
harvest, namely to the science of Morals: and it is, that the position of
Mortality in the soul, takes away all morality, and changes men into
beasts; by taking away the ground of all difference in those things, which
are to govern our actions. For supposing that the soul dies with the body;
and seeing that man has a comprehension or notion of time without end; it is
evident, that the spanne of this life, must needs appear contemptible unto
him, that well considers and weighs it against the other infinite duration:
and by consequence, all the goods, and evils which are parts of this life,
must needs become as despicable and inconsiderable: so that better or worse in
this life, has not any appearance of difference between them; at the least,
not enough to make him labor with pain to compass the one, and eschew the
other, and for that end, to cross his present inclination in any thing, and
engage himself in any the least difficult task: and so it would ensue, that
if to an understanding man, some course or action were proposed unto him, as
better then that he were going about, or for the instant had a mind unto* he
would relish it, as a great merchant, or a Banquier would do, who dealing for
Millions, one should press him with earnestness, to make him change his
resolved course, for the gain of a farthing more this way then the other;
which being inconsiderable, he would not trouble his head with it, nor stop
at what he was in hand with. In like manner, whosoever is persuaded, that for
an infinity of time he shall be nothing, and without sense of all things, he
scorneth for this little twinkling of his life, to take any present pains, to
be in the next moment well, or to avoid being ill; since in this case, dying
is a secure remedy to any present evil; and he is as ready to dye now, as a
hundred years hence; nor can he estime the loss of a hundred years, to be a
matter of moment: and therefore he will, without any further guidance or
discourse, betake himself to do whatsoever his present inclination bears him
to with most facility; upon this resolution, that if any thing cross him, he
will presently forgo his life, as a trifle not worth the keeping: and thus,
neither virtue, nor honor, nor more pleasure then what at the present tickleth
him, does fall into his account: which is the overthrow of the whole body of
Morality, that is of man's action and nature. But all they who look into
sciences, do cross that for an erroneous and absurd position, which takes
away the Principles of any science: and consequently, the position of the
souls Mortality, is to be esteemed such. There remains yet one consideration
more, and peradventure more important, then any we have yet mentioned, to
convince the souls immortality: which is, that spiritual things are in a
state of Being. But we shall not be able to declare this, until we have
proceeded a little further.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. Declaring what the soul of a man, separated from his body,
is: and of her knowledge and manner of working.
That the soul is one simple knowing act which is a pure substance and nothing
but substance.
Unhappy man! how long will thou be inquisitiue and curious to thine own
peril? Have thou not already paid too dear, for thy knowing more then thy
share? Or have thou not heard, that who will prye into majesty, shall be
oppressed by the glory of it? Some are so curious (shall I say) or so ignorant,
as to demand, what a humane soul will be, after she is delivered from her
body: and unless they may see a picture of her, and have whereby to fancy
her, they will not be persuaded, but that all are dreams, which our former
discourses have concluded: as if he, who finds himself dazeled with looking
upon the sun, had reason to complain of that glorious body, and not of his
own weak eyes, that can not entertain so resplendent a light.

Wherefore to frame some conceit of a separated soul, I will endeavor for
their satisfaction, to say some what of her future state. Let us then first
consider what a Thought is. (I do not mean, that corporeal spirit, which
beats at our common sense; but that which is within, in the inward soul,
whose nature we find by discourse and effects, though we can not see it in it
self.) To this purpose we may observe, that if we are to discourse, or to do
any thing, we are guided the right way in that subject we have in hand, by a
multitude of particular thoughts; which are all of them terminated in that
discourse or action: and consequently, every act of our mind, is as it were an
actual rule or direction, for some part of such discourse or action: so that
we may conceive a complete thought (compounded of many particular ones) to be a
thing, that orders one entire discourse or action of our life.

A thought being thus described, let us in the next place try, if we can make
an apprehension, what a science or an art is: as, what the science of Astronomy
is; or what the art of playing on the Organes is, when the Astronomer thinks
not of the motions of the heavens, nor the Organist of playing on his
instrument: which science and art, do nevertheless even then reside in the
Astronomer, and in the Organist* and we find, that these are but the resultes
of many former complete thoughts; as being those very thoughts in remainder;
whatsoever this may signify.

Lastly, let us conceive (if we can) a power or capacity to Being: unto which
capacity, if any Being be brought, that it is unseperably glewed and riueted
unto it, by its very being a Being: and if any two things be brought unto it,
by the virtue of one Being, common to both those things, that both of them, by
this one being, do become one betwixt themselves, and with this capacity; and
that so there is no end or periode of this addition of things, by the
mediation of Being; but that by linkes and ringes, all the things that are in
the world, may hang together betwixt themselves, and to this Power* if all of
them may be brought unto it by the glue and virtue of being: in such sort as we
have formerly declared, passes in the soul.

Now let us putt this together, and make up such a thing, as grows out of
the capacity to Being, thus actuated and cleaving to all things that any way
have being; and we shall see, that it becomes a whole entire world, ordered
and clinging together with as great strength and necessity, as can proceed
from the nature of Being, and of contradiction: and our reason will tell us,
that such a thing, if it be active, can frame a world, such an one as we live
in, and are a small parcel of, if it have matter to work upon; and can order
whatsoever has Being, any way that it is capable of being ordered, to do by
it, and to make of it, whatsoever can be done by, and made of such matter.

All these conceptions (especially by the assistance of the last) may serve a
little to shadow out a perfect soul: which is, a knowledge, an art, a rule, a
direction, of all things: and all this by being all things, in a degree and
strain, proper and peculiar to it self: and an imperfect soul, is a
participation of this Idea: that is, a kn^wledge, a rule, and a direction, for
as much as it is, and as it attaineth unto. Now as in our thoughts, it is the
corporeal part only which makes a noise, and a show outwardly, but the
spiritual thought, is no otherwise perceived then in its effect, in ordering
the bodily acts; in like sort, we must not conceive this knowledge to be a
motion; but merely to be a thing or Being, out of which the ordering and
moving of other things does flow; it self remaining fixed and immovable: and
because all that is joined unto it, is there riueted by Being, or
identification; and that when one thing is an other, the other is again it; it
is impossible that one should exceed the other, and be any thing that is not
it: and therefore, in the soul there can be no parts, no accidents, no
additions, no appendances, nothing that sticks to it and is not it: but
whatsoever is in her, is soul; and the soul, is all that which is within her;
so that all that is of her, and all that belongs unto her, is nothing but one
pure simple substance, peradventure M^taphysically, or formally diuisible; (in
such sort as we have explicated in the first Treatise, of the diuisibility
between quantity and substance) but not quantitatiuely, as bodies are
diuisible. In fine, substance it is, and nothing but substance; all that is in
it, being joined and imped into it, by the very nature of Being, which makes
substance. This then, is the substantial conceit of a humane soul stripped
of her body.

Now, to conceive what proprieties this substance is furnished with; let us
reflect upon the notions we frame of things, That a separated soul is in no
place, and yet is not abse^t from any place.
when we consider them in common: as when we think of a man, of bread, of some
particular virtue, of a vice, or of whatsoever else; and let us note, how in
such, our discourse determines no place, nor time: nay, if it should, it would
mar the discourse; as Logitians show, when they teach us, that scientificall
syllogismes can not be made without universal propositions: so that we see,
unless these things be stripped from Place and Time, they are not according
to our meaning: and yet nevertheless, we give them both the name, and the
nature of a Thing, or of a substance, or of a living Thing, or of whatsoever
else may by our manner of conceiving or endeauours, be freed from the
subjection of time and Place. Thus then we plainly see, that it is a very
different thing, to be, and to be in a Place: and therefore, out of a Things
being in no Place, it can not be inferred, That it is not; or that it is no
substance: nor contrariwise, out of its being, can it be inferred, that it is
in a Place: there is no man but of himself perceives the false consequence of
this argument, a thing is, therefore it is hot, or it is cold: and the reason
is, because hot and cold, are particular accidents of a body; and therefore a
body can be without either of them. The like proportion is between Being in
general, and Being a Body, or Being in a Body: for both these, are particulars
in respect of Being: but to be in a Place, is nothing else, but to be in a
circumstant Body: and so, what is not in a Body, is not in a Place: therefore,
as it were an absurd illation to say, it is, therefore it is in a Body; no
less is it to say, it is, therefore it is somewhere; which is equivalent to,
in some Body: and so a great Master (Peradventure one of the greatest, and
iudiciousest that ever have been) tells us plainly, Boethius.
that of it self it is evident, to those who are truly learned, that
incorporeall substances are not in Place: and Aristotle teaches us, that the
Universe is not in Place.

But now to make use of this discourse, we must intimate what it is we level
at in it: we direct it to two ends; first, to lead on our thoughts, and to
help our apprehension, in framing some conception of a spiritual substance,
without residence in Place; and to prevent our fancies checking at such
abstraction; since we see that we use it in our ordinary speech, when we think
not on it, nor labor for it, in all universal and indefinite terms: next, to
trace out an eminent propriety of a separated soul: namely, that she is no
where; and yet (upon the matter) that she is every where: that she is bound to
no Place, and yet remote from none: that she is able to work upon all, without
shifting from one to an other, or coming near any: and that she is free from
all, without remoouing or parting from any one.

That a separated soul is not in time nor subject to it.
A second propriety, not much unlike this first, we shall discover in a
separated soul, if we compare her with time. We have heretofore explicated,
how Time is the motion of the heavens; which gives us our motion; which
measures all particular motions; and which comprehends all bodies, and
makes them awayte his leisure. From the large empire of this proud commander,
a separated soul is free: for although she do consist with time, (that is to
say, she is, whiles time is;) yet is ^he not in time; nor does she in any of
her actions, expect time; but she is able to frame time, to spinne or weaue it
out of her self, and to master it.

All which will appear manifestly, if we consider what it is to be in time.
Aristotle shows us; that, to be comprehended under time, or to be in time,
is, to be one of those mooueables, whose being consisting in motion, takes up
but a part of Time; and has its terms, before, and behind, in time; and is
measured by Time; and must expect the flowing of Time, both for Being, and for
Action. Now all this manifestly belongs unto Bodies, whose both action and
being, is subject to a perpetual local motion and alteration: and
consequently, a separated soul, who is totally a Being, and has her whole
operation all together (as being nothing but her self when we speak of her
perfectiue operation;) can not be said to be in time, but is absolutely free
from it; though time do glide by her, as it does by other things: and so, all
that she knows or can do, she does and knows at once, with one act of the
understanding or rather, she is, (indeed and really) all that: and therefore,
she does not require time to manage or order her thoughts, nor do they succeed
one an other, by such vicissitudes as men are forced to think of things by,
because their fancy, and the images in it which beat upon the soul to mak^
^er think, whiles she is in the body, are corporeal, and therefore, do
require time to move in, and to give way to one and other: but she thinks of
all the things in the world, and of all that she can think of, together and
at once; as hereafter we intend to show.

A third propriety we may conceive to be in a separated soul* by apprehending
her to be an Actiuity; That the soul is an active substance, and all in it is
actiuitie.
which that we may rightly understand, let us compare her, in regard of
working, with a body: reflecting then upon the nature of bodies, we shall find,
that not any of them will do the functions they are framed for, unless some
other thing do stir them up, and cause them so to do. As for example; a
knife, if it be thrust or pressed, will cut, otherwise, it will lie still and
have no effect: and as it fares with a knife, so it does in the same manner
with those bodies, which seem most to move themselves; as upon a little
consideration, will appear plainly. A beast seems to move it self: but if
we call to mind, what we have delivered upon this subject in the first
Treatise, we shall find that whenever he begins to move, he either
perceives something by his sense, which causes his motion, or else he
remembers something that is in his brain, which works the like effect. Now
if sense presents him an object that causes his motion, we see manifestly,
that it is an external cause which makes him move: but if memory do it, we
shall find that stirred by some other part; as by the stomach, or by the
heart, which is empty, or heated, or has received some other impression from
an other body, so that, sooner or later, we shall discover an outward moouer.
The like is in natural motions; as, in heavy things, their easy following (if
they be sucked) an other way then downewardes, testifyeth that their motion
downewardes has an extrinsecall motor, as is before declared: and not only in
these, but throughout, in all other corporeal things. So that in a word, all
bodies are of this nature, that unless some other thing press them and alter
them, when they are quiett, they remain so; and have no actiuity, otherwise
then from an extrinsecall moouer: but of the soul, we have declared the
contrary; and that, by its nature, motion may proceed from it, without any
mutation in it, or without its receiving any order, direction, or impulse, from
an extrinsecall cause.

A description of the soul.
So that, now summing up together, all we have said upon this occasion, we find
a soul exempted from the body, to be; An indivisible substance, exempted from
place and time, yet present to both: an actual and present knowledge of all
things that may be known: and a skill or rule, even by what it self is, to
all things whatsoever. This she is, if she be perfect: but if she be
imperfect; then, is she all this to the proportion of her grows, (if so I may
say) and she is powerful according to the measure of her knowledge, and of her
will. So that in fine, a separated soul, is of a nature to have, and to know,
and to govern all things.

That a separated soul knows all that which she knew whilst she was in her
body.
I may reasonably suspect, that my saying how imperfect souls are rules to the
proportion of their grows, may hau^ occasioned great reflection, and may have
bredd some trouble in the curious and heedefull reader. I confess this
expression was delivered by me, only to free my self for the present from the
labor of showing what knowledge every separated soul has: but upon second
thoughts, I find that such sliding over this difficult point will not serve my
turn, nor save me the pains of untying this knott: for unless I explicate
what I mean by that speech, I shall leave my Reader in great doubt and
anxiety; which to free him from, I must wade a little further in this question
of the extent of a separated souls knowledge, into which, I have thus, upon
the by, engaged my self: but let him first be advertised, that I do not here
meddle, with what a separated soul may know by revelation, or by supernatural
means: but that I do only tracke out her natural paths; and do guess at
what she is, or knows, by that light which her conversation in her body
affords us.

Our entrance into this matter must be, to consider what mutation in respect of
knowledge, a souls first change out of her body, makes in her; for it is not
unlikely, but that nature may some way enlighten us so far, as to let us
understand what must follow out of the negation of the bodies consorteshippe,
added unto what we know of her and other works in this world. This then first
occurreth that surely she can not choose but still know in that state, all that
she did know whiles she was in the body; since we are certain that the body
has no part in that which is true knowledge: as is above declared, when we
showed; first, that all true knowledge is respective; secondly, that the first
impressions of the fancy, do not reach to the interior soul; and lastly,
that she works by much more, then what has any actual correspondence in the
fancy, and that all things are united to her by the force of Being: from
which last, it follows that all things she knows, are her self; and she,
is, all that she knows: wherefore, if she keeps her self and her own
Being, she must needs keep the knowledge of all that she knew in this world.

Next, she must undoubtedly know then somewhat more, then she knew in the body;
That the least knowledge which the soul acquireth in her body of any one
thing does cause in her, when she is separated from her body a complete
knowledge of all things whatsoever.
for seeing that out of the things she already knows, others will follow by
the mere ordering and connection of them; and that the souls proper work, is
to order things: we can not doubt, but that, both the things she knows in
this world, must of necessity be ordered in her to the best advantage; and
likewise, that all that, will be known, which wants no other cause for the
knowing of it, but the ordering of these things: for if the nature of a thing,
were order, who can doubt but what were putt into that thing, were putt into
order? Now, that the nature of the soul is such, we collect easily; for seeing
that all order proceeds from her, it must be acknowledged that order is first
in her: but what is in her, is her nature: her nature then, is order; and what
is in her, is ordered. In saying of which, I do not mean that there is such an
order between the notions of a separated soul, as is between material
things, that are ordered by the soul whiles she is in the body; for seeing
that the soul is adaequate cause of such order; (that is to say, a cause which
can make any an such, and the whole kind of it;) it follows, that such order
is not in her; for if it were, she would be cause of her self, or of her own
parts. Order therefore, in her, must signify a thing more emine^t, the^ such
inferior order, in which resideth the power of making that inferior order:
and this is nothing else, but the co^nexion of her notions by the necessity of
Being; which we have often explicated. And out of this emine^t or superior
kind of order, our conclusion follows no less then if the inferior order
which we see in our fancies, whiles our soul is in our Body, did reside in our
interior soul; for, it is the necessity of identification, which does the
effect, and makes the soul know; and the order of fantasmes, is but a
precedent condition in the bodily Agent, that it may work upon the soul; and
if more fantasmes then one could be together, this order would not be necessary.

Out of this, a notable and a vast conclusion, manifestly follows: to wit,
that if a soul, can know any one thing more when she is out the body, then
what she did know whiles she was in the body; without any manner of doubt, she
knows all that can be drawn, and forced out of those knowledges, which she
had in her body. How much this is, and how far it will reach, I am affraide
to speak: only I entreat Mathematicians, and such as are acquainted with the
manner how sciences proceed; to consider how some of their definitions are
made: to wit by composing together sundry known terms, and giving a new name
to the compound that resulteth out of them: wherefore clear it is, that out of
fewer notions had at the first, the soul can make many more: and the more she
has, or makes, the more she can multiply. Again, the maxims, which are
necessary to be added unto the definitions for gaining of knowledge, we see are
also compounded of ordinary and known terms; so that a separated soul, can
want neither the Definitions, nor the Maxims, out of which the books of
sciences are composed: and therefore, neither can the sciences themselves be
wanting unto her. Now if we consider, that in the same fashion as
demonstrations are made, and knowledge is acquired in one science, by the same
means, there is a transcendence from science to science: and that there is a
connection among all the sciences, which fall into the consideration of man, and
indeed among all, at the least corporeal things; (for of spiritual things,
we can not so assuredly affirm it; although their perfection may persuade us,
that there is rather a greater connection among them, then among corporeal
things) it will follow, that a soul which has but any indifferent knowledge
in this world, shall be replenished with all knowledge in the next.

But how much is this indifferent knowledge, that for this purpose is required
in this world? Upon mature consideration of this point, it is true, I find it
absolutely necessary, that the soul must have here so much knowledge, as to be
able to determine that some one thing, which has connection with all the rest,
is in such a time: but then, why out of this very conception, she should not be
able to clymbe up by degrees, to the knowledge of all other things whatsoever
(since there is a connection between that, and all the rest, and no vntransible
gappe, or Chaos to sever them) I profess I do not see. Which if it be so, then
the soul of an abortiue in his mothers womb, if he once arrive to have sense,
and from it, to receive any impression in his soul, may for ought I know, or
can suspect to the contrary, be endewed in the next world with as much
knowledge, as the soul of the greatest Clerk that ever lived: and if an
abortiue do not arrive so far, as to the knowledge of some one thing, I know
no reason, why we should believe it arrived to the nature of man.

Whence it follows, that this amplitude of knowledge, is common to all humane
souls, (of what pitch soever they seem to be here) when they are separated
from their bodies: as also, that if any error have crept into a man's
judgment, during this life, whether it be of some universal conclusion, or of
some particular thing, all such will be abolished then, by the truth appearing
on the opposite side; sithence two contradictory judgments, can not possess
our soul together: as even in this world, as well experience, as reason
teaches us.

But unawares I have engulfed my self into a sea of contradiction, from no
mean adversaries: for Alexander Aphrodiseus, Pomponatius, and the learnedest
of the Peripatetike school, An answer to the objections of some Peripatetikes
who maintain the soul to perish with the body.
will all of them rise up in maine opposition against this doctrine of mine:
showing how in the body, all our souls knowledge is made, by the working of
our fancy; and that there is no act of our soul, without speculation of
fantasmes residing in our memory: therefore, seeing that when our body is gone,
all those little bodies of fantasmes are gone with it; what sign is there, that
any operation can remain? And hence they infer, that seeing every substance
has its Being for its operations sake, and by consequence were vain and
superfluous in the world, if it could not enjoy and exercise its operation;
there is no necessity or end, why the soul of a man should survive his body:
and consequently, there is no reason to imagine other, then that it perishes
when the man dies. This is the substance of their argument; which indeed is
nothing else, but to guess without ground, or rather against all ground: but
howsoever, this comfort I have, that I have to do with Peripatetikes; men that
will hear and answer reason: and to such I address my speech.

To join issue then with them, and to encounter them with their own weapons,
let us call to mind, what Aristotle holds light to be. He says, that it is
a sudden and momentary emanation of what it is, following the precedent
motion of some body, but without motion in it self. As for example: when the
sun comes into our horizon, (says he) the illumination of the horizon, is
an effect in an instant, following from the motion which the sun had, since
his setting in the other hemisphere, until he appear there again: so that
(according to him) the way of making this light, is the suns local motion;
but the effect of the being enlightened, is a thing of a very different nature,
done without beginning, and continuing until the sun depart again from our
horizon. And as he explicateth this action of illumination, in the same manner,
does he the actions of sense and of understanding. Upon all which I urge, that
no Peripatetike will deny me, but that as in every particular sensation or
thinking, there precedeth a corporeal motion, out of which it ensues, so this
general motion, which we call the life of Man, precedeth that twinkle or
moment, in which she becomes an absolute spirit, or inhabitant of the next
world. Wherefore it can not be said, that we introduce a doctrine aliene from
the Peripatetike way of Philosophising, if we putt a momentary effect of motion
(according to their phrase of speaking) to follow out of the course of man's
life; since they putt diverse such effects, to follow out of particular parts
of it.

Now, this momentary change, or what they please to call it, is that which
makes at one blow, all this knowledge we speak of: for, if we remember that
knowledge is not a doing or a motion, but a Being; as is agreed between the
Peripatetikes and us; they can not, for the continuing it, require instruments
and motors: for they are necessary only for change, not for Being. Now, all
this mighty change, which is made at the souls delivery, we conceive follows
precisely out of the change of her Being: for seeing it is supposed, that her
Being was before in a body, but is now out of a body; it must of necessity
follow, that all impediments, which grew out of her being in a body, must be
taken away by her being freed from it. Among which impediments, one is, that
time is then required betwixt her knowledge of one thing, and her knowledge of
an other thing; and so her capacity, that of it self is infinite, becomes
confined to that small multitude of objects, which the division and
straightness of time gives way unto. Now that, which length of time could in
part work in the body, the same is entirely done in a moment, by the changing
of her manner of Being: for by taking away the bonds, by which she was
enthralled in the body, and was kept in, to apprehend but according to the
measure of the body, and was constrained to be, and to enjoy her self (as it
were) but at the bodies permission; she is putt in free possession of her
self, and of all that is in her. And this is nothing else, but to have that
large knowledge, we have spoken of* for her knowing all that, is no other thing
but her being her self perfectly. Which will appear evident, if we consider
that her nature is, to be a Knower, and that knowledge is nothing else but a
Being of the object in the Knower; for thence it follows, that to know all
things is naught else then to be all things: since then, we concluded by our
former discourse, that all things were to be gathered out of any one; it is
clear that to be perfectly her self, and any one thing, is in truth to know
all things.

And thus we see, that for the souls enjoying all this knowledge when she is
out of the body, she needs no objects without her, no phantasmes, no
instruments, no helps; but that all that is requisite, is contained absolutely
in her being her self perfectly. And so we retort our Adversaries objection on
themselves; by representing to them, that since in their own doctrine, they
require no body nor instruments, for that precise action which they call
understanding: it is without all ground, for them to require bodies and
instruments in the next life, that the soul may there be that, which, they
acnowledge she is in her body without any such helps.

And as for that axiom or experience, that the soul does not understand,
unless she speculate phantasmes: as on the one side I yield to it, and
confess the experience, after the best and seriousest trial I could make of
it; so on the other side, when I examine the matter to the bottom, I find that
it comes not home to our adversaries intention. For as when we look upon a
thing, we conceive we work upon that thing, whereas in truth we do but set
our selves in such a position that the thing seen may work upon us: in like
manner our looking upon the phantasmes in our brain, is not our souls action
upon them, but it is our letting them beat at our common sense; that is, our
letting them work upon our soul. The effect whereof is, that either oursoule
is bettered in her self, as when we study and contemplate: or else, that she
bettereth something without us, as when by this thinking, we order any action.

But, if they will have this Axiom avail them, they should show that the
soul is not of her self a knowledge; which if they be able to do, even then
when to our thinking, she seems not so much as to think, we will yield they
have reason: but that will be impossible to them to do* for she is always, of
her self, a knowledge, though in the body she ^eu^^ expresses so much, but
when she is putt to it. Or else they should show* that this knowledge which the
soul is of her self, will not by changing the manner of her Existence, become
an actual knowledge, instead of the habitual knowledge which now appears in
her.

But as these Aristotelians embrace and stick to one* Axiom of their Patron;
The former Peripate^icke^ refuted out of Aristotle.
so they forgo and preuaricate against an other for as it is Aristotle's
doctrine, that a substance is for its operation, and were in vain and
superfluous if it could not practice it; so likewise is it his confessed
doctrine, that Matter is for its form, and not the form, for the (...). And
yet these men pretend that the soul, serves for nothing (...) governing of
the body: whereas contrawise, both all. (...) doctrine, and common sense
conuinceth, that the body must (...) soul. Which if it be, nothing can be more
consentaneous to (...) then to conceive that the durance which the soul has
in the (...) assigned her, to work and moulde in her the future state, which
(...) have after this life: and that no more operations are to be expected from
her after this life, but instead of them, a settled state of Being; seeing
that* even in this life, according to Aristotle's doctrine, the proper
operations of the soul are but certain Beings: so that we may conclude, (...)
a soul were grown to the perfection, which her nature is capable of the would
be nothing else but a constant Being, never changing from the happenesse of the
best Being.

And although the texts of Aristotle which remain unto us, be uncertain
(peradventure, not so much because they were originally such* in themselves, as
through the mingling of some comments into the body of the text;) yet if we had
his book which he wrote of the soul upon the death of his friend Eudemus, it
is very likely we should there see his evident assertion of her Immortality;
since it had been very impertinent to take occasion upon a friends death to
write of the soul, if he intended to conclude, that of a dead man there were
no soul.

Out of this discourse it appears, The operations of a separated soul
compared to her operations in her body.
how those actions which we exercise in this life, are to be understood, when
we hear them attributed to the next: for to think that they are to be taken in
their direct plain meaning and in that way, in which they are performed in
this world; were a great simplicity, and were to imagine a likeness between
bodies and spirits. We must therefore eleuate our minds, when we would
penetrate into the true meaning of such expressions, and consider how all the
actions of our soul are eminently comprehended in the universality of
knowledge we have already explicated. And so, the Apprehensions, judgments,
discourses, reflections, talkings together, and all other such actions of ours,
when they are attributed to separated souls, are but inadaequate names and
representations of their instantaneall sight of all things, for, in that, they
can not choose, but see others minds, which is that we call talking; and
likewise their own* which we call reflection: the rest are plain parts, and
are plainly contained in knowledge; discourse being but the falling into it;
judgment the principles of it; and single apprehensions the co^ponents of
judgments: then for such actions as are the beginning of operation, there can
be no doubt but that they are likewise to be found, and are resumed, in the
same Universality; as, love of good, consultation, resolution, prudentiall
election, and the first motion; for who knows all things, can not choose but
know what is good, and that good, is to be prosecuted: and who sees completely
all the means of effecting and attaining to his intended good; has already
consulted and resolved of the best: and who understands perfectly the matter
he is to work upon, has already made his prudentiall election: so that there
remains nothing more to be done, but to give the first impulse.

And thus you see, that this universality of knowledge in the soul,
comprehends all, That a separated soul is in a state of pure being, and
consequently immortal.
is all, performs all; and no imaginable good or happiness, is out of her
reach. A noble creature, and not to be cast away upon such trash as most men
employ their thoughts in. Upon whom it is now time to reflect; and to consider,
what effects the diverse manners of living in this world, do work upon her in
the next; if first we acquitt ourselves of a promise we made at the end of the
last Chapter. For it being now amply declared, that the state of a soul
exempted from her body, is a state of pure being; it follows manifestly, that
there is neither Action nor Passion in that state: which being so, it is beyond
all opposition that the soul can not dye: for it is evident that all
corruption, must come from the action of an other thing, upon that which is
corrupted; and therefore that thing must be capable of being made better and of
being made worse. Now then, if a separated soul be in a final state, where
she can neither be bettered, or worsened, (as she must be, if she be such a
thing, as we have declared) it follows that she can not possibly loose the
Being which she has: and sithence her passage out of the body, does not change
her nature, but only her state; it is clear, that she is of the same nature,
even in the body: though in this her durance, she be subject to be forged (as
it were) by the hammers of corporeal objects beating upon her; yet so, that of
her self she still is what she is. And therefore as soon as she is out of the
passible oore, in which she suffers by reason of that oore, she presently
becomes impassible, as being purely of her own nature, a fixed substance,
that is, a pure Being. Both which states of the soul, may in some sort be
adu^brated by what we see passes in the coppelling of a fixed metal; for as
long as any lead, or dross, or allay remains with it, it continues melted,
flowing, and in motion under the muffle: but as soon as they are parted from
it, and that it is become pure, without any mixture, and singly it self, it
contracteth it self to a narrower room, and at that very instant, cease
from all motion, grows hard, permanent, resistent unto all operations of
fire, and suffers no change or diminution in its substance by any outward
violence we can use unto it.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. Showing what effects, the diverse manners of living in
this world, do cause in a soul, after she is separated from her body.
ONe thing, That a soul in this life is subject to mutation, and may be
perfected in knowledge.
may peradventure seem of hard digestion in our past discourse; and it is,
that out of the grounds we have laid, it seems to follow that all souls
will have an equality; since we have concluded, that the greatest shall see or
know no more then the least: and indeed, there appears no cause why this
great and noble creature, should lie imprisoned in the obscure dungeon of
noisome flesh; if in the first instant, in which it has its first knowledge,
it has then already gained all whatsoever it is capable of gaining in the
whole progress of a long life afterward. Truly, the Platonike Philosophers
(who are persuaded that a humane soul does not profitt in this life, nor that
she acquired any knowledge here; as being of her self completely perfect; and
that all our discourses, are but her remembringes of what she had forgotten)
will find themselves ill bestedd to render a Philosophical and sufficient
cause of her being locked into a body: for to putt forgettfulnesse in a pure
spirit; so palpable an effect of corporeity, and so great a corruption, in
respect of a creature whose nature is, to know of it self, is an insufferable
error. Besides, when they tell us, that she can not be changed, because all
change would prejudice the spiritual nature, which they attribute to her; but
that well she may be warned and excitated by being in a body; they merely
trifle: for either there is some true mutation made in her by that which they
call a warning, or there is not; if there be not, how becomes it a warning to
her? Or what is it more to her then if a straw were wagged at the Antipodes?
But if there be some mutation (be it never so little) made in her by a
corporeal motion; what should hinder, why she may not by means of her body,
attain unto science she never had; as well as by it receive any the least
intrinsecall mutation whatsoever? For if once we admit any mutability in her
from any corporeal motion, it is far more conformable unto reason to suppose
it in regard of that which is her natural perfection, and of that, which by
her operations we see she has immediately after such corporeal motions, and
whereof before them there appeared in her no marks at all; then to suppose it
in regard of a dark intimation, of which we neither know, it is nor how it is
performed. Surely, no Rational Philosopher seeing a thing, whose nature is to
know, have a being, whereas formerly it existed not; and observing, how that
thing by little and little gives signs of more and more knowledge, can doubt
but that as she could be changed from not being to being; so, may she likewise
be changed from less knowing, to more knowing.

That the knowledges which a so^le gets in this life will make her knowledge
in the next life more perfect, and firm.
This then being irrefragably settled, that in the body she does increase in
knowledge: let us come to our difficulty and examine what this increase in the
body avails her; seeing that as soon as she parts from it, she shall of
her own nature enjoy, and be replenished with the knowledge of all things:
why should she laboriously strive to anticipate the getting of a few drops,
which but increase her thirst and anxiety; when having but a little patience,
she shall at one full and everlasting draught drink up the whole sea of it? We
know that the soul is a thing, made proportionably to the making of its body;
seeing, it is the bodies compartener: and we have concluded, that whiles it is
in the body, it acquireth perfection in that way, which the nature of it is
capable of; that is, in knowledge: as the body acquireth perfection its way;
which is, in strength and agility. Now then, let us compare the proceedinges
of the one, with those of the other substance; and peradventure we may gain
some light, to discern what advantage it may prove unto a soul, to remain
long in its body, if it make right use of its dwelling there. Let us consider
the body of a man, well and exactly shaped in all his members; yet, if he never
use care, nor pains to exercise those well framed limbs of his; he will want
much of those corporeal perfections, which others will have, who employ them
sedulously. Though his legs, arms, and hands, be of an exact symmetry; yet
he will not be able to run, to wrestle, or to throw a dart, with those who
labor to perfect themselves in such exercises: though his fingers be never so
neately molded or composed to all advantages of quick and smart motion; yet
if he never learned and practiced on the lute, he will not be able with them to
make any music upon that instrument, even after he sees plainly, and
comprehends fully all that the cunningest Lutenist does; nether will he be
able to play, as he does with his fingers, which of themselves are
peradventure less apt for those voluble motions then his are. That which
makes a man dexterous in any of these arts, or in any other operations proper
to any of the parts or limbs of his body, is the often repetitions of the
same acts; which do amend, and perfect those limbs in their motions, and
which make them fit and ready for the actions they are designed unto.

In the same manner it fares with the soul; who^e essence is that which she
knows: her several knowledges may be compared, to arms, hands, fingers,
legs, thighs, etc, in a body: and all her knowledges taken together, do
compose (as I may say) and make her up, what she is. Now, those limbs of hers,
though they be, when they are at the worst, entire, and well shaped in bulk
(to use the comparison of bodies;) yt they are susceptible of further
perfection, as our corporeal limbs ae, by often and orderly usage of them.
When we iterate our acts of our understanding any object, the second act is of
the same nature, as she first, the third, as the second, and so, of the rest:
every one of which perfecteth the understanding of that thing, and of all that
depends upon the knowledge of it, and makes it become more vigorous and
strong; even the often throwing of a boule at the same mark, begets still
more and more strength and justness in the arm that delivers it: for, it
can not be denied but that the same cause which makes any thing, must of
necessity perfect and strengthen it, by repeating its force and strokes. We
may then conclude that the knowledge of our soul, (which is indeed her self)
will be in the next life more perfect and strong, or more slack and weak,
according as in this life she has often and vigorously, or faintly and
seldom, busied her self about those things which begett such knowledge.

Now those things which men bestow their pains to know, That the souls of
me^ addicted to science whilst they lived here are more perfect in the next
world then the souls of unlearned men.
we see are of two kinds: for some thirst after the knowledge of nature, and
of the variety of things, which either their senses, or their discourse, tell
them of: but others look no higher then to have an insight into humane action,
or to gain skill in some art, whereby they may acquire means to live. These
later curiosities, are but of particulars; that is, of some one, or few
species, or kinds, whose common that comprehends them, falls within the
reach of every vulgar capacity; and consequently, the things which depend upon
them, are low, mean, and contemptible: whereas, the beauty, vastness, and
excellency of the others, is so much beyond them, as they can be brought into
no proportion to one an other. Now then, if we consider, what advantage the one
sort of these men, will in the next world have over the other; we shall find,
that they who spend their life here in the study and contemplation of the first
noble objects, will, in the next, have their universal knowledge (that is
their soul) strong and perfect: whiles the others, that played away their
thoughts and time upon trifles, and seldom raised their, minds above the
pitch of sense, will be fainte through their former laizinesse, like bodies
benumbed with the palsy, and sickely through their ill dyett; as when a well
shaped virgin, that having fed upon trash instead of nourishing meats,
languisheth under a wearisome burden of the green sickness.

To make this point yet more clear, That those souls which embrace virtue in
this world will be most perfect in the next, and those which embrace vice most
miserable.
we may consider how the things which we gain knowledge of, do affect us
under the title of good and convenient, in two several manners. The one is,
when the appearance of good, in the abstracted nature of it, and after
examination of all circumstances, carries our heart to the desire of the thing,
that appears so unto us: the other is* when the semblance of good to our own
particular persons without casting any further, or questioning whether any
other regard may not make it prejudicial, does cause in us a longing for the
thing wherein such semblance shines. Now, for the most part the knowledges
which spring out of the later objects, are more cultiuated by us, then those
which arise out of the other; partly by reason of their frequent occurring,
either through necessity, or through judgment; and partly, by the addition
which passion gives to the impressions they make upon us: for passion
multiplyeth the thoughts of such things, more then of any others, if reason do
not cross and suppress her tumultuary motions, which in most men, she does
not. The souls then of such persons, as giving way to their passion, do in
this life busy themselves about such things as appear good to their own
persons, and cast no further, must needs decede from their bodies, unequally
builded, (if that expression may be permitted me;) and will be like a lame
unwieldy body, in which the principal limbs are not able to govern and move
the others; because those principal ones are fainte, through want of spirits
and exercise; and the others are ouergrowne with hidropicall and nociue
humors. The reason whereof is that in such souls their judgments will be
disproportioned to one an other, one of them being unduly stronger then the
other. What effect this works in regard of knowledge, we have already
declared, and no less will it have in respect of action: for suppose two
judgments to be unequal, and such, as in the action one contradicts the
other; for example, let one of my judgments be, that it is good for me to
eat because I am hungry; and let the other be, that it is good for me to
study, because I am shortly to give an account of my self: if the one
judgment be stronger then the other, as if that of eating be stronger then
that of studying; it imports not that there be more reason (all circumstances
considered) for studying: because, reasons, do move to action according to the
measure in which the resolution that is taken upon them, is strong or weak;
and therefore, my action will follow the strongest judgment, and I shall leave
my book to go to my dinner.

Now, to apply this to the state of a separated soul; we are to remember how
the spiritual judgments, which she collected in the body, do remain in her
after she is diuested of it: and likewise, we are to consider, how all her
proceeding in that state, is built, not upon passion, or any bodily causes or
dispositions; but merely upon the quality and force of those spiritual
judgments: and then, it evidently follows, that if there were any such
action in the next life, the pure soul would apply it self thereunto,
according to the proportion of her judgments, and as they are graduated and
qualifyed. It is true, there is no such action remaining in the next life; yet
nevertheless there remains in the soul a disposition and a promptitude to
such action: and if we will frame a right apprehension of a separated soul, we
must conceit her to be of such a nature (for then all is nature with her, as
hereafter we shall discourse,) as if she were a thing made for action in that
proportion and efficacity, which the quartering of her by this variety of
judgments does afford; that is that she is, so much the more fit for one
action then for an other, (were she to proceed to action,) as the judgment of
the goodness of one of these actions is stronger in her, then the judgment of
the others goodness, which is in effect, by how much the one is more
cultiuated then the other. And out of this we may conclude, that what motions
do follow in a man, out of discourse, the like will in a separated soul,
follow out of her spiritual judgments. So that as he is ioyed, if he do
possess his desired good; and is discontented and displeased, if he miss of
it; and seizes greedily upon it when it is present to him, and then cleaves
fast unto it, and whiles he wants it, no other good affects him, but he is
still longing after that Masterwish of his heart: the like in every regard, but
much more vehemently, befalls unto a separated soul. So that in fine she
will be happy, or miserable, according as she has built up her self, by her
spiritual judgments and affections in this life. If knowledge, and
intellectual objects be the goods she thirsts after, what can be happier
then she, when she possesses the fulness of all that can be desired in that
kind? But if in this world a man settleth his heart constantly upon any
transito^y end; as upon wealth, corporeal delights, honor, power, and the
like, (which are too short breathed attendants to follow him so long a journey
as into the next;) then, all the power of his soul, even after she has left
her body, will be still longing after that dear Idol of her affections; and
for the want of it, she will not value the great knowledge she shall then be
imbued withal, nor care for any other good she possesses like a man who being
sorrounded, with a full sea, and swollen tide of all specious objects that may
please and delight him, has by unlucky chance suffered his violent affections,
and his impotent desires to be entangled in some mean love, that either
neglects him, or he is hindered from enjoying; and thereby, that little drop
of gall, or rather that privation of a mean contentment (which truly in it
self, is nothing) infecteth and poisoneth the whole draught of happiness that
but for this, would swell him up to the height of his wishes.

But no comparisons of sorrows, The state of a vicious soul in the next life.
or anguishes in this life (where our earthy dwelling does so clogge, and
allay, and dull the sense of our soul, which only feels and relisheth either
delight or woe) can arrive to shadow out the misery of a separated soul so
affected; whose strains are so excessiuely vehement, and whose nature is a
pure actiuity, and her self, all sense, all knowledge. It is true, I confess
that in a man, such motions do in part proceed from passion: and therefore, I
will allow, that so much of them, as have their origin merely and only
fromthence, shall dye with the body, and shall not have made any impression in
the separated soul: but besides the stream of passion we may in such motions
observe also, the work of reason, for she, both approves and employeth her
powers, to compass and gain what the other presents; and by legitimate
discourse, draws consequences out of that principle or judgment, which
makes the byas, it then leans unto: and these, are undeniable effects of a
spiritual judgment settled in the soul. And therefore, as far as these
motions proceed from spiritual judgments, so far, it is clear they must
remain in the separated soul.

Peradventure, what I have said, may be liable to a mistake; as though I
conceived that these spiritual judgments are made in the soul according to
right reason, and to legitimate discourse: whereas, I mean nothing less; but
esteeming an ouerstrong judgment in the separated soul, to be proportionable
unto a passion in the body; I conceit that as passion settleth reason on work
to find out means, whereby she may arrive unto her ends; so in like manner,
may this judgment set reason on floate, with those acts which follow
consequently upon it (though inconsequent to the whole body of reason:) because
the disorder there, is, in the excess of this judgment over others, whose
force (according to nature) ought to be greater then it. So that, if we would
frame a conception of a disordered soul, when it is out of the body; we may
imagine it correspondent to a body, whose one part were bigger then could stand
in proportion with an other: as, if the hand (to use the example we brought
before) were greater then the arm could manage, or the foot were larger and
heauyer, then the leg and thigh could wield: unto which add that every part
were active and working of it self; so as, though it could not be governed,
yet would it continually have its own operation, which would be contrary to
the operation of the arm, or of the leg, and consequently, it would ever be
tending to incompossible operations: and by that means, both one member would
always disagree from the other, and neither of them attain any effect at all;
not unlike to the fancy of the Poets, who fained a monster, which they termed
Scylla, whose inferior parts, were a company of dogs, ever snarling and
quarrelling among themselves; and yet were vnseuerable from one an other, as
being compartes of the same substance.

But to declare this important doctrine more dogmatically; let us consider
that of necessity a disordered soul has these following judgments settled in
her. Namely, that she is not well; that she can not be well without her desired
good; that it is impossible for her to compass that good; and lastly, that
this state she is in, is by all means possible to be avoided; not, by changing
her judgment (for that is her self) but by procuring the satisfaction she
desires; and this with all the power, and total inclination of her actiuity
and possibility. This then, being the temper of a disordered separated soul,
it is easy to conceive, what a sad condition such an one remains then in;
which is infinitely more, then any affliction that can happen to a man in this
world: for since, even here, all our joys, and griefs, do proceed from our
soul; we must needs allow, that when she shall be free from the burden of
her body (which does exceedingly impeach, and limitt her operations, and
actiuity) all her actions will be then far greater and more efficacious.

But because this point is of highest consequence, The fundamental reason why
as well happiness as misery is so excessive in the next life.
we may not slightly pass it over; but we will endeavor, if we can, to
discover the wonderful efficacity and force of a separated souls operations;
that from thence we may the better collect, how great her happenesse or misery
will be in the next life. Let us then consider, how an act or judgment of the
soul, may be more forcible, either by it self, or by the multiplication of
such helps, as do concur with it. To begin with considering the act in it
self, we know that the certainest way to measure the strength of it, is to
take a survey of the force which shows it self in its effect: for they being
relatiues to one an other, each of them discovers the others nature. Now,
this we will do after our ordinary manner, by comparing the spiritual effects
issuing from a judgment in the soul, to material effects proceeding from the
operations and motions of bodies. In these we may observe three things, by
which we may estimate their efficaciousnesse: some actions dure a longer time;
others, take up a greater place; and others again, work the like effect in a
greater place, and in a shorter time: which last sort, of all others, do
proceed from the most powerful, and most forcible agents. If then in these
considerations, we compare a separated soul to a body; what an infinity of
strength and efficacity, will the meanest of those pure substances have, beyond
the most powerful and active body that can be imagined in nature? For we have
already showed, how a separated soul comprehends at once, all place, and all
times: so that, her actiuity requires no application to place or time; but,
she is, of her self, mistress of both, comprehending all quantity whatsoever,
in an indivisible apprehension; and ranking all the parts of motion, in their
complete order; and knowing at once, what is to happen in every one of them. On
the other side; an incorporated soul, by reason of her being confined to the
use of her senses, can look upon but one single definite place, or time, at
once; and needs a long chain of many discourses, to comprehend all the
circumstances of any one action: and yet after all, how short she is of
comprehending all? So that comparing the one of these with the other, it is
evident, that in respect of time and place; and in respect of any one singular
action; the proportion of a separated soul, to one in the body, is as all
time, or all place, in respect of any one piece, or least parcel of them; or
as the entire absolute comprehender of all time and all place, is to the
discouerer of a small measure of them. For whatsoever a soul wills in that
state, she wills it for the whole extent of her duration; because she is then
out of the state or capacity of changing: and wishes for whatsoever she
wishes, as for her absolute good; and therefore employeth the whole force of
her judgment, upon every particular wish. Likewise the eminency which a
separated soul has over place, is also then entirely employed upon every
particular wish of hers; since in that state there is no variety of place left
unto her, to wish for such good in one place, and to refuse it in an other; as,
whiles she is in the body happens to every thing she desires. Wherefore,
whatsoever she then wishes for, she wishes for it according to her comparison
unto place: that is to say; that as such a soul has a power to work at the
same time in all place by the absolute comprehension, which she has of place
in abstract: so every wish of that soul, if it were concerning a thing to be
made in place, were able to make it in all places; through the excessive force
and efficacy which she employeth upon every particular wish. The third effect
by which among bodies we gather the vigor, and energy of the cause that
produces it, (to wit, the doing of the like action, in a lesser time, and in
a larger extent,) is but a combination of the two former: and therefore, it
requires no further particular insistance upon it, to show, that likewise in
this, the proportion of a separated to an incorporated soul, must needs be
the self same as in the others; seeing that a separated souls actiuity, is
upon all place in an indivisible of time.

Therefore, to shutt up this point; there remains only for us to consider,
what addition may be made unto the efficacity of a judgment, by the
concurrence of other extrinsecall helps. We see that when an understanding man
will settle any judgment, or conclusion in his mind, he weighs thoroughly all
that follows out of such a judgment; and considers likewise all the
antecedents that lead him unto it: and if after due reflection, and
examination, of whatsoever concerns that conclusion, which he is establishing
in his mind, he finds nothing to cross it, but that every particular and
circumstance goes smoothly along with it, and strengthens it; he is then
satisfied, and quiett in his thoughts, and yields a full assent thereunto:
which assent is the stronger, by how many the more concurrent testimonies he
has for it. And although he should have a perfect demonstration or sight of
the thing in it self, yet every one of the other extrinsecall proofs, being
as it were a new persuasion, has in it a further vigor to strengthen and
content his mind in the forehad demonstration: for, if every one of these be in
it self sufficient to make the thing evident; it can not happen that any one
of them, should hinder the others: but contrariwise, every one of them, must
needs coucurre with all the rest, to the effectual quieting of his
understanding, in its assent, to that judgment. Now then, according to this
rate, let us calculate, (if we can) what concurrence of proofs and witnesses
a separated soul will have to settle and strengthen her in every one of her
judgments. We know, that all verities are chained, and connected one to an
other; and that there is no true conclusion so far remote from any other, but
may by more, or less consequences and discourses, be deduced evidently out of
it: it follows then that in the abstracted soul, where all such consequences
are ready drawn, and seen in themselves without extension of time, or
employing of pains to collect them* every particular verity, bears testimony
to any other: so that every one of them is believed, and works in the force
and virtue of all. Out of which it is manifest, that every judgment in such a
separated soul, has an infinite strength and efficacity over any made by an
embodyed one.

To sum all up in a few words: we find three roots of infinity in every
action of a separated soul, in respect of one in the body: first, the freedom
of her essence or substance in it self: next, that quality of hers, by which
she comprehends place and time; that is, all permanent and successiue
quantity: and lastly, the concurrence of infinite knowledges to every action of
hers. Having then this measure in our hands, let us apply it to a well
ordered, and to a disordered soul passing out of this world: let us consider
the one of them, set upon those goods, which she shall there have present and
shall fully enjoy: the other, languishing after, and pining away for those,
which are impossible for her ever to obtain. What joy, what content, what
exultation of mind, in any living man, can be conceived so great, as to be
compared with the happiness of one of these souls? And what grief, what
discontent, what misery, can be like the others?

These are the different effects, The reason why man's soul requires to be in
a body, and to live for some space of time joined with it.
which the diverse manners of living in this world, do cause in souls after
they are delivered from their bodies: out of which, and out of the discourse
that has discovered these effects unto us, we see a clear resolution of that
so maine and agitated question among the Philosophers, why a rational soul is
imprisoned in a gross body of flesh and blood? In truth, the question is an
illegitimate one; as supposing a false ground: for, the souls being in the
body, is not an imprisonnement of a thing that was existent before the soul
and body met together; but her being there, is the natural course of
beginning that, which can no other way come into the listes of nature: for
should a soul, by the course of nature, obtain her first being without a
body, either she would in the first instant of her being, be perfect in
knowledge, or she would not: if she were, then would she be a perfect and
complete immateriall substance, not a soul; whose nature is to be a compartner
to the body, and to acquire her perfection by the mediation and service of
corporeal senses: but if she were not perfect in science, but were only a
capacity thereunto, and like unto white paper, in which nothing were yet
w^^tten; then, unless she were putt in a body, she could never arrive to know
any thing, because motion and alteration are effects peculiar to bodies:
therefore, it must be agreed, that she is naturally designed to be in a body:
but her being in a body, is her being one thing with the body, she is said to
be in: and so she is one part of a whole, which from its weaker part is
determined to be a body.

Again, seeing that the matter of any thing, is to be prepared, before the end
is prepared, for which that matter is to serve; according to that Axiom, Quod
est primum in intention, est vltimum in executione: we may not deny, but that
the body is in being, some time before the soul: or at the least, that it
existeth as soon as she does: and therefore, it appears wholly unreasonable,
to say, that the soul was first made out of the body, and was afterward
thrust into it; seeing that the body was prepared for the soul before, or at
the least, as soon as she had any beginning: and so we may conclude, that of
necessity the soul must be begun, laid, hatched, and perfected in the body.

And although it be true, that such souls, as are separated from their bodies,
in the first instant of their being there, are notwithstanding imbued with the
knowledge of all things; yet is not their longer abode therein vain: not
only, because thereby the species is multiplied; (for nature is not content
with barely doing that, without addition of some good to the soul it self)
but as well for the wonderful, and I may say infinite advantage, that may
thereby accrue to the soul, if she make right use of it: for, as any act of
the abstracted soul is infinite, in comparison of the acts which men exercise
in this life, (according to what we have already showed) so by consequence,
must any increase of it, be likewise infinite: and therefore we may conclude,
that a long life well spent, is the greatest and most excellent gift, which
nature can bestow upon a man.

The unwary reader may perhapps have difficulty, at our often repeating of the
infelicity of a miserable soul; That the misery of the soul in the next
world, proceeds out of inequality, and not out of falsity of her judgments.
since we say, that it proceeds out of the judgments, she had formerly made
in this life; which without all doubt were false ones: and nevertheless, it is
evident, that no false judgments, can remain in a soul, after she is
separated from her body; as we have above determined. How then can a souls
judgments, be the cause of her misery? But the more heedefull reader, will
have noted, that the misery which we putt in a soul, proceeds out of the
inequality, not out of the falsity, of her judgments: for if a man be inclined
to a lesser good, more then to a greater, he will in action betake himself to
the lesser good, and desert the greater, (wherein, neither judgment is false,
nor either inclination is naught) merely out of the improportion of the two
inclinations or judgments to their objects: for that a soul may be duly
ordered, and in a state of being well, she must have a lesser inclination to a
less good, and a greater inclination to a greater good: and in pure spirits,
these inclinations are nothing else, but the strength of their judgments:
which judgments in souls, whiles they are in their bodies, are made by the
repetition of more acts from stronger causes, or in more favorable
circumstances. And so it appears, how without any falsity in any judgment, a
soul may become miserable, by her conversation in this world; where all her
inclinations generally are good, unless the disproportion of them, do make
them bad.

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. Of the perseverance of a soul, in the state she finds
her self in, at her first separation from her body.
THus we have brought man's soul, The explication, and proof of that maxim,
that, if the cause be i^ act, the effect must also b^.
out of the body she lived in here, and by which she conuersed, and had
commerce with the other parts of this world: and we have assigned her, her
first array and stole, with which she may be seen in the next world: so that
now there remains only for us to consider, what shall betide her afterward;
and whether any change may happen to her, and be made in her, after the first
instant of her being a pure spirit, separated from all consortshippe with
material substances. To determine this point the more clearly, let us call
to mind, an axiom that Aristotle gives us in his logike; which teaches us,
That as it is true, if the effect be, there is a cause; so likewise it is most
true, that if the cause be in act, or causing, the effect must also be. Which
Axiom may be understood two ways: the one, that if the cause has its effect,
then the effect also is: and this is no great mystery; or for it, are any
thanks due to the teacher; it being but a repetition, and saying over again
of the same thing. The other way is, that if the cause be perfect in the nature
of being a cause, then the effect is: which is as much as to say, that if
nothing be wanting to the cause, abstracting precisely from the effect; then
neither is the effect wanting. And this is the meaning of Aristotle's Axiom: of
the truth and evidence whereof in this sense, if any man should make the least
doubt, it were easy to euince it: as thus; if nothing be wanting but the
effect, and yet the effect does not immediately follow, it must needs be, that
it can not follow at all; for if it can, and does not, then something more must
be done to make it follow: which is against the supposition, that nothing was
wanting but the effect; for that which is to be done, was wanting. To say, it
will follow without any change, is senseless: for if it follow without change,
it follows out of this, which is already putt: but if it do follow out of
this which is precisely putt, then it follows, against the supposition, which
was, that it did not follow although this were putt.

This then being evident, The effects of all such age^ts as work
instantaneously, ar^ complete in the first instant that the agents are putt.
let us apply it to our purpose; and let us putt three or more things,
namely A. B. C. and D: whereof none can work otherwise, then in an instant or
indiuisibly: and I say, that whatsoever these four things are able to do,
without respect to any other thing besides them, is completely done in the
first instant of their being putt: and if they remain for all eternity,
without communication or respect to any other thing, there shall never be any
innovation in any of them, or any further working among them: but they will
always remain immutable, in the same state they were in, at the very first
instant of their being putt: for whatsoever A can do, in the first instant, is
in that first instant actually done; because he works indiuisibly: and what
can be done precisely by A, and by his action joined to B; does precisely
follow out of A, and his action, and out of B, and his action, if B have any
action independent of A: and because all these are in the same instant,
whatsoever follows precisely out of these, and out of any thing else that is
in the same instant, and that works indiuisibly as they do; is necessarily
done in that very instant: but all the actions of C and D, and of whatsoever by
reflection from them may be done by A and B, being all of them indivisible, and
following precisely out of some of the forenamed actions; they do follow out of
things being in this instant: and because they are indivisible, they may be in
this instant: and therefore, all is done in this instant. Now, supposing all to
be done that can be done by them in this instant; and that nothing can follow
from them, unless it follow precisely out of what is in this instant; and that
it is all indivisible: it follows clearly, that whatsoever (concerning them)
is not in this instant, can never be.

All pure spirits do work instantaneously.
These two conclusions being thus demonstrated; let us in the next place
determine, how all actions of pure spirits, which have no respect to bodies,
must of necessity be indivisible; that is, must include no continuate
succession: by which, I mean such a succession, as may be divided into parts
without end: for if we look well into it, we shall find, that a continuate
succession can not be a thing, which has in it self a Being: and the reason
is, because the essence of such a succession, consists in having some of its
parts already passed, and others of them yet to come: but on the other side,
it is evident, that no such thing can be, whose essential ingredients are not
it self: and therefore it follows evidently, that such a thing as we call
succession, can have no being in it self: seeing that one essential part of
it, never is with the other: therefore, such a succession, must have its being
in some permanent thing, which must be diuisible; for that is essentially
required in succession: but permanent diuisibility is that which we call
Biggenesse or Quantity; from which pure spirits are free: and therefore, it is
most evident, that all their actions in respect of themselves, are absolutely
indivisible.

That a soul separated from her body can not suffer any change after the first
instant of her separation.
Now, to make use of this doctrine to our intent: we say, that since our soul,
when it is separated from our body, is a pure spirit or understanding; and
that all her actions are indivisible; and that all actions of other spirits
upon her must likewise be such; and by consequence, that there can be no
continuate succession of action among them: we must of necessity conclude, that
according to the private nature of the soul, and according to the common
notion of spiritual things; there can be no change made in her, after the
first instant of her parting from her body: but, what happiness or misery
betideth her in that instant, continues with her for all eternity. Yet is it
not my mind to say, that by the course of the universal resolutions, from
which she is not wholly exempt, and from supernatural administration of
corporeal things, there may not result some change in her. But the
consideration of that matter, I remitt to those treatises, unto which it
belongs; as not depending, nor ensuing from the particular nature of the
soul: and therefore, not falling under our discussion in this place.

This same conclusion may be proved by an other argument, besides this which we
have now used: and it is this. Whatsoever works purely by understanding and
mind, can not be changed in its operations, unless its understanding or mind
be altered: but this can not happen, unless either it learn somewhat, it knew
not before; or forgetting a foreknowne truth, it begin afterward to think
a falsity. This second part, is impossible, as we have already showed, when we
proved that falsehood could have no admittance into a separated soul: and the
former is as impossible; it being likewise proved, that at her first instant of
her separation, she knows all things: wherefore, we may hence confidently
conclude, that no change of mind, (that is no change at all) can happen to an
abstracted soul.

And thus, That temporal sins are justly punished with eternal pain^s.
by discourse, we may arrive, to quitt ourselves easily of that famous
objection, so much pestering Christian Religion; how God, can in justice impose
eternal pains upon a soul, for one sin, acted in a short space of time.
For we see, it follows by the necessary course of nature, that if a man dye
in a disorderly affection to any thing, as to his chief good, he eternally
remains by the necessity of his own nature, in the same affection: and there
is no imparity, that to eternal sin, there should be imposed eternal
punishment.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND now I hope, I may confidently say, I have been as good as my word: and I
doubt not, but my Reader will find it so, if he spend but half as much time
in perusing these two treatises, as the composing them has cost me. They are
too nice (and indeed, unreasonable) who expect to attain without pains, unto
that, which has cost others years of toil. Let them remember the words of
holy Job, that wisdom is not found in the land of those, that live at their
ease. Let them cast their eyes on every side round about them, and then tell
me, if they meet with any employment, that may be compared to the attaining
unto these, and such like principles; whereby a man is enabled to govern
himself understandingly and knowingly, toward the happiness, both of the
next life and of this; and to comprehend the wisemans theme; what is good for a
man in the days of his vanity, whiles he plays the stranger under the sun.
Let us fear Gods Judgments. Let us carefully pursue the hidden bounties, he
has treasured up for us. Let us thank him for the knowledge he has given
us: and admire the excellency of Christian Religion; which so plainly teaches
us that, unto which it is so extreme hard to arrive by natural means. Let us
bless him, that we are borne unto it. And let us sing to him; That it is he,
who preaches his doctrine to Jacob, and gives his laws to Israel. He has
not done the like to all nations; nor has he manifested his secret truths
unto them.

BUT before I cut of this thridde, which has cost me so much pains to spinne
out to this Length; I must crave my Readers leave, to make some use of it, for
my own behoof. Hitherto my discourse has been directed to him: now I shall
entreat his patience, that I may reflect it in a word or two upon my self.
And as I am sure I have profited my self not a little, by talking all this
while to him, that obliging me to polish my conceptions with more care, and to
rang^ them into better order, then whiles they were but rude meditations with
in my own breast; so I hope, that a little, conversation with my self upon this
important subject, (which is to be studied for use, and practice; not for
speculatiue science) may prove aduantagious unto him; if his warmed thoughts
have tuned his soul to such a key, as I am sure these considerations have
wound up mine unto.

To thee then my soul, I now address my speech. For since by long debate, and
toylesome rowing against the impetuous tides of ignorance, and false
apprehentions, which ouerflow thy banks, and hurry thee headlong down the
stream, whilst thou art imprisoned in thy clayie mansion; we have with much
ado arrived to aim art some little atome of thy vast greatness; and with the
hard and tough blows of strict and wary reasoning, we have stricken out some
few sparks of that glorious light, which inuironeth and swells thee, or
rather, which is thee: it is high time, I should retire my self out of the
turbulent and slippery field of eager strife and litigious disputation, to make
my accounts with thee; where no outward noise may distract us, nor any way
intermeddle between us, excepting only that eternal verity, which by thee
shines upon my faint and gloomy eyes; and in which I see, whatsoever does or
can content thee in me. I have discovered, that thou (my soul) wilst survive
me: and so survive me, as thou wilst also survive the mortality, and changes
which belong to me; and which are but accidentary to thee, merely because thou
art in me. Then shall the vicissitude of time, and the inequality of
dispositions in thee, be turned into the constancy of immortality; and into the
evenness of one being, never to end, and never to receive a change, or
succession to better or worse.

When my eye of contemplation, has been fixed upon this bright sun, as long
as it is able to endure the radiant beams of it; whose redundant light veyleth
the looker on, with a dark mist: let me turn it for a little space, upon the
straight passage, and narrow gullet, through which thou striuest (my soul)
with faint and weary steps, during thy hazardous voyage upon the earth, to
make thy self a way: and let me examine, what comparison there is, between
thy two conditions; the present one, wherein thou now find thy self
immersed in flesh and blood; and the future state that will betide thee, when
thou shalst be melted out of this gross oore, and refined from this mean
alloy. Let my term of life, be of a thousand long years; longer then ever
happened to our aged forefathers, who stored the earth with their numerous
progeny, by out living their skill to number the diffused multitudes, that
swarmed from their liones: let me, during this long space, be sole Emperor
and absolute Lord, of all the huge globe of land and water, encompassed with
Adams offspring: let all my subjects lie prostrate at my feet, with obedience
and awe, distilling their actiuest thoughts, in studying day and night to
invent new pleasures and dilights for me: let nature conspire with them, to
give me a constant and vigorous health; a perpetual spring of youth, that may
to the full, relish whatsoever good all they can fancy: let grauest Prelates,
and greatest Princes, serve instead of flatterers to highten my joys; and yet
those joys, be raised above their power of flattery: let the wisemen of this
vast family (whose sentiments, are maxims and oracles, to govern the worlds
beliefes and actions) esteem, reverence, and adore me in the secretest, and
the most recluse withdrawings of their hearts: let all the wealth, which to
this very day, has ever been torn out of the bowels of the earth; and all
the treasures, which the sea hides from the view of greedy men, swell round
about me; whilst all the world besides, lies gaping to receive the crummes,
that fall neglected by me, from my full laden table: let my imagination be as
vast, as the vnfathomed Universe; and let my felicity be as accomplished, as
my imagination can reach unto; so that wallowing in pleasure, I be not able to
think how to increase it, or what to wish for more, then that which I possess
and enjoy.

Thus when my thoughts are at a stand, and can raise my present happiness no
higher; let me call to mind, how this long lease of pleasant days, will in
time come to an end: this bottom of a thousand joyful years, will at length
be vnwound, and nothing remain of it: and then (my soul) thy infinitely
longerliued Immortality will succeed; thy never ending date, will begin a new
account, impossible to be summed up, and beyond all proportion infinitely
exceeding the happiness, we have rudely aimed to express: so that no
comparison can be admitted between them. For, suppose first that such it were,
as the least and shortest of those manifold joys, which swell it to that
height we have fancyed, were equal to all the contentment thou shalst enjoy in
a whole million of years; yet millions of years may be so often multiplied,
as at length, the slender and limited contentments supposed in them, may
equalyse, and outgoe the whole heap of ouerflowing bliss, raised so high, in
the large extent of these thousand happy years. Which when they are cast into
a total sum; and that I compare it, with the unmeasurable eternity, which
only measures thee; then I see, that all this huge product of Algebraicall
multiplication, appears as nothing, in respect of thy remaining, and never
ending suruiuance; and is less, then the least point in regard of the immense
Universe. But then, if it be true (as it is most true) that thy least spark
and moment of real happiness, in that blessed eternity thou hopest for, is
infinitely greater, and nobler, then the whole mass of fancyed joys, of my
thousand years life here on earth; how infinitely will the value of thy
duration, exceed all proportion, in regard of the felicity, I had imagined my
self? And seeing there is no proportion between them, let me sadly reflect
upon my own present condition: let me examine what it is, I so busily, and
anxiously, employ my thoughts and precious time upon: let me consider my own
courses, and whither they lead me: let me take a suruay of the lives, and
actions, of the greatest part of the world, which make so loud a noise about
my ears: and then may I justly sigh out from the bottom of my anguished heart;
to what purpose have I hitherto lived? To what purpose are all these millions
of toilesome auntes, that live and labor about me? To what purpose were Cesars
and Alexanders? To what purpose Aristotle's and Archimedeses? How miserably
foolish are those conquering tyrants, that divide the world with their lawless
swords? What se^selesse idiots those acute Philosophers, who tear men's wits
in pieces, by their different ways, and subtle Logic; striving to show men
beatitudes in this world, and seeking for that, which if they had found, were
but a nothing of a nothing in respect of true beatitude? He only is truly wise,
who neglecting all that flesh and blood desires, endeauoreth to purchase at
any rate this felicity, which thy suruiuance promises: the least degree of
which, so far surmounteth all the heaps, which the giants of the earth are
able to raise, by throwing hills upon hills, and striwing in vain to scale and
reach those eternities, which reside above the skies. Alas, how fondly does
mankind suffer it self to be deluded? How true it is, that the only thing
necessary, proves the only thing that is neglected? Look up my soul, and
fix thine eye upon that truth, which eternal light makes so clear unto
thee, shining upon thy face with so great evidence, as defyeth the noonetyde
sun, in its greatest brightness. And this it is, that every action of thine,
be it never so slight, is mainely mischievous; or be it never so bedeckt, with
those specious considerations, which the wise men of the world judge important,
is foolish, absurd, and unworthy of a man; and unworthy of one that
understands, and acknowledges thy dignity; if in it there be any specke; or
if through it, there appear any spark of those mean and flat motives,
which with a false byas, draw any way aside, from attaining that happiness, we
expect in thee. That happiness, ought to be the end, and mark we level at:
that, the rule and model of all our actions: that, the measure of every
circumstance, of every atome, of whatsoever we bestow so precious a thing upon,
as the employment of thee is.

But we must not so slightly pass over the intensenesse and vehemence of that
felicity, which thou (my soul) shall enjoy, when thou art severed from thy
benumming compartner. I see evidently, that thou do not survive, a simple and
dull essence; but art replenished with a vast and incomprehensible extent of
riches and delight within thy self. I see that golden chain, which here by
long discourses, fills huge volumes of books, and diueth into the hidden
natures of several bodies; in thee resumed into one circle or link, which
contains in it self the large scope of whatsoever screwing discourse can
reach unto. I see it comprehend, and master the whole world of bodies. I see
every particular nature, as it were embossed out to the life, in thy celestial
garment. I see every solitary substance ranked in its due place and order, not
crushed or thronged by the multitude of its fellows; but each of them in its
full extent* in the full propriety of every part and effect of it; and
distinguished into more divisions, then ever nature severed it into. In thee I
see an infinite multitude enjoy place enough. I see, that neither hight, nor
profundity, nor longitude, nor latitude, are able to exempt themselves from thy
diffused powers: they faddome all; they comprehend all; they master all; they
enriche thee with the stock of all; and thou thy self art all, and somewhat
more then all; and yet, now but one of all. I see, that eueryone of this all,
in thee increases the strength, by which thou know any other of the same
all: and all, increases the knowledge of all, by a multiplication beyond the
skill of Arithmetike; being (in its kind) absolutely infinite; by having a
nature, that is incapable of being either infinite or finite. I see again,
that those things which have not knowledge, are situated in the lowest, and
meanest rank of creatures; and are in no wise comparable to those which know.
I see, there is no pleasure at all, no happiness, no felicity, but by
knowledge, and in knowledge. Experience teaches me, how the purer, and nobler
race of mankind, adoreth in their hearts, this idol of knowledge, and scorneth
what ever else they seem to court, and to be fond of. And I see, that this
excess of sea of knowledge which is in thee, grows not by the succession of
one thought after an other; but is like a full swollen ocean, never ebbing on
any coast, but equally pushing at all its bounds, and tumbling out its
flowing waves on every side, and into every ereche; so that every where it
makes high tide. Or like a pure sun, which from all parts of it, shoots
its radiant beams with a like extremity of violence. And I see likewise, that
this admirable knowledge, is not begotten and conserved in thee, by the
accidentary help of defective causes; but is rooted in thy self; is steeped
in thy own essence, like an vnextinguishable sourse of a perpetually streaming
fire; or like the living head of an euerrunning spring; beholden to none, out
of thy self, saving only to thy Almighty Creator; and begging of none; but
being in thy self all that of which thou should beg.

This then (my soul) being thy lotte; and such a hieght of pleasure being
reserved for thee; and such an extremity of felicity, with in a short space
attending thee; can any degenerate thought, ever gain strength enough, to
shake the evidence which these considerations implant and riuett in thee? Can
any dull oblivion deface this so lively and so beautiful image? Or can any
length of time, draw in thy memory a veyle between it, and thy present
attention? Can any peruersity, so distort thy straight eyes, that thou
should not look always fixed upon this mark; and level thy aim
directly at this white? How is it possible, that thou can brook to live, and
not expire presently, thereby to ingulfe thy self, and be thoroughly imbibed
with such an ouerflowing bliss? Why do thou not break the walls and
chains of thy flesh and blood, and leap into this glorious liberty? Here
Stoickes, you are to use your swords. Upon these considerations, you may
justify the letting out the blood, which by your discourses, you seem so
prodigal of. To dye upon these terms, is not to part with that, which you
fondly call a happy life; feeding your selves, and flattering your hearers with
empty words: but rather it is, to plunge yourselues into a felicity, you were
never able to imagine, or to frame in your misguided thoughts any scantling of.

But nature pulls me by the ear, and warns me from being so wrongful to
her, as to conceive, that so wise a gouernesse should to no advantage, condemn
mankind to so long a bannishment, as the ordinary extent of his dull life, and
wearisome pilgrimage here under the sun reaches unto. Can we imagine, she
would allow him so much laysie time, to effect nothing in? Or can we suspect,
that she intended him no further advantage, then what an abortiue child
arriueth unto in his mothers womb? For whatsoever the nets and toils of
discourse can circle in; all that he, who but once knows that himself is,
can attain unto as fully, as he that is enriched with the science of all
things in the world. For, the connection of things, is so linked together, that
proceeding from any one, you reach the knowledge of many; and from many, you
cannot fail of attaining unto all: so that a separated soul, which does but
know herself, can not choose but know her body too; and from her body, she
cannot miss in proceeding from the causes of them both, as far as immediate
causes do proceed from others over them: and as little can she be ignorant, of
all the effects of those causes she reaches unto. And thus, all that huge
mass of knowledge, and happiness, which we have considered in our last
reflection, amounts to no more, then the seeliest soul buried in warm blood,
can and will infallibly attain unto, when its time comes. We may then assure
our selves, that just nature has provided and designed a greater measure of
such felicity for longer livers: and so much greater, as may well be worth the
pains and hazards, of so miserable and tedious a passage, as here (my soul)
thou strugglest through. For certainly, if the dull percussion, which by
natures institution, hammereth out a spiritual soul from gross flesh and
blood, can atcheiue so wondrous an effect, by such blunt instruments, as are
used in the contriuing of a man: how can it be imagined, but that fifty or a
hundred years beating upon far more subtle elements, refined in so long a
time, as a child is becoming a man, and arriving to his perfect discourse, must
necessarily forge out in such a soul, a strange and admirable excellency,
above the vnlicked form of an abortiue embryon? Surely, those innumerable
strokes (every one of which makes a strong impression in the soul, upon whom
they beat) cannot choose but work a mighty difference, in the subject that
receives them, changing it strangely from the condition it was in, before they
begun to new mould it. What if I should say, the odds between two such
souls, may peradventure be not unlike the difference, between the wits and
judgments of the subtilest Philosopher that ever was, and of the dullest child
or idiote living. But this comparison falls too short by far: even so much,
that there is no resemblance or proportion between the things compared: for
as the excess of great numbers over one an other, drowneth the excess of
small ones, and makes it not considerable, in respect of theirs, although they
should be in the same proportion; so the advantages of a soul, forged to its
highest perfection in a man's body, by its long abode there, and by its making
right use of that precious time allowed it; must needs, (in positive value,
though not in geometrical proportion) infinitely exceed, when it shall be
delivered out of prison, the advantages, which the newly hatched soul of an
abortiue infant shall acquire, at the breaking of its chains. In this case, I
believe no man would be of Cesars mind; when he wished to be rather the first
man in a contemptible poor village, he passed through among the desert
mountains, then the second man in Rome. Let us suppose, the wealth of the
richest man in that barren habitation, to be one hundred Crowns; and that the
next to him in substance, had but half as much as he: in like manner, in that
opulent city, the head of the world, where millions were as familiar as pence
in other places, let the excess of the richest man's wealth, be but (as in the
former) double over his, that comes next unto him; and there you shall find,
that if the poorest of the two, be worth fifty millions, the other has fifty
millions more then he: whereas the formers petty treasure, exceeds his
neighbors but by fifty crowns. What proportion is there, in the common
estimation of affairs, between that triuiall sum, and fifty millions? Much
less is there, between the excellency of a separated soul, first perfected
in its body, and an other that is set loose into complete liberty, before its
body arrived in a natural course, to be delivered into this world, and by its
eyes to enjoy the light of it. The change of every soul at its separation
from the body, to a degree of perfection, above what it enjoyed in the body, is
in a manner infinite: and by a like infinite proportion, every degree of
perfection it had in the body, is also then multiplied: what a vast product
then of infinity, must necessarily be raised, by this multiplying instant of
the souls attaining liberty, in a well molded soul; infinitely beyond that
perfection, which the soul of an infant dying before it be borne, arriueth
unto? And yet we have determined that to be a in manner infinite. Here our
skill of Arithmetike and proportions fails us. Here we find infinite
excess, over what we also know to be infinite. How this can be, the feeble
eyes of our limited understanding, are too dull to penetrate into: but that it
is so, we are sure: the rigor of discourse, conuinceth and necessarily
concludes it. That assures us, that since every impression upon the soul,
whiles it is in its body, makes a change in it; were there no others made, but
merely the iterating of those acts, which brought it from ignorance to
knowledge; that soul, upon which a hundred of those acts had wrought, must
have a hundred degrees of advantage over an other, upon which only one had
beaten; though by that one, it had acquired perfect knowledge of that thing:
and then in the separation, these hundred degrees, being each of them
infinitely multiplied, how infinitely must such a soul exceed in that
particular, (though we know not how) the knowledge of the other soul; which
though it be perfect in its kind, yet had but one act to forge it out? When we
arrive to understand the difference of knowledge, between the superior and
inferior ranks of intelligences; among whom, the lowest knows as much as
the highest; and yet the knowledge of the highest, is infinitely more perfect
and admirable, then the knowledge of his inferiors: then, and not before, we
shall thoroughly comprehend this mystery. In the mean time, it is enough for
us, that we are sure, that thus it faireth with souls: and that by how much
the excellency and perfection of an all knowing and all comprehending soul,
delivered out of the body of a wretched embryon, is above the vileness of that
heavy lump of flesh, it lately quitted in his mothers womb; even by so m^^h,
and according to the same proportion, must the excellency of a complete soul
(completed in its body) be in a pitch above the adorable majesty, wisdom, and
augustnesse, of the greatest and most admired oracle in the world, living
embodyed in flesh and blood. Which as it is in a height, and eminency over such
an excellent and admirable man, infinitely beyond the excess of such a man,
over that seely lump of flesh, which composeth the most contemptible idiote or
embryon; so likewise, is the excess of it, over the soul of an abortiue
embryon, (though by the separation, grown never so knowing, and never so
perfect) infinitely greater, then the dignity and wisdom of such a man, is
above the feebleness and misery of an new animated child. Therefore have
patience my soul: repine not at thy longer stay here in this vale of misery,
where thou art banished from those unspeakable joys thou see at hand before
thee; from which nothing but the frail walls of rotten flesh seuereth thee.
Thou shalst have an ouerflowing reward for thy enduring and patienting in this
thy darkesome prison. Deprive not thy self through mischievous have, of the
great hopes and admirable felicity that attend thee, can thou but with due
temper stay for it. Be content to let thy stock lie out awhile at interest;
thy profits will come in vast proportions; and every year, every day, every
hour, will pay thee interest upon interest: and the longer it runs on, the
more it multiplyeth: and in the account thou shalst find, if thou proceedest as
thou should, that one moment oftentimes brings in a greater increase unto
thy stock of treasure, then the many years thou did live and trade before:
and the longer thou live, the thicker will these moments arrive unto thee. In
like manner as in Arithmetical numeration, every addition of the least figure,
multiplyeth the whole sum it finds. Here thou wilst prove how true that
rich man said, who of his gains pronounced, that he had gotten little with
great labor, and great sums with little: so if thou bestowest well thy time,
thy latter sums will bring thee in huge accountes of gain, upon small
expense of pains or employments; whereas thy first beginnings are toylesome
and full of pain, and bring in but slender profitt.)

By this time, my soul, I am sure thou art satisfied, that the excess of
knowledge and of pleasure, which in the next life thou shall enjoy, is vastly
beyond any thou art capable of here. But how may we estimate the just
proportion they have to one on other? Or rather is not the pleasure of a
separated soul, so infinitely beyond all that can be relished by one embodied
here in clay, that there is no proportion between them? At the least, though
we are not able to measure the one, let us do our best to aim and guess at
the improportion between them; and rejoice when we find that it is beyond our
reach to conceive or imagine any thing, nigh the truth and the huge excess of
thy good (my soul) over the most I am capable of in this world. It is agreed,
that the vehemence and intensenesse of ^hy pleasure, is proportionable to the
actiuity, power, and energy of the subject, which is affected with such
pleasure; and to the grauitation, bent, and greatness, that such a subject
has to the object that delights it. Now to roue at the force and actiuity,
wherewith a separated soul weighs and strives to join it self, to what
its nature carries it unto; let us begin with considering the proportions
of celerity and forciblenesse, wherewith heavy bodies move downwards. I see a
pound weight in one scale of the balance, weighs up the other empty one with
great celerity. But if in to that you imagine a million of pounds to be put,
you may well conceive, that this great excess, would carry up the single pound
weight with so much violence and speed, as would hardly afford your eye
liberty to observe the velocity of the motion. Let me multiply this million of
pounds, by the whole globe of the earth; by the vast extent of the great orb,
made by the suns, or earthes motion about the center of the world; by the
incomprehensibility of that immense storehouse of matter and of bodies, which
is designed in lump by the name of the Universe; of which we know no more, but
that it is beyond all hope of being known, during this mortal life. Thus when
I have heaped together a bulk of weight, equal to this unwieldy machine; let
me multiply the strength of its velocity, and pressure over the least atome
imaginable in nature, as far beyond the limits of gravity, as the ingenious
skill, wherewith Archimedes numbered the least grains of sand that would fill
the world, can carry it: and when I have thus wearied my self, and exhausted
the power of Arithmetike, and of Algebra, I find there is still a proportion
between that atome and this unutterable weight: I see it is all quantitatiue;
it is all finite; and all this excess vannisheth to nothing, and becomes
invisible (like twinkling stars, at the rising of the much brighter sun) as
soon as the lowest and the meanest substance shines out of that orb, where
they reside that scorn diuisibilility, and are out of the reach of quantity
and matter. How vehement then must the actiuity and energy be, wherewith so
puissant a substance shoots it self to its desired object? and when it
enjoys it, how violent must the ecstasy and transport be, wherewith it is
delighted? How is it possible then for my narrow heart, to frame an apprehension
of the infinite excess of thy pleasure (my soul) over all the pleasure this
limited world can afford, which is all measured by such petty proportions? How
should I stamp a figure of thy immense greatness, into my material
imagination? Here I loose my power of speaking, because I have too much to
speak of: I must become silent and dumb, because all the words and language I
can use, express not the thousandeth, nor the millioneth part, of what I
evidently see to be treu. All I can say is, that whatsoever I think or
imagine, it is not that: and that it is not like any of those things; unto some
of which unless it be like, it is impossible for me to make any proportion or
similitude unto it. What then shall I do, but lay my self down in mine own
shadow, and there rejoice that thou art a light so great, as I am not able to
endure the dazeling splendor of thy rays: that thy pleasure is so excessive,
as no part of it can enter into my circumscribed heart, without dilating it so
wide, that it must break in sunder: and that thy happiness is so infinite, as
the highest pitch I can hope for to glutt my self withal, during this dark
night of my tedious pilgrimage here on earth, is to see evidently, that it is
impossible for me in this life, to frame any scantling of it; much less, to
know how great it is. Shall I then once again presume to break out into
impatience, at my delay of so great bliss, and cry out, that I am content
with the meanest share of this exuberant felicity? I care not for the
exaggerations which a longer life may heap up unto it. I am sure here is
sufficient to swell my heart beyond it self, to satisfy my thirsty soul, to
dissolve and melt all my powers* and to transform me totally into a
selfeblessed creature. Away, away all tedious hopes, not only of this life, but
even of all increase in the next. I will leap bouldly into that fountain of
bliss, and cast my self headlong into that sea of felicity; where I can
neither apprehend shallow waters, nor fear I shall be so little immersed and
drowned, as to meet with any shelfe or dry ground, to moderate and stinte my
happiness. A self actiuity, and unbounded extent, and essence free from time
and place, assure me sufficiently, that I need desire no more. Which way
soever I look, I loose my sight, in seeing an infinity round about me. Length
without points: Breadth without Lines: Depth without any surface. All content,
all pleasure, all restless rest, all an unquietness and transport of delight,
all an ecstasy of fruition.

Happy forgetfulness, how deeply am I obliged to thee, for making room for
this soul rauishing contemplation, by removing this whiles all other images of
things far from me? I would to God thou might endure, whiles I endure;
that so I might be drowned in this present thought, and never wake again, but
into the enjoying, and accompletion of my present enflamed desires. But alas,
that may not be. The eternal light whom my soul and I have chosen for Arbiter,
to determine unto us what is most expedient for us, will not permit it. We must
return; and that into fears and miseries: For as a good life breeds
increase of happiness, so does an evil one, heap up Iliades of woe. First
(my soul) before I venture, we should be certain, that thy parting from this
life, waft thee over to assured happiness: For thou well know, that there
are noxious actions, which deprave and infect the soul, whiles it is forging
and moulding here it its body, and tempering for its future being: and if thou
should sally hence in such a perverse disposition, unhappiness would betyde
thee instead of thy presumed bliss. I see some men so ravenous after those
pleasures, which cannot be enjoyed out of the body, that if those impotent
desires accompany their souls into eternity, I can not doubt of their enduring
an eternity of misery: I can not doubt of their being tormented with such a
dire extremity, of vnsatisfyable desire and violent grief, as were able to
tear all this world into pieces, were it converted into one heart; and to riue
in sunder, any thing less then the necessity of contradiction. How high the
bliss of a well governed soul is above all power of quantity, so extreme must
the ravenous inclemency, and vulturelike cruelty, be of such an vncompassable
desire gnawing eternally upon the soul; for the same reason holds in both:
and which way soever the grauitation and desires of a separated soul do carry
it, it is hurried on with a like impetuosity and unlimited actiuity. Let me
then cast an heedfull and wary eye, upon the actions of the generality of
mankind, from whence I may guess at the weal or woe, of their future state:
and if I find that the greatest number weighs down in the scale of misery,
have I not reason to fear least my lot should prove among theirs? For the
greatest part sweepeth along with it every particular, that has not some
particular reason to exempt it from the general law. Insteede then of a few
that wisely settle their hearts on legitimate desires, what multitudes of
wretched men do I see; some hungry after flesh and blood; others gaping after
the empty wind of honor and vanity; others breathing nothing but ambitious
thoughts; others grasping all, and groueling upon heaps of melted earth? So
that they put me all in a horror, and make me fear, least very few they be,
that are exempted from the dreadful fate of this incomprehensible misery, to
which I see, and grieve to see, the whole face of mankind desperately turned.
May it not then be my sad chance, to be one of their unhappy number? Be content
then, fond man, to live. Live yet, till thou have first secured the passage
which thou art but once to venture on. Be sure before thou throwest thy self
into it, to put thy soul into the scales: balance all thy thougths; examine
all thy inclinations; put thy self to the rest, try what dross, what pure
gold is in thy self: and what thou find wanting, be sure to supply, before
nature calls thee to thy dreadful account. It is soon done, if thou be
what thy nature dictateth thee to be. Follow but evident reason and knowledge,
and thy wantes are supplied, thy accountes are made up. The same euershining
truth, which makes thee see that two and two are four, will show thee without
any contradiction, how all these base allurements are vain and idle; and that
there is no comparison between the highest of them, and the meanest of what
thou may hope for, have thou but strength to settle thy heart by the steerage
of this most evident science; in this very moment, thou may be secure. But
the hazard is great, in missing to examine thy self truly and thoroughly. And
if thou miscarry there, thou art lost for ever. Apply therefore all thy care,
all thy industry to that. Let that be thy continual study, and thy perpetual
entertainment. Think nothing else worth the knowing, nothing else worth the
doing, but screwing up thy soul unto this hight, but directing it by this
level, by this rule. Then fear not, nor admit the least doubt of thy being
happy, when thy time shall come; and that time shall have no more power over
thee. In the mean season, spare no pains, forbear no diligence, employ all
exactness, burn in summer, freese in winter, watch by night, and labor by
day, join months to months, and entayle years upon years. Think nothing
sufficient to prevent so maine a hazard; and deem nothing long or tedious in
this life, to purchase so happy an eternity. The first discouerers of the
Indies, cast themselves among swarms of maneaters; they fought and strugled
with unknown waves; so horrid ones, that oftentimes they persuaded themselves
they climbed up mountains of waters, and straight again were precipitated
headlong down between the cloven sea, upon the foaming sand, from whence they
could not hope for a resource: hunger was their food; snakes and serpents were
their daynties; sword and fire were their daily exercise: and all this, only to
be masters of a little gold, which after a short possession was to quitt them
for ever. Our searchers after the Northern passage, have cut their way
through mountains of ice, more affrightfull and horrid, then the Symplegades.
They have imprisoned themselves in half year nights; they have chayned
themselves in perpetual stone cleaving coldes: some have been found closely
embracing one an other, to conserve as long as they were able, a little fuel
in their freesing hearts, at lenght petrifyed by the hardness of that
unmerciful winter: others have been made the prey of unhuman men, more
savage then the wildest beasts: others have been never found nor heard of, so
that surely they have proved the food of the ugly monsters of that vast ycy
sea: and these have been able and understanding men. What motives, what hopes
had these daring men? What gains could they promise themselves, to
counteruaile their desperate attempts? They aimed not so much as at the
purchase of any treasure for themselves, but ^eerely to second the desires of
those that set them on work; or to fill the mouths of others, from whence
some few crummes might fall to them. What is required at thy hands (my soul)
like this? And yet the hazard thou art to avoid, and the wealth thou art to
attain unto, incomparably ouersetteth all that they could hope for. Live then
and be glad of long and numerous years; that like ripe fruit, thou may
drop securely into that passage, which duly entered into, shall deliver thee
into an eternity of bliss, and of vnperishable happiness.

And yet (my soul) be thou not too soar aghast, with the apprehension of the
dreadful hazard thou art in. Let not a tormenting fear of the dangers that
surround thee, make thy whole life here bitter and uncomfortable to thee. Let
the serious and due consideration of them, arm thee with caution and with
wisdom, to prevent miscarriage by them. But to look upon them with horror
and affrightednesse, would freese thy spirits, and benumme thy actions, and
peradventure engulfe thee through pusillanimity in as great mischeifes, as thou
seek to avoid. It Is true, the harm which would acrue from misgouerning thy
passage out of this life, is unspeakable, is vnimaginable. But why should
thou take so deep thought of the hazard thou runnest therein, as though the
difficulty of avoiding it were so extreme, as might amounte to an
impossibility. I allow, the thoughts that arm thee with wise caution to secure
thy self, cannot be too deep nor too serious; but when thou have prouidently
stored thy self with such, call thy spirits manfully about thee: and to
encourage thee to fight confidently, or rather to secure thee of victory, so
thou will not forsake thy self, turn thine eyes round about thee, and
consider how wise nature, that has prescribed an end and periode unto all her
plants, has furnished them all with due and orderly means to attain
thereunto: and though particulars sometimes miscarry in their journey (since
contingence is entayled to all created things) yet in the generality, and for
the most part, they all arrive unto the scope she leuelleth them at. Why then
should we imagine, that so judicious and far looking an Architect, whom we
see so accurate in his meaner works, should have framed this Masterpiece of
the world, to perish by the way, and never to attain unto that great end, for
which he made it; even after he is prepared and armed with all aduantagiouse
circumstances agreeable to his nature. That artificer, we know, deserves the
style of seely, who frames such tools, as fail in there performance, when
they are applied to the action for which they were intended. We see all sorts
of trees for the most part bear their fruit in the due season; which is the
end they are designed unto, and the last and highest emolument they are made to
afford us. Few beasts we see there are, but contribute to our service what we
look for at their hands. The swine affords good flesh, the sheep good
wool, the cow good milk, the sable warm and soft furre, the ox bends his
sturdy neck to the yoke, the spiritfull horse dutyfully bears the soldier,
and the sinewy mule and stronger camel convey weighty merchandise. Why then
shall even the better sort of mankind, the chief, the top, the head, of all
the works of nature, be apprehended to miscarry from his end in so vast a
proportion, as that it should be deemed in a manner impossible, even for those
few (for so they are in respect of the other numerous multitude of the worser
sort) to attain unto that felicity which is natural unto them; Thou (my
soul) art the form, and that supreme part of me, which gives being both to
me and to my body: who then can doubt, but that all the rest of me, is framed
fitting and serviceable for thee? For what reason were there, that thou
should be implanted in a soil, which can not bear thy fruit? The form of
a hog, I see, is engrafted in a body fit and appropriated for a swines
operations: the form of a horse, of a lion, of a wolf, all of them have their
organes proportioned to the mastering piece within them, their soul. And is it
credible, that only man, should have his inferior parts raised so highly in
rebellion against his soul, the greatest Mistress (beyond proportion) among
all forms, as that it shall be impossible for her to suppress their mutinies,
though she guide her self never so exactly by the prescripts of that rule,
which is borne with her? Can it be suspected, that his form, which is
infinitely mounted above the power of matter, should through the very necessity
and principles of its own nature, be more liable to contingency, then those
that are engulfed and drowned in it; since we know, that contingency,
defectibility, and change, are the lame children of gross and misshapen
matter?)

Alas it is too true, that nature is in us unhappily wrested from her original
and due course. We find by sad experience, that although her deprauation be not
so total, as to blind entirely the eye of Reason she sees by, yet it is so
great, as to carry vehemently our affections quite cross to what she proposes
us as best. Howsoever, let the incentiues of flesh and blood be never so
violent, to tumble humane nature down the hill, yet if a contrary force, more
efficacious then they with all their turbulent and misty steames, do impell it
an otherway, it must needs obey that stronger power. Let us then examine
whose motives, the souls, or the senses, in their own nature, work most
efficaciously in man. We are sure, that what pleasure he receives, he
receives by means of his soul; even all corporeal pleasure: for, be the
working object never so agreeable and pleasing unto him, he reapeth thence
small delight, if in the mean time, his souls attention be carried an other
way from it. Certainly then, those things must affect the soul most
powerfully, which are connaturall unto her, and which she seiseth upon and
relisheth immediately; rather then those impure ones, which come sofisticated
to her, through the muddy channels of the senses. And accordingly, all
experience teaches us, that her pleasures, when they are fully sauored, are
much stronger then the pleasures of our sense. Observe but the different
comportements of an ambitious, and of a sensual man: and you will evidently
perceive far stronger motions, and more vehement strains in the former, who
has his desires bent to the satisfaction of his mind; then in the other, who
aims but at the pleasures of his body. Let us look upon the common face of
mankind; and we shall see the most illustrious and noble part, taken with
learning, with power, with honor; and the other part, which makes sense their
idol, moves in a lower and baser orb under the others; and is in a servile
degree to them. Since then humane nature is of it self more inclined to the
contentments of the active mind, then of the dull sense; who can doubt but that
the way of those pure contentments, must be far sweeter then the gross and
troubled streams of sensual pleasures: which if it be, certainly man in his
own nature, is more apt to follow that: and when he chances to wander out of
that smooth and easy road, his steps are painful and wearisome ones: and
if he do not presently perceive them such, it is, because it fares with him,
as with those that walk in their sleep, and stray into rough and stony
passages, or among thistles and briars; whiles peradventure some illuding
dream bewitcheth their fansyes, and persuades them they are in some pleasant
garden; till waking (if at least they wake before they fall into a deadly
precipice) they find their feet all gored, and their bodies all scratched and
torn. If any sensual man should doubt of this great truth, and find it hard
to persuade himself, that intellectual pleasures (which to his depraved
taste, seem cold and flatt ones) should be more active and intense, then those
feculent ones, which so violently transporte him; let him but exercise
himself a while in those entertainements which delight the mind, taking leave,
during that space, of those unruly ones, which agitate the body; and continue
doing thus, till by long practice, he has made them easy and habituated
himself unto them: and I will engage my word, that he will find this change so
aduantageous to him, even in contentment and delight, that he will not easily
be brought back to his former course of life. Experience shows us, that
whatsoever is long customary to us, turns into our nature; so much, that even
diseases and poisons by diuturne use, do mould and temper to themselves those
bodies, which are habituated to them; in such sort, that those pestes of nature
must be kept on foot, and fed upon for our subsistence. How much more then
must the most connaturall exercise of mental pleasure, turn so substantially
into our being, that after some good practice in it, we shall not be able, with
out great struggling and reluctation, to live without it?

The violence of fruition in those foul puddles of flesh and blood, presently
glutteth with satiety, and is attended with annoy and with dislike: and the
often using and repeating it, wears away that edge of pleasure, which only
makes it sweet and valuable, even to them that set their hearts upon it; and
nothing heighteneth it, but an irritation by a convenient hunger and
abstinence. Contrariwise, in the soul, the greater and more violent the
pleasure is, the more intense and vehement the fruition is* and the oftener it
is repeated, so much the greater appetite and desire we have, to return unto
the same; and nothing provoke us more, then the entire and absolute fruition
of it. If a sudden change from one extreme of flesh and blood, to the other
opposite pole of spiritual delights and entertainements, seem harsh to him,
whose thoughts by long assuefaction, are glewed to corporeal objects; let him
begin with gently brideling in his inferior motions under a fair rule of
government: If he can not presently suppress and totally mortify their
clamorous desires, let him at the least moderate and steer them according to
the bent of reason. (If we will but follow this course which nature teaches
us, to heighten even our sensual delights and pleasures, by reasonable
moderation of them to their own advantage; we shall find her so kind a mother
to us, that of her self she will at length quelle and disincomber us of all
our enemies. If we but temperately attend her work, she will quietly waft us
over to our desired end, to our beloved happiness. In a few years, by boiling
away our unruly heat, she will abate, and in the end quite wear away the
sense of those transporting pleasures, we used to take so much delight in the
fruition of. With in a while, rheumes will so clogge our tongue and palates,
that we shall but flatly relish the most poi^^ant meats. Our dulled ears will
no longer devour with delight, the rauishing sound of sweet harmonies. Our
dim eyes will carry to our heavy fancy but confused news of any beautiful
and pleasing objects. Our stopped nosethriles will afford no passage for
spiritefull perfumes, to warm and recreate our moist and drowsy brain. In a
word, nature will ere long, warn us to take a long farewell of all those
contentments and delights, which require a strong, vigorous, and athletike
habit of body to enjoy. She will show us, by setting our graves before our
eyes, how vain this glittering fancy of honor is: how unprofitable the
staff of power to underprop our falling being: how more burdensome then
helpefull are those massy heaps of gold and silver, which when we have, the
greatest use we make of them, is but to look upon them, and court them with
our dazeled eyes; whiles they encompasse us with armies of traitors and of
hungry wolves, to tear them from us, and us in pieces for their sake. Thus
will nature of her self in a short time, dull those weapons that offend us,
and destroy the enemies of those verities that shine upon us. Courage then, my
Soul, and neither fear to live, nor yet desire to dye. If thou continuest in
thy body, it is easy for thee, and sweet and contentsome, to heap up
treasures for eternity. And if thou partest from it, thy hopes are great and
fair, that the journey thou art going, is to a world of unknown felicity.
Take heart then, and march on with a secure diligence, and expect the hand of
bounteous nature, to dispose of thee, according as she has wisely and
benignely provided for thee. And fear not but that if thou have kept a
reasonable amity with her, she will pass thee to where thou shallest never
more be in danger of iarring with her; nor of feeling within thy self the
unkind blows of contrary powers fighting in thee, whiles thou bleedest with
the wounds that each side gives; nor of changing thy once gained happiness
into a contrary condition, according to the vicissitudes of all humane
affairs. But shallest For ever, be swelled to the utmost extent of thy
infinite nature, with this torrent, with this abisse of joy, pleasure, and
delight.

But here (my Soul) well may thou stand amazed at this great word Forever.
What will this be, when fleeting time shall be converted into permanent
eternity? Sharpen thy sight to look into this vast profundity. Suppose that
half an hour, were resumed into one instant or indivisible of time: what a
strange kind of durance would that be? I see that half an hour, is diuisible
without end, into halfes, and halfes of halfes, and quarters of quarters; and
after my riades of divisions, no parcel is so little, but that it has an
infinite superproportion to an indivisible instant. What a prodigious thing
then must it be, to have an instant equalize half an hour? Were it but some
ordinary notion or quiddity, as of magnitude, of place, of actiuity, or the
like, in which this excellency of an indiuisibles equalizing a large extent,
were considered; my fantasy would offer to wrestle with it; and peradventure,
by strong abstraction, and by deep retirement into the closet of judgment, I
might hazard to frame some likeness of it. But that wherein this
multiplication is, is the noblest, the highest, and the root of all other
notions, it is Being and Existence it self. I my self, whiles I am, have my
existence determined but to one poor instant of time; and beyond that, I am
assured of nothing. My slender thridde of Being may break a sunder, as near
to that instant, as I can suppose any thing to be near unto it: and when I
shall have supposed, Here it may break, I still find that it may break nearer
and nearer; and that I can never arrive to settle the nearest point where it
may snapp in two. But when time shall be no more; or at the least, shall in
respect of me, be turned into Eternity; then this frail Existence of mine,
will be stretched, out beyond the extent of all conquering time. What strange
thing then, is this admirable multiplication of existence? or how may I be able
to comprehend it? Existence is that which comprehends all things: and if God
be not comprehended in it, thereby it is, that he is incomprehensible of us:
and he is not comprehended in it, because himself is it. He is Existence: and
by being so, he equaleth, not comprehends it. From hence then I may gather
the excellency and wast empire of existence, in its own nature: and so
conclude how admirable a change and betterment that must be, which increases,
and multiplyeth so infinitely the existence I now enjoy: for be it never so
specious; be it never so glorious; be it what it is, existence, the top, the
flower, the perfection of all created things; still there is a flaw, there is
a defect, a shortenesse, a limitation in it: for now, my soul, thou art but a
part of me; and do exist in such a manner by succession, that the security
and possession of it, is of less then of any thing whatsoever in the world;
for it is of nothing more, then of an indivisible; which being such, in truth
is nothing. But when the walls shall be broken down, that here confine thee
to such a nothing of existence, (which yet is infinitely more noble, then all
other degrees of notions) then thou shallest sum up time in formal being,
and not be limited, as now thou art, to this so divided a succession. Thou
shallest be an hour without diuisibility: and if an hour, a year: if so, an
age: and if an age, then for ever, for all eternity.

But whither art thou flowne, my soul? to what a dazeling height art thou
mounted? Thou art now soared to such a lessening pitch, as my faint eyes are no
longer able to follow thy touring flight: my head grows giddy, with gazing
up; whiles thou look down, to see time run an infinite distance beneath
thee; wafting the existences of all corporeal things from nothing to nothing,
in a perpetual stream: and thou secure, and out of the reach of its venomous
and all destroying truth. Let me call to mind, all the violent pleasures of
my heady youth: let me sum up their extent according to those deceatfull
measures I then rated happiness by: let me in my fancy chew over again the
excessive good, I then fondly imagined in them: and to all this, let me add
as much more joy and felicity, as in my weak thoughts, I am able to faddome or
but aim at: and then let me say (and with rigorous truth I shall say it) all
this excess of bliss, will be resumed, will be enjoyed to the full, in one
indivisible moment: let me think with my self, if then, when pleasure was
the Idol I sacrificed all my thoughts unto, I might in one quarter of an hour
have enjoyed a pleasure, or at the least, have hoped for one, that should have
equalized at once all those, that in my life I ever tasted: what would not I
have been content to give in purchase of that single quarter of an hour? And
instead of this pleasant dream, I now see that one real moment, will truly
and solidely give to thee and me, the quintessence, the Elixir of content and
happiness; not drawn out of such 40 years, as I have struggled through the
world in various fortunes; but out of ages and ages of pleasure, greater far
then can be conceived by a heart of flesh; and multiplied beyond the Arithmetike
of intelligences. And this happy moment, shall not be of their soddaine
fleeting and expiring nature, that are assigned to time; but shall endure
beyond the extent of that time, which surpasses all multiplication. I see
plainly that I must multiply eternity by eternity, to frame a scantling of
that bliss, which a well passed life in this world, shall bring me to in the
next. And yet it will be as far short, and as much beneath the
selfeblessednesse of him that gives one this, as nothing is short of all that
is. For my bliss shall have a beginning; and though it never shall have end,
yet that belongs not to it for its own sake, but proceeds merely from the
bounteous hand of the nothing annihilating self essence: from whom there is no
more fear of the failing of his liberal supereffluence of Being upon me, then
there is of his own deficiency from being self Being. But how can these
things stand together? That indiuisibly I shall possess a tenure beyond all
possible time? and nevertheless possibly, not withstanding my possession, I
may be bereft of what I enjoy? who can read this riddle? who can diue into
this abisse? who can shoot light into this infinite pit of darkness? It is
the abundance and excess of light that here strikes us blind. Who can
strengthen our eyes to endure eaglewise this glorious and resplendent sun?
Nothing surely in this world; unless it be silence and solitude. To these
therefore let us consecrate the reverend contemplation of this awefull
mystery: which is but profaned, if it be exposed to vulgar eyes; and to such
nightowles and battes as we are, whiles the troubled fantasies of reeking sense
and wordly occupations, do ouercloud our mysty thoughts.

Now then if nature by short and thick steps at the beginning, and by
larger paces in the progress, has delivered us over into a night of pure
light, where we can see nothing, because every thing is too visible; so that we
are feign to veyle our eyes, and are constrained to retire ourselves to
medicate and arm them, before we expose them to so strong and glorious beams:
how should we dare to look upon those admirable heights (infinitely surpassing
all these) with which the ouerconquering Grace has crowned and swelled up the
extent of nature? What sight is sharp enough to penetrate into the mysterious
essence, sprouting into different persons? Who can look upon the self
multiplied unity, upon the incomprehensible circumincession, upon those
wondrous processions, and idiomes reserved for Angels eyes?

Of these, (my soul) whose shootinges reach infinitely higher beyond all that
we have said, then what we have said is beyond the dull and muddy motions of
this life; thou art not capable now of receiving any instructions: let first
the mystagogicall illuminations of the great Areopagite; and the Ascetike
discipline of the Anachoreticall inhabitants of the wilderness, purify thy
eye, before thou attemptest to speak, or to aim at the discovery of these
abisming depths. By them thou must be first irrigated with the sweet shoures
of morninges and eueninges, with the gentle deawes, and mannadroppes, which
fall abundantly from those bounteous favors that reside in a higher sphere
then nature; and that pour out, unknown and inconceivable blessings upon
prepared hearts: which fructify into that true bliss, in comparison where of,
all that we have hitherto declared, is but shadow, vanity, and nothing.

FINIS.
PRIVILEGE DV ROY.
LOVYS PAR LA GRACE DE DIEV ROY DE FRANCE ET DE NAVARRE, A nos amez and feaux
les gens tenans nos Course de Parlemens, Baillifs, Seneschaux, Preuosts, leurs
Lieutenans, and tous autres nos Iusticiers and Officiers qu'il appartiendra,
Salut, Le Sieur Kenelme Digby Cheualier Anglois, nous a fait remonstrer qu'il a
compose un Liver en langue Angloise, contenant deux Traitez, l'vn de la nature
du corpse, and l'autre de la nature des ames, auec vne recherche de
l'immortalite de celles qui sont raisonnables. Lequel il desireroit mettre en
lumiere and fair imprimer, s'il auoit nos lettres a ce necessaires: lesquelles
nous faisant supplier luy vouloir octroyer. A ces causes luy auons permis and
accord, permettons and accordons par ces presents fair imprimer and debiter
ledit Liver pendant six ans. Durant lesquels nous faisons deffenses a tous
Libraires and Imprimeurs de nostredit Royaume, de l'imprimer vendre, ny
debiter, soit sous quelque marque de deguisement ou traduction que ce soit,
sans le consentement dudit sieur Digby, a peine de trois mill livers d'amende,
confiscation des exemplaires qui s'en trouueront, and de tous despens dommages
and interests enuers luy. Si vous mandons and a chacun de vous enioignons tenir
la main a l'execution des presents, lesquelles voulons estre tenues pour
deuement signifiees, en mettant copy d'icelles au commencement ou a la fin de
chacun desdits Livers. A la charge de mettre par ledit sieur Digby vne
exemplaire dudit Liver en nostre Biblioteque, and vne autre en celle de nostre
tres-cher and feal Chancelier, a peine de nullite desdites presents. Car tell
est nostre plaisir, nonobstant oppositions ou appellations quelconques, clameur
de Haro, chartre Normande, and lettres a ce contraires. Done a Fontainebleau
le vingt-sixiesme iour de Septembre, l'an de grace mil six cens quarantequatre,
and de nostre Regne le deuxiesme.

Par le Roy en son Conseil, GVITONNEAV.


