A DIALOGUE Between Two Members of the New and Old EAST INDIA Companies.
Old. Memb. SIR, We are now in a fair way to be upon equal Terms with You, if
our Bill of Incoporation passes, which I make no doubt of


New. Sir, if that Bill should pass, I must allow you will have an Act of
Parliament upon much easier Terms than we had. But, Sir, I do make a doubt upon
that which you seem to be so positive in, and my Reason is from the Justice,
and the Nature of the thing it self.


Old. Why, Sir, is there not as much Reason and Justice we should be
Established by Parliament as you could pretend to?


New. Really, Sir, I think not, for you may remember the occasion; 'Twas the
continual Complaints of the Irregularities and Abuses by your Company which was
the sole Reason for Erecting a New one; Instance, how the Kingdom in general
was offended with your Management, and thought it highly reasonable to give you
early Notice of your being dissolved. 'Twas this, Sir, that drove the Nation
under the necessity of settling the Trade in other hands. Besides, Sir, 'twas
not so fair a Practice in you (when the Government proposed to Raise Two
Millions upon the Establishment of that Trade) to make Offers to advance the
whole Sum, and when it came to the Pinch Nothing to be done: But on the
contrary you see the Members of the New Company was so far from hesitating, or
trifling with the King's Business (when we were under such Straights and
Difficulties) that as one Man they all Embarked in the Interest of the
Government, and completed the whole without any Obstruction. Do you make, Sir,
no Difference between the New and the Old? And pray, Sir, let me enlarge a
little farther, by asking you one Question more. Suppose that you had Advanced
the Two Millions for the Service of the Government, and thereby had been
confirmed by Parliament, should you not have thought your Selves secured from
the danger of any other Act, to Erect a New Company in a Year or two afterward
to Trade to the same Place, with very near the same Privileges? Answer me
fairly.


Old. To speak the Truth, I should have thought our selves very secure.


New. Then where is the Justice in your Endeavors to Obtain an Act in Prejudice
of others, which you would have construed to be very hard, if in the same Case
it had been done to your Selves?


Old. But, Sir, Ours is an Extraordinary Case, and if you will but consider the
whole, that is to say, The many Losses we have sustained by Sea of late Years;
the Taxes we have paid during the War, and the Discouragement we have been
under for some time, I am of Opinion you will not think it unreasonable for us
to have an Act of Establishment as well as you.


New. Sir, I must confess that you have met with great Losses, and been under
great Difficulties and Disappointments, these are Motives to some sort of
Compassion; but excuse me, Sir, if I think you are not altogether Meritorious
of such a Recompense as you seem to aim at: And further, pray give me leave to
set the Hare's head against the Goose Gibblets; Sir, as you have had great
Losses, so you must have had Extravagant Profits, or you could never have made
such large Dividends, nor have been Masters of so great Estates.


Old. Well, Well, for all this I doubt not but the Bill will pass.


New. Sir, As I said before, I do doubt it, and upon good grounds too, Please
to Observe my Reasons: In the first place, by these means we shall greatly
Lessen the Credit of the Nation; for, by the same Rule that this Act passes, we
may reasonably expect to have another Company set up in a Year or two's time;
so consequently no dependence to build a Trade upon any thing. The People will
grow weary, and not pleased with what they have trusted; give Credit to
Nothing; the Government will be brought into such a Condition, that when ever
they are in want of Money, they must Infallibly meet with Disappointments. Sir,
the Credit of the Nation must be kept Sacred; or else it can be of no Force;
besides, Sir, Pray what has the New Company done to fall under any
discouragement; when they advanced their Money, no doubt but they relied upon
the Sanction of their Act Parliament, and till such time as they become
Criminals to the State, or a Grievance to the People, or prove distructive to
the Trade of England in General, I think they have all the Reason in Honor for
the Nation, and in Justice for themselves, to expect their Rights to be
preserved, and not in the least to be Infringed upon. A Man might make a Reply
how long it is since your Company made Restitutions for your past Crimes; or
what is it that you have done lately to represent yourselves wor^hy of such a
Boon from the Government, even to the prejudice of it self. Methinks the Cause
bespeaks it self: But, however, I have another Reason to differ in Opinion from
you, that is, that Two Companies are inconsistent, and will ever be Clashing
one against another; tend very much to the keeping up Heats and Differences
amongst us, certainly prove the Ruin of Both in the end, and the Trade in a
little time, will be Irrecoveraly lost. Therefore I am contrary to you, as to
the passing your Bill.


Old. So, upon the whole Matter, you think we shall make nothing of our Bill.


New. Not so neither, I am of Opinion that it will produce a good Issue between
both Companies; in order thereto I am persuaded that the Members of the New
Company, in respect of the Good and Quiet of the Nation, will condescend so far
(though much to their Disadvantage, and greatly against their Inclination to Mix
with your Members) as to make such Proposals for an Accommodation, that if your
Company can come up to them in fairness, this Division will center in a Union.


Old. No, No, that will never do, for this is a Work of Time, and requires
abundance of Thought; besides, the New Company will never yield to the Demands
we shall make for our Dead Stock. But pray since you Talk of a Union, which way
can you propose it?


New. Why, Sir, thus, Supposing the New Company is so generous as to let your
old Members into One Million, with what they have already, which is one Half of
their Stock and Trade, and submit your Forts and Castles to be valued by the
Lords and Commons. This is an Expedient to make an United Stock. And as
considering no Body knows the State of your Effects so well as your Selves; or
at least are not inclinable to believe them so Valuable as you would have them
accounted, you must e'ne make the most of them as fast as you can, and divide
your Profits amongst your Selves, then you are sure not to he wronged by
others. By these means the Differences between both may be adjusted. The Two
Companies may be made into One in 14 Days, as well as 14 Years. But how long
you will be in getting in your Effects, and paying your Debts, is a Time I
cannot at present fix: Neither can I tell what the Dividend will be when the
Account is Balanced. But however I think my self obliged to say one Word by
way of Advice to you, and the rest of the Adventurers in the way of taking
leave: Be led no longer by the Nose. Don't suffer your Selves to be buffetted
from Post to Pillar, by Pinning your Faith upon such that propose no more than
to find a way out for themselves, like Rats that quit the House before it
falls. In a word, have a Care (according the Proverb) that you are not left
with a Dog to hold.


Old. I protest, you have spoke so much that I Am confounded, I Am afraid there is
too much Truth in what you have said, and for my own part I Will stand it no
longer, I Will go directly to the Coffee-house this Minute, and dispose of my
whole Parcel, that I may sleep quietly, and be Excused in my attendance at
Westminster on Friday, So farewell for One Hour or Two, I Will give you an Account
what I have done when I return.


New. Well, fare you well, God send you a good Deliverance.


Old. Well, Brother New Company Man, I Have done the Business, I Have sold all, and
thank you for your Advice, and to morrow I Will lay it out every bit in New-Stock,
for in Truth, I see no Reason for the Bill to pass.


New. Well Brother, I believe you will find your Account in it, and in less then
Eight and Forty Hours, I doubt not but to find more Converts, and so A-Diew.


LONDON, Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers.


