AN ANSWER TO A PRINTED BOOK, ENTITLED, OBSERVATIONS UPON SOME OF HIS
MAJESTY'S LATE ANSWERS and Expresses.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S Command AT OXFORD, By LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to
the University. 1642.

AN ANSWER TO A PRINTED BOOK, ENTITLED, OBSERVATIONS Upon some of His
MAJESTY'S late Answers and Expresses.
IN this discourse concerning Regal authority, it is needless to wast time in
declaring the original; since it is granted to be at least mediately from God.
Who intending the good of mankind, which was not to be obtained without
preservation of order, has therefore commanded all to be subject to the laws
of society, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake: not only whilst they
enjoy the benefit of Governors, but likewise whilst they do suffer under some
accidental abuses. The reason of which obligation may be this: we cannot reap
the constant fruits of an established policy, unless by compact we submit our
selves to some possible inconveniences.

Hence it follows, after a people has by solemn contract divested it self of
that power, which was primarily in them, they cannot upon what pretense soever,
without manifest breach of divine ordinance, and violation of public faith,
resume that authority, which they have placed in another; to the end that being
united in one, it may thence receive strength, and be enabled to protect all,
as also to prevent those fatal divisions which attend multitudes endued with
equal power, where almost every one upon real or fancyed injuries undertakes
to right himself, and although before positive constitution this is not
absolutely unjust, yet reason informs us it is most fit by some agreement to
part with this native right in consideration of greater good, and prevention of
greater evils which will ensue, and to restrain our selves from being judges
in our own cause.

It follows moreover, though the people should conceave they might live more
happily, if the Kings prerogative were more bounded, his revenews diminished
(and it is no hard matter to persuade them to think so, to effect this, wants
not so much rhetorique, as malice, since what is taken from the King, turns to
their present profit, though they oft-times dearly pay for it, by disabling
their King to provide for their security) it were high sin to entrench upon
his rights. For hereby they loosen the very sinews of government, by receding
from that compact, which crafty men (out of their own private interests)
persuade them they might have made more advantageous.

It does no way prejudice Regal authority, that God is the author of
Aristocraticall, he may add Democraticall power also. If these were not
lawful forms of government, their execution of judgment would be sin, and
whilst they punish, they would commit murder. Yet in these kinds, we may
observe more or less perfection, according to the aptnes they bear to those
ends which States aim at, which are safety and plenty. To have riches, and not
be able to defend them, is to expose our selves as a prey; to be safe, and
poor, is to be securely miserable. Besides, if we had leisure to look back to
the Original of Governments, we might find that God was the immediate donor
of Regal power, whereas other forms refer to him, only as confirming the
peoples Act. This the Author cunningly dissembles, and therefore (treading in
the steps of Mariana and Buchanan, sworn enemies to Monarchy) he presents us
with J know not what rude multitudes, living without laws, without government,
till such time, as out of the sense of their sufferings, which evidently
proceeded from this want, they were enforced to fly to such remedies. However
this fancy might pass for current among such heathen Politicians as were
ignorant of the original of the world, and dreamed that the first men were
bred as Insects, out of the mud of the earth: whence that frequent mention in
their writings of (...), and Aborigenes; yet we, who are satisfied with the
history of the creation, cannot imagine, that Anarchy was before a regulated
Government, and that God who had digested one Chaos into order, should leave
the most noble creatures in a worse confusion: unless we will deny to Adam,
either that power or providence, which is natural and ordinary in a father
over his children; and granted by this observer, page 18. to be more then the
King can challenge over his people. We find in this infancy of the world, upon
the multiplying of mankind, Colonies were sent out, and a City was built by
Cain. Those long lived Patriarchs had this advantage, by begetting a numerous
posterity, they might people a Nation out of their own loins, and be saluted
Patres patriae without a metaphor; the same being their subjects and their
children. In relation to this, it was properly said by the Ancients, a Kingdom
was but a larger family; Aristotle tells us, a Regal power belonged to the
Paterfamilias, and accordingly Homer I. 1. pol. c. 8. Odyss^^
(...). So that it was then no more possible in right for such a people to
choose their rulers, then to choose their Fathers. Thus Regal power sprang
first from Paternall, and Trogus made a truer observation then this author,
when he said, Principio rerum (as well as gentium, nationumque) imperium penes
reges erat. And therefore may challenge more from God, and nature, then other
forms of government; and certainly it has received larger elogies from God in
Scripture, then any other can pretend to. To say nothing of the Kings of
Israel, who are confessed by the adversary to be of divine institution; very
heathen Monarchs are acknowledged by God himself to be no less. Where he
calls Nebuchadrezzar his servant. Ier. 43.10. and Cyrus his anointed. Es.
45.1. Notwithstanding this, to the end I may give the clearest satisfaction, I
have thought it fit not to take advantage from the excellency of Monarchy,
whether in regard to its antiquity (as being not much younger then man
himself) or the several commodities thereof. For the truth is, it were no
excuse for such endeavors of innovation, were it the most imperfect
government.

I shall therefore take into consideration this Authors grounds in the method
they lie, upon which he would overthrow so ancient and well founded a monarchye.

His first exception is; The King attributes the original of his Royalty to
God and the Law, making no mention of the grant, consent, or trust of man
therein.] A groundles cavil; when God is first named, under what notion can be
apprehend Law, but as an agreement of the people, deriving their power, and
committing the Kingdom to his trust? within few lines he confutes himself,
telling us, that Law which the King mentions, is not to be understood, to be
any special ordinance sent from heaven by the ministry of Angels, or
Prophets, (as amongst the Jews it sometimes was) It can be nothing else
amongst Christians but the pactions and agreements of such and such politic
corporations] if so, he might have spared this observation.

That Dominion which is usurped, and not just, yet whilst it remains dominion,
and till it be legally again divested, refers to God, as to it is author, and
donor, as much as that, which is haereditary.] Usurpation and unjust dominion
can give no right to the possessor; he that looses a kingdom by force may
recover it by the same title. So Athalia in the seventh year of her reign was
slain by the command of Iehoida, and Joash, anointed King, 2. King. 11.
and restored to his right. He must again answer him self. page 3. he tells
us, Neither can the right of conquest be pleaded to acquit Princes etc. for
mere force cannot alter the course of nature, or frustrate the tenor of law;
and if it could, there were more reason why the people might justify force to
regaine due liberty, then the Prince might to subvert the same. And it is a
shameful stupidity in any man to think, that our Ancestors did not fight more
nobly for their free customs and laws, of which the conqueror and his
successors had in part disinherited them by violence and perjury, then they
which put them to such conflicts. Is it not a clear contradiction to say that
God is the author, and Donor of Dominion usurped, and not just, as well as of
that which is haereditary? Certainly God being Lord Proprietary of all, his
donation transfers a full right to him on whom he bestows it. This deed of
gift being known, it is not lawful to endeavor a recovery. This was the
case of Rehoboam, who after the defection of ten tribes, raised an army out of
Judah, and the tribe of Benjamin, in hopes to reduce them to obedience. But he
was warned by Shemajah the man of God, not to fight against his brethren (not
because it was unlawful in it self, or the success improbable, but for that
this was from the Lord. 2. Kin. 12.
As this was not, (setting aside that extraordinary consideration) unlawful;
So neither was it, as he is pleased to term it, a ridiculous attempt, to
endeavor to reduce ten tribes by the strength of two. For he had raised an
army consisting of one hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, v. 21.
which were warriers. And it may probably be collected from the muster roll,
which Ioab brought in to David, where the men of Judah were 500000, 2. Sam.
24.9.
that those two tribes were able to furnish an army strong enough to bid all
Jsraell battle. Besides as he had lost them only by harsh language, so he
might hope to regain them, by fair promises. It may be not unworthy our
observation, what good consequences did attend the defection of these ten
tribes. Did they not presently fall away from the true God, as well as their
King, and were they not shortly after led into captivity?

This we must observe, though force be not law, yet if after conquest a people
resign their right in part or in whole, by a subsequent act of consent, they
are obliged to stand to those conditions, which they made perchance out of a
probable fear of harder usage. For the law of God generally, L. si mulier. D.
quod me t. cau.
and the civil law in this case makes the Act binding. That covenants should
not be violated, will appear by the revenge God took in behalf of the
Gibeonites. The children of Israel suffered three years famine, and after
this seven of Saul's sons were hanged to make an atonement for this breach of
promise. Notwithstanding the Gibeonites had overreached the Children of Jsraell
by craft, yet they having sworn, were bound to perform their oath unto the
Lord. Doli exceptio could not take of this obligation. That they were deceived,
gave no right to them to imitate what they condemned, and to deceive again.
Thus we see what special care God takes to preserve the faith of contracts. He
will return abundantly, what any man's honesty costs him; and therefore it is
great reason, he that swears to his neighbor, should not disappoint him,
though it be to his own hindrance.

After some general truths, he comes to this issue. The fountain and
efficient cause of power is the people, and from hence the inference is just,
the King though he be singulis major, yet he is universis minor.] This
inference most weak: the quite contrary may clearly be concluded. The people
being the efficient cause of power (which can be no other way but by deriving
their divided power, and uniting it in him) since they cannot retain what they
have parted with, nor have, what they gave away, it follows he which has all
their power (I may add his own particular besides) must needs be greater and
more powerful then they. The truth is, he is now the only fountain of all
power and justice.

But he offers us a proof; for if the people be the true efficient cause of
power, it is a rule in nature, Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale.] Strange
that men upon such palpable sophistry should endeavor to cast of Monarchy! He
will be unwilling to follow the consequence of it. He has an estate, which no
question he would willingly improve, let him bestow it upon me, he will make me
rich, and himself richer. For Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale. I believe
rather then part with his means, he will find an answer to his own argument.
By the same reason one that enters into his service, because he has made him
his master, shall conclude himself the better man, and challenge power over
him. For Quicquid ^fficit tale, est magis tale. But because to prove his
reasoning absurd, is not fully to answer, I will show the ground of this
fallacy. The axiom is true ante effectum productum, not always after. So a
spark firing a City, was once, more fire then the houses, nor so after the
whole town is become one flame: or else thus, it is true in those agents, in
whom the quality by which they operate is inherent, and from whom it cannot be
separated: not true in those who by way of donation divest themselves of power
or wealth. Because a thing can not retain a fulness, after it has emptied
it self.

Jf the King be universis minor, then the people have placed a King not over,
but under them; and they do ^ll to petition when they might command; they may
require it from the Prince their Subject.

Hence it appears that at the founding of authorities, when the consent of
societies convaies rule into such and such hands, it may ordain what
conditions, and prefix what bounds it pleases.] This is most true; and
therefore J shall easily grant, the name King to signify a person invested
with different power according to the variety of laws in several nations.
His Majesty does most freely acknowledge, and will constantly maintain what
ever rights the law does give us; yet He is not bound to betray his own. The
truth is, we should be equally miserable under either extreme, if the Kings
prerogative should swallow up the Subjects right, or the Subjects right the
Kings just prerogative.

No dissolution ought to be of rule convayed by the consent of societyes, into
such and such hands, but by the same power by which it had it is constitution.]
This J grant, being rightly understood; but because the sense may be easily
mistaken, J shall enlarge my self upon it. It is most agreeable to reason,
that the same power should by equal right, abrogate, as it did at first
constitute. For it is not possible any body should lay a necessary obligation
upon it self to do thus, when it had liberty to do otherwise, except in
relation to some other person; to whom I may part with that right I had,
without possibility of recalling it. And this either by actual donation, so
when I have given away my money, J cannot challenge it as due on my repentance;
or by promise, which is an earnest of my performance. In these cases J cannot
use my liberty, because it would be to the injury of another; according to that
rule grounded on great equity, Nemo potest mutare consilium suum in alterius
injuriam. L nemo D. de reg. jur.


In a popular state there is but one simple power, and therefore the people
upon consent may establish an Aristocracy, or Monarchy, when they please. But
in the other two, where the authority is placed in the hands of a few, or of
one, there are two parties in the contract, and therefore even the whole people
have not any power of dissolving this government, unless this one, or those
few, will voluntarily resign up their power into those hands from which they
received it; and that such resignation be not to the injury of a third party.

It were strange if the people in subjecting it self to command should aim at
any thing but it is own good in the first and last place.] No question, rule and
subjection (divided paternall powers finding it necessary to yield to one
Regal, and instead of many, to submit to one common father) did spring from
reason directing mankind to its greatest convenience. Therefore the people,
aiming chiefly at their own good, yet perceiving this was not to be attained,
except they had a common protector to administer justice equally amongst them,
they found it necessary in a higher degree to provide for his good, in
recompense of their security, and out of their particular estates, to grant to
him honorable demaines, to whose care and justice, they owed the peaceable
possession of all. So the good of either is mutually involved, and that the
people may be happy, they must first provide for the happiness of their ruler.

What follows I shall think unworthy any answer. He breaks out into a most
scandalous, and false invective against the late government. That the subject
groaned under some grievances, cannot be denied; and we owe to the goodness of
his Majesty, that we are free even from the fear of them for the future. J
speak sincerely, what I think, though the wit of malice should set before us
the most exact table of all our sufferings, (let it not impose upon us, what we
never felt) and compare us to any other nation of the Christian world, we in
our worst times were least unhappy. Because we have no reason to be in love
with any evils, I shall not endeavor to excuse them by comparison with our
present miseries. Though neither be desirable, yet we are too sensible, which
we have justest reason to complain of.

I hope under this word (protect) the King intends not only to shield us from
all kind of evil, but to promote us also, to all kind of Political
happiness, according to his utmost de voyre.] I never before did apprehend in
the word, Protect, this large notion; we may expect all happiness from His
goodness, we cannot challenge it from His duty. How should we conceave, that
the Prince is obliged by oath to take care for his people in such a degree, as
the most affectionate mother never yet took for her dearest children. If it
were so, then all his Majesty's Royal ancestors, who did not provide for their
people in such a high degree of happiness, as he by the advice of this present
Parliament has done, were perjured, as having all taken the oath to Protect.
Every particular subject has a just title, and may challenge an interest in
whatsoever is meant by the word, Protection: Is the King therefore bound to
promote every particular person to all kinds of political happiness? to
advance all to honors, offices, power, command?

Though all single persons ought to look upon the late Bills passed by the King
as matters of Grace, with all thankfulness and humility, yet the King himself
looking upon the whole state ought to acknowledge, that he cannot merit of it
etc. all has proceeded but from his mere duty. It was believed heretofore,
the greatest happiness of a Prince, that he was able, and his greatest glory,
to be willing to oblige his people. But now he is made not capable of doing any
courtesy. When he has done all that he can, he has discharged the duty of a
trusty servant. I am confident never any age was guilty of the like
irreverence, and disrespect to Princes, as is shown in this book. If all
single persons ought to look upon the late bills passed by the King, as matters
of Grace, then they truly are so; for no obligation can lay upon a man, to
believe things otherwise then they are. This ground destroys the power of
beneficence in a Prince, and the duty of gratitude in Subjects. We should think
it very hard, if we, who are but subjects, should be dealt with by the same
rule. All owe a duty to their King, to their country; yet upon extraordinary
services we believe, we deserve well of both. The example of the House of
Commons, will better instruct him, who have several times presented their
thanks, and humble acknowledgment of his Majesty's gracious favors; and have
likewise received thanks from most Counties in the Kingdom, for procuring
those bills so beneficial to the subject: and yet surely the trust reposed in
them, by those that chose them, and the end for which they met, did no less
oblige them in point of duty to do whatsoever might conduce to the general
good of the Kingdom.

The King ought not to account that a profit, or strength to him, which is a
loss and wasting to the people, nor ought he to think that perished to him,
which is gained to the people.] By the same argument the people may share all
that he has, and he is bound to believe, he has lost nothing. If King and
people have several rights, what law is there, which binds the King suo jure
cedere, and enables the people to preserve their rights, nay to challenge his?
And if they have not, but the interests of King and people be either altogether
one and the same, or so inseparably united, as they cannot be severed, then it
equally follows, the people ought not to account that a profit or strength to
them, which is a loss and wasting to the King, nor ought they to think that
perished to them, which is gained to him.

Regal dignity was erected to preserve the commonalty.] It was so; for out of
the sense of those miseries, which the want of due administration of justice
produced, routs became societies, and placed a head over them, to whom they
paid the tribute of reverence, for the benefit of Protection.

But that which is the end is far more honorable, and valuable in nature,
and policy, then that which is the means.] The conclusion implied is,
therefore the Commons more honorable then the Sovereign. J will frame some
other arguments upon the same principle, and see how he approves them. Angels
are ministering spirits for the good of men, but the end more honorable, and
valuable then the means, therefore men more honorable then Angels. Once more
in a closer parallel; Christ is made the head of the Church for the salvation of
man, but that which is the end is far more honorable, and valuable etc then
that which is the means; therefore man far more honorable and valuable then
Christ. If any should think these instances do not fully conclude, because the
highest end of Angels ministration, and the obedience of Christ, is the glory
of God, he must consider, Gods glory is the supreme end of government also. And
therefore this being common to both, cannot difference the case. Though we
grant, the good of the people is more valuable, he cannot hence infer a greater
worthiness, or more power to be in them: though the safety of patients is most
to be regarded, yet the Physician is much better qualified to effect that end.
Marriage was ordained for the lawful procreation of children, that is
honorable amongst all men, we do not read, this is so. The rule does hold in
such means, as are only valuable by that relation they bear unto their ends,
and have no proper goodness of their own. But a King is not so to his people;
if we look back unto his first extraction, when he was taken from among the
people to be set over them, we must needs behold him even then as a man of some
worth, honor and eminency, which the superaddition of Royalty did not destroy,
but increase. To be a means of his peoples preservation, is very consistent
with the height of honor. The case is not unlike in the noblest professors,
the Divine, the Lawyer, the Physician, compared to their several charges; they
the means, these the ends: shall we from thence conclude the poor client a
better man, then his learned counsel, or the simple patient, then his Doctor.

This directs as to the transcendent (...) of all politiques, to the Paramount
law that shall give law to all humane laws whatsoever, and that is Salus
populi.] How many nations has this abused principle brought to ruin and
confusion! It is unquestionable, in the constitution of all Governments, this
is the prime end, as being most agreeable with the joint interest both of
rulers and people. It is as much without doubt, that after estates established,
the governors proportion all their laws to this end; for who that is wise
will not provide for their safety, as well as he can, in whose destruction, his
own is involved. notwithstanding this, the multitude (not comprehending the
reason which made all people commit themselves, their lives, and fortunes to
the trust of their rulers, who were wiser, and therefore could better foresee
dangers, and had the greatest share in the present state, and therefore would
more carefully endeavor to prevent them) readily hearken to crafty men, who
seem to pity their sufferings, and tell them they are not so well governed as
they might be. Thus Absalon stole away the hearts of his Fathers Subjects. O
that I were made judge in the land, 2. Sam. 15.4.
that every man which has any suit or cause, might come unto me, and I would
do him justice. There is little good to be expected from those, who will do
wrong, that they may have opportunity to do right. Such men have great
advantage on weak understandings, because there is no state wherein it might
not be wished that somethings were amended, and they press upon them present
inconveniences, and frame some new form, wherein they promise them, they shall
be free from all, and therefore desire their assistance in bringing this happy
change about. The people full of great hopes cry up these men as the only fit
instruments of state, who pretend only to take care for the public, and
though they have nothing, yet would be thought, not to desire any thing. Having
thus gained the affections of the people, their next work is to pick a
quarrel with great officers (they conceave because they accuse so zealously,
it will be presumed they are innocent themselves) that by displacing them, they
may make room for themselves. If such men will not easily out of their
preferments, the people are acquainted, these are the only rubs, which stand
betwixt them and an happy government; these are the close enemies to the State
(and so much the more dangerous, because they carry their malignant designs so
secretly, they cannot find proofs against them) Salus populi is now concerned,
the whole Kingdom is in danger; no way to escape this imminent peril, but by
tearing these men from the Prince, if in a Monarchy, or putting them out of the
Senate, if in an Aristocracy. Amongst these distractions, and unsettlement of
Government, what course is to be taken? The best way I know, (but it is
difficult) is to make the people wise, and make it appear, there is no real
danger, except from their tumultuous endeavors to avoid those which are
imaginary. Let them rely upon their governors, who have most to loose:
(especially if they have given them great and late signs of their affection to
and care of them) this is the most probable way of safety; but if they should
miscarry (which they can have no reason to suspect) they will perish with a
great deal of discretion.

It seems unnatural to me, that any nation should be bound to contribute its
own inherent puissance, merely to abet Tyranny, and support slavery.] The
inconveniences of Tyranny conclude nothing against just monarchs, we are
acquainted only with those happy names of King and Subject. It is so far from
being unnatural that any nation should be bound (by which I suppose he means
consent, from which an obligation naturally follows, for it is, as with him in
the Comoedy, voluntate coactus sum mea) to contribute it is power to that end,
that some have made it their choice, others their refuge. Seneca tells us,
speaking of the state of Rome in Julius and Augustus his times, Salva esse Roma
non poterat, nisi beneficio servitutis. How is it against nature for the Turks
to be obedient to the grand Seigneur, or the French Pesant to his Prince? There
may be reasonable motives why a people should consent to slavery; as if in
danger of a potent enemy, they could hire none on gentler conditions to
undertake their defense, or if reduced to extreme want, they had not wherewith
to sustain themselves, they may very probably, like Esau, pass away their
birthright, liberty. We find an example of each case in holy Scripture. The
Egyptians parted with all their money, and cattle, and past away the right to
their lands, and became servants to Pharaoh, Genesis 47.
upon this condition that Joseph would afford them bread. Jos. 9.
And the Gibeonites bought their lives of the children of Israel with the price
of their liberty, and thought they had a cheap purchase.

From the word trust used by his Majesty, he gathers, the King does admit his
interest in the crown in part conditionate. No ground for this collection: for
there may be a trust, and that is so much the greater, if free from condition.
But the thing is true de facto in some sense, and his Majesty has always
acknowledged, He is bound to maintain the rights and liberty of the subject.
Yet we must not so understand it, as if the right to His Kingdom were so
conditionate that it were capable of forfeiture upon a not exact performance of
covenant.

As for the word elegerit, whether it be future or past, it skills not much.]
If he take notice of the conclusion deduced thence he may find as much
difference between the Tenses, as between Democracy, and Monarchy. But the
consuetudines, which cannot refer to the future, undeniably evinces, it was
meant of the time past, and the oath in english is free from all ambiguity,
rendering consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit, by rightful customs which the
commonalty of this your Kingdom have. I may add the different manner of the
Kings answer as it is set down in their Remonstrance. Where to other questions
which respect the future, the King answers in the future; in this as referring
to what is past, He answers per verba de praesenti, concedo and permitto.

The King is bound to consent to new laws, if they be necessary, as well as
defend the old.] His Majesty never thought otherwise; but He is not bound to
an implicit faith, to believe all necessary, which is pretended to be so.

The word elegerit, if it be in the preterperfecttense, yet shows, that the
peoples election had been the ground of ancient laws and customs, and why the
peoples election in Parliament should not be now of as great moment as ever J
cannot discover.] The election there spoken of is the election of the
diffusive, not of any representative body, and that with the tacit consent of
the Prince, and so of much other authority, and for the representative, their
ancient right is not denied, no law shall be abrogated, none enacted without
their assent. But there is a mean between doing nothing, and all.

The result of all is, our Kings cannot be said to have so unconditionate and
high a propriety in all the subjects lives, liberties, and possessions, or in
any thing else to the crown appertaining, as subjects have in the Kings
dignity.] The King pretends not to have any unconditionate propriety in the
subjects lives liberties, and possessions, he would only be allowd it in his
own? And what he can mean, by subjects having an unconditionate and high
propriety in the Kings dignity, surpasses my understanding. It may seem to
speak this wicked doctrine, that subjects may dispose of the Sovereignty as
they please; for this right an absolute propriety gives.

If the King had such high right as subjects, it were not lawful or natural
for him to expose his life and fortune for his country.] How is it lawful for
subjects then to do so? The people have as great, nay greater obligation of
exposing their lives for the King. This appears by the Protestation, as also
by the ancient oath of fealty at the Coronation, Je deviene vostre Liege de
vie, and de biens, etc. Sir Hen Spelman gives us a form of sacramentum
ligiantiae still in use. Tu I. S. jurabis quod ab ista die in antea, eris
sidelis and legalis (leaux) domino nostro Regi, and suis haeredibus: and
fidelitatem and legalitatem (Leaultie) ei portabis de vita and de membro, and
de terreno honor, and quod tu eorum malum aut damnum nec noveris, nec
audiveris quod non defendes (i.e. prohibebis) pro posse tuo, ita Deus te
adjuvet.

I cannot imagine any possible color for such an inference; I would sooner
make a rope of sand hang together. may not a tyrant expose his life in defense
of his slave, without breach of any law? He does but defend his own goods,
^xod 21.1.
for the Scripture calls his slave his money. His own instance confutes him,
bonus pastor ponit vitam pro ovibus suis; for it is evident, this good pastor,
was our Savior, absolute Lord of his flock.

Parliaments have the same efficient cause as Monarchies, if not higher.] What,
higher then the law of God and of the whole land? yes, for in truth the whole
Kingdom is not so properly the author as the essence itself of Parliaments.]
just as a Proctour is the essence of him for whom he appears, or an Ambassador
is essentially the King: But suppose it true; this declares the material
cause, proves no greater dignity in the efficient. But the reason is to come,
by the former rule (he had no good fortune with that before) it is magis tale,
because we see ipsum quid quod efficit tale.] what, magis tale in essences? or
can a thing be magis tale then it self? This I conceave is beyond the sense of
the house. However this confession and the rule quod efficit tale est magis
tale subjects the Parliament to the people, as well as the same rule would do
the King; and proves as well that the Parliament is vniversis minus though it
be singulis majus.

Parliaments have also the same final cause as Monarchies, if not greater.]
what, greater then salus populi, nay then to promote the Subject to all kind of
Political happiness, which he told us, was the end and duty of a King? His
reason is, public safety and liberty could not be so effectually provided for
by Monarchs till Parliaments were constituted. This proves not the end higher,
but shows they are good helps in government, which is readily granted.

Two things especially are aimed at in Parliaments, not to be attained to by
other means.] Not so easily attained indeed; but certainly many Kingdoms have
enjoyed a most high degree of civil happiness under arbitrary Monarchs, who
knew no Parliaments. Such as have abundantly satisfied [the inter est of the
people;] and in all weighty affairs [advised with the ablest counselors.] Two
other ends might have been named as essential as those; which are to supply
his Majesty's wants by subsidies, and assent to the abrogation of old laws,
and enacting new, as necessity shall require.

In the summons of Edw. 1. ( claus. 7. m. 3. dors.) we see the first end of
Parliaments expressed: for he inserts in the writ, that whatsoever affair is
of public concernement, ought to receive public approbation, Quod omnes
tangit, ab omnibus approbari debet, or tractari.] I have not the convenience of
examining this record, and therefore cannot be able to satisfy my self in
circumstances, which perhaps might afford some light to the cleerer
understanding of this rule. For the present therefore, I will allow it to be
certain law (though he would not be willing I should have the same liberty,
and argue the legality of a thing, from a Princes bare affirmation) and see
what advantage he can make of it. It seems to me to be deduced from an evident
principle of reason, and to flow hence; it is against equity, that the act of
one, should prejudice another without his consent. There is much caution
required to the managing this rule. For if it be understood in its full
latitude, without all limitation, it will dissolve the bonds of Government, by
reducing us to that primitive state, wherein every one had absolute right, to
dispole of his own as he pleased. Therefore we must take into consideration,
that multitudes finding a necessity of Government, did restrain this native
right by positive Constitutions, so that in the best governed States, the
greater part of men were presumed by a fiction of law, to handle and approve
such things as they never heard of. The ground of which fiction is very
reasonable; for the people though they are not advised with, may well be said
to consent to what their rulers do, because they have entrusted them with
their safety, which without this power convaied into such or such hands, could
not be so effectually provided for. Thus in absolute Monarchies, what Princes
do is legally the act of all: thus in our Kingdom two hundred thousand debate
and approve things by the suffrages of two; who many times vote quite contrary
to their desires who have entrusted them, and yet the people shall be said in
law to affirm, what really and in truth they do deny. The result of all is
this: those things which the law does require shall be transacted only by
Parliament, the people do handle and approve of by their Knights or Burgesses:
in those things which the Law has entrusted the King with (many of which
concern the good of the whole) what he does, is their act. Hence it may
appear, the Kings Writ by which he calls the Houses together to consult de
quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, is no ways opposite to this supposed
Law, understood with due limitations. The desire of the Commons in the Reign
of Edw. 3. seems to me fully to justify the same, which was, that they might
not advise in things de queux ils n'ont pas cognizance. The matters in debate
were of no small concernment, being no less then the settling intestine
commotions, guarding the marches of Scotland, and the Seas. But the answer is,
herein they renounce not their right of consent, they only excuse themselves in
point of counsel, referring it rather to the King and his Council. Here then
we have the judgment of the House of Commons that in affairs of some nature,
and those too very much concerning the safety of the whole Kingdom, there may
be fitter Counselors then they are. I had conceived, n' avoir pas cognizance,
had not signified to be ignorant, or not to understand things so thoroughly;
since cognizance uses to be taken in a Law-notion, and to signify a right of
handling matters judicially, or power and jurisdiction, as cognizance of Plea.
We meet with a very observable passage, and which will give us great light in
this buisines; it is to be seen in a diary (MS.) of the Parliament held, 1.
Hen. 4. Et le lundy ensuivant S. lendemayn des alms, les communes priont
qu'eux ne soyiant pas entrez en les rolls de Parliament come parties as
juggementez quex sount donez acest Parliament mes la ou ils sount in rei
veritate party et prive a cella quar lez juggementz appartient solement au Roy
fosque la ou ascun juggement est renduz sur un estatute feat par le comune
prositz de Royalme.

Le quel fuist grante.

In English thus.

And the monday following, scil: the morrow after all Soules-day, the Commons
prayed that they might not be entered upon the Roles of the Parliament, as
parties to any judgments given this Parliament, save only where in rei
veritate they are part and privy thereto. For that the judgments appertain
only to the King, except where any judgment is given upon a Statute made for
the common profit of the Kingdom.

The which was granted.

How this shall derogate from Parliaments either in point of consent, or
counsel, I do not know, for at last they did give both, and the King would
not be satisfied without them, and the passage evinces no more but this, that
that King was very wise and warlike, and had a very wise Counsel of War, so
that in those particulars the Commons thought them most fit to be consulted, as
perhaps the more knowing men.] The conclusion which more naturally follows is
this; when the King requires and will not otherwise be satisfied, they may
advise in matters not properly of their cognizance.

The conclusion by which he thinks he has gained so much, may without any
inconvenience be assented to. These words, ad tract andum, or dinandum,
saciendum, do fully prove, that the people in those days were s^mmoned ad
consensum, as well as ad consilium.] Be it so, in those things which belong to
their cognizance. The forms which are used in passing a bill confess so much:
les Communes ont assentes, and les Seignevrs out assenas.

I have not ye done with his rule, Quod omnes tangit, ah omnibus approbari
debet.] It is true the most popular state could never punctually observe it.
For some of the poorer, and some of the younger sort, and women generally, by
reason of their sex are excluded, yet all those, having lives to loose, are
concerned in the public safety. But with what equity can he then think a
considerable party of this Kingdom, can be denied the benefit of that, which
he conceives a most reasonable law? I mean the Clergy, who certainly cannot
deserve to forfeit the privilege of common men, because they are more
immediately the servants of God.

His next endeavor is to show that Parliaments have been much lessened, and
injuried of late by some passages in his Majesty's answers. But he can never
make it appear, that any part of their truly ancient power is denied to them.
The Kings words are, what the extent of their Commission, and Trust is, nothing
can better teach them, then the writ whereby they are met. We called them (and
without that call they could not have come together) to be our Counselors, not
Commanders; for however they frequently confound them, the offices are several.

The writ runs, super dictis negotijs tractaturi, vestrumque consilium
impensuri; so that the clear meaning is, their advise is not Law, except the
Royal assent establish it into an act.

It Is alleged, he calls them Counselors not in all things, but in quibusdam
arduis, etc. and the case of Wentworth is cited, who being a member of the
House of Commons, was committed by Q. Eliz. but for proposing, they might
advise the Queen in a matter She thought they had nothing to do to meddle
with. He answers, a mere example (though of Q. Elizabeth) is no law.] It is
true, a bare example shows only what was, not what ought to be; but when
grounded on authority, and no way excepted against, by those, who have always
been earnest defenders of their Privileges, it may be reckoned amongst sound
Presidents: what he adds, that some of Her actions were retracted, is a
confirmation of this; for this being out of the number, it seems it was
accounted legal. Exceptio firmat regulam, in non exceptis. Yet neither did the
King so quote this president as to build a right upon it.

He alleadges, the King denies the Assembly of the Lords and Commons, when he
withdrawes himself to be rightly named a Parliament, or to have any power of
any court, and consequently to be any thing, but a mere convention of so many
private men.] This is falsely imposed on His Majesty; His Answers and Messages
speak the contrary, which are directed to both Houses of Parliament. Besides He
has passed some bills since his withdrawing. All that He affirms is that the
sole power of making or repealing laws, and altering any thing established is
not in them, but if He upon mature deliberation shall prefer the present
government to the proposed change, then their order is not to have the force of
law, and oblige the Kingdom.

The King is said to assert, that because the law has trusted him with a
prerogative to discontinue Parliaments, therefore if He do discontinue
Parliaments, to the danger or prejudice of the Kingdom, this is no breach of
that trust, because in formality of law, the people may not assemble in
Parliament but by His writ.] This is gross forgery: if it appear to him
necessary or expedient for the Kingdom, He acknowledges He is obliged by that
trust reposed in him to issue out his writs. And to this end He graciously
signed the bill for a trienniall Parliament; which like Physic well timed, may
preserve the body of this state in health and strength, by not sufferring ill
humors to grow to any head.

Another assertion of the Kings he says is, if the Parliament make any
transition in other matters, then what he pleases to propose, they are liable
to imprisonment at his pleasure. All this he collects from the citation of
Wentworths case. The sense of his inference is this; because they cannot
justify the meddling with things which belong not to their cognizance, therefore
they may be punished, if they meddle with those that do. We may observe an
affected mistake in this author, of which he makes frequent use; and this
animadversion though once laid down, may often be applied. Whatsoever the
Houses do, he calls that, the Act of the people. Whereas the truth is, they
represent them only to some purposes, and ends. So that if they exceed their
commission, and vote things not belonging to their cognizance, the People by no
means is engaged in it, as having no legal way of expressing themselves in
such cases.

His Majesty clearly to prove, that the trust committed to both Houses, cannot
bind Him to assent, to what ever they propose, seem it of never so dangerous
consequence to the Kingdom; nor absolve Him in point of conscience, if His
reason tell Him, His people will extremely suffer under the grant, argues thus.
It is impossible that the same trust should be irrevocably committed to Us, and
Our heirs for ever, and the same trust, and a power above that trust, (for
such is the power they pretend) be committed to others: did not the people,
that sent them look upon them, as a body but temporary, and dissoluble at Our
pleasure? and can it be believed, that they intended them for Our Guardians and
comptrollers in the managing of that trust, which God and the law has granted
to Us and Our posterity for ever?

Strange it is, that affection should so blind the understanding, and work
men's belief not according to reason but desire! I must needs think the let
lies only in his will, else he could never satisfy himself with such weak
answers. It is true, faith he, two supreames cannot be in the same sense and
respect.] If he had not hoped to hide himself in generals, he would have
descended to particulars, and told us, in what sense, what respect, and what
matters the King was supreme, in what the two Houses. But an application would
have discovered the truth, even to weak understandings.

Nothing is more known, or assented to, then this, that the King is singulis
major, and yet universis minor.] I have already evidenced the contrary; yet I
will speak something to it here. By universis he must mean the representative
all, which therefore he concludes to be above, and have greater power then the
King, that is such a power as He is bound to obey. So it seems the King has
taken the oath of allegiance as well as we, and we may call Him, our fellow
subject. Yet the oath of Supremacy he tells us, is no ways endangered.] The
sense of his reason is, because he is a better man then any one of us, take us
single. He tells us He is better then any one, He does not tell us, He is better
then two; if the Kings supreamacy be no more but this, it is no more then
possibly He might have and probably had before He was King. It is not the
Prince singulis major? nay may not any Lord in the Land challenge the same
supreamacy over all the Knights, any Knight over all esquiers to be singulis
major, though universis minor? But perhaps some oaths limitation may be found
out; the meaning shortly shall be, that he is above the Pope in these his
dominions, not but that He is under His subjects. to take of these and all
other corrupt glosses, I shall refer him to cap. 12. vices, 4o. Hen 8. In the
preface of which statute the Kings supreamacy (not over single persons) but the
body Politic is clearly delivered. The words are these; Where by diverse,
sundry, old, authentic histories and chronicles, it is manifestly declared and
expressed, that this Realm of England is an Empire and so has been accepted in
the world, governed by one Supreme head and King, having the dignity and Royal
estate of the Imperial Crown of the same: unto whom a Body Politic, compact
of all sorts and degrees of people, divided in terms, and by names of
spiritualty and temporalty, been bounden and owen to bear next to God, a
natural and humble obedience.

If there were no King at all in England, you would call this government an
Aristocracy; and why I beseech you do you not confess that name now, seeing
the thing is altogether the same? for if they give his voice, it is all one, as
if he had no voice, if their power must overruled his, it is all one, as if he
were divested of all, nay, why is it thought fit to send to him and solicit
his consent, when it is legally past in that the two houses have voted it? why
to all public bills do they require this confirmation, Le Roy Le voet? (is it
only for the same reason that Bellarmine gives why the Pope being alone
infallible, calls general counsels, ut res suavius transigatur?) suppose he
should return in answer, that of SENECA, Si vultis scire an velim, efficite ut
possim nolle. Thus though he plead for a new government, he is ashamed to own
it by the right name. For he tells us, not without some indignation at the very
thought of such an innovation. This new Aristocraticall fabrique cannot seem to
any impartial man, but as empty a shadow, as airy a dream as ever man's fancy
abused it self withal. I dare say he cannot meet in all histories, and
records (except of such Parliaments as have deposed Kings, which he confesses
no free one ever did) with one example of this nature, that the two Houses
should pretend to a power, which must of necessity overruled the King. Indeed a
reasonable man cannot imagine, any president possible, because, since the law
has given the King a power, by dissolving the Parliament, to take away that
power (as is pretended) greater then his own, if they had ever made claim to
superiority over him, he would quickly have put an end to that dispute. Before
this power be challenged, it would befit, to vote down, that clause in a law
made 2. Hen. ^. cited by His Majesty, that it is of the Kings regality to grant
or deny such of their Petitions, as pleases himself.

Yet notwithstanding this, he must be UNIVERSIS MINOR, for this we see in all
conditionate Princes, such as the Prince of Orange etc. I never knew he had
Regal power before. This instance abundantly manifests his design, though he
is pleased to say, he speaks nothing in favor of any alteration, but is as
zealously addicted to Monarchy, as any man can, without dotage.]

To the most absolute Empire in the world, this condition is most natural and
necessary, that the safety of the people is to be valued above any right of
his.] It is against common sense to suppose a King that is in his wits, (me
thinks all good people should take to heart those desperate conclusions, which
are built upon most unreasonable and most unworthy suppositions of a King that
is mad, or a child; since never subjects had greater obligation to be thankful
to Allmighty God for giving them a Prince as eminently able, as virtuous) who
will not provide for the safety of His people, nay who will not part with some
of His right, rather then they should perish, because in their destruction He
looses all. Yet this does not prove a King should part with His rights, as
often, as they will pretend to be in danger. If this were once admitted, what
wild plots would be invented, what strange intelligence would be received from
invisible spies? and as often as crafty men were ambitious or covetous, so
often the filly people were to be frighted.

Since all natural power is in those which obey, they which contract to obey
to their own ruin, or having so contracted, they which esteem such a
contract before their own preservation, are felonious to themselves and
rebellious to nature.]

He cannot mean any people contracting to their own certain ruin; there never
was government, guilty of this madness: therefore He must understand a contract
to a possible ruin; for example, an agreement patiently to submit themselves
to the ordinary trial of Law, and to suffer, if it should so fall out, though
under an undeserved sentence. In this case, he that does not make resistance,
and prefer his preservation to his contract, is pronounced felo dese, and a
rebel to nature. Unhappy thief, who for felony is condemned to be hanged, and
will be guilty of another felony in being hanged! what way is left unto
innocence? He must kill as many as he can in His own defense, so shall He
escape, or dye in the quarrel; either way He has done right to nature. Let us
put another case; an innocent man by the ordinary course of justice is adjudged
to dye, upon the testimony of two bearing false witness: he was free from fault
before; now he is in some danger, except he refuse to be punished, he becomes
guilty, no less then a self murderer. I wonder what opinion this man has of
Martyrs, who value not their own preservation; can he think by submitting
themselves to one fire, they deserve to be cast into another? nay, what of
Christ himself? who certainly suffered most injuriously, and though he had
strength enough to preserve himself, and could have been assisted by an Army
of Angels, yet he was obedient to death. I cannot imagine from what principle
he should draw such a conclusion, unless it be from this, (whence indeed most
of his book will naturally flow,) that there is no such thing as justice, but
suprema lex, the paramount law, is profit; and the faults of men consist, in
the not violation of contracts, in the not breaking promises, if they be for
their disadvantage: for it were a sin against native liberty to make our
selves the slaves of justice.

If we examine the ground of this doctrine most destructive of all commerce,
all government, we shall discover it to be no other but this, that the law of
nature does allow a man to defend himself, and provide for his own
preservation. But the observer takes no notice, that it is in our power to part
with this right, and yet do nothing contrary to nature, if reason tell us, we
shall thereby obtain a more excellent good, the benefit of peace and society;
nay, that this restraining Our selves by compact of that natural liberty to
defend our selves, will conduce more, to that end, for which it was given us,
our preservation and safety. Because in probability, we shall be in less
danger, living amongst men who have agreed to be governed by certain laws,
then if every one followed his own inclination. Where one suffers hereby
wrongfully, thousands enjoy the benefit of being protected from wrong. And
therefore though it should happen to me in particular, to be condemned by the
magistrate without cause, I am bound to suffer patiently, because having made
such a bargain, which might have been profitable, I have no right to recall it,
when it appears disadvantageous. I owe, that I have been safe thus long to the
benefit of this covenant, and therefore am bound in justice to share the
inconveniences. If reason will not satisfy, perhaps Christianity may. Qui
resistunt potestati, Romans 13.
ipsi sibi damnationem acquirunt. To resist the magistrate, damnable. The
powers here spoken of, were heathen, yet Christ commanded his, to be subject
even to them. That answer (with which too many are deceived) cannot excuse
disobedience, and Rebellion; This precept obliges private men, but not
magistrates. Since inferior magistrates being opposed to the supreme power
are but as private men, and in this respect the reason of obedience is common
to both. Neither is this a hard law, if duly considered. If we suffer justly,
we have no reason to complain: if undeservedly, we are punished, but not hurt.
The magistrate is Dei minister nobis in bonum, because God will abundantly
reward us for our patient suffering in obedience to his command. But this is
against nature.] He must mean nature guided by right reason; and does that
dictate, that rather then part with a temporal life, we ought to forfeit an
eternal?

It is objected that a temporary power, ought not to be greater, then that
which is lasting and unalterable.] He does not frame the Kings argument aright;
which concludes on this ground, that it is not probable the laws should place
a power greater then his in such a body, and yet leave it to his disposal,
when to call that body together, when to dissolve it; that is, to determine,
when and how long he would be overruled, and when be King again. His Majesty
presses it farther (which he dissembles.) This trust being irrevocably
committed to Him and His heirs for ever, it cannot be conceived, how it should
sleep, during the sitting of the Houses.

But if this were so, the Romans had done unpolitiquely, in creating Dictators,
when any great extremity assailed them and yet we know it was very prosperous
to them, sometimes to change the form of government.] Hence we may conclude it
good policy, in imminent danger, to trust to a Monarchy, not an Aristocracy,
and much less to a democracy. The Romans success cannot be imputed merely to
their change, but to this, that they altered their form from worse to better,
(as to their present ends) but that will not justify his desire of innovation
from better to worse.

It is further objected, He says, if we allow the Lords and Commons to be more
then counselors, we make them Comptrollers, and this is not suitable to
Royalty. He answers, we say here, that to consent is more then to counsel, and
yet not always so much, as to command and comptroll.] True, not always; but
then it is, when their consent shall impose a necessity upon the King of doing
the like. He has not laid down his Majesty's words faithfully. The point He
stands on is, that their advise, is not His law, neither is He bound to
captivate His reason, or submit His conscience to their Votes.

Yes, it must be so; because in inferior Courts, the Judges are so counselors
for the King, as that the King may not countermand their judgments, and yet it
were a harsh thing to say, that they are therefore Guardians and Comptrollers
of the King; therefore it holds in Parliaments a fortiori.]

The reason why the King cannot countermand their judgment, is because they
sustain His person, and His consent is by law involved in what by law they do,
and there would be no end, if He should undo what He has done. Authoritas rei
judicatae vim legis habet; there can be no appeal from himself to himself. He
therefore makes the Judges take an oath, they will deny to no man common right
by His letters, because He is not to pass sentence in private, but in public
and in a Judicial way. That it is his own act, appears from this, that He
delegates his power to them, and this is a known rule, Quod Rex facit per
officiarios, per se facere videtur. The truth is Kings have a right, and
heretofore they made use of it, to sit in judicature personally. Camden tells
us, that Bancus Regius ita dictus erat, ^rit. 112.
quod Rex ipse in eo praesidere solebat. Sir Tho: Smith too in his description
of England, Subsellia Regia (vulgo Bancus Regius) ex eo sortita sunt
appellationem, l. 2. c. 14.
quia ibi ipsi Angliae Regessedere consueverunt. This Court was called the
Kings Bench, because the King sat as judge in it in His proper person. It
removed with the King, as is to be seen 9. Hen. 3. cap. 11. by which the Court
of common Pleas is fixed. Common pleas shall not follow our court, but shall be
holden in some certain place.

Moreover the Judges swear, they will not assent to any thing which may turn
the King in damage, or disherison, by any manner, way, or color. 18. Edw: 3.
when he can make these things agree to the two Houses, he shall conclude from
the Judges sentence to their votes. But since it will clearly appear, that
they are not the mouth of the King, the Lords sitting in a personal capacity,
and the House of Commons as representing the body of the Kingdom (though not
that to all intents and purposes) the inference must by no means be granted. I
shall add this to make the answer more clear, and to avoid mistake: in matters
of Law, there lies an appeal to them, a writ of error being brought, as to the
highest Court; not so in matters of state. Because whilst they pass sentence
according to known laws, the state is no way endangered thereby, but if they
challenge to themselves a liberty of passing sentence according to reason of
state, they may when they please overthrow our laws. The Counties which
entrusted them look upon them as Judges, not Politicians.

But we ought not to conceive, that they well either Council, or consent to
any thing, but what is publicly advantageous.

When the King conceives they do not otherwise, He will most willingly follow
their advise. This fallacy (though extremely weak) has influenced on all his
book. He takes the two Houses in such a Notion as not failing of their duty,
but doing every thing as they ought, and supposes the King to be wanting to
that trust which is committed to him.

By such Council and consent we cannot imagine the King limited or lessened.]

Such a Consent, in which his is necessarily involved, renders his Power not so
properly less as none at all, it does not limit, but take it away. Pray put
the Case, a thousand pounds is left to Titius and Sempronius, to be bestowed
upon joint consent, Sempronius being just and reasonable grants to Titius the
right of a Negative, so that without he will concur, he confesses he can do
nothing, (The King does not pretend to have power of repealing old or
constituting new Laws without them) Titius not content with this Negagative,
affirms Sempronius is bound to consent to what ever he thinks fit; if so, is
not this money wholely at Titius his disposal? Can any one be so stupid as to
tell Sempronius notwithstanding this, He has a full power? How did ship money
destroy our propriety, but by this very consequence? Law and Reason inform us,
that Ejus est velle qui potest nolle. L. in bello.. medio. D. de captiv. and
postlim.
Hence Tryphonius determines that a Captive cannot consent to his sons
Marriage. Why? Cum utique nec dissentire posset. And Aristotle, (...).

It is alleged in derogation of Parliaments: that whatsoever the right of
Parliaments is, to assemble or treat in all cases of a public nature, yet
without the Kings concurrence and consent, they are livelesse conventions
without all virtue and power, the very name of Parliaments is not due to them.

If this Man had a mind to deal heartily, he would deliver the Kings sense
truly, and let Him speak His own words. The sum of which is only this, the
two Houses have not power of making laws and altering the established
government without Him.

But this Allegation at one blow confounds all Parliaments, and subjects us to
as unbounded a regiment of the Kings mere will, as any Nation under Heaven
ever suffered under.] Very tragically expressed and with high confidence, but
not any color of reason. For are we not left in the same state in which we
were? His Majesty's denying to bring in a new government, does not take away
the old. If He think it not convenient to alter that form which the least
deceitful Argument, long experience under so many of His glorious Ancestors
has proved happy, can any who is not in love with error infer hence, this
subjects us to a lawless and most unbounded regiment?

Upon the same reason by the Kings desertion other Courts must needs be
vertuelesse and void.] It were a strange consequence to conclude that, because
that may be done without the King, to which His consent by law is not required,
therefore that may be done without him, to which his consent is by law
necessary.

Many Kings have dissented from Bills, yet the people were never so mad, as to
fear a desertion of all Courts. It is against common sense to fancy that He
which enjoyes all by the benefit of Laws, should hinder the due administration
of Justice according to those Laws, so wilfully endanger, not only his
rights, but safety, by putting His Kingdom into tumults and combustion. Every
wise man may have as strong security, he shall not suffer from the (only not
impossible) execution of such a power, because it is so manifestly destructive
of the Kings own interest (and made evident to be so as well by experience as
by reason) as any man can have reason, not to be afraid of himself, because he
has a full power over himself and may destroy himself, when he pleases.

The intent of the King is, that the great Assembly of the Lords and Commons
do not represent and appear in the Right of the whole Kingdom, or else that
there is no honor nor power, nor Judicature residering in that great
Majesticall Body, then which scarce any thing can be more unnatural.

A most impudent collection, the meaning in breife is only this, when the
particular consents of three are necessary, it is not in the power of any two,
to effect whatsoever they please. A most prudent establishment in favor of
present government: that we may have no innovation without the mutual
agreement of King and people.

It is attempted to divide further between part and part in Parliament. Who
these attempters are, I enquire not. I suppose he means those who divided the
Lords into good and bad, the Members of the House of Commons, into well, and
ill affected.

So making the major part not fully concluding. They are not denied to conclude
as far as the power of that House extends, but this cannot reach to an
absolute and final decision.

It is a wonderful thing that the King's papers being fraited scarce with any
thing else but such doctrines of division, ('it is more wonderful that in a well
governed state such disrespectfull language of Princes from private pens
should pass unregarded, unpunished) tending all to the subversion of our
ancient fundamental constitutions, which support all our ancient liberties,
and to the erection of Arbitrary rule, should find such applause in the world.]

There is a vast difference between declaring what divisions are, and causing
them to be; to show, is not to teach division. But it is beyond admiration, if
the King's aims are such, as He would have the world believe, that they should
find such applause. Especially if we consider the persons from whom; men that
have much more to loose, then some who may aim at getting greater fortunes, by
pretending they are in danger to loose what they have: Men that are known not
to value their lives equal to their liberties; men of as great wisdom, as
honesty, neither of which would permit them to be active to make themselves
miserable, and pull upon their posterity and Country perpetual slavery. What
impudence of malice is it, to accuse the King to intend that, when the world
sees how much He has suffered merely to prevent it? Could our Ancestors ever
have believed there should come a King, who would plead for Magna Charta, who
would hazard His Crown in defense of the subjects Liberty, and desire nothing
more, then the utter abolition of all Arbitrary rule?

If the King have parted from his Parliament merely because they sought His
oppression, and He had no other means to withstand their tyrany, Let this
proclaim them a void assembly.

His Majesty never laid such charge to the Parliament, yet it is most evident
there was too great reason elsewhere to justify His fears; when
notwithstanding His deepest Protestations to maintain the true established
Religion, they still imputed to Him inclining to Popery; when notwithstanding
His utmost endeavors to suppress that unhappy Rebellion in Ireland, and after
the Houses had taken that work into their care, His frequent pressing them to
send over sufficient supplies, and not to spend their time in businesses of
little moment, whilst their poor Brethren were daily butcherd, yet the people
were made believe He was a favourer of their bloody designs; when the baser
sort of the people were permitted to come even to the Parliament, in Clamarous,
and unwarrantable multitudes, and there was a kind of discipline in disorder,
tumults being ready at command, upon a watchword given; when seditious
Pamphlets hourly came out, and many Presses labored day and night to abuse
the King; when factious Preachers were encouraged, whilst they did cast public
obloquies on the Laws which stood in full force, and which if they had been
duly executed, would have justified themselves, by restoring Us to our former
Peace and happiness, which We so long enjoyed, as We knew how to obey; when
such seditious fellows out of their Pulpits did dare to strike even at the
highest, and with more boldness, because with less danger, as meaning to
fight with other men's hands.

If the King could be more wisely or faithfully advised by any other Court, or
if His single judgment were to be preferred before all advice whatsoever; it were
not only vain but extremely inconvenient that the whole Kingdom should be
troubled to make elections, and that the parties elected should attend the
public business.

There are other Ends besides this for which they are called together, yet this
is one main end, as appears by the Kings writ, and therefore He never refused
to advise with them. The usual (but not the only) form of the Kings Answers
to such Bills as they were not willing to pass (which I believe was never
objected to any Prince before to His Majesty) le Roy s' avisera, proves that
after the advice of this His great Council, He is yet at liberty to advise
further with persons or occasions, as His own wisdom shall think meet. But
this Author will by no means take notice, that the use of Counsel, is to
persuade, not to compel: as if a man in a business of great concernment,
might not very prudently consult with many friends, and yet at last follow the
advice perhaps of one, if it appear more proportionable to the end he aims at.

Not so, because the many eyes of so many choice Gentlemen out of all parts,
see more then fewer.

This Argument, I believe will conclude too much, and therefore nothing at all.
For the same reason which denies a liberty of dissenting to the King, (that is
such a number, who see more, because they are more) may deny it to the House of
Pears, in comparison of the House of Commons, and to that House too, in
comparison of the People, and so both King and Lords and Commons are voted out
of Parliament. Besides experience shows this rule is not generally true, for I
dare say if we ask almost any Parliament man, he will tell us, upon the reading
of a Bill, sometimes one man in the House has found more faults, and urged
more just exceptions, then three hundred would have been able to espy. There
have been Parliaments wherein Acts have been made to remedy former mistakes.
Nay, whole Parliaments have been repealed and declared Null by succeeding
Parliaments, so 21. Rich. 2. cap. 12. does void and disanull all the Statutes
made in a former Parliament held 11. Rich. 2. so 1. Hen. 4. cap. 3. repeales
this whole Parliament of 21. Rich. 2. So 39. Hen. 6. In a Statute made at
Westminster We find a total repeal of a Parliament held at Coventry the year
before, as made against all good faith and conscience, etc: the Acts and
Statutes labored by the conspiracy, procurement and excitation of some ill
disposed Persons for the introduction and accomplishment of their rancour and
inordinate Covetise. So 49. Hen. 6. A Parliament held at Westminster is made
Null, in regard diverse matters had there been treated and wrought by the
labored exhortation of Persons not fearing God, nor willing to be under the
rule of any earthly Prince; but inclined of sensual appetite to have the whole
governance of the Realm under their own power and domination. These are the
testimonies that one great Council bestows upon another.

I could urge the same Arguments, in the very same words, only ^^anging a
Lay-councell, into an Ecclesiastical Council, and upon equal necessity,
require the King to assent to what ever they shall vote. I make no doubt, the
Author will in this case give him leave to make his conscience his guide, and
if he do, he will think his Arguments deserve no further answer.

The few private ends they can have to deprave them must needs render their
counsels more faithful, impartial, and religious then any other.] Certainly
they may have as many, as any other private Subject, and that this Kingdom
has seldom heretofore suffered under the prosecution of private interest is
to be imputed to the excellent policy, which he endeavors to overthrow. They
are strangely transported with the love of a popular state, who can so overrule
their understandings as to force themselves to think the members of it may not
be extremely subject to ambition, which would easily prompt them to alter the
good old ways of bestowing Offices, and collating Honors; to covetousness,
which would tempt them to draw the determination of causes out of the ordinary
Courts of Justice; to hatred, which would make them prosecute their enemies
with bitter violence, and upon the least suspicion of a fault, to punish them
first by imprisonments, and to prove them guilty at leisure; to affection,
which would make them shield their friends from being questioned, though their
corruptions were notorious to all the world.

The Bishop of Durham his case speaks home to the business, we are told in the
3. c. of the 2. Parliament held 1. Mar. how the Bishopric of Durham was
dissolved in a former Parliament, 7. Edw. 6. which was compassed, and brought
to pass, by the sinister labor, great malice, and corrupt means of certain
ambitious persons, then being in Authority, rather for to enrich themselves,
and their friends with a great part of the possessions of the said Bishopric,
then upon just occasion, or Godly zeal. Let the world judge, whether this Age
may not be subject to the same temptation, and whether a desire to share the
means of the Church may not have as strong operations as formerly.

Nothing more common in the Roman story then the bribing of the Senate. This
made Jugurtha cry out (who by his gifts governed their Parliament) O Vrbem
venalem and mature perituram, si emptorem invenerit! Had it been our
unhappiness to have lived in a popular state (except they are altered from
what Histories deliver them) we should have found injustice a trade, and that
the most compendious way to wealth was to buy no land, but of the Judges.
Tacitus gives us a full character of what we might well fear. When the
government of Rome was changed into a Monarchy under Augustus, the Provinces
were very well contented Suspecto Senatus populique imperio, obcertamen
Potentium, and avaritiam Magistratuum: invalido legum auxilio, quae vi, ambitu,
postremo pecunia turbabantur.

They must evidently have more private ends then the King, who may be mislead
upon wantonness, but they must struggle with solid temptations, desire of
riches, desire of honors, there being an emptiness in them, whereas He is
full and satisfied. Si violandum est Jus, regni causa violandum est; the
greatest motive that can be, a hope to share in Sovereignty, the Parliament to
rule the King and they to rule the Parliament.

We have ever found enmity and antipathy betwixt the Court and the Country, but
never any till now betwixt the representatives and the body of the Kingdom
represented.] How betwixt them and those many that entrusted them? are not they
satisfied with their carriage? If this were never till now, it may seem to be
upon some causes, which never were till now.

Except Mr Hollis his rich Widow, I never heard that promotion came to any man
by serving in Parliament.] What service commended Mr Hollis to the rich Widow
I cannot judge, this I know, if the ninteen propositions had past, it would
have been no news to hear of many promoted, and they might easily have
redeemed the time that they have lost, and challenged so much greater honors,
because they could not have them sooner. It would have been rare, to have heard
of any advanced out of Parliament, and this would have bred good stirring blood
in the Country, the Gentry would have justled to get in at the common gate of
Offices and Honors.

The Lords and Commons ought not to be deserted, unless we will allow, that
the King may choose whether He will admit of any Council at all or no, in the
disposing of our Lives, Lands and Liberties.

By Law He cannot, He will not refuse to hearken to His great Council, neither
does He challenge to Himself any right of disposing of your Lives, Lands and
Liberties, but will protect you and them according to the established Laws: He
only says, He is not bound to renounce his own understanding, or to contradict
His own conscience for any Counselors sake whatsoever. He must satisfy that
before their desires, nor must that, which they call policy, give Law to that,
which He knows to be religion.

It Is granted in things visible, and certain, that judge which is a sole judge,
and has competent power to see his own judgment executed, ought not to
determine against the light of nature, or evidence of fact.]

Sole judge, or not, alters not the case, neither is there any restraint only
to visible and certain things; in the discharging of a trust, the conscience
must be guided by a moral certainty, or high probability.

The sin of Pilate was, that when he might have saved our Savior from an
unjust death, yet upon acousations contradictory in themselves; contrary to
strange revelations from Heaven, he would suffer Innocence to fall, and pass
sentence of death, merely to satisfy a blood-thirsty multitude.]

The sin of Pilate all confess heinous, yet if examined according to his
rule of justice, he must either condemn his own judgment, or absolve his. For
first, concerning strange revelations to the contrary, all that I meet with is
this, his wife sent unto him, saying; Mat. 27.19
have thou nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered many things
this day in a dream because of him. What was revelation to her, was but a
single tradition to him, she was obliged to believe God speaking to her, he was
not bound to believe a woman speaking to him: he might think she might be
willing to deceive, out of natural compassion strong in that sex, or might be
deceived her self, calling that inspiration, which was fancy. That it was true
de facto, makes nothing against him, for a Judge, he knew, was to be guided by
proofs, he that will pass sentence according to what any shall pretend to
have from Heaven, may well deserve to go to Hell for it.

2ly Concerning accurations contradictory in themselves, he saw that plainly
and therefore professes their testimonies invalid, Ioh. 19.6.
I find no fault in him. Mat. 27.18.
But it may be objected, he knew that for envy they had delivered him. That
indeed was his private opinion, which the Jews persuade him was to be
overruled by their authority, and unanimous consent. This therefore seems to be
the case; Pilate thinks it not enough that all the chief Priests, and Elders of
the people, cry out against him as a malefactor and enemy to the state, he
requires some proofs, Ioh. 18.29. they returned this answer, v. 30.
if he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him unto thee,
Populisalus, the Commonwealth was in danger, not did it stand with the honor
of that Assembly to give more particular reasons. At length he is resolved to
pass his assent, and yields to their votes upon these grounds:

His single judgment was not to be preferred before all advice; then many eyes
of all the choycest of the people see more then his, and many spy faults which
he could not find; besides there was a Maxim and it was grounded upon nature
(and which the Author says was never 'till this Parliament withstood,
therefore then in full force) that a community can have no private ends to
mislead it.

J shall only add, the case can no way be varyed, though they had not a joint
judicial power, for if he thought him innocent, and knew he had such a right,
that except he passed sentence against him he was not condemned, and ought not
to suffer, it had been as high a fault to concur with them in their injustice.

Not so; because if one Judge on the Bench dissent from three, or one Iuror at
the bar from eleven, they may submit to the major number, though perhaps
less skillful then themselves, without imputation of guilt.]

The Oath of the Jurors is this, as we find in Mr Lamberd, Se virum aliquem
innocentem haud condemnaturos, sonten^ve absoluturos. Laying their hands upon
the holy Gospel, every man swears, he will not condemn the innocent, nor
absolve the guilty. The words of their Oath now in use speak the same sense;
They swear that they will do right betwixt party and party, according to
evidence given in: wherefore they ought to consult information by witnesses,
not their fellows votes. How his casuists will satisfy a man's conscience when
he violates this Oath, I know not. It Is true, in many cases, there may be a
legal submission, but then the law does not require a personal act contrary
to conscience, but provides for the preservation of the innocence of the
dissenting parties, by making the act of the major part, have the force of the
whole, according to that, Refertur ad vniversos, quod public fit per majorem
partem.

Jf so in Law, much more in State, where the very satisfying a multitude, some
times in things not otherwise expedient, may prove not only expedient but
necessary, for the settling of peace and ceasing of strife.] True, if in Law,
not otherwise: a Governor must not displease God to please the people. The
second thing must be ordered according to the Rulers prudence. For many times,
granting an unreasonable request, does not satisfy, but increase their desires.
And whereas the more he gives, he becomes the less able, so the more they
receive, they become the more craving.

That the Militia and Magazine of Hull etc. should be entrusted into such hands
as were in the peoples good esteem, conscience and understanding could plead
nothing against it.] Understanding and consequently conscience very much, if
the King had more distrust of some, and more confidence in the fidelity of
others.

If it could have been averred (as it could not, for the contrary was true)
that this would have bred disturbance, and have been the occasion of greater
danger.] Truly then he shall get the better, if he can impose upon our sense,
and make the Kingdom believe contrary to what they see, and suffer under. What
has been the cause of these unhappy distractions, but as the taking the Kings
Town from him by force, and the illegal alteration of the Militia, upon
pretense of apparent danger? Though for a time, they were afraid, where no
fear was, (quis illis sic timere permisit?) yet after they have had so long a
time to recover their understandings, and to consider with themselves, if the
danger were apparent, it might in so many months be made evident, and they
might know, whence to expect the blow, I dare now appeal to the weakest part
of men their distrusts, and ask them, if they can now believe, there was any
just ground for jealousies. It is not improbable, since they have raised a
house without a foundation, it may fall upon the heads of the master builders.

Where the people by public authority will seek any inconvenience to
themselves, and the King is not so much interessed in it as themselves, it is
more inconvenience and injustice to deny, then to grant it.]

More injustice to deny then grant, therefore it seems, that injustice too.
Into what streights must a King be brought by the minds of the people! If they
seek any inconvenience, injustice to deny it: O unheard of Maxims out of these
new Politiques! that a King should be bound by Law to destroy his people, and
kill them out of duty; that he does not preserve their rights, except he do
them wrong. This affabile odium has often had, but never deserved thanks. Can
a man imagine, those people, of whom Juvenall speaks, Evertere domos totas
optantibus ipsis
Dii faciles,
if they had understood their own prayers, would have accused the Gods for
denying them? Charior est Regipopulus, quam sibi. How great are His deserts
toward His People, that will not suffer them to be miserable, though they
entreat him; though they provoke him to it; and can content himself with the
conscience of merit, whilst his honor suffers under the envy of wrong doing!
Indeed this is the end of all government; for the people finding they were not
fit to govern themselves, resolved to be ruled by those that were wiser, and so
committed their safety to the trust of others. Now this were to reduce
themselves to that first state, which their sufferings made them weary of, to
place a Governor over them and to govern that Governor.

What blame is it then in Princes, when they will pretend reluctance of
conscience and reason?

No man justifies pretended conscience, no man can condemn real. But what
grounds can malice have to cast this aspersion of pretense of conscience and
reason? If we look either on that unhappy misunderstanding of the people, who
would not be undeceaved by pretenses, his actions must appear unto them as
clear as the day; or on his own necessities, his own extreme wants, it
cannot be. For certainly he that has granted so much in this Parliament, and
that in a short time, as put all his Royal Ancestors Acts of grace together,
they fall much short of his, would not have denied any thing which was
reasonable, not any thing (since his wants required supplies from them) but
what should put him into far worse condition then that of Poverty.

After a long and general discourse of the original of government, the
various forms, and several distempers, whilst policy was yet imperfect, he
returns to the present matter.

The virtue of Representation has been denied to the Commons, and a severance
has been made betwixt the parties chosen, and the parties choosing, and so that
great privilege of all privileges, that unmovable Basis of all honor, and
power, whereby the House of Commons, claims the entire right of all the Gentry
and commonalty of England, has been attempted to be shaken and disturbed.]

The sense of it is, a trust is committed to them, and they are to be guided
according to conscience in the performance of it. Let it be so: but is not this
clearly the Kings case, who is entrusted certainly as highly as they? So that
they will find the ready way to endanger their own rights, is to entrench upon
the Kings. Yet there may be a mistake in the imputation of severance and
denial of representation to the Commons. For put the case; if a few men of a
County present a Petition to the House against established laws, and the
settled Discipline of the Church; this is received, and thanks returned: if
after, another Petition (modestly and discreetly expressing their desires, and
withal due respects to the House, as to instance in that most excellent
Petition of Kent) be presented, attested by men much more eminent then the
former, whether we respect number, Gentry, means or reputation; and this in
favor of present government, which they have found happy by long experience,
and therefore have no reason to be so desirous of a change, of which they are
not able to judge so well without trial; this by no means is to be called a
severance or denial of representation, though I confess, the Kingdom (apt to
mistake) may easily be deceived, and learn to miscall it, because the Gentlemen
were imprisoned who presented it.

Most of our late distempers and obstructions in Parliaments have proceeded
from this: that the people, upon causeless defamation, and unproved
accusations, have been so prone to withdraw themselves from their
representatives, and yet there can be nothing under Heaven, next to renouncing
God, which can be more perfidious, and more pernicious in the people then this.]

Here we may see the strength of passion above reason. Certainly we never took
the oath of Supremacy, nor of Allegiance unto them. Hence it will evidently
follow, that Treason against a Burgess, is higher then that against the King.

This he grants as unquestionable, that the legislative power of this Kingdom,
is partly in the King, and partly in the Kingdom, so that neither the King can
make a general binding Ordinance or Law, without the Parliament, or the
Parliament without the King.

This one truth, if constantly stood to, would have prevented our miseryes; and
if yet embraced, might restore the Kingdom to happiness. But alas! it is soon
recalled, as bolding only in ordinary cases, but if the safety of the people be
concerned, if it may prove dangerous, or inconvenient to them, then an
extraordinary course may justly be taken.

This is it which has so miserably rent this Kingdom and caused these sad
divisions. First, the people are made believe they are in danger; and then a
prevention of those dangers is promised: This must needs be very grateful to
them, so out of that natural love they bear to themselves, they favor that
side, which pretends to take care of their safety. His way of arguing is very
plausible, and seems to carry more strength, because it works upon our
understanding by our affection. The sum is this; in case of apparent and
imminent danger the Peoples safety is not to be neglected; they ought not to be
exposed as a Prey to the enemy, who if he take them unprovided will destroy
them all, therefore most fit they should be put into a posture of defense: now
none so fit Judges of this apparent and imminent danger, as the two Houses;
wherefore they to order this Militia. So that it must be in their power, to
command Men, raise Horses, seize on all the Ammunition, send for what supplies
of money they think necessary for repelling these dangers, else they are not
sufficiently enabled for that great work, the peoples preservation. Here we are
fallen back again into (what we so much complained of). Arbitrary power, nor is
the thing taken away, but placed in another body; all that we have gained is
only this, we shall not be beaten by the same hand. Was not this the very case
of Ship-mony? upon supposall of a necessity, and the Kingdom being in danger,
very fit to secure it and the people; this cannot be done without money, the
danger will not allow the delay of asking the Subjects consent, and going the
ordinary way of Law, therefore an extraordinary course them becomes legal, and
very reasonable it is, the Subject should be content to part with some, rather
then loose all now who fitter to judge of this necessity then the King, as
being most fully informed by His advantage of intelligence from His
Ambassadors, Agents etc. of the designs of foreign Princes and States.

To wind our selves out of this Labyrinth, we will go on those grounds, on
which they argued against Ship-mony, for as the Argument runs parallel, so
will the answer. This therefore was laid down as a sure ground of reason, that
it was better for the Kingdom, though it were in real danger, in arena
consilium capere, to shift for it self, as well as it was able, by a sudden
defense, then that the Law should provide such a remedy, which would be so
easily, so frequently abused upon every pretense of danger, to prevent such an
evil, which could extremely seldom, or almost never happen, for an Army and
Navy could not be so secretly provided, but that we must have some intelligence
of it. So in the case of the Militia, it is much better, that by being
continued in the old legal way, it should hazard it self to such a possible
danger, then that Law should provide such a remedy (for what probably will
never happen) as being abused upon pretenses, may every three years put the
Kingdom in combustion. To repel danger any way but by Law, is the greatest
danger of all.

Let the world judge, whether the pronouncing Sr John Hotham's act: Treason be
not contrary to the clearest beams of humane reason, and the strongest
inclinations of nature: for every private man may defend himself by force, if
assaulted, though by the force of a Magistrate, or his own father, and though
he be not without all confidence by flight.]

He is strongly resolved upon the conclusion, that will bring it in upon such
premises. Sr John Hotham his asseizing on the Kings Town and Ammunition was it
seems in his own defense; who assaulted him? did His Majesty drive him into
Hull? what can he think of the Gunpowdertraitors, was their resistance a just
defense? then certainly every Rebellion is a just war. Indeed what is that
thing which we call obedience, if a man may refuse to submit to Law in his own
defense?

Here whole Nations being exposed to enmity and hazard, being utterly incapable
of flight, must yield their throats and submit to assassinates, if their King
will not allow them defense.] There is great difference betwixt a Subjects
defending himself, and offending his King. His fears are over-witty, if they
will not permit him to think himself safe, except he get into one of the Kings
sorts for his better security.

See if we are not left as a prey to the same bloody hands, as have done such
diabolical exploits in Ireland etc. if we may not take up arms for our own
safety, or if it be possible for us to take up arms, without some Votes, or
Ordinances to regulate the Militia.] Subjects upon in vasion would not have
wanted Commission to take up arms; till then they are safe enough by the
benefit of the Law, which could not possibly have better provided for their
safety, then by denying them a power to take arms as often as ambitious:
choletick men for their own ends shall perswa^e them they are it danger. For by
this means, being easily deceived, whilst they endeavored to avoid false,
they would run themselves headlong into true perils.

The King says; the Parliament denies etc. to whether now in this uncertainty,
is the Subject bound to adhere?]

It is possible, circumstances may afford us some light for our direction. We
may consider, whether the Houses do not barely say; and whether His Majesty
does not descend so far, as to give reasons for what He does; and to show the
Kingdom the ground of His actions, by particular citation of the Laws, which
justify them. We ought to agree whether swerving from Law, be to be judged by
the action, or by the authors that is, if the King should have done; whatever
they did, and the Houses what ever He did, whether all would not then have been
legal, because done by them. The King does not desire to captivate any man's
understanding to His authority, but is willing to make all the world the judge
of His actions* neither is a blind obedience a part of any man's duty to the
Houses. The best way to discern a right, will be to consult the rule, which is
Law, and not measure the legality of an act by the doer. Some things are
matters of fact, here we may be guided by sense, and judge as we see. As
whether the King has seized on any thing, wherein the Subject has a property?
or whether the Subject has not seized upon something wherein the King has a
property? whether the King has raised war against the Parliament, that is,
whether His Guard was an Army, and whether Hull is now London.

We had a maxim and it was grounded upon nature, and never till this
Parliament withstood, that a community can have no private ends to mislead it,
and make it injurious to it self.]

True in a state where the collective body assembles: and the reason of it is
evident; for though every man aim at his greatest particular interest, yet
except it be agreeable to the interest of the major part it will never pass
into an Act; and if it be advantageous for the most, it is to be esteemed
public. Now what service this can do the two Houses, I cannot see, because
they are a representative body. If he please to consult Livy or Tacitus, he may
find what most unworthy ends the Senate of Rome proposed to themselves, and be
quickly satisfied in the falsehood of this Maxim, taken in his sense. The
truth is he raises probabilities into demonstrations, and because it is not so
likely, (it being a work of greater difficulty) that four hundred should
contrive things for their private interests, as that four should, the takes it
for impossible. Whereas experience clearly confutes him; in other states we
find nothing more common. That we in England have so seldom suffered under
such corruptions, proceeds from causes which are peculiar to this government.
It was a court for the most part, but of short continuance, so that they had
not time to mould and fashion their aims; and when called together again, the
body was much altered. But the chief reason, and that to which the Subject
especially owes his security, is this, that the final determination, is not in
one, nor two houses, but the joint consent of three Estates is necessary. So
that nothing is likely to pass, but what is for the interest of the major
part, and what is so, is publicly advantageous. It is more possible they may
now prosequute private interests, since they challenge a power to themselves
sufficient to advance their designs; which heretofore they never pretending
to, could not hope to compass particular ends.

The King may safely leave His highest rights to Parliaments.] If this be all
the motive, he may as safely keep them. Why did the Laws entrust Him with
them, if it were fitting for Him to make no use of them?

None knows better, or affects more the sweetness of this so well balanced a
Monarchy.] I believe they affect Monarchy, why then does this Author endeavor
to take it away, by denying the King a power of dissent, which our Ancestors
inviolably preserved, as a most happy restraint of Aristocracy or Democracy?

It has been often in the power of former Parliaments to load that rule with
greater fetters and cloggs, but they would not.] A very good argument, there is
little reason now to do it. After a commendation of the exact temper and due
proportion between the three Estates, the many affecting Monarchy better then
Aristocracy, and the Nobility preferring it as much beyond Democracy.

He exhorts us not to seek to corrupt this purity of composition.] Very good
counsel: but which he overthrowes in the words immediately following. We must
not conceive, that both Gentry and Nobility can combine against the King.
Therefore it will be fitting for the King to leave all to their disposal, who
certainly can do nothing, but what is fitting. In how few words has he
destroyed that constitution, which he told us was so perfect, it could admit of
no change but for worse? But we could not stay here, if the Kings negative were
once taken away, like decaying bodies, our health would daily impair. The next
step must be, the Lords sitting in a personal capacity, no reason they should
deny what the Kingdom has voted to be necessary or convenient; either let them
not speak at all, or let the greater part of Commons join with the lesser part
of Peers.

The right of all the Lords and Commons in this State is so great, that no
change of government can be advantage to them, except they could each one
attain an hereditary Crown.] May they not attain as much as Malignant
Counselors are pretended to aim at, Honors, Offices, Wealth, Power, Commands?

Their power is merely derivative, so that except we will conceive that both
King and People will be consenting to the usurpation, nothing can be done.]
Then it is confessed, the King has a right of dissenting. Except both King and
People; here a power is given to the People collectively, beyond the Lords,
Commons and King.

If the King be an affector of true Liberty, He has in Parliament a Power as
extensive as ever the Roman Dictators was for the preventing of public
distresses.] The Dictator had absolute Authority; nor was he circumscribed in
power, but in time only. There lay no appeal from him, neither was he
questionable for any action after his government expired. Though the humor of
that people could not endure the name of King, they had the same thing; for in
imminent dangers, whether from foreign invasions, or intestine seditions,
necessity of state forced them to submit to his Authority, which relieved them
in their greatest extremities.

Hence we may make the truest judgment, what form of government the wisest
Romans esteemed most convenient, their actions, which proceeded from fear,
were unfeigned interpreters of their thoughts. That they fell back still into
their old rule, and were not as wise to prevent dangers by conserving that
Authority, as they were to encounter them by erecting it, must be imputed to
the inconstant temper of the people, who in times of peace were as proud and
insolent, as when ruin threatened (which their wantonness pulled upon
themselves) they were basely humble: Since then the Romans preferred even the
unbounded power of one to a popular sway, we have no reason to change the much
more happy temper of this government, wherein Monarchy is so wisely balanced,
that as we are not exposed to the dangers which attend the rule of the many, so
we may avoid the inconveniences, which might probably flow from the Arbitrary
power of one.

He has met in the field with two contrary Armies of His own Subjects, and yet
that Army, which He went to destroy, and advanced their colors against Him,
was more loyal then that which himself commanded.] Had he made a Conscience
of unjust slander, or had he any sense of the honor of his Nation, these words
had never fowled the paper.

That which the King here calls conscience and reason, can be nothing else but
mere private opinion.] What other possible notion can any man have of
conscience? is it not the light of reason informing us in our duty? If the
Counsel of the Parliament were directly opposite to common understanding and
good conscience, and the Counsel of the Court were evidently consonant
thereunto, there needed no such contestation.] If the Counsel of the Court
were directly opposite to common understanding and good conscience, and the
Counsel of the Parliament were evidently consonant thereunto, there would be
no such contestation.

It is a very unfaithful way of judging, to measure the goodness of Counsel
by the person advising, not by the thing advised. His Majesty always examined
what, not who, and has given His Subjects a most certain pledge of His Royal
affection, in passing so many good Acts, and was resolved to grant, as long as
any thing could in reason be desired. After He has fully satisfied the
public interest, even to the utmost extent, of what most understanding and
disingaged men wish for, he is not bound to undo again in part, and so far
to comply with the interests of private men, as to place a power in some, by
which they shall be able to hinder His good people from enjoying the full
benefits of His Royal Grace, if such a consent appear to Him to do it.

The following discourse keeps all in generals (which easily deceive weaker
apprehensions) and has its strength from this ground, that it cannot
reasonably be supposed the great and public Council of the Kingdom should
not give the most faithful advice.

Therefore Princes, if they may not be led by their own opinions, rather then
by the sacred and awful Counsels of whole Nations, unreasonably complain they
are denied liberty of Conscience, and ravished out of their own understandings.]
I appeal to any man's judgment, whether any thing can be urged for the authority
of a Lay-Councell, that it ought to enforce a submission of judgment, and a
performance of duties arising from trust agreeable thereto, which may not with
at least equal advantages, be pressed for the same binding power in Counsels
Ecclesiastical. To instance in that of Trent, if a Papist should, (as Campian
does) bragg of that to him as the representative body of almost all the Western
Church, wherein was a concourse of so many choice, able, eminent Divines, such
as had addicted their whole times to the study of truth, and therefore in all
probability could not be deceived themselves, and such as had conversed so long
with Heaven and Heavenly things, they knew sufficiently how much it concerned
them not to deceive others, and conclude it therefore unlawful for any to
pretend conscience (which is but private opinion) against so public and
unanimous determination. Notwithstanding these high probabilities, and (what
will much more justify men's absolute obedience, and captivating their reasons,
some plausible arguments for a divine assistance, and immediate directions in
all their decisions, which the Houses will not pretend to;) yet it shall go
hard but he will find some answer (as esily he might) whereby to justify his
liberty of dissenting in some things, which when he has done, he may with very
little alteration apply to civil Counsels and be satisfied. Suppose it thus:
though amongst probable Arguments, that drawn from authority of wise men carry
with it greatest weight, yet it must give place to a greater reason. Now to
every man belongs a judgment of discretion, which must decide for what
concerns his particular duty. So in the Kings case: the Votes which carry in
them the authority of both Houses, shall bear great sway, and if it be in
things extremely dubious, they may turn the scales of their side. But if
greater reason seem to contradict them, his Majesty will not hoodwink His
understanding, and blindly follow whither they please to lead him, He will
walk by the greater Light; For example his Majesty perceiving how much His
people may suffer under arbitrary power, is resolved never to make use of it,
and thinks it less fitting any other should. But it is told him now the use of
it will be for their good, by reason of apparent imminent dangers. His Majesty
understands the bottom of plausible pretenses, and knows to how great
mischiefs a way would be opened, if it were sufficient upon such specious
grounds to have a right to overruled all known and certain Laws.

Concerning the action at Hull, he confesses, to take possession of the Kings
town and shut the gates against Him is Treason, if circumstances do not vary
the nature of the act, as in this Case he pretends they do. For the first
thing to be looked on is, that the King was merely denied entrance for that
time, His general right was not denied.] If then a Subject take up Arms
against his Sovereign in a temporary war, it must not come within the compass
of Treason, and he may legally possess himself of the King's forts, and
maintain them against Him, so He confess he has no right in them.

No defying language was given. If a man take away my purse, shall he be
acquitted from felony because he did not give me ill language too? No act of
violence was used. This he may say who has picked another pocket; but it is no
sufficient plea against the Law.

But he used no violence, though the King for diverse hours together did stand
within Musket shot, etc:] It is no argument of innocence that he had
opportunity to be more highly guilty, and abstained.

The King used terms of defiance, and this makes the act merely defensive, or
rather passive.] If this were true, there was never any war but defensive; for
those, who by some great injustice offered, provoke a Nation to right it self,
fight as well to maintain their lives, as what they unlawfully possess. How
this should administer to the King any ground to leavy guards at York, many men
wonder, or that it should seem the same thing to the King, as if He had been
pursued to the gates of York.]

Certainly it was a sufficient ground, not only to raise a guard for His
safety, but an Army to punish that high indignity, and right His Honor: but
out of tender care of His Peoples safety (least they should chance to suffer
upon mistakes) He afforded him so long time of repentance, that the Kingdom
might first be satisfied, and then his justice.

If the Parliament have hereupon turned any of the Townes-men out of their
Estates. His Majesty did not charge the two Houses; Sir John Hotham kept Him
out, without any public order from them. But if it had been done de facto, the
same law would have justified this act, as well as the other. But since, not
only the Country about, but the Inhabitants within the Town have suffered in
their Estates, and libertyes.

Or if claimed any interest in it to themselves. So much the less reason to
seize on it, if he cannot so much as pretend title to it. or have disseized the
King, utterly denying the right for the future. If any Law can be produced to
justify taking away the Kings goods for a time, the case will be cleared. Or
have made any other use of their possession but merely to prevent civil war.
There is not any way more likely to create a Civil war, then endeavors to
prevent it by illegal courses. And to disfurnish the King's seducers of Arms
and Ammunition: therefore the most essential property of Treason, intention,
must needs here be absent in this act.] The Law has judged otherwise in the
case of the Earl of Essex, whose plea was, he intended the removal of evil
Counselors.

If the Parliament (the shutting the King out of Hull was not their act) be not
vertually the whole Kingdom it self. The King excluded it is not; If it be
not the Supreme judicature, as well in matters of State, as matters of Law.
Till new laws are enacted, the Subject cannot justify any act, but what is
warrantable by the old. If it be not the great Council of the Kingdom as well
as of the King, to whom it belongs by the consent of all Nations to provide
in all extraordinary cases, ^e quid detriment capiat Respublica, let the brand
of Treason stick upon it. No provisions are allowed, but what are legal least
the Remedy should prove the greatest disease. Nay if the Parliament would have
used this forcible means unless petitioning would not have prevailed. It is
no just excuse to take away a man's money, and say he did first desire him to
deliver it. Or if their grounds of jealousy were merely vain. It is against
all equity to do wrong, because there is a possibility of suffering it; no man
can have a full security; and therefore we must arm our selves against
uncertain fears, not by injuries, but a wary innocence. Or if the jealousy of
a whole Kingdom can be counted vain.] Too large an expression; much the
greater part of the Kingdom apprehend no just grounds of jealousies.

Though the minds of many were a long time unsettled, being daily disturbed by
suggestitons of plots at home, and invasions from abroad, yet if we duly weigh
the business, such fears ought not to be valued. If forty several men report
the same thing, yet if upon examination thirty nine of them say they had it
from the other man, this in Law makes but one witness; so the fears of many
thousands, if grounded upon informations, and those informations come from very
few, who can no way evidence the probability of such reports, they ought not to
be regarded, they will vanish into nothing. Or if they claim any such right of
judging of dangers and preventing them without the King's consent as ordinary
and perpetual. As often as they have a mind to make use of such a right, it is
easy for them to call the case extraordinary, and pretend a public danger. For
my part I know not how they can ever be confuted, if not now. For certainly
apparent dangers did never less appear. It would more abundantly have
satisfied me, if I had been frighted with secret plots, and conceald designs.

The King might have prevented the same repulse by sending a messenger before
hand. That is, if He had not come to get in, He had not been shut out; if He
would have stayed away, he would not have denied Him entrance. Or by coming
without any such considerable forces. Let His forces be great, he was not to
give Law to his Prince. but neither is it likely he would have admitted Him
then, for you confess a little above, He offered to enter Hull with twenty
horse only, unarmed.

The Scots in England took New Castle but by private authority, yet there were
other qualifications in that act sufficient to purge it of Treason.

The King and Parliament deserved so much respect from you, as not to have
instanced so frequently in their Act; you might well let that pass in silence,
which they have buried in an Act of oblivion.

He flourishes at large upon the example of Richard the second (he means Edw.
2.) misled by Spencer. It does not follow, because one King hearkened to evil
counsel, therefore all must be denied the liberty to hearken to good.

Spencer's party was but of inconsiderable fortunes. He will get no advantage
by putting men's estates into the Scales, and ballancing their reputations. At
length yet there is some little hopes he may prove a convert, since he does
almost promise to suspend his judgment, till he may have full satisfaction
from His Majesty's Narration, which in due time will more fully inform him.

An Aristocracy in Parliament cannot be erected withoutsome means, and what
this means shall be, is yet to us altogether inscrutable. Certainly he is
quicker sighted then not to perceive what is so obvious. Deny the King a
negative, and the thing is done.

The power of Parliaments is but derivative and depending upon public
consent, and how public consent should be gained for the erection of a new
unlawful odious Tyranny amongst us, is not discernable.] It is not thought
this was the intent of those that entrusted them, but it may be the abuse of
power, if the Kings authority be once swallowed up in theirs. For though their
power depend upon a public consent in the election, yet not so after they are
met together. The necessities of the time made His Majesty grant, that this
Parliament should not be dissolved without their consent; but they may now
challenge it as their right, if the King be bound to confirm, what they vote
necessary or expedient.

But it cannot be: and his reason is, the Kingdom would not obey them.] In
truth a very probable thing: I believe they would not be able to go through in
that new way. But yet they must needs have a great party; considering their
several relations, and the advantage they have, in advancing the interests,
whether religious or civil, of some, which may be able to do them service,
and this would create division in the Kingdom.

His Majesty expresses His just indignation, that they (He imputes it not to
the Houses, though this Author still involve them, but to the contrivers and
penners of the Declaration) should dare to tell their King, they may without
want of modesty or duty depose him: He returns answer, this cannot be
collected from those words, That if they should make the highest presidents of
other Parliaments their pattern, there would be no cause to complain of want
of modesty and duty, because it may justly be denied that free Parliaments did
ever truly consent to the dethroning of any King of England. What was there
affirmed of Parliaments had none of his present restriction of Free in it. If
the ^. of Hen. 4. Were indeed not Free, why were Statutes cited out of it? The
authors of those quotations must be presumed to account it so.

The King is offended at their franck expressions, disguised under the charge
of a malignant party. The sense of his answer is this, they have no other way
to clear themselves: for there being faults somewhere, not to lay them upon
others, were to take them upon themselves. His Majesty has proposed a very
good way which will fully satisfy the world in their innocence, and that is not
always to accuse, but sometimes to prove.

The King demands justice for tumults and high indignities offered, and
complains of a prohibition sent from the House of Commons into Southwarke, to
hinder the process against a Riot according to Law. His answer is, equal
justice could not be obtained against the Court-Cavaleeres. His Majesty never
protected them from legal trial; it was free for them to have proved what
they could against them.

The Kingsaies, it being granted by them, that their privileges do not extend
to Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace, so as to exempt the Members from
all manner of trial, yet if they be so privileged in the method of their
trial, that the cause must first be brough before them, and their consent
asked before you can proceed, then their Privileges extend as far in these,
as in the most unquestioned cases; because no privilege exempts them from all
manner of trial, the House being acquainted and leave given, He says nothing
can take of this: it was fully intended the Members should have had a legal
and speedy trial; for His Majesty conceives it high injustice to clap men up
upon a bare charge, and after they are in prison, forget there are such men in
the world.

The Parliament does not deny the King a true real interest in anything held
by him, either in jure Coronae, or in jure Personae, but only affirms that in
the same thing the State has an interest Paramont in cases of public
extremity; by virtue of which it may justly seize and use the same for its own
necessary preservation.] The King is a part of the state, and therefore the
other part has not any power warranted by Law, to do what they think fit to
His prejudice, upon pretense of public extremity. This is ship money again;
in every man's lands and goods, the State has an interest Paramount in cases of
public extremity, by virtue of which it may justly seize, and use the same
for its own necessary preservation. Here Is the difference, the head without the
body was the State before; now it is the body without a head. The King has
graciously freed us from that inconvenience, and we hope He will not suffer us
to be oppressed with this. The prudence of our laws has provided against
either; but were there a necessity we must fall into one, we ought in reason to
choose the former, we are acquainted with that, and therefore could better
digest it: It would be a great affliction to fall from such hopes, and what we
looked on as a remedy, to find that our disease: but especially it would be
less burden to our estates, to satisfy one, then five hundred.

But the King's things are still reserved for him in better hands, then he
would have put them. Though this were true it were an ill president for the
Subject, who must be bound to give up his means as often as they conceive they
could dispose it more wisely, as they yet keep them away from him for his good,
so hereafter they may spend them against him for his advantage. Let what will
be pretended; the Subject cannot be so stupid, as not to understand, these, who
undertake to manage the Paramount interest of the State, may seize on any
subjects fortunes, by the same right they take the King's.

That there is an Arbitrary power in every State somewhere, it is true, it is
necessary, and no inconvenience follows upon it.] If he mean by arbitrary, a
legislative power, this is granted, yet not to a part, but the whole body. But
this speaks not to the case; for still they give us a certain rule to live by.
The old laws are in force, till repealed, and when new are once enacted, we
must conform our actions to those standing rules. He is to justify, there is
such a Paramount Law, which shall make all our other laws truly Oracles, that
is, capable of contrary meanings. So that now a man may be justly punished for
doing such a thing, because he has disobeyed the letter of the law; a week
after he shall be justly punished too, for not doing the same thing, because he
has disobeyed the equity of the Law. Aristotle tells us (and it is very wisely
said) (...). Rhet. l. 1. c. 1. Those laws are with greatest prudence
established, which define most cases, and leave nothing, which possibly may be
determined, to the breast of the judge. The reason of it is this; Laws are made
without any respects to persons, it cannot be foreseen what parties would be
engaged; but Judges do not always abstract from these; they may be mislead
by the relation of Kinsman, friend, Patron, or other interests. Now how fully
may these corrupt ends be satisfied by this equitable construction of Law?

Mr Hooker does not say, that the Anabaptists in Germany did deceive
Parliaments with their hypocrisye.] No man told you he did; we only learn thus
much from that story of their foul injustice and cruelty, that upon
proportionable principles, such mischiefs being then, may be again. For
example, if a power be placed in a certain body of men, by which they are
allowed to break all inferior laws, if they think it is for the good of the
people, etc: and if this body be backed by the greater part of the people, as
having gained on their affections by fair promises of a perfect reformation,
and that they shall at length enjoy the purity and simplicity of the Gospel;
in this case may it not be a sufficient motive to take away men's estates,
because they cannot confide in them? is it not just to take from enemies of the
State the power of hurting it? It Is very obvious, that for those men, of whom
they have no good opinion to have wealth may be a crime, to have honors
treasonable.

As for the thirty Tyrants of Athens, we know they were not chosen by the
people, as our Knights, Citizens, etc: This circumstance alters not the case,
if after they are elected, they challenge as unquestionable and as irrevocable
power. But the main intent of that instance was, to show there may be a tyranny
of many, and that much more miserable then that of one, in many respects. If
the inordinate desires of one are hardly satisfied, how much more may we suffer
under those of many? we cannot hope to weary them. If we must be slaves, better
to have one master, then four hundred. Though the blows were equal, that
from a Royal hand would not smart so much; it wounds the very soul to be
trampled on by equals. The weight of present evils would less afflict, then
the fear of future. There may be continual supply of torment; new and hungry
flies may succeed in the room of the old, and suck strongly, not regarding many
have already been glutted. Neither can we expect an end of these miseries, such
a body is immortal, whereas the vices of a Prince are personal and dye with
the man, we may be restored to happiness by His successor.

I will in brief relate the story of their reign. They had got into their
hands the power of declaring what was Law, and this by the consent of the
people. In the beginning they call some men into Question, who were much hated
by the City; and though the law could not take hold of them so far, yet they
past sentence of death. This was very plausible to most, who judged of this
proceeding by the rule of their present affections, not looking so far into
the future, as to consider, what ill consequences this might produce; for by
the same way innocent men might be cut off, if they were pleased to call them
enemies of the State. After this they gave some part of public authority to
three thousand of the Citizens, and disarmed all the rest, by this means (and
the benefit of a Militia from Sparta) the City was wholly in their disposal.
In a short time they had committed so many outrages, and such high injustice,
that Theramenes, one of their own body, one of the thirty, professed his
public dislike of those proceedings. Then was he accused as a Traitor to
them, and (though it was a privilege of the three thousand, that none of them
should suffer death by the sentence of the thirty, but according to accustomed
process and trial) yet Critias wiped his name out of that number, and so
reduced him to their trial. Theramenes pleads for himself; they ought to look
upon his as a common case; their names might as easily be blotted out, he
advises them to be very wary in making such a president which might ruin them
and their posterity. The issue was this: Particular men being overawed by
their fears, thought it their wisest way to hold their peace, since if they
should speak in his behalf, there was little hopes to redeem him, but great
probability to ruin themselves. So they chose rather to expose themselves to
those future inconveniences, which possibly might not come upon them, then
hazard a present danger. By this advantage the Tyrants prevailed and condemned
him to dye.

The things taken from the King at Hull were Arms, which are of more danger
then other kind of chattels.] By the same Law all that part of the Kingdom
which is not confided in may be disarmed, nay why may not their money be taken
too, upon probable fear they may buy arms with it? The Subject is in a
miserable condition that is liable to be undone as often as they please to be
fearful. It is so far from excusing, it aggravates the fact, to take away
the Kings Arms, that is the means whereby he may seize what ever else belongs
unto His Majesty. The Law of this Kingdom has only entrusted the Prince with
Arms, so, that the Subject ought not to be arraied, trained, and mustered, but
by His Commission.

But some determination must be supreme, and therefore either the Kings power
and trust must be guided by the discretion of the Parliament, or else the
Parliament and all other Courts must be overruled by the Kings mere
discretion.] No necessity of either; For in cases of this nature, which he
confesses to be extraordinary, if the King and Parliament dissent, things must
be at a stand, and the Subject must be obedient to the ordinary Law. The case
of Ireland, as it is laid down by His Majesty, is unanswerable, and therefore
he is forced to extreme shifts, being unable to say any thing material, and
yet unwilling to hold his peace.

England and Ireland are one and the same Dominion, there is as true and
intimate an union betwixt them, as betwixt England and Wales.] If this were so,
Irish Barons would be English Peers, and English Peers would have a right to
vote in Irish Parliaments. Besides all laws here enacted would stand in full
force in Ireland, as they do in the Kings dominion of Wales.

Though the major part should vote a thing, yet if it be disliked here, they
would want authority to overrule the thing so voted. For the reason why the
minor part in all suffrages subscribes to the major, is, that blood may not be
shed, for in probability the major part will prevail. This is a good reason
for such a contract, that the minor part should subscribe; but after such
agreement in States, justice lays an obligation on them so to do: upon his
grounds, if the lesser part in Parliament though never so few, can make it
appear the greater part of the Kingdom are of their opinion, the major part
ought to subscribe to the minor. Nay, if at any time the major part of Ireland
joining with the minor part of England, make a major of the whole, then the
major part in our Parliament must sit down. He takes no notice of the other
case: suppose the malignant party should be a major part of both Houses, which
His Majesty shows how very probably it might have been, and were there a new
election, it is not impossible, the Counties should send up the greater part of
such men as he calls malignant, would he think the King bound to consent to all
such alterations, as they should propose?

Some scattering reasons are laid down concerning the Militia, which are but
repetitions of what I have formerly answered.

A Faction is said to have prevailed upon a major part, by cunning, force,
absence, or accident. He argues thus against it; if by cunning, we must suppose
the King's party in Parliament, has lost all their Law policy and subtilty.]
The reason why they are over-borne, may be this; not because they have less
Law, but more Honesty, which will not permit them to maintain a good cause by
ill means. We all know in how great stead those piae frauds, holy falsehoods,
and religious untruths stood the Church of Rome, though there were such who
laid down better reasons for the contrary opinions, yet truth prevailed slowly
and with a few only, because the minds of most were craftily prepossest with
prejudice against it, begotten and nourished by fained stories. The dispute
proceeded upon very unequal terms; for the Roman party gave themselves the
liberty of taking all advantages, whereas their adversaries were forced to
betray a good cause out of mere ingenuity: they had none of their side who
could lie. We ought to examine, whether this policy work not (at least in the
beginning, till a discovery of their falsehoods is made, and the people is
undeceived) the same effects in a civil State; whether there are not such
things, as frauds (pretended to be) reipublicae salutares, which have so
strong an influence on the understandings of many, that they can submit to the
votes of some, who have insinuated themselves into their affections, against
the clear reasons of others, whom they have been taught causelessly to suspect.
How easy is it to deceive by giving in false informations of dangers from
abroad? If some, more scrupulous then to be abused and led away by light
reports, inquire after the hand that they may judge of the probability of the
intelligence, according to the faith and credit of the relator, they must be
satisfied with this, the informer desires his name should be concealed, Pour
l'eviter^le tiltre d'espion.

It cannot be by force, because they have no army visible.] A thing is said in
Law to be done by force, not only when men actually suffer, if they make use of
their liberty, and refuse to satisfy the passion and humor of some, but then
also when they have just grounds of fear, for this works on the mind, as
strongly as the other on the body. And therefore Seneca tells us, stating this
point of freedom, vim and majorem, and metum excipio, quibus adhibitis electio
perit; and Cicero, nec quicquam aequitati tam infestum est, quam convocati
homines, and armati. It remains then we examine, whether the names of many
gentlemen were not openly read in tumults; whether they were not posted, with
directions to their particular lodgings; whether the way to the house were not
so beset with clamarous multitudes, that they must pass thorough the midst of
them, whilst they inform them, what is fit to be voted, and inquire after their
names, and what side they take. The other two may be reduced to those; It is no
wonder many stay away, since they must be absent even whilst they are there.

The Parliament requests of the King, that all great Officers of State, by whom
public affairs shall be transacted, may be chosen by approbation or
nomination of the great Council: could the King conceive this dishonorable
for him etc. if all Parliaments were not taken as deadly enemies to Royalty?]

Is that the reason why each man preserves his own rights, because he takes all
the rest of mankind for deadly enemies? Can he with honor confess himself
unfit to manage that trust which the law has committed to him? with equal
reason they may challenge to themselves the nomination of all Bishops,
Ministers, Sheriffs, Justices, etc: and dispose of all the Preferments in
England.

The substance of the request seems to be no more but this, that it would
please the King to be advised by Parliaments, etc:] What an affected mistake is
this? He is ashamed to call it by the true name, and therefore styles that
advice, which is properly command, if it be not in His power to reject their
counsel, seem it never so unreasonable.

If the King choose such a man Treasurer or Keeper out of His own good liking
only, or upon recommendation of such a Courtier, here he is divested of no
power; but if it be upon the recomme^dation of the whole Kingdom in
Parliament, who in all probability can judge better, and are more concerned,
this is an emptying himself of Majesty and devesting himself of power.]

If this will content them, they shall have as much power, as He grants to His
Courtiers. Counselors are not names of authority: they are the Princes ears,
His eyes, (this relation is near enough) He sees, and hears by them: yet they
must not pass their bounds; they must be like to the outward senses still, and
make a bare representation; the office of reason is peculiar to him; to pass
judgment thereon: Their information is not always faithful; he may consult
reason, and, by the benefit of that, correct their error misrepresenting an
object as crooked, which in it self is straight.

If not out of duty to their King, and a just sense of His honor, yet out of
love to themselves, and a natural care of their own safety, Subjects are bound
in all legal ways to express their dislike of this proposition. For they
must expect to suffer all those evils which Faction can produce; and what
happiness can be hoped for in a Kingdom divided in it self? This were the
ready way to kindle a fire in our own bowels, which would first break out in
the Countyes electing, and divide the familyes of the gentry by irreconcilable
hatred. For it cannot be imagined, but that power will bandy against power, and
relations against relations, to put Sons or Kinsmen into that road, which only
leads unto preferment. Nor would the flames be quenched, but rather burn more
fiercely even in the Houses, (as being pent in a narrow room) to which the
insolency of some attaining offices, (to which they are not equal) the shame
and discontents of others repulsed, and the ambition of all would add
continual fuel. But the greatest misery of all is, were their corruptions
never so high, we could have but slender hopes of redress. Since the
prevayling party (jealous of their own honor) would easily maintain the
reputation of their choice, and perhaps it would be necessary for them to wink
one at another. He that cannot think it probable, that out of private ends they
should so far neglect justice and honor, let him only examine, whether in
some Parliaments most known offenders, and active instruments in the peoples
misery, by striking in with the prevailing side, have not been more safe then
innocence could have made them.

There are several degrees of Prerogatives Royal, some whereof have greater
power of protection, and less of oppression, and such J am most studious of.]

Certainly it were to be desired, we might enjoy the benefits of power, and not
be subject to the possible abuse thereof. But since this cannot be fully
provided for, because the same hand which is enabled to protect, may injure;
the aims of wisest States have been, not so much to take away the power
(because then they should be likely to suffer under a weak Protector) as the
will of oppression. The most probable means to effect this, is, (after a
certain rule is agreed upon, and Laws are established, to acquaint a governor,
what he ought to do, in performance of that trust committed to him) so to
order his interests, that to advance the peoples good shall be for the Princes
advantage. Subjects will have great reason to promise to themselves a full
happiness from the faithful discharge of his Regal office, to which he is so
strongly tied by those bonds of justice and profit. This the wisdom of our
Ancestors has provided for in a high degree, and so tempered this government,
that both King, and people, will be jointly happy, or jointly miserable. The
several goods of each form are here united; we have great Democraticall
advantages, and yet may avoid the evils of a popular State, as long as
Monarchy is kept up in its due height, and tumultuous insolent multitudes are
not protected from a legal trial: we have the good of Aristocracy, counsel
of the best experienced (such as have studied nations and men) nor yet are we
acquainted with the disease of it, faction amongst the Nobility. The Counsel
of many is profitable, but the resolve of one is necessary. Since they looking
upon one another as equals would be very apt to quarrel; for when one
contradicts, what another has advised, the debate between them seems to be,
which is the wiser man. Their discourses are like so many pleadings for honor,
and we know what issue such suites would come to, when the thing in controversy
is so highly valued, if there were not a judge to determine. And this is the
benefit of Monarchy; which is so restrained by some power proper to the Houses
it cannot degenerate into a tyranny. For how should this enter in? The old
laws (the security of our libertyes) cannot be taken away till both Houses
give consent: but grant an illegal, violent Government should break in upon
us, by what means could it be maintained? The King can have no supply of
money, without the House of Commons, and without these sinews his arm would
not be strong enough to hold the reins, which should govern that provoked
beast, the multitude. But He may take it by force, He cannot do it in person,
and it is not to be imagined, any considerable number of His people, will be
active in their own slavery. Besides what can he propose to himself? The
people will give more then can be forced from them; so he looses by it, and
then how much does he hazard against less then nothing? He has least reason
to break the laws wilfully, because he injoyes most by them, and experience
having showed the benefit of observing them, and the ill of the contrary, He
cannot but doubt, the People would fail of their duty, if he do in performance
of trust, and cast of the bond of obedience, if he do that of Protection.
These things duly weighed, render that malice inexcuseable, which has long
time exercised the people with most unreasonable fears, of lands, and liberty,
and Religion being in danger; and this notwithstanding the King's many sacred
Protestations to the contrary before God and all the world, and the whole
course of his proceedings, which evidently tend to the securing all.

Now I think it does fully appear, that the doctrine of that Remonstrance,
laid down by His Majesty, by way of recapitulation in seven positions, is most
justly offensive; being such as does threaten ruin to both Church, and State,
not permitting us, either to obey the King, or serve God as we ought.

1. That the Parliament has an absolute indisputable power of declaring Law; so
that all the right of King and People depends upon their pleasure.

This power must rest in them, or in the King, or in some inferior Court, or
else all suits must be endless, and it can no where rest more safely then in
Parliament.] The two Houses are not the Parliament. The subject of such power
is the entire body, which consists of three estates. Some things are clear and
evident in Law, and want no declarer; if otherwise, all the Subjects right
would lie in the breast of the Judge. If the two Houses should Vote, younger
Brothers ought to inherit by the Law of England, could this destroy the right
of the first born?

2. That Parliaments are bound to no Presidents.

Statutes are not binding to them, why then should Presidents? yet there is no
obligation stronger then the Justice and Honor of a Parliament.] This is an
excellent ground to justify their innocence against all the world. For if they
can make it appear, they are not bound to keep any law, no man can accuse
them for the breach of any. What obligation can justice lay on them, who by
astrange virtue of representation, are not capable of doing wrong. It will
become justice, because they did it* when he has declared what Honor is, I
shall be able to judge of that bond; it may perchance not stand with their
honor, not to be able to prove men guilty, after they have once accused and
imprisoned them. Statutes stand in, full force to the two Houses, as being not
void, till repealed by a joint consent of all the Estates.

3. That they are Parliaments, and may judge of public necessity without the
King, and dispose of any thing.

They may not desert the King, but being deserted by the King, when the
Kingdom is in distress, they may judge of that distress and relieve it, and
are to be accounted by the virtue of Representation, as the whole body of the
State.] To dissent, after he has granted what ever can in reason be desired,
is not to desert the Houses. Upon pretense of distress, to take illegal
courses, is as if they should persuade us, we are not in health, and therefore
they must break our heads to forward our recovery. They represent the people
to some purposes, not the King to any, and therefore are but a part of the
State.

4. That no member of Parliament ought to be troubled for Treason etc. without
leave.

This is intended of suspicion only, and when leave may seasonably be bad, and
when competent accusers appear not in the impeachment.] If by suspicions be
meant only a bare not considing in, this in justice cannot be sufficient
ground. But upon Articles drawn and proofs in readiness, which it is not fit
to produce, while the accused parties are at liberty, they may be meddled with:
for designs of this nature may brook no delay, because it might prove
dangerous to the King's safety, or at least afford them liberty to escape. If
the Houses being adjourned were not able to give consent, or upon too much
confidence, should not be willing, has not the Law provided in such a case for
trial of Treason?

5. That the sovereign power resides in both Houses of Parliament, the King
having no negative voice.

This power is not claimed as ordinary, nor to any purpose, but to save the
Kingdom from ruin, and in case where the King is so seduced, as that be
proferres dangerous men, and prosequutes his loyal Subjects.] Not as ordinary;
that is they will only be King's as long as they please, and when they are
weary of Reigning, the Kingdom shall be out of danger, and then it shall be
his turn to command again. To save it from ruin; the Law has better
provided for the Peoples safety, by prohibiting all illegal executions of
power, grounded upon what specious pretenses soever, And in case where the King
is seduced; that is, when he is not so wise as he should be, because he does
not think as they do, and refuses to satisfy the humors, and interests of
some. And prefers; (this seems to be the true cause of all; preferments do not
go the right way) dangerous men, i. e. such as desire he should govern
according to the known Laws of the Land. And prosequutes his loyal Subjects;
i. e. is driven from London to York, where He long time patiently expected the
undeceiving of His People.

6. That leavying Forces against the personal commands of the King (though
accompanied with his presence) is not leavying war against the King: but war
against his Authority, though not Person, is war against the King.

If this were not so, the Parliament seeing a seduced King ruining himself and
the Kingdom, could not save both, but must stand and look on.] It is against
common sense to fancy a King ruining Himself and Kingdom; He can neither be
willing nor able. Upon a mad supposall, mad consequences will follow.

7. That according to some Parliaments, they may depose Kings.

It Is denied that any King was deposed by a free Parliament fairly elected.]
This is most certain, but takes not off those words upon which this Proposition
is grounded.

These might well have been omitted, as being more fully handled in the book.
But least he should complain any thing was past over, I chose by a short
review to be his remembrancer. The Propositions collected out of His Majesty's
Declarations, are but the brief of his Observations, to all which I have
already spoken.

To conclude, if the people hearken to reason they must needs think, His
Majesty will be more ready to prevent all real danger, then any Subject
whatsoever, because He is sure to bear the greatest share in the loss. It
always was the master Policy amongst the wisest Legislators to grant to them
the greatest power of government, to whom the preservation of the present state
would be most beneficial; because their private interests were the same with
the public, from which if they swarv'd by error or misinformation their own
disadvantage did soon appear.

FINIS.

