A strange and true RELATION OF A YOUNG WOMAN possessed with the Devil. By name
Joyce Dovey, dwelling at Bewdley near Worcester.

With a particular of her actions, and how the evil spirit speaks within her,
giving fearful answers unto those Ministers and others that come to discourse
with her.

As it was certified in a Letter from Mr. James Dalton unto Mr. Tho. Groom,
Ironmonger over against Sepulchers Church in London.

ALSO A Letter from Cambridge, wherein is related the late conference between
the Devil (in the shape of a Mr. of Arts) and (...)e Ashbourner a Scholar of
S. John's College, near Trinity Conduit-Head, a mile from Cambridge, who was
afterward carried away by him, and never heard of since, only his Gown found
in the River.

Imprinted at London by E. P. for Tho. Vere at the upper end of the Old-Bailey.
1647.

A Letter sent from Mr. James Dalton to Mr. Tho. Groom, Ironmonger, over
against Sepulchers Church, London.
IT is the property of humane nature to desire news, and therefore having
seen the last Diurnall (out of which I could pick but small crumbs of comfort) I
afterward saw a Letter imparting good News, which should come by the Post to
Birmingham, that the two Kingdoms were reconciled, and a peace concluded. I
pray you send me what news you have, which I shall endeavor to requite by
this ensuing Relation, which although I received it but at the second or third
hand, yet by such persons, as I nothing doubt the truth hereof: Sir it is thus:

At Bewdley, seven miles from us, there is a young Woman (by name Joyce Dovey)
one who formerly was little taken notice of for Religion, until about 4. years
since, who after the hearing of a Sermon, seemed to be much wrought upon and
dejected, who afterward fell into some passions, and (as was conceived by her
friends) Convulsion fits, which in time grew stronger upon her, and observed
especially to take her in the time of private prayer, or performance of other
pious duties; whereupon they procured a devour religious young man, to b^ in
the house, and to be as a Keeper unto her; the bruit whereof increasing, there
came to visit her a Chaplain of a Regiment, and a Captain, who by some
discourse, and other informations, strongly imagined, that she was possessed;
whereupon about three weeks or a month since, her Keeper lift up his heart to
the Lord in prayer, without uttering of words, that if she were possessed, the
Lord would be pleased to make it manifest, which no sooner conceived, but the
Devil answers with swearing, Wounds, Blood, etc. that thou shall know; and
this observe generally, that he makes the woman's tongue and organs instruments
of speech, but it is in a bigger and grosser tone then her ordinary speech, and
when he speaks, she looks fiercely with something arising big in her
throat, and commonly with swearing, and especially by the life of Pharaoh: When
any discourses with her about wordly business, she will familiarly talk with
them, but when any use speech of Divine matters, she is most troubled.

It is further reported, that M. Burrowson Minister there with others came to
see her, to whom M Bur. said, thou foul spirit, thy power is limited; to whom
was replied, Thou lie, my power is over all the world, and my Kingdom is the
greatest: To another that said, Thou foul unclean spirit, what have thou to
do to vex a poor creature, was answered, I have Commission and power to tempt
you all. Three Soldiers, (they say,) came to see her, who talking of Papists,
Crucifixes, and Crosses, presently appeared in her breast or throat two
Crosses, whereupon the Soldiers being aghast, began to get away; haw, haw, haw,
says the Devil: now (says her Keeper) they are afraid, and the Devil laughs
at them. She usually goes abroad, and coming to the House of an honest
religious man, where many came in after her to s^e her, she began to be so
distempered, that she could not go home that night; and as they were at prayer
in an upper Chamber, she was on a sudden caught up into the window, and the
greatest part of her body thrust through a great casement, but her Keeper having
an eye unto her, stepped unto her, and caught her by the coats, and took her in
again: She is often thrown against the walls, and into the fire, but all without
any hurt: One time being cast into a great fire, some would have taken her out,
but her Keeper said, let her alone, and observe the providence of God, and
strait-way she was snatched out without humane help, not having any hurt, or so
much as the smell of fire on her clothes: She has snatched a pair of Cizzers
from a woman's girdle, and applied them to her throat; and another time a knife
from another, in an admirable quick way, and struck her breast, yet both
without so much as a scarre in either place: She has thrown a Bible into the
fire, which was not burned. On a time one coming into the house, to discourse
with her Keeper, and to take some observations in writing concerning her, they
went into an inner chamber, and as he came forth with the paper in his hand,
she fell upon him very violently, and would have taken the paper from him, but
he contended with her very toughly, and after a long conflict, gave her the
repulse, who having kept the paper without tearing, only a little corner, but
not a word torn off, he voluntarily threw it down on the ground, saying,
Devil thou have not power to take it up, and so took it up himself and
departed.

It is very like I have not heard of all the passages concerning her, which if
any of note come unto my knowledge (as I believe I shall shortly see a
Catalogue of the particulars) if they come not to public view (which I suppose
will be ere long) I shall further acquaint you therewith (God willing.)

No more at present, but with mine and my wives kind remembrance unto you, my
Sister, and Cousens Henry and Mary, I rest,

14. December. 1646: Your very loving and affectionate Brother, JAMES DALTON.

A Leter from Cambridge,
wherein is related the late conference between the Devil (in the shape of a
Master of Arts) and one Ashbourner a Scholar of S. John's College, near
Trinity Conduit-Head, a mile from Cambridge, who was afterward carried away by
him, and never heard of since, only his Gown found in the River.

SIR,
BEfore I acquaint you with mine own occasions, I think it expedient to let you
hear in the first place, how matters stand here. I hope Sir this great Tempest
which lately was, has not been much hurtful to you at London, though unto us
at Cambridge, a place where strange business has been acted of late, but that
which is most strange, one Ashbourner a Scholar of S. John's College, whom the
Devil* that Malignant Sophister) did surprise, being serious with himself,
and meditating about his studies, at a place called Trinity Conduit-head, a
mile from Cambridge, who appearing to him in the shape of a Mr. of Arts, or (as
some say) like a Gentleman, asked the Lad wherefore he was so discontented, who
answered, because I cannot understand that which I read; Let me see thy Book
(which was a Magirus) quoth the Devil, which the Lad showing, he immediately
expounded the places that were difficult, so that the Scholar wondered he
understood it so clearly; but yet see sir, how the Devil caught advadvantage
from this, for at last having propounded two questions to the Scholar, 1. An
Deus sit Omnipotens. 2. An Malum sit ens privativum vel positivum, asked him
whether he would be his scholar, promising him if he would, he should go to
Padua (a famous University in Italy) where he would instruct him in all manner
of Learning, and help him to his degree of Doctor of Divinity in a ^eekes time:
The Lad consented, and ti'd himself sure with this Obligation Dabo tibi animam
si vis dare mihi Doctrinam and sapientiam: But as God would have it, the Lads
conscience was stricken with fear, returning to the College in apprehension
of what he had done, but the soul being so precious, and the very thing that
the Devil always aims at, was sold at too low a rate, and little comfort
could he find from any; so that by continual trouble of the evil spirit, he
is either gone to Padua, the place aforementioned, or else has drowned
himself, his Gown being found in the water, (but nothing of him) two days
after he left the College.

FINIS.

