Choice and Experimented RECEIPTS IN Physic and Surgery, AS ALSO CORDIAL
and DISTILLED Waters and Spirits, Perfumes, and other Curiosities. Collected by
the Honorable and truly Learned Sir Kenelm Digby Knight. Chancellor to Her Majesty
the QUEEN MOTHER. The Second Edition Corrected and Amended. LONDON: Printed by
Andrew Clark, for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1675.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Duke of Buckingham, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and one of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
I Had formerly the Happiness of wearing an humble Relation to Sir Kenelm
Digby, and to his Business; by means of which Interest and Favor, there came
to my hand diverse of his Excellent Curiosuies and Receipts: In truth, it is so
choice a Collection, that in the first place I made it a matter of Conscience
to recommend it to the Public: And (having permission from his ingenious Son
Mr. John Digby thereunto) my next care was, so to do it, as to render all
possible Honor and Right to the Memory of that eminent Person. Upon which
Consideration, I have taken the boldness to make a Dedication of it to your
Lordship, as the most competent Judge and Patron of Learning and Virtue. From
which presumption, I shall now descend to my self again, and vanish with this
Protestation, That without pretending to the Honor of being any way known to
your Lordship, No man living bath a greater Reverence for your Person and
Faculties, than

My LORD, Your Graces most Humbe and Obedient Servant, GEORGE HARTMAN.

An approved Remedy for all sorts of Agues.
TAke thirty grains of the species of Hiera Picra, put this with half a pint of
the best Aqua Vitae into a glassbottle, too big to contain it, which cork well,
and set so near a fire, that it may feel a gentle, and but a very gentle warmth
for ten or twelve hours, shaking the bottle very often: then let it stand and
settle; and an hour or two before the patient expects his fit, pour off gently
five or six spoonfuls, and let him take it: he may after it walk, and do what
moderate exercise he pleases; perhaps it may give him a stool or two: repeat
this thrice; in Quartans and Quotidians five or six times, but no oftener: it
opens obstructions if the constitution be not too hot.

Another for the same.
TAke four spoonfuls of the juice of Red-nettles, and eight of the best strong
Ale you can get, mingle them well together and give it warm to the patient, as
soon as he feels the first emotion that always precedeth his fit, which uses
to come an hour before the formal fit seiseth him; and let him lie warm in bed,
with bottles of hot water at his feet, and under the armpits, to cause sweat,
which he will do abundantly.

You need not give so much of the juice to a child, as to a very big man,
proportion it according to their bulk: this here set down is for middling
persons.

The juice is best in the Spring, but is good all the year long.

An approved Cure of Tertian Agues.
TAke a good handful of the leaves of Ribwort, (in the Summer green, in the
Winter dry) boil them in a large draught of clear posset drink, so that it be
strong of the herb. Give this to the patient to drink warm, as soon as he
finds such alteration in his body as warns him of the approaching fit; and
then let him lie conveniently warm to sweat: if this cure him not the first
time, it may the second.

For the Tedious Agues.
TAke a good pint of the best White Wind, put into it half a handful of
Camomile-flowers; set these upon the hot embers in a vessel close covered: let
them stew simpringly at the edge for an hour or thereabouts, till the Wine have
drawn out all the virtue of the flowers; then pour off the liquor, and put into
it thirty grains of the fixed Salt of Tartar, drink it warm as soon as you find
any emotion of the approaching fit, and lie warm, and it will make you sweat.
Do so the next fit, adding five grains more of the Salt of Tartar, so that you
take thirty five grains; at the third fit take forty grains, and so rest there
till you are well, not exceeding that quantity, though you repeat the Medicine.

A most excellent Sudorifick Cordial, which cures all sorts of Agues, and all
Burnings or Purple Fevers, as also all sorts of Fluxes and Pyles. It is also
excellent for the hot Gout.
TAke Salt of Tartar one ounce, put it into a pint of French Aqua Vitae, let it
stand in gentle warmth a day, then filter it through a gray paper.

Take then good Opium well chosen, cut it into thin slices, and dry it very
gently till it be a little friable; then cut it very small, and put it into a
glass-bottle, and pour upon it a quart of Aqua Vitae; stop the bottle well; and
tie it with a bladder, and set it in the Sun in Summer, in the Winter in some
gentle warmth to digest twenty four hours, or till the tincture be of a reddish
brown, and the Opium be dissolved; then strain it through a gray paper, and put
to it the dissolution of the Salt of Tartar, and infuse half an ounce of
Saffron in it, then let it stand in a gentle heat six hours or more, then
strain it through double paper so often till there remain no feces in the
straining of it, then will the Opium be purified from all its venom, and is of
great; virtue in the foresaid diseases, then let the patient take the following
purge.

Take the powder of the root Jallop twenty or twenty four grains,
Cremor-Tartari ten or twelve grains, mixed with syrop of Roses for a dose in the
morning. But when there is any looseness or bloody flux, you need not purge,
but take the foresaid prepared tincture, or Cordial; the dose of it is a
spoonful and half, or two spoonfuls for strong persons, and for little children
three or four drops mixed with the milk of the Nurse; then let the patient sweat
in his bed. This medicine will make sweat sometimes a day and night, or only
some hours. The manner of using this remedy is thus: Purge (for example) Monday
morning, Tuesday night take the Sudorifick Tincture, drink nothing all night,
unless the heat of your mouth persuade you to take a spoonful of Wine. In the
morning when your sweat is over, take a Tossed of Wine with Sugar, and lie yet,
to see if you shall sweat again; which being quite past, eat and drink
moderately of good things. Thursday morning take the purge again. Friday night
take the Tincture again, or if you will (and that the day of the fit falls out
proper for that) take a dose of Antimony Diaphoretick upon Thursday in stead of
the purge, and Friday night take the Tincture again. In fine, govern your self
for purging, or taking either of the Diaphoreticks as you shall find best; and
continue the Diaphoretick of Antimony as long as you think fit, after you have
done with the other Diaphoretick, and with purging.

This excellent medicine has done great miracles upon persons that have had
the Ague three years; it restores the spirits and strength lost; and
comfort the heart. It cures likewise the Colic, the Toothache, the
Catarrhs, the violent Cough, the Griping in the Belly, and stays Vomiting.
The use of it for the Toothache is, to take half a spoonful, and hold it on the
side where your Tooth aketh in your mouth, the space of a quarter of an hour,
then spit it out, and take some fresh; if it needs for the Gout, dip a
feather in it, and foment the dolent part with it.

When they rave and are frantic in their Fever, you may put eight or ten
grains of Salt of Pearls into every dose of this Medicine.

A Diaphoretick of Antimony to be used with this Medicine.
TAke one part of Regulus of Antimony and six of Nitre. Burn them well in a
Crucible, reverberate them an hour after they are melted. Then have an earthen
Pitcher full of Conduit-Water; upon the mouth of it set a Crucible with a hole
in the bottom: pour through this into the cold water your melted Antimony and
Saltpetre. It will make a strange noise, as if all would break in pieces, but
it will not do so. Most of the Salt will be dissolved in the water, and the
Antimony will settle to the bottom in white Powder: pour off the water when all
is thoroughly settled, and dulcifie yet more with often ablutions in fresh
waters the remaining powder, till all saltness be gone: then dry it in due
manner, and keep it for use.

A Julep to cool in Fevers.
NOthing does more hinder the fermentation of sharp humors and their flying up
to the head, than the use of dilute Oxymel, such as Hippocrates and the
ancients used. Make it thus,

Take two parts of Honey and twelve of Water; boil them very gently together,
till you have scummed away all the Scum that will rise, and have clarified it
with Whites of Eggs. Then take it from the fire, and put to it one part of
Vinegar, and let it run twice or thrice through an Hippocras bag. Drink three
or four spoonfuls at a time of it, morning, evening, night, or when you will.

Cuchinile for a Purple Fever.
TO persons above twenty years of age, give thirty or forty granes of Cochinile
in some fit Cordial-water or in Wine, if you have no Cordial-water at hand. If
they be younger, proportion it to their age; as, seven granes to a Child of
three years old, eighteen granes to one of six years. After twice or thrice
doing this, and keeping the Patient very warm, the Disease will break out in
spots. But fail not to give it once or twice after they are stricken out.

A Remedy for a Burning Fever.
TAke of Honisucle leaves a good quantity, stamp them in a Mortar; put as much
fair Water to it as will make a Clyster, then strain it, and put it into the
Bladder or Syringe, and give it the Patient not quite cold. It opens the body
and cools the Veins.

A Cooling Drink in a Fever.
TAke a Gallon of Spring Water, five Spoonfuls of French Barley, half a pound of
the best blue Currants, let it boil softly till a quart be consumed; then take
two handfuls of Wood Sorrel, as much of Roman Sorrel; bruise them well, and let
them infuse one hour, then take it off and strain it through a Sieve; drink of
this with the juice of an Orange, and a little fine Sugar.

An often approved Remedy for an Ague.
TAke three drams of Venice or London Treacle: put it into a quarter of a pint
of White Wine, and put it into a little Pot very close covered, let it stew
simpringly for half an hour, stirring it sometimes. When the Patient feels
any emotion of the approaching Fit, let him take this, shaking it well
together; let him go to bed and cover himself warm to sweat. Repeat it thrice.

A present Remedy for all kinds of Colicks whatsoever.
TAke Mint, Sage, (both of them dry) of each two handfuls, and of the best
Spirit of Wine a Pottle, digest it in a Cucurbite eight days. Then distill it in
Balneo Mariae, taking but a third part of it; the rest is good, but in a weaker
degree. Of this first Spirit take a dram and half; and two ounces of White
Wine: Mingle and drink them.

For violent Coughing by a sharp thin tickling Rheum.
TAke old Conserve of Roses, and work into it by strong rinding and beating as
much as you can of pure fine Olibanum in most subtle powder, that the
Consistence be very stiff. Of this take as much as a good Hasel Nut in a Spoon
with a little Syrop of Violets about it, in the morning and at night, and the
like sometimes in the day, if you have need.

For a Cold in the Head, to draw Rheum from the Head.
PAre very thin the yellow Rind of Orange, roll it up conveniently, to thrust
up into the Nostril, turning the innermost side outward, to be next your flesh
within the Nose; put a roll into each Nostril. It will cause sneesing, and will
make much water run down out at the Nose, and comforts the Brain.

For all sorts of Fluxes.
TAke two quarts of new Milk, two sound Nutmegs sliced thin, eighteen blackest
Pepper-corns, eighteen largest Cloves, five pennyworth of Stick-Cinnamon, of
the outward Bark of an old Oak (the rough part a little scraped off) twice as
much as of the Cinnamon, both which must be sliced thin: boil this to between
two and three Pints, then pour the Milk from the Spice, and divide it into four
parts, which will be about a Porringer-full apiece. Give a draught of this as
hot as the Patient can drink it, early in the morning fasting, another at Ten a
Clock, a third at Four in the afternoon, and the last going to bed, and make
fresh every day. The Patient may dine and sup as he has a mind. The first
draught will take away the pain and griping, and then afterward it is not
necessary to take it so very hot.

It does not bind it suddenly, but smoothneth and heals the guts, and
strengthens the stomach, and he shall have at the first two, three or four
gentle stools a day. And if he have lost his Appetite, so that he can eat
nothing, as usually happens in great Fluxes, this Milk gives him sufficient
nourishment.

For a Bloudy-Flux often approved.
TAke four drams of Diaphaenicon, and half a scruple of Pulvis sanctus fasting,
in White Wind made warm, that the Diaphaenicon may be dissolved; and keep the
Patient from sleeping, until it have wrought, and an hour after they have taken
it, give them some Chicken Broth; if it be given alone without Pulvis sanctus,
it riddeth the Belly and Guts from all raw and crude humors, and eases the
Belly from gripings and pain proceeding of Wind and cold causes.

For any Looseness.
TAke one dram of the seeds of Plantane, bruise them and take them in a draught
of Broth (which is best, if a little tops of Plantane be boiled with it) in the
morning fasting. Continue this three mornings together.

For Fluxes.
TAke the herb Swallow-wort when it is in the flower, (it must be gathered in
dry and fair weather) the whole herb or plant, i. e. the root, stalk, leaves
and flowers; make it clean without washing it; let it lie a day in a dry
Chamber in the open Air; but so that the Sun come not to it, then chop it
small, or bruise it, (without deperdition of any juice) and put it into a
Cucurbite of Glass, and put upon it some good Aqua vitae (such as comes from
France) as much as will be above it a fingers breadth or two, and cover it
close with a Blind-head, and let it digest three or four days (best, near a
little warmth) then change the head, putting on one with a Limbeck, and distill
with gentle heat of Sand, till you have drawn off so much of the humidity as
may not endanger Burning. This Liquor will have some little strength in it, but
not by a great deal so much as the Aqua Vitae: The Dose is a little Wine-glass
full at a time. I have found it admirable for the Brain, the Eyesight, the
Heart, the Stomach, and all languishing Diseases and Decays of Nature, and
causes a little gentle breathing, scarce amounting to sweat: When you take it
in a morning, it gives you a wonderful severity of brain and cheerfulness of
humor in languishing Diseases; if bad humors abound, it must be given with
Purges of Gambogium, one morning the one, the next the other; thus, three times
each.

It must be given seven, eight or nine granes of Gutta Gamba or Gambogia for a
Dose, either in Powder, in Wine, or other fit vehicle; or make it up into a
Pill with a drop of Syrup of Roses: This quantity will purge gently watery
humors, and give a gentle Vomit if the Stomach be foul.

For a Looseness.
TAke a Pint of Claret Wine, and put into it two penyworth of bruised Cinnamon,
and as many Cloves; boil this gently upon Embers (covering the Pot) till half
be boiled away: In the mean time tossed a Tossed or two of light Bread, and cover
them sufficiently with Sugar, then pour (through a Lixor) the Wine upon them:
Eat those sopped Tosts for all the Dinner, and the like for the Supper, eating
no other sustenance that day; and it uses to cure in a day.

An Anodyne Clyster.
TAke six ounces of thick Barley Cream ( Cremor Hordei) and the Whites of three
new-laid Eggs beaten into an Oil, and about two spoonfuls of lump kitchen Sugar
(not brown Sugar used in Clysters, nor Loaf-Sugar, but the best sweetning
Sugar, and that is in lumps) and as much Rose Water as may reduce the whole
into a fit consistence for a Clyster (which may be three or four good
spoonfuls) then warm it sufficiently for a Clyster, and so take it. You may
with ease keep it three or four hours or more. It cools and tempereth the
Bowels exceedingly, and heals much any excoriation or fretting in them and
eases the pain arising thence.

The best Rule to discern if there be Sugar or Rose Water sufficient in the
Clyster, is to taste it; for it should be so as to be most pleasant to your taste
if you were to eat it.

An Excellent Clyster to cure any painful Flux or Scowring.
TAke a convenient handful of Barly-meal that has all its Bran in it, as much
Bran of Wheat, and as much dried Roses. Put these to boil gently in three pints
of water, in a glazed Pipkin covered, for about three quarters of an hour; then
strain hard through a linen-cloth all the liquor with the slimy substance that
comes out with it. This is enough for two Clysters when needfully done. Take
half this Decoction, and put into it the yolks of two new-laid Eggs, and one
ounce of Mel-rosate. Give it the Patient duly warm. He may keep it a long time
(two or three or four hours) without trouble, because the quantity is less than
of an ordinary Clyster, and that it is of a Balsamic and comforting quality to
the excoriated Guts. This is an excellent Remedy to any sharp tormenting Flux,
where the Guts are enflamed, excoriated and ulcerated, either through ordinary
causes (as eating fruit or the like) or by taking Mercury to Flux one by
Salivation. You will presently find ease, at the first taking it, but it is
well to repeat it twice or thrice a day.

For the greatest Flux or Looseness.
TAke a right Pomwater the greatest or two little ones, roast them very tender
to pap, take away the skin and the coar, and use only the pap; and the like
quantity of Chalk finely scraped: mix them together before the fire, and work
them well to a Plaster, then spread it upon a linen-cloth warmed very hot as
may be suffered, and so bind it to the Navel twenty four hours, use it two or
three times till the Flux stay off.

An approved Remedy for the Obstractions of the Spleen or Liver.
TAke the Whites of eight Eggs, and beat them very small, two good handfuls of
the leaves called Vervein (in Latin Verbena) stamp it very well: mingle these
two together and add as much Barlyflower to it as will make it a Pultis; which
spread upon a coarse cloth and apply it, leaving it on twice twenty four hours.

An excellent Limewater for Obstructions and Ulcers, etc.
TAke one pound of Stone-Lime hot from the Kiln, and pour upon it a gallon of
fair water, let it stand eight hours, and then pour it off clear, and put into
it of English Licoris, Aniseeeds and Sassafras, of each four ounces, large Mace
two drams; let these infuse in the water twelve hours, then pour it off from
the Ingredients, and keep it for your use.

Drink of this Water twice or thrice a day, half a pint at a time. It is very
excellent for all manner of Obstructions and Ulcers, either inward or outward,
and likewise to be used by way of injection.

An excellent Bemedy for the Dropsy.
LEt the Patient swallow every morning three or four whole Cloves of Garlic
without taking any other thing with them, but you must first prick them with a
needle in four or five several places, out of which will issue a sharp biting
water which you must wipe away: And a little while after swallowing theGarlick
he must drink a good draught of Wormwood Ale; and then do upon it as much
exercise as conveniently he can; at dinner eat what you will of wholesome diet,
but at night sup not, or but very little, and at going to bed, take the Cloves
of Garlic and Wormwood Ale as in the morning. Continue this till the Patient
be well, which usually (...)s in twenty or thirty days. Take the best Wormwood
Ale and strongest of the Wormwood, by putting. overnight a sufficient quantity
of Wormwood into quick good midling Ale; but during the Cure, you must every
morning and night use the following Bath or Fomentation.

Take three gallons of Conduit-Water, and boil in it five or six handfuls of
Mallows, and two pound of fresh Mutton-suet, (that which is next the Kidneys)
stripped from the skin and chopped small, and half a peck of Wheat-bran; boil it
till the fat be thoroughly melted, and the virtue of the Mallows drawn out into
the liquor, then you must strain it to cast away the dregs, and this both hot,
foment the legs, very well for one half hour or an hour, setting the feet in
the Boul where the Decoction is. This will draw much water from the Legs: For
after you have taken the Garlic and Wormwood Ale a while, it will drive the
humors into the Legs and Feet, which will be much swelled with it, and pit much.

Another Remedy for the Dropsy.
TAke three or four pound or thereabouts, of Mountain-Sage, (a bagful above a
foot, or fourteen or fifteen inches high, and eight or nine, or ten overthwart)
bruise it in a Mortar, and put it into a Bag of Boulter-cloth, and put it into
a Kilderkin of middling Ale as soon as it is tunned, putting into the Ale the
Juice that may have run out of the Herb upon beating it: and as soon as it is
fit to drink (which may be in a week or five or six days) continually drink of
it at meals and all times you have occasion, and drink nothing else: Have still
a new Vessel coming on under the former, so to have always some ready. A
Kilderkin is the fourth part of a Barrel, and may hold about nine gallons.

Another.
GAther ordinary Wormwood in May, when it is in greatest vigor, and distill it
in an ordinary Still that serves for Rose Water: Put the water that comes
over upon fresh Wormwood as before, and distill it as you did: Put this Water
upon another like Paviel of fresh Wormwood, and so distill a third time: you
must have a care never to distill to perfect dryness, but still to leave a
little behind, which is the very gross part. Drink of this Water in the morning
fasting, and in the afternoon about four or five of the clock.

Another.
TAke four handfuls of the inner green rind of Elder, after the outward gray
bark is pared off, and one handful of Wormwood: Put them to two gallons of
liquor composed thus: Let two parts of it be Beer and Ale, of convenient
strength, and one part White Wind: Let the proportion of Beer and Ale to one
another be according to the best liking and taste, and the White Wind half as
much as both they together: Let the Vegetables (...)ie in this liquor close
stopped three or four days, that it may imbibe into itself all the virtue of
them: After which time bottle it up into Quart-Bottles, which stop close; it
will soon grow very quick and pleasant. Drink only of this at meals and all
times, when you have need to drink.

A great and approved Care of the Dropsy.
FIrst purge well with some fit Purge (as of Jallap, Manna, Seen,) to carry
away warry humors. Then take the following Diet of Garlic. Make some moderate
Broth of Mutton, Chickens and Gapon or Hen, but not Veal. It must not be too
strong of the Meat, nor too weak; but such as you may drink all the day, for
you should drink no other Liquor. You must make but about a pottle of Broth at
a time, for it will not keep. And for this quantity you must take a gallon of
Water, into which put above a handful of Garlic and Rosemary, Peniroial,
Thyme, sweet Marjoram, Fennel-roots, Parsly-roots, or any other fit Roots or
Herbs; as also Currants and a sufficient quantity of Salt. And after some days
taking the Broth, put into every draught you take of the Broth a Spoonful or
more of the crude juice of Garlic stamped and strained out. But if you cannot
bear it always to drink this Broth, then use the following Decoction. Take
Sarsaparilla twelve ounces, China Roots five ounces, Sassafr as three ounces.
Cut all these very small, and pour upon them Fountain Water, to three fingers
breadth above the Ingredients, and: let them infuse over a soft fire the space
of four hours, then throw away this water; and stamp the Ingredients well in a
Mortar with a wooden Pestle; then pour upon them tea quarts of Fountain Water,
and boil it in a Vesle close stopped till four quarts of it be consumed.

Of this Decoction drink without any other drink but the Garlic Broth.

Another Drink.
TAke all the foresaid ingredients in the same manner prepared and stamped:
then take a clean vessel and fill it with Beer, then put all the ingredients in
a Bag, and hang it in the Beer. One ounce of the ingredients is sufficient for
a quart of Beer.

Either of these drinks is only in case you cannot bear the use of the Garlic
Broth; which alone will dispatch the Cure much the sooner. After twelve or
fourteen days the Patient will begin to piss in great abundance, and very
stinking noisome roping matter. Continue your diet till you are perfectly cured.

Then to strengthen and secure your Liver, take the following Electuary. Take
of Powder of Turmerick a sufficient quantity, make with it and Sugar an
Electuary, add to every ounce of it th^e^ drops of Aniseed Oil made by
Distillation. And if you put a little of Ambergris to it, it will be the better
to strengthen.

Take of this Electuary two or three times a day, the quantity of a Hazle Nut;
but take not above one ounce in a day.

Besides this to strengthen the Stomach, use the following Stomacher: Take
Wormwood, Marjoram, Rosemary, Rue, ana one handful; Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, ana
one ounce; bruise these Spices, and mix them with the Herbs; of these make a
Stomacher, and apply it. And you may likewise anoint your Stomach and region of
the Liver with Oil of Nutmeg and Oil of Roses.

This course of the Garlick-Broth is for all Obstructions and superfluity of
Cold, raw Humors clogging the Brain or any other part, as well as for the
Dropsy.

For Legs or other parts of the Body swelled coming by abounding of bad Tumors,
or by the Dropsy.
TAke yellow Amber, the worth of three or four pence, mix it with a quart of
good Wine-Vinegar. Then take a Stone or Brick, and make it hot, but let it not
be red hot, and put it into a Tub, then pour upon the Stone or Brick the
mixture of the Vinegar and Amber, and hold the swelled Leg over the smoke of
it, covering the Tub well with Sheets or Blankets, to the end that none of the
smoke may come out: And immediately the water will come out of the Leg
powerfully, and it will be cured. An eminent Person of Quality was exceedingly
overgrown with the Dropsy, and his belly swollen to a prodigious bigness: He
sat in a great Pipe, such as men use to sweat in, and used this remedy,
pouring the Liquor upon hot Bricks laid upon ashes to save the wood from
burning and smoking (which he changed as their heat was deaded, and could raise
no more smoke of the Vinegar and Amber) and in a little while it had melted him
away to an unbelievable proportion: but whilst he was in that steam, he felt a
wondrous active heat piercing into his body. The Tub was covered close at the
top with a Sheet and Blankets, leaving only his head out in the air, with the
clothes fastened about his neck. Once sweating thus served his turn; all his
Servants with fresh hot Napkins could not suffice to wipe dry the sweaty water
that ran out of his body.

Another for the Dropsy.
TAke a gallon of White Wind, and put into it a handful of Roman Wormwood, and
a good piece of Horseradish, and a good quantity of Broom-ashes tied in a
cloth; then take a good bunch of Dwarf-Elder, beat it in a Mortar, and strain
out the juice, and put it into the Wine when you will drink it; but if the
Dwarf-Elder be dry, you must steep a good quantity in the Wine. Take of this
half a pint morning and evening.

For the Haemorrhoids. For Aches. Probat.
TAke six Figs, and cleave them along through the middle, lay them in a
Porringer, and pour upon them some good Brandy-wine to cover them a fingers
breadth or two over; set the Brandy on fire by a flaming Paper, and let it burn
as long as it will; the Figs will then be very tender and soft (that they may
be so, you must choose the best plain ordinary yellowest Figs, that are sound
and pulpy.) Apply one of these halfs as hot as you can endure to the swelled
Haemorrhoid that comes out, and let it lie on till it grow cool, which will be
in less than half a quarter of an hour; then apply another half Fig as before,
and so continue till you have used all the twelve halfs; and to that end, you
must keep them hot by a fire. This will give you perfect ease, though the pain
were never so great before, and take away all the swelling and knobs upon the
veins, and make them retire orderly into the body. For the inner Piles, make an
Unguent of Pilewort and Butter thus: Stamp Pilewort (in May) with fresh Butter,
working into it as much of the herb as you can make it well take in, so that
the Butter be highly green; then melt it over the fire, and let them boil
gently till the Butter have taken in all the juice and virtue of the Herb, and
the superfluous moisture be evaporated. In a word, you are to make the Butter
as strong as you can of the Herb, and that it be of a deep perfect green
color, and no flegmatic moisture remaining with it: (I conceive it were well
to digest it a while in Horse-dung, before you melt and strain it:) Then strain
it into Gallypots through a strong Cloth; when it is cold, it will be firm and
hard: This will keep many years. With this anoint the Piles, putting it unto
them.

The best Brandy is excellent good for Aches and Pains by Rheums or Colds in
Legs, Knees or Shoulders. Rub the part with a hot hand before a good fire with
the Spirit of Wine, chafing it in a good while; then wet a Paper in the Brandy,
and lay it on, and bind it to: Repeat this as often as you see occasion.

Another for the Piles.
A Person had once the Piles in the greatest extremity that could be, and he
was cured by this following Medicine.

TAke Flower of Sulphur one part, fine Sugar three parts; make this into
Tablets of one dram apiece with Gum Tragacanth soked with red Rosewater into a
mucilage. Eat of these four or five times a day one at a time: Doing thus, it
gave him three or four Stools a day, and in a little while he was perfectly
cured of his Piles.

For the Toothache.
When there is great pain of the Toothache, by a defluxion of a sharp Rheum
upon all one side of the Jaw, this is a certain Remedy.

TAke some green Parsley, and work it in the palm of your hand, with the other
finger and thumb, pressing and squeezing it till you mortify it all, and mould
it up together, and the juice be ready to squeez out: Then take as much of it
with its juice (if any should chance to be pressed out) as may conveniently be
thrust into the Ear, and six or seven fair corns of Bay Salt. Mingle them well
together, and so put it into the Ear on the aching side; it will soon take away
the pain: Nevertheless let this Medicine remain three or four hours in the Ear
(though the Patient be well long before) that so it may continue the Cure. If
the pain come again, repeat the Medicine.

Water for the Teeth.
An excellent Water for the Teeth, to harden, fasten and whiten them, and to
strengthen the Gums, is following:

TAke of ordinary Limewater one pound, crude Alum one dram; burnt Alum, roots
of Flower de-luce, of each half a dram, mingle them together, and when the Alum
is dissolved, and the tincture drawn out of the Flower-de-luce; let the liquor
run through a linen, that it may be clear. Then put half a spoonful of
Orange-flower water to it to make it more grateful, and wash the Mouth and
Teeth with this.

For the Teeth and Gums.
To preserve the Teeth and Gums, wash them often with a Liquor thus made:

MAke a Decoction of Lentisce, Lignum Guaiaci, and a little Rosemary; into a
fitting proportion of this put some of the best distilled Water of Rosemary and
Sage, in which some common Salt is dissolved, as also a good proportion of
Spirit of Wine that has dissolved Myrrh (or extracted the Tincture of Myrrh)
and is very strong of it, and the like of Spirit of Wine, that has in like
manner extracted the Tincture of Mastick.

Or use Alum dissolved in some of the Waters abovesaid or in Claret Wine.

Or put some Oil of Myrrh made per Deliquium in Whites of Eggs, and some Oil of
Sage made by Distillation, quaere of adding also Oil of Rosemary into
Canary-Sack in which is dissolved some Salt (rather than into Claret Wine.) To
fasten the Teeth and preserve the Gums, wash your Mouth every morning, and in
the day with the Pickle that Limons are kept pickled in, a little warmed: Those
that have the Scurvy in Holland use it much. It is singularly good.

For familiar washing the Mouth, which confirms and fastneth the Teeth much,
and preserves the Gums sound, is thus:
PUt one dram of Alum, and two drams of pure Oriental Bole-armoniac, both in
subtle Powder, into a pint of Claret Wine; shake it well and use it. Quaere of
adding Myrrh in Powder, or dissolved in hard Whites of Eggs.

For the Toothache.
ONe that had the Toothache in great extremity, and had tried many Medicines in
vain, took a little Cotton and imbibed it with Lucatella's Balsam, and so put
it into the hollow Tooth, within a little while the pain ceased, but came again
about a week after: Then he applied the same Remedy a second time, and the pain
soon ceased, and never came again, though before he was very often subject to
this pain.

Vinegar of Squills for the Teeth and Gums.
TAke Vinegar of Squills, to settle loose Teeth and cure ulcerated Gums, and
the Toothache, all which it does powerfully. Use it thus; Dip well a bit of a
soft linen cloth in it, and hold it a pretty while upon the Gum that needs;
repeat the dipping still as the moisture of the mouth, mingling with the
Vinegar upon the cloth, takes away the force of it: If the water be cold, you
may warm it a little.

To fasten loose Teeth. Probat.
YOu will find a secure and certain Remedy, when any of your Teeth are loose
with the Scurvy, or by other abounding humors, if you take some Alum (a great
proportion) and put it into water (which you may warm to dissolve the more) and
rub well every day once or twice the Gums and Teeth with that. Fill the glass
almost half full of Alum before you put the Water upon it; when that Water is
used out, you may put more upon the remaining Alum.

An excellent Powder for the Eyes.
TAke Camphire in fine powder one ounce, put it into a pot and put upon it four
ounces of Vitriol, in powder also: cover the pot with double Paper, and lay
upon it a Porringer with some weight in it; then calcine it with a gentle fire,
and when it is hard, take it off, and let it cool; then beat it into fine
Powder with four ounces of Bole-armoniac, then sift it finely. Take of this
Powder half an ounce, put it into a quart of water, boil it together, then put
it in a glass and keep it for your use.

Dip a little green Sarcenet in it and shut your Eyes, washing only the
Eyelids, except they be very ill and inflamed, and then you may drop some into
them; and if you find it too strong of itself, put to a spoonful of it, two
spoonfuls of Rose Water, and so use it.

An excellent Eye-water.
TAke white wind and red Rose Water, of cach half a pint, put them in a Glass,
then take Aloes Epatic. Lapis Tutia, and fine hard Sugar, of each four ounces;
beat them severally into fine powder, and put them into the Glass, and stop it
very close; then set it in the Sun in the heat of summer for a month, and shake
it three or four times a day that it congele not.

A Remedy for Defluxions and all Diseases of the Eyes.
TAke the Herb called Pied de Pigeon in French, stamp it into a Cataplasm, and
put a little Salt to it, and apply it to the Wrist of the contrary Hand; as if
the right Eye were sore, put it to the left Wrist, and chang it morning and
night. It is wonderfully efficacious. A Gentlewoman had three great white
Excrescencies in one of her Eyes after the Small - Pox; this Remedy cured it
perfectly in a months space, but she added washing the Eye at every dressing
with a drop of Spirit of Urine.

To take away the Redness of Bloud-shot Eyes.
PUt a little Hyssop in a little Bag of Sarcenet, and dip it in warm water, and
therewith foment the Eye three or four times a day.

To stanch Bleeding.
A Very desperate and continual Bleeding at the Nose had often been stanched by
making the Party hold in their Hand, or any where about their Body, a little of
the Herb Shepherds. Pouch; wear it continually, and it will prevent Bleeding.

Another for the same.
TO stanch the blood of a Wound, even though an Artery be cut; Strew thick upon
it the Powder of certain Balls, that in French are called Visses de Loup. And
if you have the whole Ball, put over the Powder some of the fungose part of the
Ball (which is that next the stalk under the Powder) and bind it on. If it stop
not the Bleeding presently, repeat it with more Powder. By his description I
judge these Vesses de Loup to be our Fuz-Balls.

A Cure of Bleeding, either at the Nose, or by a Bloody Flux.
TAke two parts of the Moss growing on the skull of a dead man (pulled as small
as you can with the fingers) and one part of Mastick (in Powder) mingle them
well together; then make them into the consistence of a soft Plaster, with Gum
Tragacanth brought into mucilage by steeping in Plantane and red Rose Water. Of
this make a Plaster upon Linen or Leather, an inch and a half, or two inches
long; and not so broad, to lay upon the veins of the Forehead at the joining to
the Nose and along the Eyebrows, for bleeding at Nofe. But for a Bloody Flux
it must be as large as the palm of a hand, and round, to lay upon the Navil and
all round about it. This last must be applied warmed a little.

Against Poison inward or outward, or for the stinging of venomous Beasts in
Men or Beasts.
TAke the Leaves of black Corants in Powder one dram, give it in Wine or any
thing. You may gather the leaves in Summer, and keep them dry all the year.

An approved Remedy for Spitting of Blood.
TAke Cumfry-roots freshly gathered six ounces, Plantan-leaves twelve handfuls:
Beat all well in a Mortar, and express the juice strongly by a Press; and with
such quantity of Sugar more or less, as you intend to keep it long, or else use
it quickly, make Syrup of it.

Take of this often in the day a spoonful or two at a time.

If you make the Syrup to be used presently, you need take but equal parts of
Syrup and Juice: But if you would keep it the year about, then you should take
two parts of Sugar to one of Juice.

You need not let the Juice settle to separate the the gross parts from it
(which may be the best in this case.)

Remedium ad Fluxum immoderatum Sanguinis Menstrualis.
TAke the Scull of a man, scrape of it one dram, put it into a glass of
White Wind, let it infuse a night, and in the morning take it fasting. In two
or three times taking it every two days, it will cure it.

Contra Fluorem album. Probat.
AFter due Purging give the Ceruss of Antimony twice or thrice a day, about
fifteen granes for a dose in White Wind.

A Remedy for the Jaundise of any kind, Black or Yellow.
TAke eight ounces of chosen Corants well washed and picked from all the little
Stalks; put to them one ounce of Rhubarb in most subtle Powder; beat them
together in a Mortar seven or eight hours. Take of this every morning fasting,
and at night about the quantity of a Walnut. It purifieth the Blood and
strengthens the Liver wonderfully, and (continued) carries away the peccant
humors of the body.

For the Mother.
TAke twenty grains of the fixed Salt of a Plant called Stinking Orach, in
White Wind or in Mugwort water, if the Patient be of a hot complexion.

For the Sinews and the Head.
TAke of the Chemical Oil made by Distillation, of Sweet-Marjoram, of Nutmegs,
of each three parts, and of Cloves one part. If you will have it liquid, leave
it thus: but if thick, to be portable; make these into an. Ointment with the
ordinary Oil of Nutmegs made by expression; With this rub the Soles of the
Feet, twice a week: As also the Perinaeum between the Anus and Scrotum, and the
Scrotum and the Emunctories outsides of it.

This strengthens Nature exceedingly.

For Deafness.
TAke Oil of bitter Almonds, Oil of Spiknard, of each fix drams, Juice of
Onions, Juice of Rue, of each two drams, Black Hellebore half a scruple,
Coloquint half a dram, Oil of Exceter two drams; boil this till the Juices be
consumed; then take Wool, dip it in, and put it in the Ear. Be very cautious
when and how you use this Medicine.

Another for the same.
TAke of wild Mint, mortisie and squeez it in the hand till it renders Juice;
then take it with its Juice, and put it in the Ear, change it often; this will
help the Deafness, if the person has heard before.

For Deafness through Cold and humors clogging and benumming the Ears, causing
sometimes pain in them; you may drop into the affected Ear one drop (no more)
of Oil or Quintessence of Rosemary (which will not burn or pain them) and after
it is soked in (by lying with that Ear up) stop the Ear slightly with Cotton or
black Wool dipped in the Spirit of Rosemary. Repeat the drop after a day still
as often as you find need.

For the Small Pox.
TAke two or three granes of Saffron, and dry it well by the fire, then make a
little Bag of it in fine Linen, and infuse and press it in Posset-ale, Mace-ale
or White Wind, till all the tincture and virtue be drawn out: give that to the
Patient, and keep him warm. If he have soreness in the Throat, do thus: Boil a
quarter of a spoonful of dried Saffron (in a little Bag) in half a pint of Milk
till it be very yellow; in this boil a broad stay of Linen till it be thoroughly
tincted, and put it warm and moist under the Throat, as if you pinned it to
keep on a Coif. When this stag is cold and dry, take it off, and put on a new
one, to which end you must have at least two, that one may heat in the Milk,
whilst the other is pinned about the Throat. This will certainly take away all
pain of the Throat in six or eight hours: you must not use Ointment or Grease
to anoint the Scabs, but only plain ordinary unguentum Album, when the Pustules
begin to dry; and this has preserved all my Children from any marks. Yet in
this Disease the less you meddle, the better it is commonly for the Patient.

To drive the venomous Vapors from the Heart and Head in the Smallpox,
Measles, etc. with great success, with a familiar Julep or Emulsion, take the
following.
TAke Seeds of Citron one ounce, Seeds of Carduus Benedictus one ounce and an
half: beat them well, and draw out all their Pulp with two pound of some fit
Cordial-water, as of Scabious, Card. Bened. Marigold, or the like; and sweeten
it with two or three ounces (as much as will serve) of Syrup of Citron: Drink
of this as often as you have a mind to drink, a reasonable glass-full; to make
it more Alexipharmacal to take now and then, make a Julep containing Confect.
Hyacinthi, or of Alkermes and Treacle-water, and diaphoretic Antimony, and
prepared Pearl, and what else you think fit, and put a spoonful or too of this
into a draught of the Emulsion. Use this with caution.

An infallible Remedy for the same.
IN a Wine-glass full of Sack dissolve as much Sheeps-dung newly taken out of
the Sheepsgut warm, as will make it pretty thick, yet so, that the Patient may
drink it: Let him drink this, and lie quietly in his bed reasonably warm
covered. This will make him sweat, and cause the Pox or Measles to come out
kindly, and finish the cure very speedily.

To prevent Marks of the Smallpox.
TO prevent pitting in the Smallpox, boil Cream to an Oil, and with that
anoint the wheals with a feather as soon as they begin to dry, and keep the
Scabs always moist herewith: Make your face be anointed almost every half hour,
not before they begin to be crusted.

An Experimented Remedy for the Falling Sickness.
TAke of the Scull of a man, of Parings of Nails of Man, of each two ounces,
reduce this to fine Powder, and grind it upon a Marble-stone, then take of
Polypody of the Oak, Misletoe of the Oak, Misletoe of the Hasle-tree, Misletoe
of Tile-tree, of each two drams, Peony-Root dried half an ounce; beat this all
into fire Powder: Then take six ounces of fine Sugar, boil it to the
consistence of Rose-Sugar; then mix all the Powders with it, and let them well
incorporate over the fire, stirring them well together, then take it from the
fire, and make it into little Tablets, of which give one in the morning
fasting, and another two hours after dinner, and one two hours after supper.
Continue this whiles the Tablets last. Probat.

Another for the same.
Many persons have been cured of the Falling Sickness by the following Remedy:

TAke Misletoe of an Oak, the Leaves, the Berries, the sprouting Stalks and the
solid Branches; dry it gently in an Oven, then beat it into fine powder, of
which give as much as will lie upon a shilling, for one of ripe years; for
middle aged, a six pence; for a child, a groat; give it morning and evening in
Cowslip-water, three days before and three days after the full of the Moon.

For the Falling Sickness and Convulsion-Fits of Children.
TAke Peony-roots fresh dug, scrape of them with a Knife, and apply it to
the soals of the feet.

To cause a good Delivery.
TAke a good large white Onion, or two lesser, peel and slice it, and in a
Drying Pan, fry it with two or three spoonfuls of the best Sallet-oil till it
be tender; then put all into a little Pipkin with half a glass-full of Water,
and boil it well together, then strain it out, and drink that in the morning
fasting. Continue this for a fortnight or three weeks immediately before the
time expected for delivery. In a word you prepare this Broth just as if you
would make a Pottage of Onions, except you put in no Salt; and that you use Oil
instead of Butter: This course will so dispose the parts of the Woman with
Child, that she shall be brought to bed with security and very little pain: And
if the Child should be turned in the Mothers Belly, it will bring it to rights
before labor. Women that have had most dangerous labors till they took this,
have had no difficulty afterward.

For want of white Onions ordinary ones will do well.

A Receipt of the Labour-Powder.
TAke Date-stones, Amber, Saffron and Cumin-Seeds, beat and searse them all
severally into very fine Powder; take of each as much as will lie upon a groat;
but double so much of the Cumin-Seed, mingle them all together, and when the
Woman is in her greatest extremity give her a spoonful of it in Mace-ale: This
is also very good to bring away the After-burthen.

To bring away the After-burthen, or any Foulness, or a dead Child, and to cure
the After-throws and Griping, after a Woman is delivered.
TAke the inner skins (that are wrinkled) of Gizards of Hens that are laying of
Eggs; wipe them clean and lay them by to dry: When you have need to use them,
beat them to subtle Powder, of which give one dram for a dose in a little
White Wind: you will see the effect in a short time. If it be needful you may
repeat the dose once or twice the same day.

For torn Bladders.
A Person of credit told me, that he has hung about the neck of women, who
have had their Bladder dilacerated by unskilful Midwives in their Delivery, and
made always their water with great torment, a little Bag containing some Powder
of Toads calcined; so that the Bag lay always upon the pit of the Stomach next
the skin; and presently it took away all pain and inconveniences from that
accident, as long as it hung there: but if you left off the Bag, the pain
returned. A Bag continues in force but a month; after so long time you must
wear a fresh one.

To bring down a Woman's Courses.
MAke the Sulphur of Antimony in this manner: Take Antimony, crude Tartar; beat
them to small Powder and mingle them well: put them into a strong Crucible, and
give fire by degrees, at last extreme strong, in six hours all is done: Take
out the matter and powder it small; pour store of warm water upon it, that it
may dissolve all that is dissolvable of the Calcination: filter it, and then
pour upon it enough of distilled Vinegar to precipitate all the Brimstone. Then
(when it is well settled) pour off the supernatant Liquor, and dry the
remaining Sulphur. Put a little of it to burn upon a Chafing Dish of coals, and
over it a Funnel with a long neck, which makes it enter up the body, and it
will make the Courses come down.

For the Breast and Belly of Women lying in.
TAke Whales Spawn and pure white Virgin-Wax; melt the Wax first gently, then
put the Sperma Ceti to it and incorporate them well together, at last put a
little Spirit of Wine to them, and stir all well together, and take it from the
fire, and dip in a linen cloth of the bigness of the Breasts and of the Belly,
to cover them completely all over: Those for the Breasts must have a little hole
in each, for the Nipples to come out. As soon as a Woman is delivered, she must
put on these, and upon the Plaster of the Breasts she must put some Flax picked
loose, to cover all the Plasters over, and some Flax under the arm-holes, then
cover the Flax upon the Plasters with other Linen: The Plaster on the Belly is
to cover it all over, then she swatheth her body well: All this must be opened
every morning, and turns the Plaster on the other-side (for it is a
Sear-cloth, and consequently both sides Plaster alike) and at the end of eight
days take fresh Plasters for eight days more; after which time there needs no
more.

An admirable Sear-cloth for a sore Breast; Impostumes, Fellons, green and old
Cuts.
TAke half a pound of the best Virgins-Wax, half a pint of the Oil of Roses,
half a pint of the Oil of Olives; melt them altogether, and let them stand till
they are cold, then take half a pound of white Lead beaten fair; put it into
the Oil and Wax, then set it over the fire, and let it boil half an hour; then
take two ounces of Mastick, two ounces of Frankincense, two ounces of Myrrh,
two ounces of Gum Olibanum, beat all the ounces very small; put them into the
other Ingredients, and let them boil half an hour more: Then take a quarter of
an ounce of Camphire, and put it in, stir it over the fire, and dip the Cloths
thereih, and make it up in Rolls for use.

An Anodyne Pultis for Cancered Breasts.
The first cataplasm that Mr. Bressieus applied to Mrs. Brents Cancered Breast
when it began to break, was this,

TAke an old mellow Pippin, cut off a Cap at the top of it; and then take out
the Core, leaving the sides of the Apple whole, that the melted Grease may not
get out; fill that hole with Hog's Grease, then cover it with the Cap, and set
the Apple to roast, when it is well roasted to Pap (by which the Hog's Grease will
be imbibed into the substance of the Apple) take it and pare off all the
Paring, and break and mingle perfectly all the Pap, that it may spread well,
and be an uniform Pulp: Spread it thick upon Linen, and lay it warm upon the
Sore, putting a Bladder over it. This is an excellent Cataplasm, to take away
and cool, and dissolve the swelling and hardness, if it be dissolvable; and if
not, to make it break and separate with ease and without sharpness. This is to
be changed every twelve or twenty four hours, according as it grows dry.

For Hardness in Women's Breasts.
FOr a month take continually a Purge of Jallap, and always put over all the
Breast a Linen-Cloth that has loose flocks of Flax stitched upon it, in such
sort that there may be no hardness felt any where; let it be very thick and
warm.

The way to take Jallap is to reduce a pound or more in one parcel of the wood
into Powder, and mingle it well together, and keep it in a Glass close stopped:
Then take half a dram or one dram or four scruples of it for a dose in
White Wind and Sugar; and by this you may know certainly how all the whole
quantity will work, that so you may increase or diminish the dose to the need.

With this a Lady of great Quality cured her self.

For hard Breasts in Women.
An adnirable Pultis that cured many Women of hard and sore Breasts, is thus
made.

TAke Turnips and boil them well in water, so that they be very tender, then
take then out and squeeze out the water clean from them, beat them to mash, and
mingle with them some good quantity of fresh Butter unsalted, and apply this
warm to the Breast Pultis-wise upon a thick cloth very large; and change it
morning and night. In three days it perfectly cures, though before the pain
and hardness has been very great.

Another Medicine for the same is thus:
TAke Boars-grease and Aqua-vitae, melt them together, with that foment the
Breast well; then take a Pewter large broad Porringer, or very large deep
Saucer, or deep little Dish, that may enclose and contain the Breast, and warm
it well, and so put it upon the Breast, and tie it on all night. In the daytime
it is inconvenient to keep on the Porringer; but if you could have it always
there, it were much the better; Dress it with this Ointment morning and
evening. No metal but Tin will-serve.

For the Tetters.
TAke Venice Turpentine one ounce, make it to an Ointment by washing in
Rose Water; then melt two pennyworth of white Virgin-wax over a Chafing Dish of
coals; put the Turpentine to it, and add one ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds to
it, take it from the fire and beat it to the consistence of an Ointment. Anoint
your Tetters with it.

For Aches in any part of the Body, even in Women's Breasts.
CAuse a Dyer to dye you some thick spongy Flannel of the blue color called
Coventry-blue. When it is dry, dye it again; dye it thus five times, at last
the Dye will be so deep, that it will look almost black, lay of it on a good
deal beyond the pained part on all sides; keep it thus continually covered, and
warm with it.

A Remedy for the Piles or Hemorrhoids.
When the Hemorrhoids are exceedingly swelled, (chiesty outwardly) the Cure of
them is thus:

TAke a little Cotton-Wooll, dip it in Oil or Quintessence of Rosemary, and
with that wipe gently over the swelled Vein, (which sometimes will be as big as
a large Cherry) and after an hour or two, moisten the Vein again with the faid
Oil; doing thus three or four times at like intervals: It smarts a little for
the present. After two or three or four times fomenting thus, the swelled Vein
will break and much foul matter run out, and he shall have present ease, and in
a little while it will grow whole; and after the breaking, it hinders not his
going abroad about his business: The Patient needs the Oil no more, after the
Sore is broken: for it will then be too sharp.

Another for the same.
TAke about a spoonful of the sa of Eel, and near as much of the yolk of a
new-laid Egg, and beat them very well together to an Ointment: In this roll a
Tent, so as to make it take up as much as you can, and put it into the
Fundament, and lay also a Pledget covered with the like Ointment upon the
outward swelling, and this will give some case presently. Change your Tents and
Pledgets as they grow dry and hot, and in a small time the Veins will open and
run, and it will be well.

The fat of Eel is made by boiling one or more Eels in water, and then skimming
off the fat that swimmeth at the top: Or if you roast an Eel, take the fat that
droppeth from it, so it be mixed with nothing else.

A Plague Cordial.
TAke a pound of the Leaves of Wood Sorrel, and pound them by themselves half
an hour; then take three pound os fine Sugar beaten small, and mix these
together, and keep it stirring into the Wood Sorrel for three hours more,
keeping still pounding, and then take four ounces of Mithridate or
London-Treacle; pound them altogether half an hour longer, which makes four
hours together, then keep them close stopped in a Gally-Pot. In time of Infection
in a morning fasting: Take as much as a great Nutmeg; and if stricken with any
disease at the heart, or pain in the stomach, take the same quantity, and go to
bed, and put your self into an easy sweat for one hour; and you will find
excellent effects by it. Prob.

For the same.
TAke the best Brandy-wine, and leaves of red Poppy that grows among the Corn (
Papaver Rheas) of each one pound, you are to extract the Tincture of the Poppy
with the Brandy; but you must not put all together at once, but thus: Put four
ounces of the Poppy-leaves to the whole pint of the Spirit of Wine, and let
them infuse together till you judge it has extracted all the tincture, and
then the leaves themselves will be in some degree dissolved: Then press out all
the Liquor, and throw away the remaining feces. Into this thick liquor put four
ounces of fresh Poppyleaves, and do all as before: so do twice more till you
have the tincture out of the whole pound of the Leaves, which if you should do
at once, would not proceed well, because the Leaves are light and take much
room: Into this Liquor put two ounces of good old Venice-Treacle, and make it
dissolve therein; take two or three spoonfuls of it in a little Sack or
Mace-Ale: It drives out the Infection powerfully.

To preserve one in time of Infection, eat a little of the tops of Rue with
Bread and Butter, in a morning: Or, eat a little old strong Cheese with Bread
and Butter (and a little Rue with it, if you please) and drink a glass of
stomachal Claret Wine, or Wine and Water after it.

Another Excellent Remedy for the Plague.
TAke a pound of the Leaves of Wood Sorrel, and pound them by themselves half
an hour; Then take three pound of fine Sugar beaten small, and mix these
together, and keep it stirring by little and little into the Wood Sorrel for
three hours more, pounding them all that while: Then take four ounces of
Mithridate, and pound it with the rest half stopped in a Gally-Pot. In time of
Infection take in a Morning fasting as much as a Nutmeg; and if you fear you
have taken any Infection, take almost as much more, and go to bed, and procure
sweat for an hour.

Another Antidote.
TAke a little, almost half a Glass-full of your own water, (of the mornings
water) heat with two or three spoonfuls of it a little Rue and a little
Smallage, not half a handful of each; squeez out all their juice hard. Drink
this Wine and Juice fasting.

An excellent Plague-Water.
TAke Rue, Egrimony, Wormwood, Celandine, Sage, Balm, Mugwort, Dragons,
Pimpernel, Marigold, Fetherfew, Burnet, Sorrel, Scabius, Wood-Betony,
Brown-mugwort, Avens, Tormentil, Carduus Benedictus, of each one handful, and
as much more of Rosemary as any of these, Angelica, Burdocks, green Walnuts:
Shred all these very small; then pour upon them as much White Wind as will
cover them; then slice into a glass a quarter of a pound of Enula Campana
Roots: Let all these infuse three days, stirring them every twelve hours, cover
them close, then still them in an ordinary Glass-body, but lay it not above an
inch thick in the bottom. Save the first running by itself.

For Worms in Children.
TAke one dram and half of the best running Mercury, put it into a Bolts-head,
and spit fasting-spittle upon it (from a wholesome mouth) and shake it well: Then
pour off the spittle from it, and wash the Mercury clean with warm milk several
times, casting away the milk as long as it contracts any stain or soulness or
fullying from the Mercury: Then let the Child swallow this Mercury in a spoon
with a little warm milk upon it, and drink a little more warm milk after it. Do
thus twice or thrice, intermitting two or three days between every dose.

For Worms in the Belly or Stomach.
TAke an Apple of Coloquintida, and split it in the middle into two halfs: fry
one of them very well in good store of the Gall of an Ox, till it be very
tender and pappy, and have imbibed into itself a good quantity. Then apply it
warm (as hot as he can well endure it) to the Navel of the Child or Man at the
hour of their going to bed, and tie it on fast with a convenient Bandage, that
it may keep it on fast from stirting all night: When they rise, they may take
it off: Next evening repeat the same again with fresh materials. Do thus three
nights in all: This will kill any Worms in the guts or maw, be they never so
many or dangerous. Often approved.

An Excellent Plaster for the Stomach, that has done such notable Cures, is
thus:
SPread Mithridate pretty thick upon thin Leather, and lay upon it all over
some grated Nutmeg, laid also pretty thick on; and cover this with another
Leather like the former, sowing them together round about, and lay this to the
pit of the Stomach, and keep it on. One Plaster will serve many days. Use to
cut off the upper part of a white Kids-skin Glove, about a good hands breadth,
and sow it together at one end; then spread the Mithridate upon it; then strew
on the Nutmeg, then turn the Glove, so that the Plaster is between two
Leathers, then sow the other end together, and so apply it: The bigness of the
Plaster is to be about a hands breadth round. It is excellent for all
Indigestions and Weakness of the Stomach; which cause Loosnesses.

To take Warts away.
TAke green Leaves of Marigold, and beat them to mash in a Mortar, so that upon
pressing it the Juice be apt to come out. With this Juice-mash rub your Warts
well three or four times a day.

Another for the same.
TAke some fat Bacon, and rub the Warts with it; and then hang it in the Sun to
dry.

For Frenzy.
I Was assured by a Person of credit, that one cured a Woman that had been mad
some years, by giving her a draught of the Juice of the Herb Ground Ivy or Gil
go by ground, at once taking: And they tried it afterward upon several others,
and it had always the same infallible effect.

For Head-achs, sore Eyes, Fellons, etc.
BOil a good handful of the Leaves of Ground Ivy (it may be had fresh all the
year) in a quart of Ale to a pint, give half in the morning fasting, and half
at night going to bed: It is admirable to cure all Head-achs, Pains,
Inflammations and Defluxions in the Eyes, Jaundises, Coughs of the Lungs,
Consumptions, Spleen, Stone and Gravel, and all Obstructions. The Herb stamped
and applied to a Fellon like a Plaster or Cataplasm, cures it marvellously and
speedily. It is admirable for old Sores, in which you may add a little Copperas
and Honey, if they need cleansing: you may make an Ointment of it.

For Leprosy and Squinansie.
TAke a Pint of the Juice of Housleek, and half a pint of Verjuice, with these
and a pint and a half of Milk make Posset Drink: of which give half a pint in
the morning and as much at night: but to do better, be drinking of it all day
long; so that you drink up this proportion in twenty four hours. It cures the
Leprosy, the Squinansie, the painful white Swellings in the Knees, and any
Aches.

An experimented Remedy for the Stone.
A certain Person at Rome was sick of a great Stone in his Bladder, who after
many Remedies taken in vain, was resolved to be Cut; having agreed with the
Operator: This following Remedy was proposed to him by a Priest, of whom he
received the Sacrament, who had made trial upon himself and many others. It is
thus:

TAke a good quantity of Millepedes, wash them with white Wine, then put them
into a glased Pot, lute and close it well, and set it in an Oven to dry the
Millepedes: Then reduce them to fine Powder; then put to this Powder as much
white Wine as it will drink up; then put it in the Oven again as before, which
repeat three times; then take this Powder, and mix it with Strawberrywater, and
a scruple of Oil of Vitriol, and dry it once more in the Oven; then keep it in
a Glass close stopped. Of this Powder the Patient took four scruples, and half
an ounce of Aqua Vitae mixed with some fit Broth or other appropriated Vehicle,
in the morning fasting; the effect of it was thus: The Patient found himself in
great pains, and was much tormented, for the space of two hours; and after five
hours past he made a little Urin, but very thick: The second day having taken
this Medicin again, his Urin was much thicker than the first. The third day he
avoided a great deal of Sand; but the seventh day he avoided so much Sand that
his Urin was full of it: And the nineth day the Patient was perfectly cured
from his Stone.

Another excellent Remedy for the Stone.
TAke the Berries of Hawthorns, and dry them; then beat them to Powder, and
searse them finely; take a spoonful of this Powder in a glassfull of White Wind
in the morning fasting.

Another for the same.
TAke Parsnips, boil them in fair Water; drink of this water one glass-ful in
the morning fasting, and one at night going to bed, and all the day long
drinking nothing else. Continue this six weeks.

Another for the same.
TAke the White of a new-laid Egg, beat it into an Oil, then let it stand a
quarter of an hour to settle; then take away the Scum and mix the White with
two spoonfuls of White Wind, four spoonfuls of red Rose Water, then put to this
one ounce of white Sugar Candy in Powder, stir it well together and take it in
the morning fasting, and another at night going to bed. Continue this six or
seven days.

Another for the same.
TAke the Juice of sour Limons, Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without fire, of
each one ounce; beat the Oil and the Juice together; then mix it with half a
pint of White Wind. Take of this a glass-full or half a glass, according to the
age or force of the Patient, three days before and as many after the full of
the Moon.

A Compounded Hydrosaccharum for the Stone.
TAke four Gallons of Running-Water, four pound of fine Sugar in powder; Eringo
Roots sliced one pound, Raisins of the Sun stoned one pound, a branch of fresh
Rosemary. Boil these all together till half be consumed; then work it up with a
little Yest, then tun it, and put the Peel of a fresh Limon into it: After it
has done working, you may bottle it, if you please. Of this drink morning and
evening, and whenever you are a dry.

Another excellent one for the same.
TAke a spoon-full of Oil of sweet Almonds, three spoonfuls of Juice of Limons,
two spoonfuls of Aqua Vitae, three spoonfuls of fine Sugar mix all these well
together by shaking them in a Bottle, then take it in the morning fasting. It
has done great effects.

A certain Remedy for Retention of Urin.
TAke two handfuls of Watercresses, twenty four of the Seeds of Alkakingi, two
great white Onions cut in four quarters, two good handfuls of Cremor Tartari;
put all these together into a leaded Pot, pour upon it a good quart of
Whitewine, let it boil till half a pint be consumed. Take of this a glass-full
in the morning fasting, and another at night, and you shall be cured.

Another for Retention of Urin.
MAke a strong Decoction of Horseradish roots in White Wind, put to it a
little Hares Wool dried in powder. Drink of this Decoction morning and night.
You will see the effects of it speedily.

Another approved Remedy for the Stone and Gravel.
TAke a spoonful of Virgin-Honey, the whitest you can get, and mix it with a
glass-full of Juniper-berry water; take this in the morning fasting, and
continue taking it for some time, and it will bring away the Stone and Gravel,
and will open the passage of Urin wonderfully.

Another for the Stone and Gravel, and for Strangury of Urin.
TAke the Fat of a Buck-Rabbet, melt it and anoint the Back and Reins with it.
This will open the Passage of Urin wonderfully. A Child was cured with this; so
that in twenty four hours it made four Pots full of Urin.

A Friar in France, much troubled with stoppage of Urin and Viscosities; (which
they called the Stone.)
WAs taught to take one dram of Carrot-seeds (he said the wild Carrot-seeds are
better) and bruise them a little, and put upon them a draught of White Wind in
a Bottle close stopped. Run the clear next morning through a Linen, and drink
that. This once preserved him from all inconveniences of Urin for half a year.
When the Disease grew again upon him, he took again this Remedy.

An approved Remedy for the Pleurisy.
TAke an Apple, and open it at the top to take out the Coar, then fill it with
white Frankincense; then stop it again close with the same piece you cut out at
the top, and roast it in hot Ashes; then beat it to mash, and give it the
Patient to eat.

A Remedy for the Sciatica or Rheumatism.
TAke Storax liquid, yellow Wax, new Pitch, Honey, of each four ounces;
Cinnamon, Pepper, of each one ounce; put all these (in Powder) together into a
new Pot, and let it boil but one walm, stirring it carefully all the while:
then take it from the fire, and put into it four ounces of Aloes, and one ounce
of Oil of Lilies, stir them well together to make them incorporate; then put
the Pot again upon some hot Ashes, and stir it until it be of the consistence
of an Ointment, which spread warm upon Leather and apply it; but if your
Disease be in a whole Thigh, then you may spread it upon a whole Lamb-skin.

You may leave it on seven or eight days, if it requires. If the Disease come
again, put the Plaster on again.

This Medicin will keep a long time.

To Cure the Hot and Cold Gout.
TAke a good quantity of the Insect called Cockchaffers, in the month of May,
upon which (in Powder) put rectified Spirit of Salt to be two or three fingers
breadth over the Powder; digest till the Spirit be tincted deep red; then pour
off that, and put on more, which digest again. Repeat this till the Powder
gives no more tincture, doing in such sort that you employ no more Spirit than
is necessary to extract the Tincture; which filter so often till it leaves no
more feces. Then dissolve two ounces of Salt of Tartar in a sufficient quantity
of Spirit of Salt, then filter it, then mix these two tinctures together, and
digest them eight days in a gentle heat, then separate it from the feces by
filtration, and keep it in a Glass close stopped. The manner of using this
liquor, is thus; Begin with a little dose, as two or three drops, so little a
one that it may cause no sharpness of Urin. Take it in Hydromel or Small-Beer.
The next day take one drop more, so increasing till you find a little
sharpness; which you will do the third or fourth or fifth day. The next day
rest and take some Diaphoretic, the next day purge. The next take again the
same dose of the liquor as you did the last day; continue that three days. Then
as the former time, resting and purging. Repeat this course till you are well;
continuing always the same dose of the liquor, which by a little pricking of
Urin you found to be the due one.

The Purge which the Patient is to take, is thus; The day before, take Reifin
of the Root of Jallap twenty or twenty four granes, Crystal or Cremor of Tartar
ten or twelve granes; mix these with Syrup of Roses, and take it in the
morning. This will purge both the hot and cold Gout by Stools.

During this course the Patient is to eat no salt meat nor fish; besides he
should drink nothing but Tisanne or Small-Beer that day he takes the Liquor or
Tincture.

An excellent Plaster for the Gout.
TAke Rosin of Pine, common Rosin, yellow Wax, of each four ounces, Colophona
half an ounce, Stags or Does-grease five drams; melt all these together, and
then take Cloves two drams, Croci Orient. one dram and half, Olibani one ounce,
Mace two drams; reduce all these to Powder, and stir it in with the rest: Then
take it from the fire, and mix with it by little and little a pint of Alicam
Wine, and make it well incorporate together. Spread this upon Leather of such a
bigness as you will have it, and so apply it, leaving it on until it grow loose
of itself.

Another excellent Plaster for the Gout.
TAke the whitest part of Pigeons-dung, Mustard, of each a like quantity,
temper this with White Wind Vinegar; then take the Grease of a Puppy-dog, so
much as will make it an Ointment or Salve, set it over a gentle Fire, and put
into it a handful of shred Parsley; let it stew easily the space of an hour;
then take Garden-Snails, and stamp them in a Mortar, then squeez out all the
Juice of them through a Cloth, which mix with the Ointment and apply it.

For the King's Evil.
A most contumacious foul inveterate King's Evil (several times touched by the
King, and wrought upon by the best Surgeons; and given over as desperate)
was perfectly cured thus:

TAke Garden-Snails that have white or gray Houses upon them, and beat them in
a Mortar with a little Parsley into the consistence of a Plaster, and so apply
it to the Sore or Sores, and change it every twenty four hours. This is also
good to take away the raging Pain of the Gout.

An approved Remedy for Ruptures.
TAke Solomon's Seal, Agrimony, Milt-wast, Maidenhair, (which is the Capil.
Veneris) Roots of Straw-berries, of each one handful: Pick and wash them well,
then stamp them, and boil them in two quarts of good White Wind the space of
two hours; but let the Vessel be well stopped, that nothing may expire. Then
strain the liquor, pressing it hard through a Linen, and drink of this Tisanne
a good glass-full in the morning fasting, and an hour after drink another; and
continue this (taking two glass-fuls every morning) till you are cured. The use
of this cured a Lady of a great Rupture in a fortnights space; and likewise
several others.

Another for the same.
A Child was cured of a Rupture thus: Take Cow Dung, warm it well before the
fire, and so lay it as a Cataplasm upon Leather, and strew upon it some
Cummin-Seeds, and so apply it hot to the Rupture: When it is grown cold, put on
a new one. This Course they continued two days (in Bed,) and the Child was
perfectly cured, and also many others. It is excellent, especially when it is a
windy Rupture.

An excellent Remedy for the Cankers in the Mouth.
TAke nine leaves of Succory, and as much of long Plantan, and as many leaves
of Rue; boil these in fair water with a spoonful of Honey the space of a quarter
of an hour. Then take it off, and with the liquor gargarise your Mouth, and
likewise drink of it, and with the Herb rub the inside of your Mouth.

For a Fellon.
TAke Garden-Snails, and beat them in a Mortar, shells and bodies and all, till
they be smooth and like an uniform Unguent; then apply this like a Pultis, and
when it begins to stink, (which it will do in few hours) change it.

An Ointment for Burning.
TAke Cows-Dung, and put to it a sufficient quantity of Sein doux (Hog's Grease)
fry or boil them together till they are well incorporated: Then strain the
Liquor through a Napkin; and when it is cold, you will have a green Ointment,
which is excellent for Burnings.

A most excellent red Balsam or red Salve.
TAke the best Sallet-Oil three pound, Venice Turpentine one pound, yellow Wax
half a pound, Red Sanders two drams, Dragons Blood six pennyworth. Wash the
Turpentine well in Rose Water, and the Oil in Sack; then boil the Oil,
Turpentine and Wax, to the Consumption of the Sack; then put in the red Sanders
and Sanguis Draconis; boil it a while, keeping it stirred continually, then
take it off and strain it.

It is excellent for any Bruises or Inflammation.

It will draw Bones, Slivers or Thorns, dead flesh, or whatsoever festereth.

It is excellent for Aches in the Bones or Sinews.

It is excellent for Burnings.

It helps the Headache by anointing the Temples and Nostrils with it.

It is also admirable for the Colic and Stitch in the side, being applied with
hot cloths.

A dram of it being taken inwardly in a little warm Milk, is excellent for any
inward Bruises, Cough of the Lungs, for Surfeits and any inward grief.

It is very good against any Poison.

Another Excellent Ointment for Wounds or Sores in Man or Beast.
TAke Rosin, yellow Wax, of each a like quantity: Melt it with a soft fire,
then put into it half a pound of Hog's Grease, which being melted, put into it a
spoonful of Honey, and half a pound of Turpentine, stir it well together half a
quarter of an hour. Then take it from the fire, and put into it one ounce of
Verdigrease in most subtle Powder; stir it well together a pretty while, then
put it over a soft fire again, but take heed it boil not: As soon as it
begins to simper, take it from the fire and strain it through a Cloth; then
put it into an Earthen Pot and keep it for use.

This is also a most sovereign Ointment to mundifie and heal any foul
inveterate Wound, be they never so festered with dead, proud, spongy or naughty
Flesh. It heals suddenly and abundantly.

It draws Thorns, Nails, Splinters, Slivers and all things in the flesh.

Another excellent Green Ointment to be made in May, which cures all sorts of
Strains, Swellings, Aches, Bruises, Kibes, Cuts, Cramps, Burnings and
Scaldings. It eases the Sciatica. It is also excellent for all Swellings in
the Face and Throat, yea though they look red and have an Ague in them.
TAke young Bay Leaves, Wormwood, of each half a pound, red Sage, Rue,
(gathered in the heat of the day) of each one pound; beat them very small in a
Mortar. Then take four pound of Sheeps Suet new killed and picked from the
skin. Work this well together with your stamped Herbs, till they be well
incorporated, then put to them a Pottle of good Sallet-Oil; work it well with
your hands, till it become all of one softness and color; then put it into a
new earthen Pan, and let it stand covered eight days; then boil it over a soft
fire the space of four hours, stirring it well all the while; then put into it
four ounces of the Oil of Spike and let it boil about four hours more. You will
know when it is boiled enough by putting a drop upon a Plate, when it appears
of a very fair green. Then take it from the fire and strain it through a new
Canvas. Keep it close stopped in a Gally-Pot. It will last seven or eight years.

An approved Remedy for Biting of a mad Dog.
TAke a quart of Ale, and a dram of Treacle, a handful of Rue, a spoonful of
shavings or filings of Tin. Boil these all together, till half be consumed.
Take of this two spoonfuls in the morning, and at night cold.

It is excellent for Man or Beast.

A most precious Ointment for all manner of Aches and Bruises; and also for the
Redness of the Face.
TAke Violet, Primrose, Elder, Cowship, Leaves and Flowers. Sage, Mugwort,
Ragweed, white Lilies, St. John's wort, Ncp, Smallage, Marjoram, Lavender,
Sothernwood, Rosemary, Rose-leaves, Rue, Fetherfew, Tansie, Lovage, Mint,
Camomil, Thyme, Dill, Clary, Oak of Jerusalem, Pemroial, Hyssop, Balm, white
Mint, Marigold, Peony-leaves, Bay Leaves, Saffron, of each one handful. Stamp
all these in a Stone-Mortar, as you get them, then put them into a Pottle of
Sallet-Oil, and so let them infuse there till you have all the rest together;
for you cannot get them all at one time, but get them as fast as you can. Then
put to them and the Oil, a quart of White Wind, and set it over the fire, and
boil it to the Consumption of the Wine; then take it off and strain it; then
put it into a Glass and keep it for use.

When you anoint any Sore with this, do it by the fireside, chasing it well
in; and then lay a Hogs-bladder next to it, and a Linen upon that.

A most excellent Ointment for a Gangrene and all foul Diseases of the Skin.
TAke good yellow Wax, Gum of Pine, or instead of that, take Colophony, Rosin,
of each one pound in powder. Melt the Wax first, and when it is well melted,
put into it your Rosin, stir it well the space of two hours over a gentle fire;
then put your Colophony into it, and keep it still stirring with a wooden
Spatule to make it well incorporate over a gentle fire that it may not burn
your drugs: When you see that they are well incorporated, keep it still
stirring the space of an hour; then take it from the fire, and put a pound of
fresh Butter into it, that has no Salt in it, which work well into it without
fire, stirring it continually the space of a quarter of an hour, after which
put half an ounce of Verdigrease into it in most subtle Powder, work it well in
also by stirring it continually the space of an hour and half. When you see
that all is well incorporated, which you will know when you see that the
Verdigrease appears green; then put it upon hot ashes, and stir it well for
half an hour, but take heed it boil not, for so it would be spoiled. Then
strain it, and keep it in a leaded Pot for use.

A most excellent Water for a Gangrene, to be used with the aforesaid Ointment.
TAke fine Sugar four ounces, round Aristoloch cut in Rolls, pare off their
shells, and wash them three or four times in White Wind, then take two quarts
of the best White Wind, and put it together with the Sugar and Aristoloch into
a Vessel; which lute very close that the Spirits may not expire. Let it boil
very gently till a third part be consumed; then take it from the fire, and when
it is cold, strain it through a Linen Cloth, pressing it well to have the
substance out of it, which put into a Fiol, and keep it for use.

The manner of Using those foresaid Ointment and Water, is thus:
PUt some of the Water in a dish, and warm it over a Chafing Dish of Coals;
then dip some fine Linen or Cotton in it, and bathe the sore part with it, and
three or four fingers breadth about the inflammation of it; then spread a
Plaster of the Ointment, and lay it on; then lay a Linen sour double dipped in
the Water upon that. Dress it thus every six hours. When you see that a Circle
forms itself between the good and bad flesh (which is a sign that the Gangrene
looseneth itself from the sound flesh) then take away by little and little the
mortified flesh, continuing dressing of it till you see a perfect cure.

The foresaid Water is also excellent for all old and rotten Ulcers, the
swelling of any member or sinews, rubbing them with it, and chafing it in
before the fire, and putting a Linen four double dipped in it upon the Sore.

It is also excellent for any interior grief or pain being taken inwardly; but
for that, it will not serve above eight days, for it grows too bitter; but
for any other operation it is always good. It is an excellent Preservative
against the Plague, and for any Poison, taking three spoonfuls of it morning
and night going to bed.

It is also excellent for any Bruises by a stick, stone or by a fall.

It is an excellent Remedy for the Biting of a mad Dog, for stinging of
Scorpions, Vipers and Serpents, opening the wound if it be not large enough,
and bathing it with it, and dressing it with the foresaid Ointment, as you are
directed above.

You may give the Patient (in the beginning) three or four spoonfuls of it
inwardly during three or four days.

This Water and Ointment are also excellent for a Horse sarcys.

Monsieur Trear the famous Surgeon at Paris has done great and admirable
Cures with the foresaid Ointment and Water.

Sir Kenelm Digby transcribed them (with several other rare Receipts which are
in this Book) out of his Book that his Widow lent him.

A Purge which he used to give the Patient during his Cure.
TAke two quarts of White Wind, four ounces of Sena well cleansed, two ounces
of Thyme or Serpiles, one ounce of Pithemus': put all these together in a
glazed Pot, which stop well, and let it infuse the space of forty hours. This
quantity will serve for nine times taking. You may take some Broth after it.

Another Excellent Water for a Gangrene, with which Monsieur D'Alance does
such wonderful Cures in Gangrenes.
TAke Frankincense, Mastick, Cloves, Galangle, Cinnamon, Cubebs, of each two
ounces, Lignum Aloes one ounce, Venice Turpentine two ounces: Put all these
into a Retort, and let them infuse the space of twenty four hours: then distill
it in Balneo Mariae till you have two Waters; the first will be clear, the
second whitish. The clear Water is admirable in a Gangrene; bathing the Sore
with it warm, and laying a Linen four double dipped in it upon the Sore, and so
changing it every six hours. But because the clear water keeps not so well
alone, you may mingle it with the second, and so use them both together.

Monsieur Belieur cured the Gangrene, and all old Ulcers, Cankers, Pocky Sores,
and Cancers, etc. with the Oil of Gold made thus:
TAke Spirit of Salt two parts, Spirit of Saltpeter one part; in this dissolve
as much Gold as it will dissolve: distill off very gently the liquor in Balneo
Mariae till the Gold remain in a Crystalline Gum or Salt, then let it resolve
to liquor in the air of itself; then distill again and resolve. Repeat this till
it congele no more, but remain a deep high colored liquor. Dip a Straw in this
Oil, and touch all round about the borders of the Sore with it. With this he
cured a very malignant Ulcer in a Leg (that had been there above three years)
in the space of ten days; and also a Cancer in a Woman's cheek in fifteen days
space, that other Surgeons (without hope of cure) had given over. With this
he cured also a Woman (that had 17 Cankers in her private parts, that had been
so some years, and without hope of Cure) in fifteen days.

A Cure for a Gonorrhea.
THe next day after the Purgation of Sena, Clary, Diaprunae laxativae, in
White Wind, as you know. Take this following: Take Trochisci Alahand. half an
ounce in most subtle Powder. Infuse it in a pint of good Spirit of Wine in a
large Boltshead close stopped, set it in bloud-warm Ashes or Sand, or rather a
little hotter, the space of twenty four hours, shaking it well as often as you
can; then pour it from the feces, and let it stand till it be very clear. Take
of this one ounce after your Purge, continuing taking it two days together; but
if it be too hot, mix it with a little pure Canary-Sack. The third day take the
Purge again. Repeat till you are well.

An expedite Cure for a Gonorrhea.
PUrge the Patient very well three or four times, and give him smoothing
Emulsions. Then take Venice Turpentine, wash it well with Rose Water, and make
it into a reasonable thick body for Bolus's with subtle Powder of Mastick;
about the fourth part will serve. Take of this every morning fasting two or
three drams, and drink upon it a good draught of new milk, if you fup not. Do
the like at night going to bed.

A Way to cure Venereal Cankers.
APply to them the ordinary Suppurative, which is Basilicon, with a fitting
proportion of Mercury dulcis ground to most subtle Powder, mingled with it.
This will suppurate it, and draw out all the Venereal venom, and heal it
without any scar or hardness: whereas if you touch the Cancers with Spirit of
Vitriol or Sulphur, it will make a scar, and then the venom not being able to
run out, it will work inwards, and may make the Pox, and will make hardness in
the place of Sores. If you cannot come to anoint or lay a Plaster upon the sore
parts, syringe it with Rose and Plantan-water, in which you have put a good
quantity of Mercury dulcis in most subtle Powder, and make the Syringe suck up
the Powder of Mercury. This will quickly allay the Inflammation and Pain, and
kill the Poison, that you may afterward finish the Cure with your Basilicon
and Mercury dulcis.

For Contusions or Bruises.
AFter Mr. Craquenel's broken Leg was knit, he wore all the day during some
time a laced Stockin of Dogs-skin, and at night (to discuss the humors and
swelling, and to strengthen the part) he spread very thick upon stupes some
Honey, and laid that to it, after he had first bathed the part with Spirit of
Wine, and sprinkled also the Honey with Spirit of Wine. This is a great
discussive of humors. A Boy fell upon his face, and a knob as big as an Egg
swelled presently upon his Forehead and Temple: they laid this Remedy to it,
and by next morning it was well. It is for Contusions and Swellings thereupon;
but not where there is solution of continuity.

The Spirit of Wine is much better for this, if it be first well impregnated
with the Tincture of Hypericon.

For any kind of Tetters, Herpes, etc.
DIssolve two ounces of running Mercury in four ounces of the best Aqua fortis,
pour upon the solution a quart of fair water, in which is dissolved two
handfuls of Salt, and then filtered. This will make the Mercury fall down to
the bottom in a white Calx. When it is well settled, pour off the clear water;
which keep for your use. Pour the remaining milky thick substance upon one
pound of Hogsgrease melted in an earthen Pot. The Grease must be very hot when
you pour in the dissolved Mercury; but take the Pot from the Fire when you pour
the Mercury to it; and stir it well all the while you are pouring it in, and
when it is all in, set the Pot upon the fire again to boil the Grease, till all
the moisture of the Mercurial Substance and Solution is evaporated away; but be
sure you stir it very well all the while; as also after you take it from the
fire (which you do as soon as the moisture is gone) till the Grease is cold and
hardened.

The way of using this Ointment and Water to cure all sorts of Tetters or
Herpes, or any scabby Itches, or inflamed red Faces or Noses is thus: First, if
the evil be very great, purge and let blood very strongly. Then begin with the
Water: rub the Tetters and all about it with Linen dipped in the Water made as
hot as you can endure it; and when you have rubbed and bathed it well, lay upon
it Compresses wetted in the Water. Do thus twice a day for two or three days or
more, till you see it has drawn out the Salt humor abundantly, and that the
part is much inflamed and very sore, and has little holes or ulcers eaten in
it. Presently after the first washing it will grow very sore and inflamed;
therefore you must not afterward rub it so hard as at first, but very gently.
Some Sores will require that you use the water five or six days, others more,
tender ones two or three days. When you judge that the Water has drawn out
sufficiently the violent matter; then anoint with the Grease as hot as you can
endure it, and lay on it a Plaster of the same Ointment, binding it on.

This Ointment will presently assuage the pain, and take away the Inflammation.
Dress it with it twice or thrice a day. Much matter will run from the Sore as
from an Ulcer; and by little and little it will heal up. And that which is
wonderful is, that whereas one would think that such deep holes as the Water
will have eaten, should leave Scars, there will not appear the least mark of
them; but a fine new tender natural skin will come over it all.

Monsieur Trear's Excellent Medicinal Stone of great Virtues.
TAke white Vitriol half a pound, green Vitriol one pound, Alum one pound and
half, common Salt three ounces; Salt of Tartar, Armoise Mugwort, Cichory,
Plantan, Arsmart, of each half an ounce; Myrrh, Frankincense, of each four
ounces; Salt of Wormwood half an ounce. Reduce all these to most subtle Powder.
Then put them into a new glased Pot, and pour upon them a good quantity of Rose
Vinegar. Then put it upon a soft fire, and stir it continually, till you see
that it begin to thicken; then put into it half a pound of Cerussa Veneta in
subtle Powder; keep it stirring over a gentle fire till it grow to a Stone.
Then take it off and keep it for use.

This Stone (a piece of it) being dissolved in Rain or River-water (warmed, and
the affected part bathed with it, and a Linen laid on four double dipped in
this water) will cure any foul inveterate Wound, or any old and rotten Ulcer.

It cures any Defluxion, and comfort the sore part.

It cures any Ulcer or Canker in the mouth.

It fastneth loose Teeth, and hinders putrefaction of the Gums.

It cures the Noli me tangere, or any Ulcer in the Throat, warming a little of
this water, and gargarising your mouth with it.

It cures any Fistula's and Chilblains on Feet.

It is an exceeding good Remedy for all sorts of Impostumes.

It is exceeding good for any Burning or Scalding.

It is an excellent Remedy for any Cancer in the Breast. In fine, its Virtues
are innumerable.

To dry up Sharp Humors with ones own Water.
A Certain Lady had an humor broke out at the lower part of her heel, which
neither Physicians with Purgings and Diet-drinks, nor Surgeons with
Ointments could heal and dry up: it was healed in three or four Fomentations
with her own Urin newly made and some white Salt dissolved in it, all warmed,
and then with Linens doubled foment the place by the fireside, for a quarter
of an hour; then bind on a clean dry Linen and compress to it. Do thus morning
and night. This is also excellent for Kibes and Chilblains, even after they are
broken; and if used before they are broken, it will prevent them.

It is exceeding good to wash and bath ones feet and back-sinews with ones own
water warmed. It strengthens and suppleth them.

An Experimented Vulnerary Potion or Wound-Drink.
TAke leaves of the large Comfrey, Agrimony, Armoise Mugwort, of each two
handfuls; herb Robert 3 handfuls, Mumia half an ounce, Paul's Betony or Speedwel
six handfuls; make a Decoction of this with White Wind and Water in a Vessel
close stopped.

Then pour off as much as you can of the clear; then distill the remaining
matter. Then add the distilled Water to the Decoction. Take of this a little
Glassful in the morning fasting, and as much at four of the clock in the
afternoon.

This has cured a Gentlewoman of an Ulcer in the Reins, in six weeks space.

This cured also a Friar, who being Cut of the Stone, could not be healed.

An excellent Ointment for Wounds and Ulcers.
TAke eight ounces of the Oil of Nuts, Ceruss, Minium, of each four ounces, two
ounces of Bole-Armoniac, one ounce of burned Alum, eight ounces of white Honey.
Put your Oil of Nuts into a Basin, and make it hot; then put into it your
Ceruss, Minium, and Bole-Armoniac, by little and little, being first well
pulverized: and stir it well for an hour or two; then add to it the Honey, and
the Alum brought into a Powder: All this you are to boil for two hours over a
gentle fire, and have a care of too great an ebullition; and as soon as you
see, that it is boiled to the consistence of an Ointment, take it off from the
fire, and stir it so long till it be cold.

It is a most excellent Ointment in all fresh Wounds, in Nerves cut, Fractures
and all Ulcers.

A Digestif.
TAke of Venice Turpentine the worth of two pence, and wash it well with water,
the yolk of an Egg, and a pennyworth of Oil of Roses: beat all together, and
use it in fresh Wounds, dipping Cherpibint in it and laying it on, and a
Plaster of the said Ointment; and a Compress wetted with Spirit of Salt and
Water upon it, and tie up the Wound.

The Proportion of the Spirit of Salt is, to be so much as to make the Water
pretty sharp, a little sharper than to drink. This Digestif and Compress are to
be used only when there is an Inflammation or Erysipelas about the Wound; else
the Ointment alone serves.

To cure any Sore Leg, or old contumacious Sore or Wound.
TAke the Leaves of the Herb called Garden Nightshade (the leaves of it have
teeth, the buttons or flowers are yellow) and beat them in a Marble or wooden
Mortar; then open the edge with your Fingers to make it light and spongy, that
it may take up his juice again to it. Then lay it pretty thick upon the Sore,
and a double Linen over it then over that a Leaf of red Cabbage boiled till it
be tender, that may cover the Leg all round about the Sore (for this takes away
all Intlammation and angriness in the flesh) then bind up over that. Dress it
thus morning and night. If there be any rotten or dead flesh in the Sore, that
must be first eaten away and cleansed before you apply the Nightshade, that
the Sore be clear and red. With this have been cured strange Ulcers on Legs.

For Fistulas and Ulcers.
GEt Paul's Betony one handful; Agrimony, Sanicle, Mouse-ear, Bugle, Self-heal,
Winter-green, Wood-Rue, Saracens Consound, Corsswort, Scabius, Sweet-Maudlin,
Avens, Spatling-Poppy, Plantan, each half a handful; of Roots of Licoris,
Scorsonera, wild Angelica, red Beets, golden Rod, of each an ounce and half; of
the inner green Rind of woody Nightshade and Tamarisk, each a handful and
half; Hartshorn four ounces, Crabs Eyes bruised three ounces, China two
ounces, Sarsaparilla four ounces, cut, bruise, chop all small; infuse them in a
pottle of White Wind; a quart of Elder-flower water, Wormwood and Ladies-mantle
water, of each three pints. Let them stand in warm embers; but not boil more
than twelve hours. Then boil all in a covered Vessel, till almost half be
consumed: strain it lightly, clarify it with Whites of Eggs, pour it off,
leaving the dregs behind; then add Honey of Roses one pound and an half, Syrup
of juice of Scurvy Grass six ounces. Give it the boil only till it mingle; scum
and bottle it close. Take five spoonfuls at once first in the morning, and at
four in the afternoon, and at going to bed; adding to every dose six granes of
Salt of Vitriol, and two granes of Salt of Tin.

Where there is Fracture of Bones, put to the other Ingredients three ounces
weight of Savin dried and powdered, and one ounce Lapidis ossifrag.

Use no Unguent to the Ulcer, nor Plaster, unless that of the juice of Tobacco,
and juice of Bitter-sweet or Wood Nightshade, boiled to a consistence, and
made into the form of a Plaster with a little Wax and Turpentine.

A most Excellent Plaster of very great virtues, called the Plaster of
Norimberg.
TAke half a pound of Litharge of Silver and a pint of very good Wine-vinegar;
mix these together, and let it stand so three days. Then pour often the clear,
and add to it half a pound of Minium, and as much of Water of Frogs Spawn. Let
it stand again three days, stirring it often every day with some stick or
other. After three days standing pour it out quickly into a broad Brass Basin;
adding to it of Oil of Olives or Walnuts, one pound, and three ounces of common
Salt. Let it boil, stirring it very well to the consistence of a Plaster,
adding in the end a little Camphire.

A Plaster very Excellent for many things.
TAke a peck of Garden-Snails, and pick them clean from the shells unwasht,
which stew in a close pot with a quart of Muscadine; and be sure they do not
boil. When they are tender stewed, take them out of the Muscadine and stamp
them: and as they are stamping, take of the tender tops of Rosemary, Rue,
Elder-tops or buds, red Sage, of each of these a handful; chop them small, and
put them into the Muscadine, where the Snails are stewed in, and boil them very
soft and tender; then put in the Snails again, and with them six pennyworth of
Saffron, five spoonfuls of Neatsfoot Oil, and an ounce of Mithridate: Boil all
these together, till they be very thick and fit to spread; then put it into
Pots, and kee p it for your use. This will keep good a year. When you apply it,
spread it upon Leather to the grieved place, and renew it once in four and
twenty hours. The best time to make it, is in May or June. It will cure any Ach
or Sinew, Strain or Grief, in the Sinews or Muscles, and the dead Palsy, as
has been often proved.

An Excellent Astringent Plaster for the Back.
TAke Comfry Roots, Knotgrass Roots, Cinquefoil Roots, Budweed or Baudweed, of
each two good handfuls. Stamp all these, and put to them a quart of the best
Sallet Oil; then let it boil softly till the Oil has extracted the virtues of
the Roots; then strain it; then put to it four ounces of Venice Turpentine, and
as much of Virgin-Wax, and two ounces of Pitch.

The Excellent Balsam of Doctor Salvatore Winter, given me by him, and made by
my Chymister, with an Addition of his own of more Ingredients.
TAke Linseed Oil two gallons; Colophony, Rosin, Beeswax, of each three pound;
Storax, Pitch, of each one pound, Venice Turpentine two pound, Oil of
Turpentine four ounces [to these he added, by his own judgment, Oil of Bricks
half a pound.] Put your Linseed Oil in a Kettle, and when it is very hot, put
into it your Colophony, Rosin and Wax, in little pieces: then put in your
Turpentine and Pitch, and Storax, and the Oil of Turpentine, stirring it as
long as it is on the fire.

His Addition.
Now put into it half a pound of the Oil of Tobacco, and four ounces of the
juice of Orpin (that is, the Herb stamped and the juice strained out; and
permitted to settle till the thick feces be sunk to the bottom; then pour off
the clear juice) also four ounces of Saccharum Saturni, and one ounce of Borax.
Let them incorporate on the fire half a quarter of an hour. Then take the
Kettle from the fire, and keep it stirring till it be just cold, lest some of
the Ingredients should be so heavy as to sink whilst it is liquid. When it is
through cold, put it into Gally-Pots.

For the King's Evil.
MElt one dram or two of the Balsam, and put as much of the following Spirit
unto it, taking it immediately from the fire: mix them well together, and
anoint the Swelling with it; as also the Sore if there be any broken out, (for
it causes no pain, but gives rather ease to any raw part) and continue this
bathing or anointing twice a day, and keep the affected part warm. But it is
convenient to purge and sweat in this case. The like mixture of Balsam and
Spirit is excellent for the running Gout or other Gout; also for any Strain or
Bruise or Swelling, or Pain whatsoever, and for Stitches, and any Strain in the
back, and for any Wounds, new or old. They are great Searchers and penetrate
mightily; yet without all pain.

A Maid had been much troubled with a Tetter on her Arm above four years, much
matter running out of it. Some of the matter being taken upon a rag, was
dressed with some Sympathetic Powder, and some of the Balsam applied to the
Tetter; and so dressed twice a day for three days, and the Maids Arm was
perfectly cured, and continued well and firm.

Doctor Salvatore Winter's Spirit, as my Man made it for me.
TAke common good Brandy seven gallons, Flowers of Camomil four handfuls;
Leaves of Plantan, Leaves of Rue, of each three handfuls, Leaves of Rosemary
twelve handfuls, Leaves of Betony two handfuls. First dry all these Herbs, and
then put them into the Brandy, and set them in a gentle heat to digest for
eight or ten days; and then press it out and distill it from the feces, and then
put it in a long body, and to every pint of this liquor put the following
Ingredients, Myrrh half an ounce, Saffron, Castor, Amber, Benjamin, of each
half a dram, Storax one dram; beat all these grossly together, and then put them
into the Spirit, and let it stand in digestion eight or ten days more; and then
distill off the Spirit in a gentle Bath, taking only that which will burn all
away.

[This addition of Myrrh, etc. was done by my Man upon his own conceit that it
would make the Spirit the better; and the truth is, it had very good effects in
the cases afterward set down. But methought it was weaker after the second
Distillation and Addition, than the Authors Spirit; which peradventure may be,
because peradventure the latter Ingredients did retain some of the chief
Spirits. Therefore if this Addition of Ingredients be judged good, I should
choose to put them in at the first with the Herbs, and so make but one
Distillation.]

This Spirit I found excellent in Fits of the Mother. Smell strongly to it, and
drink a little of it down. You can take but a little down, it is so strong;
some drops or half a spoonful or so. Use it after the same manner for
Giddiness, or any Pain in the Stomach, and against all Fumes offending the
Head, either hot or cold; any swouning Fits or Faintings. For Deafness and to
help the Hearing, dip a little Cotton in it, and put it into the Ear, and
likewise smell strongly to it, that the strength of it may penetrate through
all parts, and pour a little of the same upon the head.

This Spirit alone is excellent for Burnings.

Distillation of Tobacco.
FIrst, distill the Stalks of Tobacco with three heads of Glass, and three
Receivers, the one after the other. In the first you will have a Balsam, in the
second a yellowish Oil, in the third nothing but Water.

The next trial I made was with one head only; but changing the head, as soon
as it was hot, for one that was cold, I found in the Receiver Balsam, Oil and
Water altogether, which separate at several Distillations.

The Balsam alone being laid upon an Ulcer in a man's Leg, did presently fume
into his Head, and provoked both Stool and Vomit, and healed the Ulcer.

It is of an extreme light quality. It healed the Thumb of a Skipper, that was
cut to the bare bone, in twenty four hours.

It cured also a Tetter or Ringworm in a Gentlewomans forehead.

If you dip a little Lint or Cotton in this Balsam, and put it to the Tooth, it
will cure the Toothach.

It is also very medicinal, being taken inwardly (from eight to ten drops) in
White Wind. It is excellent to open Obstructions of the Lungs, etc. but more is
a Vomit.

The Stomach anointed with the Balsam or with the Oil, provokes Vomit; but
anointing with it about the Navil, works downwards.

You may draw the Salt out of the Remainder, which is excellent to cleanse all
impurities of the Lungs and Liver: It purges the Head and Brain, as also the
Blood. It provokes Appetite, and causes good Digestion. It is also good to
drive away the Dropsy. The Dose is six granes in a dram of the Balsam of
Sulphur.

This Salt being lapt in a rag, and held between the Teeth, draws abundance
of Rheum, and cures the Toothach.

For the Falling of the Uvula.
IT is an infallible Remedy for the falling of the Uvula to do thus: Gag your
self with the Joint of your Thumb, whose one end joineth to the hand, and the
other is the middle juncture of the thumb: let your two rows of teeth rest upon
these two ends of that Joint, so as to make you gape wide: Keep your self
gaping with this Joint in your mouth as long as you can, all the while sucking
in your breath. When you are weary of continuing in this posture, take out your
Thumb and rest. After you have reposed sufficiently, repeat again all the same
action: and when you are weary pause again. You shall not have done so thrice,
but your Uvula will be restored to its due place.

Cornacchius his Medicinal Powder.
TAke Regulus of Antimony four ounces, pure Saltpeter four ounces, mingle them
well together in subtle Powder, and cast them into a red hot Crucible, and make
them burn by casting in a fiery coal, which repeat as often as it consumes; for
without that the Saltpeter will not burn, there being no more Sulphur in the
Antimony to set it on fire. Keep it thus in fusion in a reverberating heat for
at least an hour, stirring the matter often with an Iron Rod; then let it cool.
Give of this with the Scammony and Cremor Tartari, of each ten granes. Be sure
that the fixed Salt of Saltpeter do not dissolve nor be separated from the
Antimony; for in that consists the virtue against Fevers.

The best way is to make the Regulus of Antimony, to put first into the
Crucible the Saltpeter and Tartar, and when they are well melted, put in the
Antimony, and proceed in the rest in the usual manner: Thus you shall have six
or seven ounces or more, of every pound of Antimony. Likewise to make a martial
Regulus, put the Antimony first into the Crucible; and when it is in perfect
susion, then put in the Mars.

The use of the Spirit of Tartar, is also good for all Obstructions,
particularly of the Spleen, and keeps the body open.

The Dose is from fisteen to thirty granes.

It does also good in Fevers and Agues, and likewise in the Venereal Disease,
it is a good cleanser of all parts.

Spirit of Salt Ammoniac.
TAke Sulphur, Salt Ammoniac, of each five ounces, very strong quick Lime six
ounces: Powder them all apart very finely, then mix and grind them well
together, and put them into a Retort, and distill in Sand, giving very strong
fire, at last a very strong Spirit will come over.

The yellowness of it, and tinging black the fingers, or silver, shows there
is of the Sulphur in it.

Make thus the Spirit of Salt Ammoniac to smell to which is exceeding subtle
and penetrant. Put into the bottom of a body Retort about three fingers thick,
more or less, a bed of strong quick Lime ground into subtle Powder. If but
coarsly broken it will serve, (...) (...) water (...) dissolve it. Pour upon it
(...) (...) (...) is dissolved Salt Ammoniac, as (...) (...) the water can
dissolve. The quantity of this solution, which you must pour upon the quick
Lime, is so much as to soke it well, and swim a little half a ringers breadth
over it. Distill this in Balneo, keeping the subtle Spirit by itself. If any
phlegm should be come over with it, rectify it once from the phlegm in Balneo.
This is not only good for benumbed heads to smell into, but also to take
inwards. The former is a great healer of inward Ulcers.

Balsam of Sulphur for the Breast, etc. and for Tetters.
MAke Spirit of Turpentine thus: Distill it in a Cucurbite by itself (without
Water or ought else) in Balneo Mariae. Then rectify it by itself four or five
times. The measure to know when it is enough rectified, is that it unites
perfectly with the pure Spirit of Wine. Put this upon flowers of Sulphur
sublimed five or six times per se (unless it be so after sublimed, it will not
do) and digest them a while together, and the Spirit will dissolve all the
Sulphur (which if there be not enough of the Spirit to do at once; pour off the
solution, and put on fresh Spirit.) Put this solution with eight or ten or
twelve times as much pure fair water (if it be distilled it is the better) into
a Cucurbite, and distill it in Balneo till there remain in the bottom a
Substance like a Colophonia; which when it is cold, will be brittle and
transparent red like a Ruby. The water will have carried over with it all the
Spirit of Turpentine, and only the Sulphur will remain behind. Beat this
friable Substance into subtle Powder, and pour pure Spirit of Wine upon it. All
will dissolve in the Spirit of Wine, excepting a very little feces of the
Spirit of Wine, leaving the Sulphur in a mucilaginous Balsam.

This is excellent in all inconveniences of the Breast and Lungs. Also if you
anoint any Tetter, Itch or Scabs with it, it cures them in three or four times,
doing it morning and night or oftener.

The Balsam of Sulphur made the ordinary way with the Oil of Walnuts, is also a
certain cure of Tetters, Scabs or Itch: also the Oil of Toads.

If all the Oil of Turpentine be not come away at this once putting of Water
upon the Solution: put more Water upon it before it be distilled dry (for
before that, you may judge whether all the Spirit be, or will come away this
bout) and distill as before. When you see the Water come away without bringing
any Spirit over with it, and yet some Water remaining behind, it is a sign all
the Spirit of Turpentine is severed from the Sulphur; then distill to dryness.
Till this sign put on still new Water.

A Panacea of Antimony.
TAke Antimony, reduce it to Powder, and imbibe it by little and little with
good Oil of Vitriol; then put it to digest in Sand fifteen days; then imbibe it
again, and put it to the Sand again, and digest it fifteen days more with a
moderate heat; then put it into a Retort, and with a strong fire make all the
Spirit come over; then break the Retort and your Panacea will be fixed.

Another Panacea.
FUlminize Saltpeter with Charcoals; then give it strong fire for two hours;
then dissolve it in fair water; filter and evaporate to dryness; then give it
strong fire for two or three hours more, till it become like green.

Take two parts of this Saltpeter, and one part of Antimony in Powder, put it
in an earthen Pot, and put upon it a sufficient quantity of water, which being
evaporated, give it a strong fire for two hours, then put your matter in water,
and let it settle a night, and it will draw the Tincture of Antimony, which you
will find at the bottom; pour the water from it and dry your Powder. The Dose
is from ten to twenty granes. It purges gently by stools.

A Medicinal Powder.
IT is to be done two several ways; for the one sublime Mercury for it seven
times (beginning with the best Venice Crystalline Mercury) revivifying it after
every Sublimation, and then subliming it again with new Sulphur and Salt. To
six ounces of this purified Mercury revivified, put one ounce of Leaf-Gold,
making an Amalgame after the ordinary manner of Goldsmiths, which wash with
many waters, till no more blackness comes from it; then (being very well dried)
put it in a large Oven, and stop it but slightly with Cotton, and so digest it
in Ashes or Sand without ever stirring the Fiol, till it be a red Precipitate
(all but a very little, which will continue running Mercury) putting down with
a Raker from time to time what shall sublime to the sides of the Glass (but
without shaking it) but you must have a care not to give too great heat to
sublime much, but to be still in the next degree to Sublimation. The Mercury
thus prepared, grows presently hard with the Gold, soon after it is put to
digest.

In the other way take a good Mercury distilled from Cinnabar, and make an
Amalgame as above, with a sixth part of Leaf-Gold, and wash it very well; then
put it to digest in a little Bolts-head for three or four days; then take it
out, and wash it very well from new blackness that will grow in it: When the
Water comes off clear, put it again to digest three or four days; then wash as
before, and more blackness will come away. Continue these sharp Digestions and
Washings, till no more blackness come away with washing, but your Amalgame is
in a permanence of whiteness and clearness, which will take up five or six or
seven months to bring it to that pass. Then put it to digest, as is said above.
It will be five or six or seven months after your washings before the Mercury
precipitate, be completely made, more or less, according as you govern the fire
dexterously. Now the first washings (in the first method) before the Amalgame
come to be clear without blackness, will take up six or seven months; so that
it will be fifteen or sixteen months before the work be completely finished
that way; and six or seven the other way. After the Mercury precipitate is
made, continue it some time in the fire (increased as much as you may without
danger of subliming or revivifying the Mercury) to accustom it to greater heat,
and to dispose it a little to some degree of fixation, or at least of less
volatility or churlishness, and violence in Salivation: and that it may stay
the longer in the body to work otherwise more radically, when the wild Spirits
are a little tamed.

A great Medicin which has don great Effects, from an intimate Friend.
DIssolve six drams of Silver in Aqua fortis (the purest and best Aqua fortis
that can be had) using no more Aqua fortis than is just necessary for the
solution (which will be about one ounce and half, i. e. two parts to one.) When
you see that it is all perfectly dissolved (without fire) cast into the Matras
an Amalgame made (after the ordinary manner of Goldsmiths) of one dram of pure
Gold, and two ounces of Mercury; you will presently see a Pelagus
conturbationis made. Let the Matras stand still upon a Table, or in some
corner, till you find the matter at that pass as you desire. You will see many
beautiful colors appear. After forty days standing, you will see a kind of
roughness appear upon the Superficies of the Mercury, which will daily grow and
sprout out more. In twenty days more (sixty in all) it will be shot out into
little spears or needles and twigs. When you see it grows or shoots out no
more, pour off all the liquor, and the Mercurial matter will soon dry of
itself. Then with some little piece of Glass break off these Excrescencies or
Needles from the mass, (whereof you may have about one dram or better) and
grind them to Powder, which will be very white. Of this give twenty four
granes, or more (according to the complexion) in a Cherry, or Yolk of an Egg.
In the morning very early, or at night going to bed, or rather after the first
sleep at three or four in the morning, and in this last case sleep after it. It
is seven or eight hours before it uses to work.

Sometimes the first Dose will not work at all, otherwise than by strengthening,
and then he gives a second Dose two or three days after; which will work
either by Stool or Vomit or Sweat, as Nature shall require, and in due
proportion.

It cures Quartans and other Agues, and works admirably in all desperate
Diseases. He used to take it once a month. When there is no peccant humor in
the body, it works not by evacuation, but strengthens. The Mercury encloseth
and shuts up the Metals, like a Rose of Jericho, from whence he calls it
Sigillum Hermetis. The part of the Needles next the Mass works rougher than
the ends. Out of the Mass you may draw most of the Gold and Silver with loss of
about an eighth part of the first, and less proportion of the Silver. He
thinks this to be a Philosophical Mercury, and to be useful in the great work.

One has made a Work of Projection with Gold or Silver and Mercury,
amalgamated with Antimony, that has been impregnated by the Universal Spirit
cast into it from the Sunbeams by a Burning-Glass, which increases the weight
of it, though in calcining of it, much of its humidity do evaporate away.

A Menstruum of Citron-Pills to dissolve Bodies of Metal and Coral.
PRovide sufficient of the thin rinds of Citron Pills, the yellow part only,
that gives the Oil. Expose them (freshly cut) in Glass or Porcellane Plates
(being very thin) to the open Dew, setting them out about midnight, and taking
them away an hour or two before Sunrise. Distill the Oil of these rinds thus
impregnated with dew. You will find it much more active and yet more benign,
then if it were not rectified. You may reiterate this course with new chips, as
often as you please, during the season of the Dew; so to have what quantity you
will of this Spirit.

A Menstruum to open any Body, but chiefly the Body of Gold.
TAke Salt of Tartar and Saltpeter, grind them very well together; then set
them in a moist place to dissolve. When they are dissolved, put them in
digestion in a Bolts-head for three weeks in a gentle heat. Then take out the
liquor, and evaporate it till it be dry; then mix it with three parts of Bolus
Armenus, and distill it in an earthen Retort, first with a soft fire, then with
a strong: Have a great care that no Spirits break out, for they are very
subtle. When all is come over, put it into a Glass-Retort, and rectify it in
Sand. Then you will have a mighty subtle Spirit, which will dissolve almost any
metal, and it will draw a Tincture out of Calx of Gold. It has a pleasant
smell and taste. All the Salt of Tartar will come over with the Saltpeter.

A Remedy which cures Fevers by a Lunary Emetic, which is an Universal
Medicin, even for the Morbus Gallicus and Leprosy.
DIssolve Silver in Aquafortis made of Vitriol and Saltpeter, and precipitate
it with Spirit of Salt, then dry the Calx.

Take of this Calx and Antimony, of each a like quantity, distill it as a Butter
of Antimony, and you shall have a Butter white and transparent, which will
dissolve Gold. Precipitate one part of this Butter with common water,
edulcorate with bloud-warm water, and you will have an Emetic Remedy, which
will purge and cure all sorts of Fevers, and is a Catholicum for ill humors;
the Dose is from one grane to three in some fit thing, and stay four or five
hours after it before you eat or drink. This must be given with great caution.

To make an admirable Sudorific of this, that will cure the Venereal Disease,
and the Leprosy, is thus:
TAke the other part of this Butter, and put upon it some Spirit of Saltpeter,
cohobating three or four times; then wash it with Water, and burn some Spirit
of Wine upon it; and you shall have a Sudorific, which will do admirable
Effects; taking from eight granes to sixteen: And after the sweating you must
well rub over the whole body with warm clothes; observing a reasonable diet,
and some Purge before: as also the use of some fit Decoction.

Spirit of Verdigrease.
Distill a Spirit from Verdegris; rectify it once by itself, it will leave some
feces and Metalline terrestreity behind.

Take one part of this Spirit, and three of fair Water; put it upon Litharge
finely searsed, as much as it will dissolve. Deflegm it in Balneo, and then a
pure and powerful Spirit will come over in Sand, without acrimony, and tasting
a little sweetish, as in the making of Saccbarum Saturni. It is excellent for
Convulsions of little children, in some fit vehicle; a drop or two for sucking
Infants; but to Men you may give ten or twenty drops. It is very good for the
Epilepsie, Colic, Spleen, etc.

Qu aere of using this Spirit of Venus, to extract the Tincture of Vitrum
Antimonii, from whence extract it afterward with Spirit of Wine. Note that in
making that extract, the Spirit of Wine will hardly tinge itself with the
extract made with this Spirit or with distilled Vinegar, if you evaporate that
Menstruum to dryness; but if you leave it moist, then it presently tingeth
itself, and leaves the Salt and precedent Menstruum, without any Tincture of
the Antimony.

If you dissolve the pure part of Verdegris in distilled Vinegar, filter and
congele, as Zuelfer teaches; then dissolve again in new distilled Vinegar, and
work all as before. This repeat three or four times; so to have your
Verdegrease perfectly pure, before you draw the Spirit from it. Qu aere of
dissolving it in Rainwater rather than in distilled Vinegar.

To Corporifie the Salt of Spirit of Wine, etc.
TAke the best and purest old Wine, distill the pure Spirit from it; then distill
away all the Phlegm, till there remain a black viscous substance. Take this
black viscous substance, and put the Spirit of Wine upon it, so much as to
dissolve it all. Digest it five or six or seven days, then distill; first in
Balneo, till the Spirit come away; then distill this in Sand to dryness, and
there will come away a white milky Oil or Spirit (which Lully calls Aqua
secunda) receive this by itself, and keep it carefully. Upon the dry Caput
mortuum put a good quantity of Spirit of Wine to dissolve it all, and digest it
seven or eight days; then distill as before, and keep the milky liquor or Aqua
secunda with the former. Repeat these Distillations still with new, or the same
Spirit of Wine poured upon the earth, and digested; then distill it till there
come no more milky liquor, and the Earth be dry and in powder. Then reverberate
the dry Earth twenty four hours between two Crucibles or Pots, to make it
exceeding dry. Then imbibe it with a tenth part of the Aqua secunda, and digest
it two or three days; then distill it in Balneo, and the Liquor will come off
insipid, leaving all his virtue in the Earth. Add new Aqua secunda to it, and
do as before, repeating this till you have imbibed all your Aqua secunda into
the Earth. Then take a seventh part of pure Spirit of Wine, and imbibe the
Earth with it, and digest it two or three days; then distill it in Balneo, and
the Liquor will come off like Phlegm. Then imbibe the Earth with a sixth part of
the Spirit of Wine, and do as before; then with a fifth, then with a fourth
part; all which proportion continue, repeating the Imbibations with the fourth
part till the Earth will take no more, but that the Spirit of Wine comes off as
strong as you did put it on. Then put this impregnated Earth to sublime for
twenty four hours or more; at the last, making the Vessel red hot, a pure white
Salt will sublime up, which is the Salt of the Spirit of Wine. All is not yet
gone out of the Earth; therefore you may repeat the Imbibations with new Spirit
of Wine, till the Earth will take no more in. Then sublime as before new Salt.
Repeat all this till the Earth will corporifie no more Spirit of Wine; and then
it is an Earth damanta. Take all the sublimed Salts, and put upon them three
times as much pure Spirit of Wine, and distill them over together. This is
Lully's great Menstruum; and dissolveth radically all metals, even Gold: and
draws the essential Tinctures of them all. After you have drawn the Tincture
of Gold with this, boil the remaining body some time in Spirit of Urin, and it
will resolve into running Mercury.

To have a less Menstruum that will draw out the Tincture of Vegetables
exceeding well, you may take the Earth after it is impregnated with the Aqua
secunda, and the Spirit of Wine, as much as it will take in, and before you
sublime any Salt from it, being in that state, pour upon it three times as much
as it is, of pure Spirit of Wine, and digest them two or three days together;
and the Spirit of Wine will dissolve all the volatile Salt that is in the Earth.
Dicant it off clear, and use this Menstruum.

To volatilize the fixed Salt of Tartar.
CAlcine it in a close Vessel to blackness (for if all the Sulphur be driven
away it will not do) Then put upon it a pure Spirit of Wine, and after some
digestion distill it off. Cohobate the same Spirit of Wine upon the calcined
Tartar, and do all as before. Repeat this till you find that the Spirit of Wine
be exceeding sharp, and have carried over with it all the Salt of the Tartar.

Another way to Volatilize the Salt of Tartar.
TAke Salt of Tartar very white, dissolve it in distilled Vinegar; philter it
and then evaporate to a Pellicule, put to it twice as much of white Sand; then
reverberate it together twelve hours in an earthen Vessel, not glazed. Take
this Salt reverberated with the Sand, and dissolve it again in distilled
Vinegar, philter, evaporate, reverberate and dissolve, so often till the Salt
of Tartar be as white as snow. Take this Salt and dissolve it again in
distilled Vinegar, evaporate in Balneo, dissolve again, repeating till the
distilled Vinegar become acre or sharp; then dry the Salt gently. Then take
this Salt, and put upon it its weight of well rectified Spirit of Wine, digest
and distill it gently; then put new Spirit of Wine upon it; and repeat this so
often, till the Spirit of Wine come from it as strong as it is put on; then
evaporate it gently in a Retort: Then sublime by degrees of fire; take the
sublimed Salt, (which is the volatile Salt of Tartar) and keep it carefully in a
Glass. It will dissolve Gold and all Metals.

An Excellent Mercury Vitae of a singular Preparation.
TAke Mineral Antimony very clean six ounces, that has never been melted, and
as much of good Saltpeter, grind them to subtle Powder, then mix them together,
and put them in a Crucible, and cover it with another Crucible that has a hole
in the bottom. Calcine it with a wheel fire by degrees; when you see that it
sumeth no more through the hole, take it out and grind it very small. Then take
three Ducats of Gold, and six times as much of this Powder; put the Powder
first in a Crucible, and melt it; then put in one of your Ducats, and stir it
with a stick till it be melted; and then put in the other two one after
another; and when they are all melted; leave it yet a while in the fire. Then
take it out, and when it is cold, beat it into fine Powder, and searse it. Then
put to it its weight of Mercury sublimate in subtle Powder, mix them well
together, and put them in a Retort well luted; then put it in a Furnace, and
put a Receiver to it filled with common Water, so that the end of the Retort
lie in the Water; but you must not lute the Joints: Increase the fire by
degrees, and the matter will distill into the Water; but the most part of it
will stick about the neck of the Retort, which you may draw forth, and make it
fall into the Receiver; when you see that nothing more comes over by force of
fire, let it cool, break the Retort, and take out the matter that sticks
about the neck, and likewise that which is in the Water. Keep the Water, for it
is exceeding good to cure all sorts of Ulcers. Pour clean Water upon the matter
which was settled in the Receiver, and shake it sometimes; then let it settle;
then pour off the Water, and put fresh upon it; Repeat this seven or eight
times; then separate the Mercury from it, and put warm Water upon the Powder,
and let it stand till the next day; then repeat the lotion as the day before.
Continue this six days, on the seventh day, wash the Powder with fresh cold
Water, and let it settle: pour off the Water, and dry the Powder, which keep
for your use. The Dose is from one grane to two for little Children; but for
Persons of Age seven or eight granes. It will cause a gentle Vomiting, and
works likewise by Stools. It has done miracles in Fevers, and in the
Venereal Disease, and of the Gout. You will find in the Caput mortuum the
greatest part of the Gold.

This Mercury vitae is not white like the ordinary, but of a brownish gray. It
appears by this to have some of the Mercury in it, that if you rub Gold or
Venus with the Powder, it will make it white, which common Mercury Vitae will
not do.

If you take the remaining Salt, after you have distilled the Water Athletica
of Saltpeter and Salt Ammoniac, and distill that by strong fire as you do Aqua
fortis; the Water that comes so, will carry Gold over the helm, much more
powerfully than the Water that comes first, and which ordinarily is used.

A great Corroborant.
MAke an Amalgame of Gold and Mercury in due manner; which grind well with
flowrs of Sulphur, and set it upon Coals, and so make Calx of Gold according to
art. Repeat this Calcination two or three times. Then take your Calx of Gold,
and grind it exceeding well with twice as much pure decrepitated Salt; put
these into a Crucible, which cover well, and set it to cement or reverberate
during six hours or more in a Furnace, where the heat may be increased by
degrees, so that in due time the Crucible become red. Continue so a pretty
time, but have a care the Salt melt not. When it is cold, take out the matter
and grind it well, and pour hot water upon it to dissolve the Salt, and philter
it off, and pour on more water, doing so till you have severed all the Salt
from the Gold (as also a white earthy substance that will swim upon the water)
then dry the Gold: which grind again with double its quantity of prepared Salt
(the same Salt will serve again when the Water is distilled from it) and cement
it, and work all as before, having a care always that the Gold settle well to
the bottom, after you have stirred it in the water. Repeat this six or eight
times (the more the better) till the Gold become to be all gray or white
Powder. Then cement it with double its quantity of pure Salt of Tartar, in the
same manner as you did with the Salt, and do all as before. Repeat this two or
three or four times, dulcifying it every time very well from the Salt. Then put
upon it (being very dry) the Menstruum of Spirit of Urin mentioned hereafter,
and it will be tincted bloud-red in twenty four hours: pour off that and put on
more, till you have drawn out all the Tincture; which distill in a Cucurbite
with a very gentle fire, till it become a Gum; of which put one dram into a
pint of Sack, and give a spoonful for a Dose. It is a mighty Corroborant; as
also Sudorific, where Nature requires it. It will make one sweat twenty four
hours. The Menstruum is thus made: Take pure Spirit of Wine, and pure Spirit of
Urin: Put them together into a long Cucurbite with a narrow mouth, on which put
a head fitting it in the Orifice, and so distill of this Spirit of Wine with a
very gentle heat; there will remain a slegmatic liquor in the bottom. Cohobate
the same Spirit upon it till there remain only perfect Phlegm in the bottom, and
that all the Spirits and volatile Salt of the Urin be in the Spirit of Wine.
This is a great Dissolvent and A'cahest; but it will be stronger if you work it
again with new Spirit of Urin; and so you may make it as strong as you will.

To make Aurum potabile.
TAke one ounce of Gold, dissolve it in eight ounces of the Aqua Regis set down
hereafter; then pour upon it a quart of common Water; and then pour upon it by
little and little two or three quarts of a Lixivium made of common Water and
Tartar, which will precipitate the Gold; Continue pouring till the Ebullition
cease: then let it stand till you see all the Gold precipitated; then pour off
the Water, and put on fresh. Repeat this till it be well dulcified; then
philter it, and let it dry of itself without fire; then put it in a white
Porringer, and pour upon it by little and little, and by diverse times, two
ounces of the Oil of Vitriol mentioned hereafter; and presently it will begin
to boil, and all will become as black as Ink. Let it stand three or four days,
during which time it will work continually upon the Gold, which you shall
perceive by the little Ebullitions. Then pour upon it by little and little four
or five gallons of common Water, which will be of a Violet color, and will
carry with it all the Gold; which put into a large Vessel, and let it stand to
settle; within two days the Gold will appear like spongious Atoms; and-when it
is well precipitated, pour off the Water and put on fresh. Repeat this three or
four times, then dry the matter gently in Sand. Then pour upon it distilled
Vinegar four fingers breadth over it and digest the distilled Vinegar, it will
extract all the remaining Oil of Vitriol and Tartar; then pour it off, and dry
the Powder: Then put it in a Crucible, and dry it again by a moderate fire.
Then put it in a Matras, and pour upon it eight ounces of good Spirit of Salt,
digest it in hot ashes till it be tincted of a high Gold color; then pour it
off and put on fresh. Repeat this till the Spirit has drawn out all the
Tincture. Then put it into a Cucurbite, and distill it to a consistence of
Honey, cohobating the distilled Spirit six or seven times, and the last time
distill to dryness. Then put upon the Gold eight ounces of Spirit of Saturn,
digest it twenty four hours or more, and it will extract all the Tincture of
the Gold. This may be used so alone, taking some drops of it in some fit
Vehicle. But you may make it more efficacious in mixing it with the Tincture of
Bezoar, of Coral, of Pearls, and of Ambergris, made as follows.

Dissolve Pearls and Coral in distilled Vinegar, then evaporate away the
Liquor, and put upon the remaining matter some Aqua vitae acuated with the
fourth part of Spirit of Salt: Digest it and then pour off the tincted Liquor,
which evaporate; then take the remaining extract and dissolve it in as much of
Carduus Benedictus water.

To make the Tincture of Bezoar.
GRind Bezoar, and put upon it pure Aqua vitae impregnated with Spirit of Salt,
it will be tincted of a deep red: then pour it off and put more on. Repeat this
till you have drawn out all the Tincture of it, evaporate the Menstruum, and
dissolve the extract in Rose and Carduus Benedictus Water.

To make the Tincture of Ambergris.
TAke Ambergris, and put upon it good Spirit of Wine or Spirit of Honey; digest
it in the heat of the Sun, or with a gentle heat in Ashes.

To make the Aqua Regis for this Aurum potabile.
TAke one ounce of decrepitated, dissolved and coagulated Salt, distill it with
eight ounces of Spirit of Nitre.

To make the Philosophical Oil of Vitriol for the foresaid Aurum potabile.
TAke eight ounces of good Jupiter, melt in a Crucible, and whilst it is in
fusion; put into it eight ounces of Antimony, and presently put it into a Stone
- Mortar, and grind it very small. Then take one pound of good Venice
Sublimate, and grind it well with the first Amalgame, till it turn black, and
greasy sticking to the Pestil. When you have reduced it to a black Liquor; put
it into a white Porringer, and set it in a moist place; and the Oil will swim
upon the Liquor: which take off gently, and put it into a Fiol, and let it
settle.

Note, That to make this Oil well, it must be done in moist or rainy Weather,
or in a Cellar.

To make an Excellent Oil of Pearl for Health, and for the Face.
TAke Pearls in Powder, and pour upon them distilled Vinegar; digest it in
Balneo, till you see the Pearls be all dissolved. Then evaporate it with gentle
heat; then edulcorate the Substance of Pearls several times in fair Water, till
the Water come from it insipid: Then wash the matter once or twice with
Rose Water; then pour upon it distilled May - Dew, or fresh May-Dew only
philtered: Then distill it; but let it boil strongly in the time of
Distillation, and you will find in the Receiver the Water and Oil, which
separate.

You may also putrify the macerated Pearls with Spirit of Wine in Horse-dung
nine or ten days or longer, after you have washed the matter: Then separate the
Spirit that must be separated; then distill with the same Dew, as aforesaid.

An Excellent Tincture of Gold.
CAlcine Gold with the three Salts boiled with it in Water, in such sort as
Zuelfer teaches: When the Water is evaporated away, and that you have an
Aureal Salt, grind it with double its weight of Flowers of Sulphur, then put it
into a Crucible, and burn it away in a reverberatory Furnace: Take out the Calx
of Gold, and grind it again with new Flowers of Sulphur, and burn and
reverberate again: Repeat this burning with Sulphur twelve times, and
reverberate it well at last; then put a well rectified Spirit of Wine upon it,
and digest them together and the Spirit of Wine will be tincted very yellow. Of
which few drops for a Dose in a fit Vehicle, has wrought great effects.

An Excellent Physical Salt, which is very efficacious in all Fevers, either
Simple or Malignant any ways, or spotted: In the Small - Pox or Measles, in all
the Progress of them, from before their coming out till the end, and preserves
the Heart from hot and putrid Fumes, and purifieth the Blood.
TAke Nitre, Sulphur, of each one pound, Camphora two ounces, mingle them well
together, and cast them by little and little into an earthen Cucurbite red hot,
which shut close immediately with a just stopper of Brick that closes it
firmly; the Cucurbite must have two arms, unto which are fastened two Ballons of
Glass, each containing about two quarts of Spirit of Urin (to the quantity of
Ingredients here named) which draws unto it the Spirits which will fly up and
pass by the two arms on each side. When all is cold, take out the fixed matter
that remains in the Cucurbite, and grind it small, and dissolve it in simple
Spirit of Urin, and when that is filtered and congeled, dissolve it in the acid
Spirit of Urin, that was in the Ballons, and has the Spirit of Nitre and
Sulphur and Camphire in it; and distill and cohobate this, till the Salt have
retained in it all the Spirits that were in the Urin; which will be very
grateful, and not taste or smell at all of the Camphire, nor is Saturnine or
Antivenereal in its effect; and of this dissolve thirty or forty granes (at
discretion) in about two ounces of Rose and Plantan-water, and a pint or two of
fair Water (in fine, so much Salt as to make the Water grateful acid) and of
this let the Patient drink three or four times a day, and when he is thirsty.

The way to make the Spirit of Vrin is thus:
LEt the Urin stand eight or ten days, in which time it will putrify and
ferment. Then distill very gently; and that which comes first is the Spirit.
When it begins to come weak and insipid, (which you will know by tasting a
drop) then cease, for all that is good is passed over. Thus you shall have near
half your quantity of Urin in good Spirit.

The best way to make the Oil of Myrrh.
HAve a moderately low Cucurbite of Copper, (for Earth will imbibe the Spirits
of Myrrh) in the midst of which have a Circle of Wire fastened to the sides by
Grampons, that may suspend in the air a Glass like a large drinking Glass
without a foot. To the Cucurbite have a large chap of Glass with a Nose or
Limbeck; and let there be in it a hole at the top, in which set a Glassfunnel
with a long Pipe, which correspondeth just to the suspended Glass, and so like
an internus to the helm or chap. Lute the pipe of the Funnel on the outside
fast to the hole of the helm, so that nothing can expire. Likewise stop the
narrow neck of the Funnel within, with an exact fit stick of hard Wood; and for
more security, lute a double Bladder wetted, over the mouth of the Funnel, that
no Spirits may expire. Put your Myrrh into the Cucurbite; fill the Glass with
fair Water, and set the Cucurbite in an Iron pot full of Sand; which set in a
Wind-Fornace. Distill by degrees of fire, and the smoke of the Water in the
Glass will rise and mingle with the fumes of the Myrrh, and go over together
into the Receiver, and so preserve the Oil of the Myrrh from Empyreume. You
increase the fire, till in the end the bottom of the Iron Pot with the Sand be
red hot. And as you perceive (by looking in at the Helm with a Candle) that the
Water consumes in the Glass, pour in more (but warm) by the Funnel at the top
of the Helm, taking off the Bladder, and out the wooden Stopper; but close them
again presently. By this method you will draw half an ounce of pure clear
yellow Oil (when it is severed from the Water, from one pound of Myrrh. Close
fast the Nest of the Limbeck to the Receiver, that no Spirits may expire. When
all is come over into the Receiver, you sever the Oil from the Water with a
Funnel.

A great Cordial made out of English Saffron.
TAke Saffron freshly gathered, and picked from the Whites or other things that
grow upon or about it. Shred it on a smooth stone, that you may save the
moisture that comes from it in the shredding of it. Then put four pound of it
into a new glazed Pipkin or Pitcher, (put it in very slightly, not pressing it
down, you must not fill the Pitcher above half full) and then bury it deep in
the ground, and put the Earth loose and slightly about it; lay a cover over it
upon sticks, so as to lie two fingers breadth above the Pitcher, that the air
may come in: let it stand so six weeks: Then take the Saffron out of the Pipkin
or Pitcher, and put it into a large Retort, put a Receiver to it close luted,
and distill in Balneo Mariae by degrees of fire; you will first have a clear
Water, which keep by itself; as soon as you see a yellow Tincture or reddish
Oil come, change the Receiver, putting on a new one, and that is the great
Cordial; but when you see that none of it will rise in Balneo Mariae, take out
the Glass, and wipe it; then set it in ashes, and put a Receiver to it; if any
phlegm or nutry part distill from it there, put it to the first; but as soon as
the foresaid yellow Tincture comes, change the Receiver, and so continue the
fire gently, as long as there comes any of this Tincture. But you must have a
great care, that you give not so strong fire, as to make any fumes or burning
matter to rise; after you have distilled a good quantity, or the most of your
Tincture, change the Receiver, for fear of spilling the first Liquor, and then
you may distill till it be almost dry, what is left; out of which you may
extract the Salt of Saffron; then rectify the yellow Tincture once or twice,
and keep it in a Glass close stopped.

The Dose of it is two or three drops. It is exceeding good in all Diseases
wherein a Cordial can do good.

It restores and comfort the Spirits and expels Poison.

A great Electuary.
TAke of Sarsaparilla two ounces, China Root, Root of Turbith, of each one
ounce and half, Cortex Guajaci one ounce; Sassafras, yellow Sanders, of each
three ounces; Jallap, Sena, of each two ounces and half; Hermodactyles one
ounce and half: Reduce all these to most subtle Powder, every one by itself,
and searse them through the finest Searse that can be: Then mix them all
together upon a large Sheet of Paper; then to four parts of this Powder, put
three parts of the best Honey well clarified, putting first the Powder into a
Skillet, and pouring in the Honey by degrees, stirring it continually till it
be well incorporated; then beat it well in a large Mortar to a perfect
Electuary: Then put it into Gally-Pots, stop them close and keep them in a dry
place.

Take of this one ounce or five drams, dissolved in a little warm Posset Drink;
or take it with a little Virgin Honey in the Bed, and sleep after it. You may
drink now and then some warm Posset drink; but eat not till two or three hours,
after it has don working.

The Sarsaparilla must be only the mealy part of it, which flies up beaten in a
close Mortar, on the sides; you will hardly have two ounces out of a pound,
unless it be mealy and large Sarsa: The rest is good for Diet-drinks. The Sena
must be fresh, and all the Stalks picked out, nothing but the Leaves. If the
China Root be not perfectly good (as oftentimes it is not in England) take as
much more of the Sarsaparilla in stead of it.

The excellent Success of this Medicin, depends upon the exceeding Beating
and Searsing the Ingredients into most subtle Powder, and you must weigh out
the Proportions when they are in Powder, and not when they are in their gross
bodies. In mixing the Powders with the Honey, you use no Fire; and you must be
four or five hours beating the Mass in a Mortar, to incorporate all perfectly
and uniformly.

This Electuary cures the greatest Pox, Gonorrhea's, Cankers, and all Venereal
Diseases, using this method. For a great Venereal Disease, begin with two or
three Doses of Mercury vitae, intermitting one day between: but for Gonorrhea's
begin with the Purge of Sena in White Wind with Diaprunis: The next day take a
Dose of this Electuary; the third day repeat the Purge; the fourth the
Electuary; the fifth purge: then continue the Electuary for ten or twelve days,
by that time the Patient will be well: If then it needs, give an injection of
Limewater with Mel rosat. and Mercury dulcis: Purge also then again with Sena,
and take again the Electuary five or six days more. This Electuary is also
excellent to be used Spring and Fall, though there be no Venereal Disease or
Inconveniences, but only to carry away viscous tough Humors, and it preserves
the Body in health and clean: And if one have any Ulcer in the Legs, or Aches
or Rheumatism in any part of the Body, it will cure them, if it be continued
for a while.

A great Confortative.
TAke Cochenele in Powder six ounces. Put it in a broad Glass, and pour Spirit
of Wine upon it four fingers breadth above it; shake it very often every day
during six or eight days, the Vessel close stopped: Then pour it off, and put
on new Spirit of Wine, and do as before. Repeat this till you have extracted
all the Tincture, then put the Extractions together, and evaporate it till it
be thickish. To this quantity, take Diasatyrion Nicolai majus gratam one pound,
of Magistery of Coral made by solution of distilled Vinegar, and precipitated
with Oil of Tartar, in fine Powder, of Magistery of Pearl, made the same way,
of each half an ounce, of Syrup of Sassafras four ounces, of Limewater
philtered and evaporated the quantity of a Pottle to a thickish substance; of
Confection Alkerms half an ounce, Ambergris one ounce. Take of this a quarter
of an ounce morning and night; but eat nothing between meals, and drink but
little Wine at meals.

A Restorative and Cordial of Dates, which is much celebrated.
DAtes are a great Cordial and Comforter of Nature in all kinds, and
Restorative in Consumptions and to old men; but they are hard of digestion. And
this Inconvenience is taken away, and their good qualities lightened by
preserving them with Sugar, in such sort as they may become very tender and
digestible. Do thus then; first pare off the rough hard outward skin; and
likewise pick away all their inner hard filmy white thick skin that is next to
the stone; and cut into quarters the pulpy middle fleshy substance. Boil this
tender and preserve it in the best manner with Sugar, so as you may lose none
of the substantial part that boileth out of them. Eat of these the quantity of
three or four Dates in a morning after your first sleep, and sleep an hour or
two upon it before you rise.

Then if you will add a further Restorer of Spirits, do this as soon as you
rise out of your bed.

Take four ounces of the purest best spiritful Canary Sack or Greek Muscadine,
and sop in it a Tossed of light pure Bread, till it be thoroughly drunken with the
Wine; and so large a one that it have drunk up the better part of the Wine:
Then lay the Tossed upon a Plate, and strew it over on both sides with a little
fine Sugar, but a large proportion of scraped Nutmeg (which is a great friend
to the Kidneys and Bladder and Head, and smoothneth much, and gives Spirits)
then eat your Tossed and Sugar and Nutmeg; and drink upon it the remainder of the
Wine, and do some moderate exercise after it, besides making you ready. Repeat
the same at night instead of a Supper.

Cordial and Pleasant Tablets.
TAke three ounces of pure refined Sugar; boil it up with Orange-flower water,
into a consistence for Manus Christi; when it is at the due height, put into it
two drams (or three) of pure Confection of Alkermes, and drop into it two drops
of the Quintessence of Cedri. Stir it well together, and drop it into Tablets.
They are very pleasant and very Cordial.

If you will not use fire, you may make Tablets or Pastils of the same
Ingredients, with Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Orange-flower water. You may add
a little Ambergris and a little Musk, if you please.

A great Venereal.
TAke Opii Thebaici colati with Spirit of Wine, one part; Ambergris three
parts: Grind them very well together with Syrup of Flowers of Sage, till they
come into the consistence of an Opiate: of which give four or five or six
granes in some fit Liquor for a Vehicle, at going to bed.

The preparing of the Opium is thus.

Dissolve it in Spirit of Wine, then percolate it through some fit Cloth that
it may leave the Dregs behind: Then distill away the Spirit of Wine till the
Opium become of a due consistence.

Another great Venereal.
TAke Consol. Flor. Anthos, Boragin. Caryophyll. of each half an ounce, Elect.
Diasatyr. one ounce, Ering. Condit. six drams, Theriac. Vet. two drams, Sem.
Erucae, urticae, of each half a dram, Spec. Diamosch. dulcis two scruples,
Syrup. Stoechad. s. q. f. Elect.

After taking as much as a Nutmeg of this Electuary (morning and night, or when
you will) drink a little of the following Decoction:

Take Fol. Salviae, Origani, Rosmarini, Calaminth urticae, of each one handful,
Chamaedr. Chamaepit Stoechad. of each half a handful, Sem. Erucae, Urticae,
Foenic. of each three drams, Rad. Pyrethri half an ounce. Boil all these in a
quart of Fountain Water; then add a pint of Malaga Sack to it.

You may anoint the Perinaeum, and that Region, with the following Ointment.

Take Unguent. Martiat. two ounces, Oleum Succini two scruples, Oleum Euphorb.
two drams, Moschi three granes, Ambergrisae Misce f. Unguent.

An Excellent Plaster to put upon the Stomach.
TAke Storax in powder, and Aloes also in fine powder, of each one ounce. Boil
these together with half a pint of Rose Water till the Rose Water be consumed,
then let it cool. Then take as much of very good Honey as will make it to a
Past; which spread upon Leather, and put it upon the Stomach. It will
strengthen the Stomach extremely, and will free it from all Corruption and
Flegms, and will give it a natural heat not superfluous.

It has saved the life of many, even those that already had lost their speech.
This Past is very odoriferous and incorruptible, it will last for ever.

An Excellent Ointment for the Stomach, or for any Pain about the Heart.
TAke wild Thyme, red Mint, Wormwood, Hyssop, Balm, of each one handful, of
red-Rose Leaves two handfuls, of Bayberries beaten, Ginger grossly beaten, of
each one ounce, Mace half an ounce; chop the Herbs, and mix them with the
Spices. Then put all together into a large Gally-Pot, and pour upon them a
quart of the best Sallet Oil; then close the Pot well with Paste, and set the
pot into a Skillet of Water; then let it boil the space of five hours: Then
take it off and strain without pressing or squeezing the Herbs too hard. Then
put it into a Dish, and put into it of Essence of Orange-flowers two ounces,
Oil of Cinnamon half a quarter of an ounce, Oil of Cloves a quarter of an ounce,
Ambergris ten granes, of the finest yellow Wax thin sliced: then set it over a
Chafingdish of Coals, stir them well to make them well incorporate together.
Then put it into Gally-Pots, and keep it for use.

An approved Remedy for a Sprain in the Back or any Weakness.
TAke a quarter of a pint of good Muscadine, a spoonful of Mader, incorporate
them well together; then give it the Patient to drink for three mornings
together; and if need requires, you may use it often in a day. This will
strengthen the Back exceedingly.

A most precious Diet-drink for any weak and consumed Body with Sickness, Pox
or any Aches or cold Humors.
TAke White Wind, old strong Beer, of each seven gallons, Sena one pound,
Cortex Guaiaci two pound, Licorice one pound, Coloquintida one dram,
Sarsaparilla one pound. Put all these together into a deep large Pot, stop and
lute it close: Then set it in a great Kettle full of water, and so let it boil
highly the space of four hours; then strain it, and when it is almost cold, put
into it one ounce of the best and strongest Mithridate.

Drink of this twelve times in a day, about three ounces at a time; continue it
for twenty or twenty four days together (almost twenty will do it) but you must
neither eat nor drink any thing else during that time; and after three or four
days the Patient will have no mind at all to eat. And in twenty four days he
shall be cured and restored to health, and to good blood, and shall be lusty
and fat, and all diseases will vanish.

The Author said, that if the Patient were pressing to eat something of
nourishment and solidity, he allowed him some Partridge, with Biscuit or well
baked fine Bread; but no other Sustenance at all: The Drink itself giving
sufficient in this case, I conceive that Raisins and Biscuit were not amiss.

An Excellent Remedy to procure Conception.
TAke of Syrup of Motherwort, of Syrup of Mugwort, of each half an ounce, of
Spirit of Clary two drams, of the Root of English Snakeweed in fine powder one
dram, Purslain-seed, Nettle-seed, Rocket-seed, all in subtle Powder, of each
two drams. Candied Nutmegs, Eringo-Roots, Satyrion-Roots preserved, Dates,
Pistaches, Conserve of Succory, of each three drams; Cinnamon, Saffron in fine
powder, of each a scruple; Conserve of Vervein, Pineapple Kernels picked and
pilled, of each two drams. Stamp and work all these Ingredients in a Mortar to
an Electuary: Then put it up into Gally-Pots, and keep it for use.

Take of this Electuary the quantity of a good Nutmeg in a little Glass-full of
White Wind, in the morning fasting, and at four of the clock in the afternoon,
and as much at night going to bed; but be sure not to do any violent exercise.

An Excellent Bolus for the Stomach and Liver.
TAke green Ginger and Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of each one part; Conserve
of Wood Sorrel two or three or four parts (more or less, as you conceive your
Liver shall require) beat them together into a Pulp. You may make the Conserves
by beating the Herbs raw with two or three parts of fine Sugar.

A Cordial Drink for weakness of the Stomach and want of Digestion.
TAke three pints of Claret Wine, half a pint of Mint-water; of Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, of each one dram and half, of fine Sugar four ounces. Put all these
into an earthen Pot, and let it stand close covered over a gentle fire to
digest twenty four hours; but let it not boil: Then take it off, and strain it
through a Hypocras Bag. Take of this three or four ounces at a time.

For Trembling of the Heart or a weak Stomach.
TAke Lignum Aloes and Ambergris, and mingle them with the best yellow Wax
melted: Make a thin Cake of it, and apply it to the Heart and Stomach.

Ladanum Opiatum.
TAke Opium Theb. cut very small, three ounces, Salt of Tartar, Crystal of
Tartar, of each one dram. Mix all these well together in a Mortar; then put
them in a Glass body, and pour upon them a pint of distilled Vinegar, and an
ounce of Spirit of Salt. Digest them till there rise no more scum upon it; then
boil it to the consistence of an Electuary: Then pour upon it a quart of fair
water, and boil it again till all the Opium be dissolved; Then philter it and
boil the feces again with water till all be dissolved. Then philter it, and put
all together; which boil to an Electuary with one ounce of the juice of
Licorice. Then add to it of the Tincture of Juniper Berries, and Powder of
Saffron of each two ounces, Castor one dram; boil it again with a gentle fire
to a due consistence; then work it well in a Mortar with Oil of Anniseeds, Oil
of Nutmeg, Oil of Cloves, of each one scruple. Then put it up close.

The Dose is from three grains to eight.

An excellent Panchimagogue that Purges all Humors.
TAke of black Ellebore four ounces, Coloquint, Aloes, of each two ounces,
Saffron one ounce: Extract the Ellebore and Coloquint with Cicorywater acuated
with Salt of Tartar: Then extract the Aloes by it self with the same Menstruum
without Tartar, and the Saffron with good Spirit of Wine. Then mix all your
Extractions together, and evaporate it to a consistence of Honey; then add to
it four ounces of Reisin of Scammony, two ounces of Reisin of Jollop, and one
ounce of Mercury sublimate dulcis in most subtle powder; stir it well together
to make it incorporate, leaving it upon the sand fire till it be a past for
Pills.

The Dose is ftom twelve to eighteen grains.

An excellent Laxative Tisanne to take, when one has a need.
TAke a good handful of Pimpernel; of Sena, of green Annise, of Licorice, of
Salt Prunelle, of each half an ounce, of Rhubarb one ounce, two penniworth of
stick Cinnamon, the juice of two Limons.

Take of this Tisanne a good Glass full in the morning, another a little before
dinner; and (if it needed) a third in the afternoon.

Bezoardicum Theriacale.
TAke a Viper, which has been newly caught, and hold her fast by the neck with
your thumb and the next finger, so that she cannot stir or wag at all, and with
a Penknife cut her throat open, so that you may be able to tear out her
tongue, which you lay by. Loosen also the skin round about the neck, joining
the head, and skin it all; afterward cut the body an inch above the Navil, and
throw away the tail. Then take out all the entrails, putting the grease by it
self, and the heart and liver likewise; and cut the body or bulk upwards
joining the head, and cast away the rest. Prepare a great many Vipers after
this fashion. After this, put the bulks of the bodies upon some Plate apart,
and the hearts and livers by themselves upon another likewise; and the tongue
upon another, without washing them at all; and put them to be dried gently in a
furnace that is but a little warm. All this must be observed in the beginning;
afterward a little more heat is required, that so the humidity may be the
sooner dried up, which otherwise might be the cause of their being spoiled. But
after this first time, which may be perhaps a night; one needs not but to keep
them in a dry place with so little a heat, that they may fully be dried, and
hardened, to be fit for to be pounded; which will be done within eight or ten
days. When they are fully dry, put all the parts to pounding, dropping upon
them now and then a drop of Opobalsamum, or white oriental Balsam, or for want
of the same, of the Peruvian Balsom; and sometimes a drop of a compounded
Balsom. But all this with so much discretion and heed, that the Balsoms may dry
immediately, and be sucked in by the powder, that is, a pounding, without
discerning of any liquor; for this would make it come to be a paste, and will
not afterward be fit for to be pounded: But putting in the Balsom by little
and little at a time, the heat of moving the Pestil dries it, makes it to be
imbibed, and the superfluous humidity to evaporate.

Mark this, That there must be far less used of the natural Balsom, than of the
compounded; because the greatest part of the humidity of this, does evaporate
through the heat of the pounding; whereas on the other side, the other Balsom,
being viscous remains: For example; To one pound of the substance of Vipers,
one ounce, (or at the most, two ounces) of the natural Balsom may suffice: But
of the other you may make to enter as much as you can; as for example, if you
could spend a whole pound, it would be the better for it, provided the powder
do not grow wet by it, nor like a paste. It must be now and then sifted what
will pass through a hair cloth; but what will not, must be pounded again,
dropping upon it from time to time of your Balsoms. And if so be there be any
likelihood of any quantity of the powder, let it run again through the Sieve,
what will go through, and pound again the rest with the Balsoms; doing this so
long till all be passed through.

The Author told me, that all will not pass, but that at the end there will
remain a white powder, which cannot be pounded any more, which are the bones;
and he throws it away as useless: besides that there is but little of it, and
your powder is prepared.

The Balsam Compounded is made thus.
Take of Myrrh, Ligni Aloes, yellow Sanders, of each one ounce. Specier.
Aromat. Rosat. two drams. Draw the tincture of these things with good Spirit of
Wine tartarized. Myrrh is drawn by it self in a Vessel, the rest, that is, the
other three things being mixed together in another Vessel. When the Spirit of
wine is well tinged, pour it off, and pour other Spirit upon it, till it be no
more colored; then take an ounce of the tincture of Myrre; and an ounce of the
tincture of the other three ingredients, and one ounce of excellent water of
Odoriferous or Damask Roses; mix these three ounces together, and this mixture
will be like a Balsom and of a gray color. And this is the compounded Balsom.

The best Rose Water is made thus.
LEt your pale Roses putrify, and when they have fermented enough, distill your
Rose Water; which you are to put upon new or fresh fermented Roses, and distill
as before: The water that comes first is the best. He sets it afterward into
the Sun.

Of this Bezoardique Theriacal powder you are to give four or five grains for a
dose in some Broth or Wine, either to be freed of a Disease, that has left
great weakness behind it, or else for a preservative against the Infection of
the whole nature, or bad air, and to keep ones self in good health, by
continuing the same for some days. The Author does command a continual use of
this powder, for the keeping of one in good health. It is also excellent good
for the small Pox. But as for the intermittent Fevers, (even in Quartains, but
not so certain as in others) the dose is half a dram, immediately before the
fit; but in those that are continuae, it is given on the Critical day. And if
so be, the Fever does not go away after twice or thrice taking, then let the
Patient take a Purge convenient, immediately after the fit is over.

The Purge which the Author makes use of in Fevers, is this following.
TAke Antimonii Diaphoretici, (that is in the Ceruss of Antimony) Diagridium
prepared according to Cornachinus, and Tartar. Vitriolat. of each 8 or 10
grains, mix them.

It is also necessary to prepare the body by Purge before one begin to take of
this Powder.

But to make a most rich Cordial proceed thus.
TAke Conserve of red Roses, Conserve of flowers of Oranges, of each one ounce,
of the Confect. de Hyacinth. and of the above mentioned Bezoardique Theriacal
Powder, of each two drams, Confection of Alkermes one dram, of Powder of Gold
one scruple. Mix all these well together in the form of an Opiate; and if the
composition be too dry, add to it some Syrup of red Corans, as much as is
needful. Take of this Composition every morning the quantity of a Nut.

The best fashion to make Conserve of Roses is this following.
TAke the Leaves of Roses, being very well cleansed of the white at the ends of
them. Put them into a Cucurbite well stopped; place it in Balneo Mariae, and
keep it boiling for an hour or two, till the flowers be perfectly mortified;
then take them out and pound them, and add to them double the quantity of very
fine Loaf-Sugar, and pound them well together: then put it up in pots to keep.

The Heads, Skins, and Grease of the Vipers, which you have separated for to
make your Bezoardick powder, are kept, because they are endowed with sundry
virtues. Dry gently the Heads and Skins, and keep them by themselves. Melt the
Grease, and keep it as an Oil. The head being worn near to ones throat, is
excellent against the Quinsie and other Diseases of the Throat. The Skin laid
upon the Kidneys of a Woman being in Travel, will promote her deliverance. And
if the Afterbirth does not come away after the Child, put the Skin upon the
Thigh of the Woman, and it will come away within a short time after.

The fat is most excellent for the anointing of a red face.

The skin being dried and cut small, and mixed with Oats, and given to a Horse
that has the Farcy, cures the Horse, if it be continued for a while.

The Bezoardique Powder cures the Pox, being taken for fifteen or twenty days.

(The Author told me since, eight or ten days) in some good Vehicle, (as Wine;)
having first of all prepared the body by taking of a due Purge. It will make
one sweat mightily, if one puts himself upon it, which ought to be done.

The Author does Tartarise his Spirit of Wine thus
PUt some pure Salt of Tartar into your Spirit of Wine, and let it stand till
the separation be well made; then pour off the Spirit of Wine, and leave the
phlegmatic solution of Tartar; from which evaporate the water to dryness. Then
put your purified Salt of Tartar again into the Spirit of Wine, and do as
before: Repeat this till the Salt of Tartar dissolve no more in the Spirit of
Wine, nor no part of it.

A Tincture of Coral.
TAke Honey, and deflegm it in an open Vessel upon the fire, till it be as
thick as Pitch; then mingle one part of that with two parts of Sand, and distill
it in a Glass body, in Sand fire as long as it comes clear, and till the Oil
be ready to come. Then put off this distilled water upon Coral, and in twenty
four hours you will see the Spirit of Honey tincted of a deep yellow color:
then pour off that, and put on more of the Spirit of Honey, and digest as
before. Repeat this till it tinge no more. Then philter the extracts, and
distill the liquor away, that the tincture remain dry, upon which pour good
Spirit of Wine, and digest, and it will be tincted deep red; pour it off, and
put on fresh Spirit of Wine, and do as before: Repeat this till you have
extracted all the tincture. Then philter the extracts, and distill away the
Spirit of Wine; then put new Spirit of Wine upon the remaining matter;
repeating this till you have the pure tincture, and that the solution set off
no more faeces.

This will be as red as the deepest red Wine, and transparent.

The dose of it is twenty or thirty drops in a fit Vehicle.

It works all the good effects that are said of a perfect tincture of Coral,
and particularly it has done wonderful effects in all the Diseases of the
Matrix.

A Cordial to Rest, and for Surfeit.
TAke Diascordium one dram, Confection Alchermes one dram and half, Syrup of
Clovegilly-flowers, a good spoonful. Mix these very well with about two ounces
and half of Dragon-water, or red Poppy-water, or in Carduus-water, as the
Diseases require.

It is excellent to cause rest and sleep in a Fever, or when one is oppressed
with pain; as also in a Surfeit, and an excellent Cordial.

I conceive you may increase the Dose a good deal to large bodies.

An excellent Poppy-water for Surfeits.
TAke two large mouthed Glasses of some six quarts apiece, and put into each of
them five quarts of the best double stilled Anniseed water: then thrust in as
many red Poppy leaves as will fill them top-full, and let them infuse twenty
hours; then strain them out, and put in fresh, and let them infuse as long;
then strain them again, and put in others, and let them infuse six or seven
days: which strain well from the liquor, and then strain the liquor from the
dregs. Then put into each Glass six ounces of stoned Raisins of the Sun, and a
pound of stoned Cherries, and half a pound of refined Sugar; then tie up your
Glasses very close.

Another excellent Stomachical Surfeit-water.
TAke Mint, and Carduus Benedictus, of each four parts, Angelica one part,
Wormwood two parts; chop and bruise them a little; put a sufficient quantity of
them into an ordinary Still, and put upon them enough new Milk to soak them;
but not to have the Milk swim much over them. Distill this as you do Rose Water;
stirring it sometimes with a stick to keep the Milk from growing to a Cake.

I judge the best way of making Poppy-water to be thus: Macerate Poppy-buds,
with Carawayseeds, Anniseeds, etc. in Sack, and distill a good Spirit from this,
in which infuse fresh Poppy-buds, and proceed as in the ordinary Receipt. Or
you may sweeten your tincted Spirit, or Poppy-water, instead of Sugar, with the
Syrup of Poppy made by putting Poppy leaves and Sugar, into a flagon, and set
that (close luted in the Jointure) in a kettle of boiling water, etc. which is
the way of making Syrups of Flowers.

A Cooling Stomachical Mint-water.
TAke two parts of Mint, one part of Wormwood, and two parts of Carduus; put
these into as much new Milk as will soak them: let them infuse five or six
hours; then distill as you distill Rose Water: but you must often take off the
head, and stir the matter well with a stick. Drink of this water a Wine Glass
full at a time, sweetened with fine Sugar to your taste.

An excellent Cordial Water.
TAke Angelica, Carduus Benedictus, Paul's- Betony, Juniper Berries, of each one
handful, of Wormwood two handfuls. Mix them, and put them into a wide mouthed
Bottle; and pour upon them as much Spirit of Wine as will cover them an inch
over them; stop the Bottle close, and digest it so fourteen days; then pour off
the Spirit, and keep it for your use.

The Dose is ten or twelve drops (or more, if there be occasion) in a Glass of
White wine.

It is good in all distempers of the Stomach, against Worms, and all gripings;
and admirable against all Infections. It cannot be given amiss.

Another great Cordial Water.
TAke Sage, Celendine, Rosemary, Rue, Wormwood. Mugwort, Pimpernel, Dragons,
Scabious, Agrimony, Balm, Rosa Solis, Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, Centory,
Betony, St. John's Wort, Marigold, of each one handful; Roots of Gentian,
Angelica, Tormentil, Zedoaria, Petasites, Peony, Licorice, of each three
quarters of an ounce. Wash the Herbs well, and shake them in a dry Cloth; then
shred them small: the Roots are to be scraped and sliced. Then mix all these
well together, and put them into an earthen Pot, and pour upon them three or
four Gallons of very good white Wine. Let this stand well stopped three or four
days, stirring them once or twice a day. Then distill this with an ordinary
Still with a gentle fire, keeping the cover of the Still cool with a wet Cloth
upon it, often wringing and renewing it with fresh water: Let your Still be
well luted with Rye-flower, whites of Eggs and Vinegar. You may have ended your
Distillation in two days and a night; and of this quantity you may have four or
five quarts of water, which divide into two or three several Glasses; the
weakeft is chiefly for Children. You may use this water in all occasions where
Cordial Water is required; and particularly for Surfeits; and to strengthen the
Stomach, and comfort weak persons.

Water of Rue for the Head and Brain.
WHen Rue is in its prime and vigor, pick the leaves, and put them into a
Glass body with a head, and distill off the water in Balneo Mariae, which put
upon fresh Rue, and distill again as before. Repeat this distillation three or
four times. Then take all the water, and distill it again by it self, taking
only two third parts of it, and leaving one third part in the body undistilled.
Then put again the two thirds already distilled into the body, and distill it
again by it self, taking only one half of it, and leaving the rest undistilled
in the body.

This last water is most pure, excellent, spiritful, and well tasted, and full
of virtue. Drink of this a Wine Glass full in the morning fasting, and at night.

It is excellent for the Head and Brain preserving against Apoplexies, and
Paralysis, and the like; and for that end, eat often in the morning fasting
some Conserve of Rue, as much as a Walnut, made by beating very well two or
three parts of fine Sugar with one of Rue.

An excellent Cordial or Palsy Water.
TAke Lavender flowers, Borage flowers, Buglos flowers, flowers of Lil.
Convall. every one gathered in their season. Pour upon them good Aquavitae, and
let them digest six weeks close stopped in a warm place; then distill it off.
Put this distilled Spirit into a large Glass, and infuse in it flowers of Sage,
flowers of Rosemary, and flowers of Betony, of each one handful. Then take
Balm, Motherwort, Spikenard, Bay Leaves, all cut or chopped; Limon Pills, Peony
seeds hulled, of each six ounces; Cardomum, Cubebs, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace,
yellow Sanders in Powder, of each half an ounce: Lignum Aloes one dram: Pour
upon these good Aqua vitae, and let them digest also six weeks. Then put this
to your first Ingredients, and distill it off to dryness. Then take of fine
dissolved Pearls two drams, prepared Smaragd-stone one scruple, Ambergris,
Musk, Saffron, of each half a scruple; red Rose-leaves dried, yellow and red
Sanders, of each one ounce: Mix them well together, and put them into a
Sarsenet bag, hang it in the distilled water, and keep it close stopped.

This Water is of exceeding virtue in all Swooning of the Head, and weakness of
the Heart, decaying of the Spirits; also in all pains and numness of Joints
coming of cold. In all bruises outwardly, bathing them with it. It strengthens
and comfort all Animal, Vital and Natural Spirits, and cheareth the external
Senses. It strengthens the Memory, restores lost Appetite; it is exceeding
good for weakness of the Stomach. It is also good for Deafness. The Dose is a
quarter of a spoonful, in the morning and at night.

A most excellent Balsom for the Palsy, and Apoplexy, etc.
TAke of Imperatory one pound, Sarsaparilla, Castoreum, of each half an ounce,
Bruise them a little; then take Lavender-flowers, Rosemary-flowers,
Sage-flowers; put all these together into an earthen Pitcher, and pour upon
them good Aquavitae; stop it close, and let it digest in a warm place four
days, shaking it five or six times a day; then put it in a Cellar to cool. Then
put into it nine ounces of Camphire, dissolved in half a pint of Spirit of
Wine, mix them well together; then strain it three times through an Hypocras
Bag, and keep it in a cool place close stopped.

For the Palsy, rub the Mould of the Head and Nape of the Neck with this.

It is also excellent for all Contraction of the Sinews, or debility of the
Nerves, rubbing and chafing it well in.

It is also good for the Gout or any Crick or Aches; as also for the Headache,
rubbing the Temples with it.

An often approved Remedy for the Dead Palsy.
TAke white Onions, shred them small, and put them into an earthen pot or dish;
cover them but slightly, and set it in an Oven, stirring the Onions sometimes.
Let them bake till they are become pappy; Make a thick Cataplasm of this and
lay it upon the benumbed part. Change it every twenty four hours, and continue
it till you are well. If it be an universal Paralysie, you must use your
Cataplasm all over.

The best way to make the Spirit and Oil of Clary, Mint, Rosemary, Roses, etc.
Distill a pure water of Mint, or flowers of Clary, or Rosemary; in a pint
thereof dissolve as much pure refined Sugar, as to your taste will seem to
sweeten the whole composition when put together; put to this one fourth part of
a pint of pure Spirit of Wine, and half as much Rose Water, and some drops of
Spirit of Ambergris, with an eighth part of Musk, or lay in it a little bag of
Amber and Musk.

The proportion of the Spirit of Wine, Amber, Sugar, and Rose water, are to be
varied to your taste.

Distill the water thus: Fill large Glass Cucurbites a third part with Mint, or
Clary flowers, or Rosemary flowers, and in Balneo with moderate heat (not
boiling) distill off the water till you leave the Herb almost dry, but not quite
dry; for if you distill off all that will come, you will have a great bitterness
at the last; therefore taste the drops toward the latter end, and when you
feel them come bitter, cease. Put this water upon as many new Flowers or Herbs,
as it was distilled from, and distill as before to near dryness. Repeat this
four or five times, pouring upon fresh Flowers or Herbs all that is come over;
for this repeating of Distillation (of the same water) actuateth and enliveneth
the Spirit exceedingly. When you have water enough, put the water alone in the
large Cucurbite, and distill gently till there remain in the Cucurbite about one
third part of the water; which throw away. Then take the two third parts that
are distilled over, and distill them again as before, leaving one third part of
them in the Cucurbite, which also throw away; and that which is now come over,
is pure and perfect without any bitterness, and is very pleasant, and to be
used as is taught above. If any Oil swim upon the water, either before the
latter Rectifications or after, separate it, and keep it for other use.

The Emperor Charles's Cephalic Capital Water, of great Virtues.
TAke Lilly Convalleys three pound, Lavender flowers one pound, Rosemary
flowers half a pound, red Rose buds three pound, Marjoram five handfuls, Rue
four handfuls, Betony six handfuls, Sage three handfuls. Because you cannot get
all these herbs at one time, gather them as they come in season; and as you get
them one after another, put them to infuse into four quarts of Brandy; let them
remain there (close stopped) till you have all the rest. Then take Cinnamon one
pound, Cubebg four ounces, Paradis Corns five ounces, Carawayseeds, Mace,
Cloves, Amber, of each three ounces, Nutmeg four ounces, Ambergris half an
ounce: Bruise all these, and then put them to the first Ingredients, and pour
upon them all, eighteen quarts of Rhenish Wine, stop it close, and let it
infuse three or four days more; then distill it off to near dryness: taking the
strongest Spirit by it self; the rest is good for ordinary drinking.

This Spirit is excellent for Dizziness and Swimming in the Head, and for the
Headache. It strengthens the Memory, and the Eyesight, etc.

The Great Duke of Florence his excellent Celestial or Imperial Water of
great Virtues.
TAke of the white and Gummish Thubit two ounces, Mastick, Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
Cubebs, of each half an ounce, yellow Sanders two ounces: Bruise all these, and
then put them together into a Glass-body, and put into them two ounces of
Venice Turpentine, and two pound of white Honey: Then pour upon them four pound
of good Spirit of Wine; stop the Vessel very close, and digest it two days,
Then distill it off in Balneo, till it begin to come whitish; then take the
Vessel out of the Balneo, and set it in Sand, changing the Receiver, and distill
by degrees, and you will have a whitish water; unto which add half a pound of
newly drawn Spikenard, Salt of Pearls, Salt of Coral, of each half an ounce,
and one ounce of Crystal of Tartar; stop it close and keep it for your use.
Then increase the fire, and distill to dryness, and you will have a reddish
Oleaginous water; which keep also by it self.

The first clear water is excellent for the Cholick Nephritick, and for any
pains of the Stomach. It is also very good for Surfeits, and excellent for
Obstructions of the Spleen or Liver. It purifieth the Blood. It is a sure
remedy for the Fits of the Mother; as also for the Convulsion and Falling-fits.

It comfort the Brain, and strengthens the Memory. The Dose is half a
spoonful, mixed with as much Fountain water.

The second whitish water is an excellent Remedy for the Stone and Gravel. It
is also very good for Sores and Wounds, It will cure the Noli me tangere; and
if you mix some of the first Water with it, it will be the more efficacious.

The third reddish Water is an Infallible cure of the Hemorrhoides and Piles.

It is also excellent for the Gangreen and Wounds.

An excellent Cordial Water for Dizziness and Swimming in the Head.
TAke four pound of black Cherries, bruise the stones of them, and then put
them with the Cherries into a Glass body, and put into them a good handful of
Balm, and a handful of Rosemary tops, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, of each half an ounce;
then pour upon them all two quarts of Sack, stop it close and let it digest
twenty four hours. Then distill it off in Balneo; distill so much of it, that it
be weak like weak Aqua Mirabilis. Sweeten it with white Sugar Candy to your
taste, and drink a little wine glassful of it in the morning fasting, and at
night going to bed.

This cured a Lady of a great Dizziness and Swimming in her Head; and many
others have found the like effect of it.

An excellent Water for Surfeits and for the Ague.
TAke three Gallons of Aqua-vitae, put into it half a bushel of red Poppy
flowers, let them infuse twenty four hours in a Glass close stopped; then
strain it well, and put the clear liquor into the Glass again; into which put
half a pound of Figs, and as much Raisins of the Sun stoned, and three ounces
of Anniseeds beaten, all tied up in a bag; set this in the Sun for ten or
twelve days. In two or three spoonsfuls of this water dissolve well the
quantity of a Hasle-nut of London-Treacle, and give it the Patient an hour
before his fit of the Ague, and let him do what moderate exercise he can, and
fast four or five hours after it.

An Excellent Julip of Limons for Calentures or Fevers.
TAke the thin rind pared from Limons, then squeeze out all the juice. Let this
settle twenty four hours; then pour off the clear and filter it, which put into
Glass bodies to digest in exceeding gentle warmth of Balneo for ten or twelve
days; and more faeces will settle: Pour the clear from the faeces and filter
it; then digest again. Repeat this so often till no more faeces settle. In the
mean time calcine the thin yellow Pills, and with phlegm of Wine (in want
thereof with distilled Rain water) extract the Salt, which put to the purified
juice. Digest these a while in Balneo; then sever it into Glasses, containing
one ounce, which is a dose for an ordinary Person. Give it in the hot burning
of a Calenture; two doses will cure. It is best to take it pure thus; but if
the taste displease, you may put a little Sugar to it. This is much better than
Syrup made by boiling, which evaporateth much of that which is best in the
juice of Limons. This will keep well four or five years.

An excellent Orange Water or Spirit.
PUt the thin parings or chips of the rind of two hundred Oranges into a
Cucurbite, so large that they fill it not above a third part full. Pour upon
them six quarts of good Aqua vitae, let them digest with a Blind-head close
stopped during three or four days; then change that head for one with a
Limbeck, and distill in Balneo. Keep the first two quarts by themselves; for
they will be excellent good. Then change your Receiver, and the Oil will come
over with the rest of the liquor; toward the last it will be too weak, both of
the Orange and of the Spirit of Wine. Mingle one quart of excellent Syrup of
Clove-gilly-flowers, with the two first quarts; and it will be an excellent
Cordial-water. You may Aromatise it with Ambergris; and then it will be much
better to those that love Amber.

To make Spirits of Herbs, etc.
TAke four ounces of dried leaves of Mint, or tops of Clary and flowers, or any
other such Herbs, and put upon them a pottle of the best Aqua vitae that comes
from France. Digest them a while together; and then distill it off, and you
shall have a quart of singular good Spirit: the rest will be weak. In the same
manner you may do with other Herbs or Citron Pills dried. Of Caraway seeds you
must take but two ounces to a pottle of Aqua vitae, more will be bitter and
unpleasant. Sweeten this with the Syrup of Sugar that you have from the
Sugar-bakers. It is a Syrup that runs down from Sugar-loaves as they stand to
dry. This will never congeal; and will keep above a year without sowring. There
is of two sorts; the first which is of ordinary Sugar; the second, which is of
the finest, or double refined: this I used. Less then a pint will serve for a
pottle of Spirit. It is pure, clear and white, like Rock-water: put it into the
Spirit, and wake them together. If you will Aromatise it vith Amber, put half
an ounce of Spirit of Amber to this proportion. Make the Spirit of Amber thus:
Digest one ounce of Ambergris and one dram of Musk in a pottle of good Spirit
of Wine, till all be dissolved that will be. Use this. I conceive it will be
much stronger of the Amber, if you distill and cohobate the Spirit several times
from the Amber; but then have a care of keeping the Junctures close shut that
no Spirits expire, and do it in Balneo.

A Cordial Water of Wall-nuts. Monsieur Bressieux, a Physician in Paris makes
the water of walnuts thus:
THe first thing that buddeth out of these trees, is a long green excrescence,
like slender Pine Apples, which is called their Flower. Distill the water of
these, and keep it, throwing away the Caput-mortuum. Then when the Nuts are as
big as Hasle-nuts, stamp them in a Mortar, and strain out the juice; which
distill till you have the Caput-mortuum of a thick consistence, like an extract;
which keep, as also the water. When the Nuts are growing big and have but a
gelly instead of a kernel, and would be half ripe within ten days, or a
fortnight: then stamp them as before, and distill their juice to a like
consistence, as the other. Mingle your three Waters together; and this is his
Water of Walnuts, which is a great Cordial: and when he will make
Cinamon-water, he uses this only, without Wine or any other liquor to the
Cinnamon, and holds it for a great Cordial. The two thick consistences
(remaining after distilling the two juyces) he puts together, and when he
has evaporated them to a fit height for making of Plasters (if they were not
so already by their distilling) he puts to them (removed from the fire) a
little Venice Turpentine (an eighth or tenth part, or a little more) and a
little Powder of Cinnamon and Cloves, and a little Wheat Flour to thicken it,
also a little Salt; and keep it in a Pot all the year (where it fermenteth) to
make a Plaster of it for the Stomach, from the Sternum to the Navil, and six
or eight fingers breadth; which let remain on as long as it will stick, taking
it off sometimes to wipe a little water that sometimes it draws.

This comfort and strengthens the Stomach wonderfully, when it digesteth
not well. If you have none of this Composition ready, take two or three
condited Wall-nuts (conserved black; not green, or white) and stamp them to a
Pulp, and mingle with them about as much Turpentine as a Hasle Nut, and some
Wheat Flour to thicken it and a little Salt, and a little Powder of Cinnamon
and Cloves; and make a Plaster of this for want of the other.

You should so proportion your substances or Nuts, as to have about a like
quantity of juice of each; as also so much of the Flowers as to have as much
distilled water as out of either of the Juyces. For crudities and Indigestions
of the Stomach, when a Looseness follows (which usually comes from eating
more than one can digest) he prescribed two or three days very slender diet;
and then to eat on mornings three or four condited Walnuts, and to drink a
little Wine after them, eating a mouthful of Bread; this sets the Stomach
very right.

The Nuts are conserved black, for those have all their bitterness and virtue
in them (whereas, the white are pared; and the green are boiled in several
Waters to make them sweet; and so lose their virtue) only rubbing off a little
thin skin with a Napkin, after they have been boiled; then thrusting a Clove
and a little stick of Cinnamon, crosswise through them.

He had a good maxim to cure Diseases in men, rather by fitting and easy Diet,
than by strong Physic.

About the Diet of Milk.
MOnsieur du Clos, gives the Diet of Milk to many Patients, as well as he has
taken it constantly these many years himself: and in all, he observes the
following circumstances. To those who digest it not well, and out of whose
Stomach it goes not scon enough, he gives a grain or two of Salt with it: To
those with whom it curdleth, he gives a little Sugar; and to those who are
bilious, and in whom it turns to choler, he puts a little quantity of fair
water.

He takes it often; as four or five times a day: about two Paris pints a day in
all or better. If all day he takes nothing but Milk, he finds it weakens him
at length: therefore about noon, he eats a manchet of fine light Bread, of
about a penny price. But neither that strengthens him sufficiently; but he
uses withal to eat then two dozen of good Damask Raisins (or more) eating
first half his Bread, then twelve Raisins; then drinks a Porringer full of Milk
upon it: Then he eats the rest of his Bread and Raisins, and drinks another
Porrenger of Milk. With this course he grows strong, fat and full of blood:
but without Bread and Raisins, he becomes very faint, and cannot walk far: but
with them he is fain to do much exercise, he finds his health require it, and
he performs it with great ease. Every night at going to Bed, he takes a Pill of
five or six grains of his Composition of Aloes and Juyces of Herbs, in a
spoonful of Milk, and drinks three or four more upon it: which gives him but
one Stool the next morning; after which he is free for all day: but without his
Pill, his milk would constipate him much.

To Digest a large Meal.
WHen one has eaten a great meal, and that it lies heavy and dead upon the
Stomach, and digesteth not, but would hinder one from sleeping at night: It
will digest presently and trouble you no longer, if you drink a great draught
of Claret Wine made as hot as you can well drink it; heat it so, that you may
not lose the Spirits of it, in a Silver Tumbler with a close cover sinking
down, so that it may press upon the Wine, and consequently no Spirits rise into
the void place between the Wine and the cover; which hindering of their motion,
keeps them fixed homogeneally through the whole body of the Wine.

Cinnamon Water, or Spirit.
TAke chosen Cinnamon bruised one pound, spiritful white Wine three pound, pure
Rose Water two pound. Let them digest a day or two close stopped, then distill
it in a Refrigeratory: The first pound (or near so much) will be pretty good;
and the last, milky and sweet of the Cinnamon, but strong of the Spirits. You
may distill this, till you perceive it comes no more strong of the Cinnamon.
Keep every one of these three Waters in a Vessel a part, close stopped, Instead
of white Wine, you may use a weak Spirit of Wine, or Aqua vitae: but then you
must take at least two parts of Rose Water to three of Spirit of Wine.

Lignum Casiae makes a much finer Spirit than Cinnamon.
PUt three or four pound of it well bruised to a gallon of Malaga Sack. Digest
them together three or fout days in Balneo, then distill with very gentle heat.
If you will rest there, sever the first, second, and third running, as the
custom is; but, if you will have it richer of the Wood, distill off all together
as long as it comes with vigor, and put that liquor upon fresh Cassia (the
same is to be done with Cinnamon) and digest as before. Repeat this till it be
as strong as you desire, Then either separate the runnings as long as you will
put new wood to the liquor distilled over, you distill till it comes with no
more strength; but the last time you put fresh wood, you may keep three
runnings each a part; or if you distill all over together, you may rectify the
liquor by it self, and then make your separating of stronger and weaker, so as
to have some of such strength as you wish: or take a high Spirit of this, and
mingle it with Rosewater in which Sugar is dissolved, and put Ambergris to it.
Or do it with three parts of Wine, and two of Rose Water at the first putting
upon the wood, and repeat it as often as you think fit; and then dulcifie that
without putting more Rosewater to it.

The best way of distilling pure Spirit of Wine, is, to digest the Wine first
eight or ten days close stopped in Balneo: But you must have a care that the
Balneo be but lukewarm. Then distill it. You shall have thus twice as much
Spirit of Wine as the ordinary way. You may keep such a heat as is requisite
for this, with Sawdust, which is a slender expense.

Cordial Water of Clove-Gillyflowers.
PUt Spirit of Wine, or Sack, upon Clove-Gillyflowers; digest it two or three
days: put all in a Glass-body, laying other Clove-Gill flowers at the mouth of
it upon a Cambrick or Boulter cloth (that the Spirit rising and passing through
the flowers, may tinge it self of a beautiful color) add a Head with a Limbeck
and Receiver: Then distill the Spirit as strong as you like it; which sweeten
with Syrup of Gillyflowers or fine Sugar. Quaere, of laying Cinnamon and Amber
with the Flowers.

An Extract of Poppy Flowers.
PUt Spirit of Wine upon red Field Poppy-flowers, digest it till the Spirit of
Wine is highly tincted. Dicant, if it be not high enough, put it upon new
flowers. When it is tinged enough, dicant and philter, and distill of the Spirit
of Wine to the consistence of an extract, of which eight or ten grains is a
Dose. This is to be used instead of a Ladanum; and with better success, in
causing rest, and in Surfeits, causing a gentle Sweat, and thereby discharging
the Stomach of what oppresieth it.

Limon Water.
PAre off the yellow rinds of Limons, thin as to make chips, which will be as
low as the Pores go; and put them into a Glass body with a Head and Limbeck,
and distill them in Bal^^^, with gentle heat. You shall have a very sprightful
water (with Oil swimming upon it; which conserves it) whereof a little will
Aromatise Wine or any liquor, and make it very pleasant. It is a very pleasant
Cordialwater to dissolve Sugar in Orange-flower-water, and then mingle Spirit
of Wine with it; both of them to your taste, for sweetness and strength.

If you distill Raspes in a cold Still, as you do Roses, and put a little of
that water into Sack or other Wine, or into Claret or White wine and Water; it
will Aromatise it very strong of Raspes (without changing the color) and make
it very pleasant; two or three spoonfuls is sufficient to a quart of Sack.

An excellent Cordial Water of Sweet Marjoram, exceeding good for the Head and
Memory.
FIll a Cucurbite, reasonable lightly, with Sweet Marjoram duly dried; set it
in an iron pot full of water, which is over actual fire, and fill it up with
Brandy, and after a days digestion distill it gently. Keep the strong Spirit by
it self; then change the Receiver, and keep the phlegm by it self, ceasing
distilling when it comes insipid, weak both of Wine and Herb. In near a quart
of this phlegm dissolve one pound of pure double refined Sugar, and let it stew
some hours in boiling Balneo to make them incorporate well. If the liquor be
not perfectly pure, heat the Solution to almost boiling, that the dross may
rise for you to scum it off. A quart of this Syrup will serve to sweeten near
two quarts of the first Spirit, to most tastes. You may either put more Syrup,
or make the Syrup stronger of Sugar, if you are afraid of making the
Composition too weak. You may make your first Spirit stronger of Herb, by
drawing it again from fresh (dry) Herb. You may add Ambergris to make it more
Caphalick and virtual. You may do the like with Rosemary tops and flowers.

To make Hipocras presently.
TAke twelve drops of Oil of Cloves, eight of Oil of Nutmegs, and five of Oil
of Cinnamon. Put them into a large strong drinking Glass, and mingle well with
them two ounces of the purest double refined Sugar in Powder. Then take twenty
drops of Rose Water in a spoon, and in it a little Ambergris, and a little
Musk; and then pour that to your former Composition, and work all well
together; and if you find the matter too moist, knead some more Sugar amongst
it. If you put a little of this Composition into a quart of Wine, and make it
sweet with Sugar besides, it will taste like excellent Hipocras.

To make a Coagulated Spirit of Ambergris.
PUt one ounce of Amber bruised into little pieces, into the head of a
Refrigeratory. Let there be eight or ten ounces of pure Spirit of Wine in the
Refrigeratory; close the Joints very well. Distill over the Spirit of Wine, and
in passing over boiling hot, it will impregnate it self strongly of the Amber.
Do the like with excellent Orange-flowerwater made carefully of pure flowers,
(and often rectified upon fresh flowers) and other fresh Ambergris. Put one
part of the ambered water to three parts of the ambered Spirit of Wine, and
they will instantly coagulate (to a drop) into a consistence of Butter: which
is, both very pleasant for the odor and taste, and also a very great Cordial.
You may add an eighth part of Musk to the Amber. And when Orange-flower water
cannot be had, use a pure and spiritful Rosewater instead of it.

Dissolve Ambergris and Musk (one part to eight) in sufficient quantity of pure
Spirit of Wine (as sixteen or twenty parts to one) so that all the Amber may
remain dissolved (after twenty or thirty days digestion) when the Glass is
through cold. Dicant or philter it from remaining dregs. Put it into a Retort,
or rather into a Body with a Head and Limbeck, and distill it off in Balneo,
with as gentle warmth as may be, so that (for example) there be sixteen or
twenty measures between every drop. Cease when you find the body dry, and like
a soft Gum. This will be of an excellent odor and taste, and the Spirit of
Wine will have carried over very little of the virtue or Spirits of Amber: Or
put Spirit of Wine upon Amber, to be three or four fingers breadth over it.
Digest it in Balneo till it be highly tincted: Pour off that and pour on fresh
Spirit of Wine. Digest as before till it be tincted. Repeat this till you have
all the tincture; then evaporate the Spirit of Wine to a Gum or Butter.

To make Sweet Water.
TAke Rose leaves, Bay leaves, Lavender, Sweet Marjoram, Eglantine, Pinks, of
each two handfuls, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each one ounce: bruise all these, and
pour upon them two quarts of strong Ale, (that is near the grounds) let them
infuse twenty four hours, then distill it, and draw it till the Ingredients
remain almost dry.

Another.
TAke Damask Roses at discretion, Basil, Sweet Marjoram, Lavender, Wall-nut
leaves, of each two handfuls, Rosemary one handful, a little Balm, Cloves,
Cinnamon, of each one ounce, Bay leaves, Rosemary tops, Limon and Orange Pills
of each a few; pour upon these as much white Wine as will conveniently wet
them, and let them infuse ten or twelve days; then distill it off.

Another.
Take juice of Cloves three ounces, Calamus Aromaticus, Cypress, of each two
ounces, Orchis half a pound, dry Rose leaves, dry Spike flowers, of each two
handfuls, Bay leaves one handful; beat all these to powder, and put them in a
pot and pour upon them three gallons of fair water; and let them infuse five or
six days stirring it every day seven or eight times. Then distill it. Then take
out the Bay leaves and use the rest for Sweet-bags, you may hang a little Musk
in the water

To Preserve Fruit all the Year.
PUt the fruit into a fit Case of Tin, and soder it together, so that no air
can get in; then lay it in the bottom of a cold Well of running water.

To make Perfumes to Burn.
TAke half a pound of Damask Rose-buds (the whites cut off) Benjamin three
ounces beaten to powder, half a quarter of an ounce of Musk, and as much of
Ambergris, the like of Civet. Beat all these together in a Stone-morter. Then
put in an ounce of Sugar, and make it up in Cakes, and dry them in the Sun, or
by the fire. There is no difference in making the Bags, but that they must be
red Roses, and you leave out Sugar.

Cassolettes.
TAke Benjamin four ounces, Storax two ounces, Lignum Aloes half an ounce,
Ambergris two drams, Musk twenty four grains, Civet one dram, twenty Cloves,
Cinnamon in powder two drams; the Peels of two Limons, (cut small without
touching them with your hands.) Mix all these together with Rose Water, and
make a paste of it with your hands; and never use it without Rose Water or
other Sweet water. You may steep Gum Tragacanth in Rose Water till it become a
Mucilage, and with that work the other Ingredients into a paste, and form it to
Cakes for use.

^o make an Odoriferant Ball.
TAke Benjamin two drams, Storax, pure fine Ladanum, of each one dram, Bark of
Cedar, the thin rind of Orange and Limon, Violets, Odoriferant Roses, Rosemary,
red Sanders, Calamus Aromaticus, of each half a dram, Cloves, Cubebs, Ireos of
Florence, of each two scruples. Reduce all these into powder, and make Paste of
it with Gum Tragacanth steeped in Orange-flower or Rose Water. Then, heat a
little the inside of a Mortar, and put a spoonful or two of Orange-flower or
Rose Water in it, and upon that put one scruple of Civet, and half a dram of
Ambergris, and grind it well together with a warm Pestil. When it is well
incorporated, put half a scruple of good Musk to it, which incorporate also;
dropping into the Composition thirty drops of Oil of Lilly Convally, when it is
all cold. Then mix this Composition with the first Paste, working them well
together; and lastly, add to it ten drops of perfect Oil or Quintessence of
Cinnamon made by Distillation. Then form this into Balls of such a bigness as
you will have them, and dry them in the shadow.

Rose Pastils to Burn.
TAke Benjamin three ounces, Storax two ounces, Alexandrine or Damask Rose-buds
one ounce; grind the Roses by themselves, and the rest also: Then take Lignum
Aloes, Amber, fine Sugar, Civet, powder of Cypress, of each half a quarter of a
pound; grind all these well together. Then mix it with Gum Tragacanth disiolved
in Orange-flowers or Rose Water, and make them up.

To make Mouth Pastils.
TAke fine Sugar well sifted one pound, Ambergris two drams, Musk half a dram,
grind the Amber, and Musk with a little Sugar, putting it in by little and
little till all be well incorporated. Make paste of this, thus: Take some
Kernels of Quinces, bruise them, and put them to steep in fair water twelve or
fifteen hours; then strain the water through a Linen, and it will be gluant;
with this make up your paste, and let them dry in the shadow, putting a sieve
upon them to keep it from the flies.

To make a Pomos like those that are made in Spain.
TAke Benjamin half a pound, steep it in Rose Water, expose it to the Sun the
space of six weeks, stirring it three or four times a day; and when you see
that it grows dry, add still more Rose Water to it. Then grind it well with
four Cloves, and a little Cinnamon in powder, and one ounce of Storax, half an
ounce of the thin rind of Limon shred very small, half an ounce of Ambergris, a
quarter of an ounce of Civet, half an ounce of the perfumed Italian Powder, one
ounce of Rose powder, a dram of Musk; boil this together in as much Rose Water
as will just cover it till it be well incorporated together. This proportion
will serve for eight Pomos. In using it you must keep it always covered with
Rose Water.

To make the Sweet Water, called in French L'eau d'ange.
TAke three pints of Rose Water, half a pint of Orange-flower water, Musk,
Ambergris, Lignum Aloes, of each twenty five grains, Civet fifteen grains,
Benjamin four ounces, Storax one ounce, all in fine powder; mix all these well
together, and put them in a brass Pot, covering it very close with Linen, and
set it to boil in a kettle full of water the space of three hours; then pour
off the clear, and put upon the remaining matter the same quantity of fresh
Rose and Orange-flower water, and five or six grains of Civet. Then of the rest
you may make Pastils or Cassolettes.

A pleasant and wholesome Perfume for Tobacco taken in a Pipe.
TAke one ounce of the hard Balsom that is in Nuts, Ambergris half a dram, Oil
of Anniseeds six drops, Oil of Cinnamon six or seven, or ten drops, Oil of
Thyme, five drops, Oil of Nutmegs, Oil of Lavender, of each two drops, Oil of
Cloves three drops; work all these well together by long malaxation in a Mortar
warmed a little, into an uniform gummy substance: whereof as much as a
Pepper-corn pressed in at the top of a Pipe of Tobacco, will make it taste
exceeding well, and perfume the mouth and Room very pleasantly, by taking it in
smoke.

Another.
TAke Balm of Peru half an ounce, seven or eight drops of Oil or Quintessence
of Cinnamon, Oil of Cloves five drops, Oil of Nutmegs, of Thyme, of Lavender, of
Fennil, of Anniseeds, (all drawn by Distillation) of each a like quantity, or
more or less as you like the odor, and would have it strongest. Incorporate
with these half a dram of Ambergris. Make all these into a Paste, which keep in
a box. When you have filled your Pipe of Tobacco, put upon it about the bigness
of a great pins head of this Composition, and it will make the smoke most
pleasingly odoriferous, both to the takers and to them that come into the Room;
and ones breath sweet all day after. It comsorts the Head.

To convert Water into Ice in Summer, without the help of either Ice or Salts.
PUt boiling Water into an earthen Pitcher or Pipkin, that it be full; cover
the mouth of it and shut it very close; and so hot hang it in a deep cold Well,
in the Water; after a while, the boiled Water will be all become Ice, so that
you must break the Pitcher to get it out.

To Convert Water into Ice with Snow or Ice Immediately.
SEt a Glass of water in a Basin of Ice or Snow, as you do an Egg in Salt; and
set a quick fire under the Basin, and it will presently drive the cold of the
Snow or Ice into the Water; and make it Ice.

If you put Snow and Saltpeter into a quart Pot, and set the Pot upon water
spilled upon a Table, and stir well the Snow and Salt with a stick; the Pot
will presently stick to the Table.

A Table of the Receipts contained in this Book.
A
FOr all kind of Agues, Page 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 Agues and Fevers, 3 Aches in any
part of the body, etc. 39 58 To make Aurum Potabile, 94, 96 97
B.
For Bleedings, 25, 26 Burnings, 55 An excellent red Balsom, or Salve of great
virtue, 55 Biting of a mad Dog, 58 Balsom of Sulphur, for the Breast, Lungs,
etc. and for Tetters, 79 Balsom of Dr. Salvator Winter, 73 Bolus for the
Stomach and Liver, 111 Bezoardicum Theriacale, 114 Ball odoriferant, 142
C.
For Coughing, 7 Colicks of all kind, 7 Cold in the head to draw Rheum from
it, 8 Cancers in the Mouth, Breast, or any part, 36, 37 Cankers in the Mouth,
54 Cancered Breasts, 36 Contusion or Bruises, 64 Conception, to procure it, 111
Cornachinus powder, 77 Corporified Salt of Spirit of Wine, 88 A great
Corroborant, 93 Confortative, 105 Cordial Tablets, 106 Cordial to rest and for
Surfeit, 120 Cooling 'tomachal Mint-water, 121 Cordial water, 122 Cephalic
Capital water, 127 Celestial or Imperial water, 128 Cordial out of English
Saffron, 101 Cordial water of Sweet Marjoram for the Head and Memory, 138
Coagulated Spirit of Ambergris, 139 Cassolettes, 242 Cordial water of Walnuts,
132 Cinnamon water or Spirit, 135 Cordial water of Clove-Gilliflowers, 137
D.
Deafness, 29 To cause a good Delivery, 33 Dropsy, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 19
Dizziness and Swimming in the Head, 129 Diet Drink, 110 The Diet of Milk, 134
To Digest a large Meal, 135
E.
For the Eyes, 24, 25 Eyes red or bloudshot, 25 A great Electuary, 103 Extract
of Poppy Flowers, 137
F.
For all kinds of Fevers, 5, 6 Fluxes, 8, 9, 11, 12 For Fistula's and Ulcers,
70 Felons, 54 For the Falling Sickness: 32, 33 Fruit to preserve all the year,
279, 306
G.
Gowt hot or cold, 51, 52 Gangrene, and all foul diseases of the skin, 59, 60,
61, 62. Gonorrhaea, 63
H.
Haemorroides, 19 Hardnefs in Women's Breasts, 37, 38 Headache, etc. 45
I.
For Imposthumes, Fellous, etc. 36 Jaundise of any kind, 88
K.
For the King's Evil, 53 Kibes and Chilblains, 133
L.
A Receipt of the Labour-Powder, 33 For a Looseness, 9, 10 For the Leprosy, 45
Ladanum Opiatum. 112 Lime water, 137 Leau d'ange 204
M.
For the Mother, 28 Menstruum of Citron Pills, 85 Menstruum to open any Body,
but chiefly the Body of Gold, 85 Mercurius vitae, 91 Medicinal Stone of great
virtues, 66 Medicine which has done wonderful great effects, 83 Medicine from
Antimony and Mercury dulcis, 174
O.
For Obstructions, 12, 13 An excellent green Ointment of great virtues to be
made in May, 57 Ointment for Wounds and Sores in Man or Beast, 56, 58, 68
Ointment for the Stomach, 109 Orange Water or Spirit, 130 Oil of Pearl for
health, and for the face, 97 Oil of Myrrbe, 100
P.
For the Piles, 20, 39, 40 Poison inward or outward, 27 Plague, 40, 41, 42
Plurisie, 50 Palsy, 124, 125 Frenzy, 45 Plaster for the stomach, 44, 108
Plaster of Norinberg, 711 A Panacea of Antimony, 80, 81 An Excellent Plaster
for the Ba^k, 72 Pachimagogue, 113 Purge in Fevers, 117 Physical Salt 99
Perfumes to burn, 241 Pastils of Roses, 143 Pastils for the Mouth. ibid. Pomos,
144
R.
For Retention of Urine, 48, 49 Ruptures, 53, 54 Restaurative and Cordial of
Dates, 105
S.
For the Stone and Gravel, 46, 47, 48, 49 Strangury of Urine, 49 Squinsie, 45
Spitting of Blood, 27 Sinews and Head, 28 Smallpox, 30, 31 Sciatica and
Rheumatism, 50 Sharp humors to dry them up, 67 Sprain in the Back, or any
weakness, 109 An Excellent Spirit of Dr. Salvator Winter, 74 Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, 78 Spirit of Verdegris, 87 Sale of Tartar Volatile, 90 Surfeit Water,
121, 129 Spirit of Clary, Mynt, etc. 126 Spirits of dried Herbs, etc. 131
Spirit of Lignum Cassiae, 136 Sweet Water; 240, 241
T.
For the Toothach, 21, 23 Teeth and Gums, 21, 22, 23 Tetters or Herpes, 38, 65
A pleasant and wholesome Perfume for Tobacco taken in a Pipe, 145 Trembling of
the Heart or a weak Stomach, 112 Tincture of Ambergris, 96 Tincture of Bezoar,
ibid. Tincture of Coral, 119 Tincture of Gold, 98 Tisanne Laxative, 113
U.
Venereal Cankers, 64 Venereal Disease, 86 Vulnerary Potion or Wound drink, 68
A great Venereal, 107
W.
For Women in Labor, 33 Women in Childbed, 34 Women's reast and Belly lying in
35 Women's Torn Bladder, 34 Women's Flowers to bring them down, 35 Women's
immoderate Fluxes, 27 Women's Whites, 28 Worms in Children, 43 Worms in the
Belly or Stomach, ibid. Warts to take them away, 44 Water of Rue for the Head
and Brain, 123 To convert Water into Ice in Summer without the help of either
Ice or Salt. 146
FINIS.
Digby's Receipts.


